THE ROMAN HISTORY, CONtaining such Acts and occurrents as passed under
Constantius, Iulianus, Iovianus, Valentinianus, and Valens, Emperors.

Digested into 18. Books, the remains of 31. and written first in Latin by
Ammianus Marcellinus: Now translated newly into English.

Whereunto is annexed the Chronology, serving instead of a brief supplement of
those former 13. Books, which by the injury of Time are lost: Together with
compendious Annotations and Conjectures upon such hard places as occur in the
said History.

Done by PHILEMON HOLLAND of the City of Coventrie, Doctor in Physic.



LONDON, Printed by Adam Jslip. An. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, the Major, and his Brethren, the Aldermen etc. of
the City of Coventrie.
HAving entered heretofore into an English translation of the Roman History,
compiled by T. Livius from the foundation of Rome-citie unto the Caesar's days;
and then proceeded forward in their lives, to the death of Domitian, according
as they were penned by Suetonius Tranquillus, J was of late earnestly moved by
a noble Baron of this Kingdom, to travail on still, and follow the train of
this argument, so far forth as I found extant in Ammianus Marcellinus, who
had written at large from the end of the said Emperor unto the beginning of
Gratianus. And albeit this enterprise seemed unto me more than difficult,
considering the harsh style of the Author, a Souldior, and who being a Grecian
borne, delivered these Hystoricall reports in Latin; the strange terms
occasioned by the late alteration of the State under Constantine; the greater
part of the original lost, which might have given light unto the rest; the
prints so defective and faulty even of that which remained; and the want of
others to tread out the way before me in other languages: yet could I not deny
that honest request of so honorable a personage, whom I knew to be very
studious, passing well learned, and judicious, (right commendable parts
adorning true Nobility) but set in hand with this piece of work also, and
finish the same in some sort, though I have not altogether therein pleased my
self.

And the better to give contentment unto the Readers (for now by this time I
perceived it should come under the Press) I took me to a new labor, and like
as the loss of the later part of T. Livius I supplied with the breviaries of
L. Florus, so the want in the beginning of this Writer I made up with a
Chronology; to the end I might present unto my dear countrymen a continued
narration of the Roman affairs, from the first infancy, to the venerable old
age and declining days (that I may use Marcellinus his own words) of that
eternal City. To explane likewise those unusual phrases and terms
aforesaid, not obvious in former Historiographers, as also to open some obscure
places, which here and there offer themselves, I thought not much of my pains,
to annex thereunto certain brief Annotations and Conjectures of mine own:
which if they yield not full satisfaction unto the Reader, may yet minister
occasion to some better learned than my self, for to travail in that kind,
unto whose censure and judgment I submit those my Supposals.

These Endeavor of mine whatsoever I dedicate unto your Worships, the chief
Magistrate and grave Senate of this City; and that for diverse respects: First,
your wise and moderat government of the place, wherein J have so many years
conversed, has affoorded unto me both quiet repose and means also to follow
my studies: Secondly, the affectionate love that ye have always borne to good
literature, testified by courteous entertainment of learned men; by competent
salaries allowed from time to time to such professors, as have peaceably and
with discreet carriage bestowed their talents among you; by exhibition given to
poor scholars in the University; by erecting also of late, and maintaining
of a fair Library, not exampled (without offense to others be it spoken) in
many Cities of the Realm: Lastly the experience I have already of your kind
acceptance of my former Labors, though not exhibited unto you at the first
hand, have emboldened or enforced me rather, immediately to entitle you in this,
and under your name to transmit the same unto all others: not doubting that you
will take this small gift in good worth, as a token of his unfaigned love and
affection, who has always prayed for your welfare, and wishes not to live
longer than he may see the prosperous and flourishing estate of your city.

Your Worships in all dutiful respect, Philemon Holland.

GALLVS AND CONSTANTIVS.
LIB. 14.
CAP. 1. The horrible acts of Caesar Gallus, through his wives instigation
committed in the East parts.
AFter the events of an invincible expedition achieved, whiles the hearts or
Factions.
of both the Magnentius the Usurper, and Constantius the Emperor, who in one
field at Mursa lost 70000 between them. Pomp. Lat.
sides were fainting, which sundry dangers and travailes had sore quailed;
before that either the trumpets gave over sounding, or the soldiers were
bestowed in their wintering stations; such storms of fortune still raging,
arose, as poured down a world of new troubles upon the State and Commonwealth,
occasioned all by many wicked and horrible acts of Caesar Gallus; who from an
exceeding poor and miserable condition, advanced in the very flower of his
years (with unexpected honor) to princely dignity, and running out beyond the
bounds of that authority which was conferred upon him, made foul work every
where, and with extreme rigor marred all: For, presuming upon his neerenesse
of kin unto the He was cousin germane to Constantius, even the son of his
uncle great Constantinus the late Emperors brother.
blood royal, and the alliance which he had still with the name of
Constantine, he bare himself very proud and insolent, ready (as it was
thought) to have given some hostile attempt even against the founder of his
own good fortunes, if he had bin of greater power: whose cruelty was not a
little enkindled and set on fire by his Constantina, or Constantia.
wife; who beside her unmeasurable pride, as being sister in the whole blood
unto the Constantius.
Emperor, and by her father the Great.
Constantine before time joined in marriage with his brothers son king
Annibalianus, was a very devil incarnate, inciting and incensing him
continually, given as he was to cruel tyranny, and no less bloud-thirstie
her self, nor of a milder disposition than her husband: who both of them in
process of time by little and little grown more skillful in doing mischief,
by means of secret and crafty tale-bearers, such as lewdly used to make those
things greater that upon slight grounds were discovered, ready also to
Dicentes, others read, Discentes, i. to learn and find out.
report untruths and matters pleasing unto them, falsely raised upon innocent
persons imputations and slanders, either of ambitious aspiring to the kingdom,
or of practicing wicked and naughty arts. Now, among other designements and
deeds of a lower nature (for by this time their greatness surmounted the
terms of mean delinquences) notorious above the rest was the horrible and
sudden death of one Clematius, a nobleman of Alexandria: whose wives mother
falling in hot fancy with him her son in law, and soliciting him wantonly
to company with her, when she could not obtain his love, was (by report) let
in at a posterne gate of the palace, and thereby presenting unto the Queen a
rich jewel of great price, effected thus much, That by virtue of a writ or
warrant sent unto Honoratus, then Comite^^ Oricutis under (...),
lieutenant a general of the East, the said Clematius, upon deadly malice,
without touch and attaint of any wicked act, not permitted once to open his
mouth, or to speak for himself, should be killed. After this wicked part
committed, which now was feared also in others, as if a license had been
granted unto cruelty, certain persons, upon obscure mists only of suspicions
and presumptions were judged guilty and condemned: of whom, some suffered
death, others punished with forfeiture of goods, and turned out of house and
home as banished folk, having naught left unto them but plaints, mones, and
bitter tears, lived only of contribution and alms. And thus, whiles in lieu
of civil and just government, a bloody mind and will bare sway, wealthy and
noble houses were quite shut up: neither was there required in all these heaps
of enormities and troubles, any voice of an accuser, were he but counterfeit
and suborned, that criminal matters might seem (though but in outward show)
committed to the formal trial of Law (a course that very tyrants diverse times
have taken:) but whatsoever settled once in Caesar's irreconcilable heart, the
same went current for right and lawful, yea, and was followed hard even to
present, execution. Moreover, devised it was, that certain unknown persons,
such as for their baseness were of small regard, should be sent out of purpose
through all parts of Some call it at this day Aleppo. O^telius.
Antiochia, to hearken after tales and rumors, with direction, to relate
whatsoever they heard. These fellows in manner of travailers raunging from
place to place, and covertly joining themselves close to men of quality and
honor at their meetings, entering also in habit of needy and poor folk into
rich men's houses, what ever they could learn or hear, being let into the
Court secretly at the back doors, made report thereof; observing this one
point jointly with one accord, some things to invent and forge of their own
heads, and what they knew in deed, to make the same worse by the one half: but
in any wise to suppress and conceal all the praises that came to their ears
of Caesar; which many men were forced even against their wills to give out, for
fear of calamities that hung over their heads. And otherwhiles it fell out so,
that if the husband had whispered ought in his wives ear, within a secret
room, where no servitor at all, more inward and privy to his life, was
present, the same should the Emperor be sure to know the morrow after; no
less than if b Amphiaraus or Martius, renowned Divinors and Wisards in old
time, gave intelligence thereof: and therefore, the very bare walls alone, made
acquainted with any secrets, were feared. Now, this obstinate and settled
purpose of his, to search into these and many such like matters, became of
greater force, by reason of the Queen ever at his elbow to prick and proke
him forward, who bearing her self shrewd and froward upon her husbands high
estate, lay on him, still creaking and crowing, as one most sharp set and
hotely bent to work mischief: whereas, out of that mildness which beseems
a woman, she ought rather by good and wholesome persuasions to have reduced him
into the way of truth and courteous humanity; as we have reported in the acts
of the Gordians, That the wife of Maximinus that c cruel emperor was wont to
do. To conclude, this Gallus after a new and pernicious example, feared not to
put in practice the same foul and dangerous pranke which Gallienus is reported
to have attempted sometime at Rome, with the greatest dishonor and shame that
might be: and taking some few in company, privily weaponed, he would in the
evening walk here and there about the shops, hostelries, carrefours, and
cross streets, busily inquiring in the Greek tongue (wherein he was very
perfect) what any man thought of Caesar? And these parts played he boldly within
the city, even where lights shining clear all night long, are wont to
resemble the bright days. At length, being oftentimes known who he was, and
perceiving now, that if he came thus abroad he should be discovered, he was
not seen to go forth but openly by daylight, and that about his serious
affairs, as he thought them. And these verily were the courses that he took,
whereat many a man grieved and groaned at the heart. Furthermore, Thalassius,
then Praefactus Pratorio.
Lord chief d Justice, being in place, who also himself was of an arrogant
nature, considering that this hastiness of his, to the hazard of many, still
increased, did not by gravitie or sage counsel mitigate his mood (as diverse
times men placed in high authority have mollified and assuaged the wrath and
ire of princes) but by way of opposition and rebuke at unmeet seasons set him
farther out, and made him stark mad, giving informations very thick unto the
Emperor of him, aggravating his proceedings, and making them more than they
were, yea and endeavoring (of what mind I know not) that the same should not be
hidden: whereat Caesar within a while much more fell and enraged, erecting on
high the banner, as it were, of self-will and frowardness, without regard
either of other men's safety, or his own, ran on end still in manner of a swift
stream, with irreclamable violence, to bear down and carry quite away all
under him.

CHAP. 11. War raised by the Brigands or Robbers of Isauria, whereof the
events and issues were diverse.
NEither verily was this the only bane that plagued the East with sundry
troubles and calamities: For, the Isauri (with whom an usual matter it is, often
times to rest quiet, and as often with sudden outrodes to disturb and
confound all) from secret robberies, and those but seldom committed, brake out
(while impunitie fostered their boldness growing worse and worse) into
grievous wars, stirring up verily their hostile and rebellious stomachs a
long time by commotions without all rest; howbeit mightily moved by occasion of
this indignity (as they gave it out) that some of their consorts taken
prisoners, were at Cogni, Bellonio Gognia, Postello. Conia. Leuncla^.
Iconium, a town of A Region within Cilicia. Ptolem.
Pisidia, contrary unto the manner and custom, cast out to be devoured of
ravenous wild beasts, at a public show in their Amphitheatre: and according
to the saying of Tully, Like as even savage beasts, upon warning given, return
for the most part unto the place where sometimes they have been fed; even so
all of them, in manner of a whirlewind, being come down from the cumbersome
and high mountains, repaired to the sea coasts, along the which, hiding
themselves within the valleys, full of lurking holes, toward dark night
especially, when the Moon was but new, and in her first quarter, and therefore
yet not shining out in her full light, observed the Na^tices.
shippe-masters and sailors; whom when they perceived once to be laid along to
sleep, creeping on all four among the anchor-gables, and then going softly
for being heard, they conveyed themselves slyly into the shippe-boats, and so
stood hard by them ere they were aware: thus, while greedy covetousness gave
fire unto their cruelty, having slain them all, and spared not so much as one
Cadentium.
that yielded, they carried away rich merchandise Me^ves op^mas vel utiles.
, or gainefull commodities; for, none there was to make resistance. But these
prankes were not long practiced: For, when knowledge was taken, that the
sailors and merchant venturers were thus murdered and left dead in the place,
no man afterward arrived at these rodes, but avoiding them no less than the
deadly cliffes of e Scyron, they sailed close along the coasts of Cypri.
Cyprus, whereas they lie opposite unto the rocks of Isauria. Therefore,
within a while after, when they could find nothing thither brought, leaving the
sea coasts, they went into Lycaonia, adjoining hard unto Isauria, and there
within their thick grown Fastnesses and Fore-fences, after the manner of
those that lie in ambush for such as pass by, they maintained and enriched
themselves with the goods as well of the provincial inhabitants as the
wayfaring folk. This broile raised the soldiers that lay in garrison within
many towns and castles confining upon them, who endevoring all of them with
might and maine, to repel them, incroaching further still, and spreading thus
all abroad, one whilekeeping together closely in squadrons, other whiles
dispersed asunder, were overmatched by reason of their huge multitude: who
being bred and brought up among the high and crooked mountains, carrying a
great compass about, use nimbly to pass over them, as if they were plain
places, and even, charging a far off as many as come toward them, with shot,
and affrighting them with hideous cries and yellings. And diverse times our
footmen being forced in the pursuit after them, to clime up steep rising
hills, albeit that as their feet slipped from under them, by taking hold of
shrubs and bushes, they got up to their very tops; yet among those narrow and
unpassable streits, having no room to imbattell and set themselves in array,
nor yet to march on with sure and strong footing, whiles their enemies
traversing their ground to and fro, tumble down pieces of rocks and crags
from aloft, they made shift to get away down the hill with danger enough; or
else, if they were driven upon extreme necessity, valiantly to fight it out,
overwhelmd they were, and laid along with the fall of huge and weighty pieces.
From thenceforth therefore, this due observation, with wary circumspection,
was made, that ever as these robbers began once to make toward the high
mountains, our soldiers knowing the disadvantage of the place, gave way and
retired: but when they might be found upon the plain (which happens very
often) having not the liberty either to stretch forth their arms, or to
brandish and shake their darts which they carry, two or three apeece, their
fortune was to be slain like dumb and silly beasts. Wherefore the same
robbers, afraid of Lycaonia, for the most part a champian country, and knowing
by many proofs made, that they should not be able to make their parts good with
our men in a stable and set fight, through blind by-ways went into (...)
Giravo and Alph. Adnan. together with Cilicia, it is (...) C^ramania. Bellemu^.
Pamphylia, which had continued a long time verily without trouble, but yet for
fear of wasting, spoiling, and murders, whiles soldiers ranged through all
the quarters near adjoining, was fortified with strong garrisons on every
side: whereupon speeding themselves in great have, for to prevent all rumors of
their remove, by exceeding celeritie, trusting also upon the vigor and
agilitie of their bodies, through winding lanes they got up (somewhat late
though it was) to the hill tops. Now having overcome these dangerous
difficulties, when they were come as far as to the banks of that deep and
whirling river Crionero. Marius Niger.
Melas, which in stead of a wall fenceth the inhabitants on either side
thereof, considering the time, and how the night grew apace upon them, they
rested a while waiting for daylight: For they supposed, that when they had
once gotten over the same without any one to hinder their passage, they should
by any sudden and unlooked for incursion, be able to lay wast whatsoever stood
in their way. But all the laborious and painful toil that they took, came to
no effect: for after the sun rising, by reason of the big stream, narrow,
and deep withal, they were disappointed of their passage over: and whiles
they seek for small fish boats, or prepare to flit or swim upon floats set
together and pinned in have, our legions wintering then at Chirisonda, or
Candalor, a city in Pamphylia.
Sideniste, came abroad, and with a speedy march affronted them, and having
imbattelled themselves near unto the rivage, to join in fight hand to hand,
most skilfully they made a fence before them with their targuets couched thick
and close together: Some also that trusted upon their swimming, or adventured
in hollow troughes and trunks of trees, secretly to cross over the river, they
most easily killed. Whereupon when they had assayed many means and devises,
even to their uttermost peril, and nothing auayled, what with fear, and what
with violent resistance, quite put beside their purpose, and doubting which way
to take, and whither to go, they drew near unto the town Laranda. There
having refreshed themselves with food and repose, now that fear was past, and
set upon the rich towns, by help of certain companies of horsemen, which
fortuned to approach near hand; not so much as assaying to make head again in
the broad and open plain ground, they departed aside, and as they retired
back, raised all the strength and manhood of the youth which was left at home.
And forasmuch as they were sore distressed for want of food, they went to a
place named Paleas, bending toward the sea, and fortified with a strong wall,
where are laid up in store even to this day victuals usually, distributed among
the soldiers lying in garrison, to defend all the costs of Isauria. This
strong hold therefore they besieged round about for three days and three
nights together; and seeing neither the place so steep could possibly be
gained without danger of death, nor any good might be done with undermyning,
and that no devise belonging to a siege took effect, they departed heavy, and
ill appaid, with a purpose in the end, upon an angry mood, to enterprise
exployts above their reach. Having conceived therefore a feller fit of furious
rage, which despair and hunger together did set on fire, they reenforced their
power, and in a heat unrestrainable, advanced forth, with a full resolution to
destroy the mother city Seleucia, which Castritius a Common.
lieutenant, f together with three legions of old beaten soldiers, hardened
already in war services, defended. Now the captains of these said
soldiers, advertised before hand by trusty espials of their coming, after
the ordinary token or watchword given, led them all forth in arms, well
appointed to make a quick and speedy sally; and having with great agilitie
passed over the bridge standing upon the river Saleso. Mar. Nig. or Salepho.
Matthew. Paris. Some call it at this day Del Ferro.
Calycadnus, the mighty stream and waves whereof run hard by the very towers
of the walls, they arranged them in order ready to fight: how beit not one of
them set foot hastily forward, nor was permitted to encounter and join
battle: for why, they stood in fear of the adverse power, so furiously set
upon rage, being both for number superior, and ready also to run without all
regard of life, upon the very pyke and swords point. These Brigands then,
having espied our army afar off, and heard the trumpettiers and cornettiers
sound, stayed their march, and stood still a pretty while, and drawing forth
their swords in threatening wise, afterward went on fair and softly: against
whom our soldiers continuing still resolute, ready to make head and encounter
them with their displayed ranks, yea, and knocking their shields and spears
together (which manner and fashion stirs up in warriors both anger and
dolor) with this their gesture now hard at hand, greatly terrified them. But
thus sharp set as they were to give battle, their leaders reclaimed and drew
them back, supposing it unseasonable and inconvenient to hazard themselves
upon a doubtful piece of service, being as yet not far from the walls of a
city, within the defense whereof they might be all fully secured from danger.
The soldiers moved effectually with this persuasion, were brought back again
within the said walls: and after they had locked up and made fast the gates on
every side, stood upon the plat-formes, bulwaikes, and battilments, having
every where in readiness stones and daits, to the end that if any one had
ventured far forward, he might with multitude of shot and stones be beaten
down and overthrown. Howbeit, this one thing mightily troubled those which
were shut up within, because the vessels that used to bring corn along the
river, were taken, whereby the Isaurians for their parts had plenty of
victual; but themselves, having spent up already the ordinary provision of
food and sustenance, wonderously feared the woeful and deadly miseries of
imminent famine. When the news of these occurrents were flowne far abroad,
and intelligences thereof continually given one after another had made Gallus
Caesar to starckle, for that the or General.
Master of g the Horsemen was greatly employed and busied very far off,
Nebridius Comes Orientis.
Lieutenant general in the East, by commandment and commission directed unto
him, having from all parts assembled his forces, sped himself with exceeding
have and diligence to deliver this city, so great and of such importance, from
danger: which being once known, the foresaid thieves departed, without
atchieving any memorable exploit besides: and being scattered asunder (as their
manner is) made toward their wields and desert mountains.

CHAP. III. The violent Rhode into Mesopotamia of Nohodares the Persian,
together with the Saracens: whose manners are lively depainted.
THe case thus standing in Isauria, whiles the king of the Persians was
encumbred with the wars of borderers, and busy in driving from his own
confines and frontiers those most fierce and cruel nations, which of a
certain wavering and mutable mind, many times in hostile manner assail him,
and otherwhiles aid him when he warreth upon us: a certain great lord and
nobleman, one named Nohodares, appointed so often as opportunity served to
invade Mesopotamia, searched with great care and diligence into all parts of
our territories, ready to break through with sudden violence, wheresoever he
could find convenient place. And for that all the tracts and quarters of
Mesopotamia, which used oftentimes to be disquieted, were kept safe with
fore-fences and standing wards abroad, turning his journey on the left hand, he
forelayd closely ^xtimas parts.
the utmost parts of otherwise, Osi^ena.
Osdruena, and entered upon a new device and stratageme, that little at any time
had been attempted, which if he might compass, he would in manner of a
lightning lay wast and consume all. Now the design which he projected was
after this sort. A borough town there is named Batne in Anthemusia (built by
the ancient Macedonians) not far distant from the river Aferat, or ^rat.
Euphrates, and replenished with wealthy merchants; where ordinarily every
year toward the beginning of September there meet at a solemn Mart or Fair a
multitude of people of all sorts and degrees, to buy and sell the commodities
which the Indians and Seres send, together with much other merchandise that
usually is brought thither by land and sea. This country, the foresaid
Nohodares.
Captain purposing to invade, during those days appointed for this great
concourse, and that by the way of the deserts, and green banks of the river
Giulap. in tabulis Geographicis. Hornuz. in Onuphrius.
Abora, being discovered and betrayed by his own men, who in bodily fear for
some foul and heinous fact committed, ran unto the Roman garrisons, went his
way without any thing done, and afterward sat still and stirred not. Howbeit,
the Saracens, whom we are never to wish either for our friends or enemies,
raunging up and down over the country, whatsoever came in their way, in a
small time spoiled and destroyed, like unto ravenous Gledes and Kites, which if
they have spied any prey from on high, quickly in their flight snatch it up, or
if they seize upon it, make no long stay. As touching whose manners, although I
well remember that I have related in the Acts of the Emperor Marcus, and
diverse times afterward, yet will I now also briefly write somewhat of the
same. Among these nations, whose beginning reaches out unto the or waterfals.
Cataracts h of Nilus, and to the confines of the or Blemyes.
Blemyae i, they be warriors and martial men, all of like condition, half
naked, clad as far as their groine with painted or stained short cassockes,
by the help of swift horses and slender gant cammels, raunging here and there,
as well in peace, as in troublesome times: neither does any of them ever lay
hand to the plough, plant or dress a tree, nor get his living by tillage of
the ground, but wander always they do from place to place, dissete far and
wide asunder, without house and home, without any abiding seat and positive
laws: neither can they any long time endure the same air, nor the tract of
one and the same soil ever pleases them: the manner of their life is always
in flight and flitting: and mercenarie wives they have, hired by covenant and
upon condition for a time; and for a show yet of matrimony, the wife that shall
be, by way of dowry presents unto her husband a spear and a tent, after a
certain set day ready to depart from him, if she be so disposed. And
uncredible it is, with what heat both sexes of them are given over to fleshly
lust: and so long as they live, they use so to rove and scatter themselves
abroad, that the woman wedded in one place, is brought to bed in another, and
leads her children far off, without any time at all permitted of rest and
quietness. They feed generally of Venison, and great plenty of milk, which
is their chief sustenance: also of many kinds of herbs, and what birds can
be gotten by fowling: and for the most part we have seen them altogether
ignorant of the use either of corn or of wine. Thus much of a dangerous and
mischievous people. Now return we to our proposed text.

CHAP. IIII. The Massacres of Constantius Caesar, committed in the West, by the advice and endevors of flatterers about him.
WHiles these things thus pass in the East, Constantius keeping his winter at
Arelate.
Arles, after he had set forth his stage plays and k Circeian games with
sumptuous furniture and provision, upon the the x. of October.
sixth day before the Ides of October, which made up the thirtieth year of his
Empire, peising all strange occurrents with a very heavy hand, and
entertaining what doubtful or false matter soever was presented unto him, as
evident and truly known; among other things after he had caused Gerontius, a
comitem.
captain 1 of Magnentius his faction, to be sore tortured, awarded him to
woeful exile. And like as a crasie and sickly body is wont to be sore
distempered upon every light grievance, even so his base, faint, and tender
mind, supposing whatsoever he heard spoken, was some practice or plot devised
to the loss or danger of his life and estate, with the slaughter of innocent
persons achieved a lamentable victory: for look what martial man, what
honorable person or noble gentleman in all his train was but by some flying
rumor charged to have favored and maintained his Magnentius.
enemies part, sure he was to have heavy chains hung upon him, and so was
drawn and haled like unto a beast; yea, and though his very adversary or none
at all followed hard upon him (as if it sufficed only that he was but named,
presented, or accused) he had sentence pronounced against him either to suffer
death, or to lose his goods, or else to be confined within some desert Island.
This rigor of his was much more exasperate by information given of certain
offensive crimes which were commonly divulged, sounding, as it was said, much
to the prejudice of the imperial majesty; and his suspected anger, set on
fire with flattering speeches (tending all to bloudinesse) of such favorites as
were next about him, ready enough to aggravate and multiply all occurrences,
making semblance also of exceeding grief and sorrow, in case the prince
forsooth should loose his life, upon whose good estate and welfare, as upon a
twined thread, the whole world depended, as they with open mouth and
counterfeit words gave it out. And therefore reported it is, that he commanded
no man at any time (were he once adjudged to be punished for these or such
like offenses) to be called back upon the tendering, as the manner is, of a
commendatorie m testimonial; a thing that hard hearted and inexorable princes
have been wont to do: and this mischievous or deadly vice, which in others
sometime abateth and waxes cooler, in him, as age came upon him, grew the
hoter, whiles a company of claw-backe flatterers egged him forward in his
purposed course: among whom, the principal and of greatest note was one Paulus
a n Notarie, borne in Spain, who verily under a smooth countenance or
Chancellor.
carried a close and secret nature: a man passing witty and subtle, finding out
all the hidden ways to endanger folk. He being sent into Brittany for to
bring away with him certain martial men, who had entered into conspiracy and
action with Magnentius, seeing they could make no resistance, after he had
outrageously come over them in manner of a flood, suddenly seized upon the
fortunes and estates of many more. Thus went he on still making much spoil and
havocke, to the utter undoing of a number, imprisoning such as were free borne,
and afflicting their bodies with bonds, yea and crushing some of them with
mannacles, whiles (forsooth) he patched and pieced many crimes and imputations
together, that he laid to their charge, and all as false as might be:
whereupon was committed such an impious and wicked fact, as branded the days
of Constantius with a note of perpetual shame. There was one Martin that ruled
those provinces as deputy or Justice.
Lieutenant Pro Prafecto.
, who grievously lamenting the miseries of the innocent, and oftentimes
beseeching him to spare the guiltless; when as he could not prevail,
threatened to depart: to the end that this malicious inquisitor and persecutor,
at leastwise for fear of it, might give over at length to draw and induce into
open dangers a people naturally given to quietness and peace. Paulus,
supposing that by this means his profession and trade would decay, as he was a
shrewd artisan, and his craftsmaster in wrapping and linking these and such
like matters together, (whereupon he came also to be surnamed Catena, id est,
a Chain) drew the said Deputy Lieutenant himself (who still protected them,
whom the other as yet had spared) to bear a part in these common perils: and
earnestly bent he was to bring him also bound with Tribunes and many others
before the Ad Comitatum Imperatoris, or to the Court.
Emperors privy o counsel. At which extremity of mischief so near at
hand, Martin thoroughly provoked, caught up a or Rapier.
dagger, and assaulteth the person of the same Paulus. But for that his right
hand Happily for the gout, or some other infirmity therein.
failed him, so that he was not able to give a deadly wound with the said
weapon drawn, as it was, he stabbed himself into the side: and so by this
unseemely kind of death departed he this life (a most righteous man) after he
had attempted by some stay to ease the piteous cases of many. Which wicked
parts thus committed, Paulus all embrued with blood, returned to the princes
camp, bringing with him a number of prisoners, covered in manner all over with
chains, as men dejected and plunged into miserable calamities and woeful
sorrows: at whose coming were the Eculei.
Rackes p made ready; the hangman prepared both hooks and wresting-vices: and
of them, many were proscribed and outlawed, some banished, and other had their
punishment by bloody stroke of civil sword: For, no man well can remember,
that under Constantius any one went away quiet, whenever these matters were
but by way of whispering set a foot. During these troublous affairs, Orphitus
governed the Vrbem aeternam.
City of Rome as q Having civil jurisdiction as a Judge etc. or L. Justice.
Prefect, bearing himself insolently beyond the bounds of the dignity
conferred upon him: a wise man verily, and passing well practiced in plees and
judicial proceedings, but nothing so well furnished and adorned with liberal
arts, as a nobleman ought to have been: in the time of whose being in place,
dangerous commotions were stirred up for scarcity of wine; the common people
greedily set upon the use and expense whereof, is soon provoked to raise many
tumults and insurrections.

CHAP. V. The lively portraiture of the city of Rome, in her flower and
youthful days of growth, in her full years and strength, in her old age also
and crasie time full of diseases. Likewise, the description of the most
miserable estate thereof under Constantius and Gallus.
ANd for as much as I suppose some strangers, who happily shall chance to
read these writings may wonder, what should be the reason that when my style
is diverted to show those things that were done in Rome, I relate nothing but
of seditions, tavernes, and such like base matters: I will summarily touch the
causes hereof, and not swerve by my good will one whit at all from the truth.
What time as Rome began to arise with luckie presaging tokens even at the very
first to worldly glory, like to live and flourish so long as men shall remain
upon the face of the earth, to the end that she might increase and grow on
still to an high estate by the firm league of eternal peace; Virtue and
Fortune (which for the most part use to disagree) concurred both together: of
which twain, if the one should have failed, she had never mounted to the pitch
of that perfection. The people thereof from their very cradle (as one would
say) and first infancy, unto the end of their childhood, which compriseth the
space well near of three hundred years, endured neighbour-warres even round
about their walls: and then, being once entered into the growing age and prime of
their youth, after manifold travailes and toils of war, passed over the
Alps, and beyond the sea: no sooner were they shot up to their vigorous years
and perfect manhood, but from all parts of the wide world environed within the
cope and curtain of heaven, they carried away victorious triumphs: And now
enclining toward old age, and conquering diverse times by the name only and
fame that went of them, betook themselves to a more calm and quiet manner of
life. Therefore, this venerable and renowned city, after she had subdued and
yoked the proud necks of fierce and savage nations, and made laws (the only
ground-works and everlasting stays or hold fasts of freedom) like a good and
thriftie mother, prudent withal and wealthy, committed unto the Or Emperors.
Caesar's q, as to her children, the whole right and interest of the
inheritance, to be managed and ordered by them: and long since, although the
tribes sat still, the centuries were quiet, and no contention or strife rose
about giving voices, but as if the peaceable and secure days of Pompilius his
reign were returned again throughout all the quarters and coasts of the
earth, honored she was like a sovereign lady and queen, and in every place
the reverend gray hairs of Senators carrying authority with them, and the
name of the people of Rome became highly Circumspect^^^.
regarded and held in reverence. But this glorious show and majesty of their
councels and assemblies, is much blemished by the rude disorder and levitie of
some few, who consider not where they were borne; but as if the reins were let
loose unto vices, are slipped quite aside into errors and wantonness. For, as
Simonides the Lyricall Poet teaches us, For him that would live perfectly
happy, meet it is and requisite above all things, that his native country be
glorious. Now, some of these there are, who making account that they may be
eternized by Statues, are hotely affected thereunto: as if they were to gain
greater guerdon out of works made of brass and copper, void of all sense,
than from a conscience privy to good and honest acts: and the same (forsooth)
they take order to be gilded all over: which honor was conferred first upon
Acilius r Glabrio, when by policy and force of arms he had vanquished king
Antiochus. But how brave and goodly a thing it is, for a man despising these
gaudes and trifles of no worth, to mount and climb up the long and difficult
ascents of true glory, as Vates Ascraeus.
Hesiodus the Poet says, Cato Censorius has showed, who being demanded, why
among many noble personages he had not his own Image standing: I had leiffer
(quoth he) that good men should move question, wherefore I have not deserved
it, than (which of the twain is the worse) mutter softly among themselves, why
I have obtained it. Others again, reposing the chiefest grace and glory that
is, in carroches higher than ordinary, and in the superfluous braverie of
sumptuous apparel, sweat again under their weighty and massy mantles,
which they may fasten with very claspes to the shoulders, bearing out from the
neck, having exceeding fine our wrought therein and passing through, and the
same standing out from all places, and the left side especially: to the end,
that these inner garments, thus beset with long jagges and purfles, might shine
again with variety of threads seen quite through, and those portrayed and
shaped after many and sundry forms of living creatures. Moreover, there are
among them such, as, unasked of any man, with a counterfeit gravitie of
countenance, extol their possessions and patrimonies infinitely above all
measure, multiplying the yearly revenewes and profits of their lands
fruitful (as they think) by good husbandry, which they vaunt abroad and spare
not, that they possess from East to West; ignorant as they be, how their
ancestors, by whom this greatness of the Roman State reaches so far,
became so renowned in the world, not by their riches, but by most cruel and
bloody wars; who differing neither in wealth, nor fare at their table, or
homeliness of apparel from common soldiers, conquered all before them by
virtue and valor. Hence it was, that the noble Valerius s Publicola was buried
by a contribution of money gathered for him: and the poor wife of t Regulus,
together with her children, were maintained by the help and relief of her
husbands friends: the daughter also of u Scipio had a dowry given her out of
the Chamber of the city, when the nobility were abashed to see the flower of
a big and grown virgin unbestowed, and ashamed at the long absence of her
poor father. But now adays, if happily thou, a good honest man, come as a
stranger unto one of these great monied men, that are so puffed up with pride
for their full bags, to do thy duty by way of salutation, at the first thou
find entertainment, as a right welcome and wished-for guest; and after many
and sundry questions asked (whereby thou art forced to make some lies) thou
wonderest, being never seen before, that this great man thus affectionately
favors thee so mean a person: insomuch as it repents thee that thou had
not seen ten years sooner these happy days, as a principal felicity. And
thus presuming confidently upon such Roman courteous affability, if thou do
the same the next morrow, thou art at a stand with thy self, as one altogether
unknown and come of a sudden, whiles that wondrous encourager that
heartened thee so much but yesterday, is in doubt a long time, who thou
should be, and from whence thou art come. But being at the length agnized
and taken into the rank of friends, if thou show thy self ordinarily in his
chamber of presence to do honor and reverence, intermingled with other
waiters, for three years together, and be wanting as many for them again,
thou returnest to abide the like services, not once demanded where thou were,
and whether thou did depart out of the way; thou shall to no in stipite
submitendo.
purpose spend all thy life time in servile attendance and drudgerie. Moreover,
when preparation begins to be made for these long and unholesome feasts, which
are kept ordinarily after certain set times between, or the distribution of
these solemn doles, or gifture banquets; put to question and debated it is
with careful and serious deliberation, Whether it will be meet (excepting
those to whom by course it is due) that a stranger should be invited? and if
after full and mature consultation had, it be agreed upon, That it shall so be;
such an one is called and admitted, who watches and waits duly before the
houses of Chariottiers, or professes Dice-play and Cheators craft, or else
makes as though he knew some more secret arts than ordinary: for, learned and
sober persons they even of purpose avoid as unluckie folk and good for
nothing. Over and besides, the x Nomenclatores or beadles also, who are wont to
set to sale these and such like vanities, receiving some piece of money for a
bribe, foist in among the rest at suppers and dinners, certain base and
obscure fellows in lieu of others. For, I overpasse, least I should proceed
too far, their wastfull and excessive fare at the table, and the sundry
allurements of pleasures; minding rather to speak of this point, that some of
them drive their steedes apace (as if they were public posthorses of the
State, with shoes, as they say, especially Signatis (quod dicitur) calccu.
marked to be seen, without fear of danger) through the large and spacious
streets of the city, yea and over the stones turned up of the broken
pavements: drawing after them at their tails great trains of the meniall and
household servitors, like unto crewes and troops of preading brigands, leaving
at home to keep the house not so much as Sannio, according as the Te^ene^.
Comicall Poet says: With which retinue of attendants and followers, many of
their dames with their heads covered and in close chariots, course up and down
over all the quarters of the city; and like as skillful captains, in
arraunging of their battles, place first in the vantguard thick and strong
squadrons to affront the enemy, then light armed soldiers, afterward the
archers and darters, and last of all in the rereward the companies of succors,
ready upon any extremity to advance forward, and to charge: even so,
according to the careful direction and dispose of those overseers and masters
that have the marshalling of these city servants (otherwise to seek what to
do) and make a goodly show with warders in their right hands, now as if the
signal were given, close unto the front of the chariot marches all the sort
of weavers and embroderers; next unto whom goes the black guard and
kitchinree; then all the meiny one with another, with a rascal rabble of idle
commons from out of the neighbor streets, joining unto them: in the last
place, a multitude of guelded grooms keeping their ranks and files, the old
ones foremost, and the boys behind, of complexion pale and wan; for their
lineaments and making of the body, crooked and ill favored: So that which way
soever a man went, and beheld such companies of maimed and dismembered men, he
might detest the remembrance of Semiramis that Queen in old time, who was the
first that ever guelded the tender babes of male kind, offering violence, as it
were, unto nature, and turning her quite back from her intended course: who at
their very first beginning and nativity, by those primitive fountains of seed
which they are borne with, showed in some sort by a secret ordinance the ways
and means to propagate posterity. The case thus standing, those few houses
which before time were frequented with serious students and professors of
learning, swell now and overflow with the ridiculous toys of lithernesse,
resounding with loud noise and shrill ringing, as well of wind-Organs as
stringed instruments. Furthermore, instead of the Philosopher, a Chaunter; and
in place of the Orator, a teacher of trifling and toyish arts is in request:
and whereas the Libraries be shut up fast for ever like unto Sepulchers, framed
there be Organs, or water instruments, huge Harpes like unto chariots,
Haut-boys also, and no mean furniture for gesturing actors and stage players.
Finally, the world is grown now to this baseness and indignity, that when
aliens and strangers were driven forth of the city by the head and shoulders
for fear (not long since) of dearth and scarcity of victuals, yea and the
students or professors of liberal Sciences (whereof the number was exceeding
small) without any delay or breathing time, thrust out, yet were there kept
still the followers of wanton gesturing wenches, such as were so indeed, or but
counterfeits for the time, yea, and there remained behind three thousand such
dancing wenches, not so much as once disturbed and troubled, together with
their quiers, and as many masters and teachers to them: and what way soever a
man casts his eye, he may behold a mighty number of women with their hair all
to curled and frizled (who if they had wedded, might well by this time for
their age have been the mothers of children at three several births) dancing
and footing it upon the pavements, until they be weary again, wagging and
winding themselves with many a turn about, whiles they express and resemble
an infinite number of counterfeit forms that Stage Plays have devised.
Moreover, no doubt is made of this, that when Rome was in times past the
dwelling place of all virtues, the Nobility and Gentilrie for the most part
(if any strangers well borne and of good fashion, came thither) used with many
offices of kindness and courtesy to keep them there still (like as the y
Lotophagi in Homer with their sweet fruits and pleasant berries.) But now, such
is the vanity and pride of some, that they esteem all bred and borne without
the walls of the city, to be base and of no worth, unless they be childlesse
and unmaried folk: and incredible it is, what obsequious loating and courting
there is at Rome sundry ways to such persons as are without children. And for
as much as among them, as in the head place of the world, grievous diseases
reign and rage in the highest degree, for the allaying and assuaging only
whereof, no art of Physic is of any force; devised there is a preservative
and helpefull mean therefore, to wit, that no man should visit and see a
friend, that suffers such maladies. And among those few wary cautions and
provisoes there is another effectual remedy ordained, namely, That such
servants as have been sent to enquire how those of their acquaintance do that
are held with this disease, they receive not into the house again, before they
have cleansed their bodies with a bathe: so fearful be they even of an
infection, that other men's eyes only have seen. And yet, as careful as they
be in these points to save themselves, some you shall have (enfeebled
otherwise, and much weakened in their lims) if they be requested to a
marriage, where gold is offered with hollow right hands, to go lustily and
nimbly enough even as far as to Spoleto.
Spoletium. Well, these be the courses that the Gentry take. To speak now of
the multitude, which consists of the base and poor commons; some pass all
the night long in the wine tavernes, others lurk within the shadie boothes and
bowers of Theaters, which Catulus imitating the wantonness of Capua, in his
Aedileship pitched and reared first: or eagerly play at dice, making a foul
and unseemely noise with snuffing and drawing back their wind inwardly at
their broken nosethrils: or else (which of their delights is the greatest) from
morning to night they abide till they faint again, in rain, or sunshine,
enquiring diligently after the chief prizes or delinquencies both of
chariotters, and also of horses. And a very wonder it is, to see so infinite a
number of the common people with such an ardent mind and affection, depending
upon the event of these chariot-runnings and contentions for the best game.
These and such like vanities suffer no serious and memorable thing to be gone
in hand with at Rome. Now therefore I am to return unto my text.

CHAP. VI. Gallus takes pleasure in spilling of man's blood, and manageth all
his affairs unfortunately, and by commandment from Constantius admonished
hereof, makes a tumult, whereupon ensues horrible bloodshed in the East.
CAesar now by this time having given the head unto licentiousnes more and
more, became burdenous and offensive to all good men: and from henceforth using
no mean or measure, plagued all parts of the East, sparing neither honorable
persons nor the principal Burgesses and nobles of cities, no nor the inferior
commons. In fine, the chief masters of the reverend order and state of
Antioch, by virtue of one writ z or warrant he commanded to be put to death,
enraged and wood hereupon, for that when he out of season urged instantly to
have a cheapnesse and low price set in the market, what time as a general
scarcity was feared, they answered him in some hard and unreasonable terms,
that it was not convenient: and died they had every mothers son, in case
Honoratus, Comes.
lieutenant general of the East for the time being, with firm resolution had
not withstood his proceedings. This also was no obscure and covert sign of his
cruelty, that he took delight in bloody sports, and in the Cirque or show
place joyed to see six or seven combats, otherwhiles forbidden, of champions
wounding and killing one another, and to behold them all agore blood, as if
(forsooth) he had gained some rich and great booties. Over and besides, his
purpose forward enough of it self to do mischief, was set more on fire by a
vile and base woman; which being let into the palace (as she required) had
disclosed a conspiracy, and made known, That certain soldiers of the
meanest reckoning and condition laid wait secretly for him: whereat Constantina
much rejoicing, as if now her husbands life had been secured and safe for
ever, rewarded her highly, and setting her in a coach, sent herforth at the
palace gates into the open streets, that by these allurements she might entice
others also to discover the like or greater treasons. After this, Gallus
minding to make a journey to or Hieropolis. Hal^pp^. Be^^nio.
Hierapolis, to the end that in outward show he might personally be seen in a
voyage, whereas the Comminaltie of Antioch humbly besought him to remove the
dread they had of famine, which for many and those weighty reasons was
Spera^atur.
feared would shortly ensue, did not (as the manner of princes is, who of their
large power and prerogative yield remedy from time to time of such local and
public distresses) take order for any dispose, or that victuals should be
transported out of the provinces bordering upon them; but unto the multitude
(fearing the utmost extremities) appointed Theophilus (...) so called because
he had Consuls ornaments he was a deputy (...) under (...).
the President of Syria, who stood hard by for their governor, replying
continually unto them in these terms, That no man could want food, if the
Governor were unwilling thereto. These speeches incensed the boldness of the
baser sort. Now when scarcity of victuals grew still more and more, upon
hunger and fury withal, at the instigation of one Eubulus, a man of much
reputation among them, they set fire to his stately and gorgeous house, and
burnt it: and the foresaid governor, as being one delivered over unto them by
an imperial judgment, they laid at and spurned with their heels, knocked
well and soundly with their fistes, and when as he was half dead, piteously
mangled and tare in pieces. After whose lamentable death, every man considering
in the destruction of one, the like peril of his own person, upon this fresh
example was afraid of semblable measure. At the same time Serenianus, late Ex
duce. Du^ at the first was L. Warden of the inland Marches, and of less
authority than Comes: how ever since the name is more honorable. Pancirol. in
Notitiam.
L. Warden of the Marches (through whose slacknesse and cowardice, as we have
related before, otherwise called Coelesyria.
Coele in Phoenice was harried and wasted) being accused of high treason, and
justly endited according to law, (uncertain it is by what favor and mediation
he could be acquit) was manifestly convicted, that he sent a familiar friend,
with a cap (wherewith he used to cover his head) enchaunted by the means of
sorcerie and unlawful arts, unto an idoll-temple where an Oracle was, to
enquire expressly, Whether there were fore-signified unto him the Empire firm
and sure as he desired? And thus at one and the very same time there fell out a
joint and twofold mischief: for that both Theophilus, a guiltless person,
was cut off by an horrible accident; and Serenianus also, who had deserved the
curse of all men, went away clear, as harmless and blameless,
notwithstanding the public force of justice in manner openly gainsayd it.
These prankes Constantius hearing of anon, and being informed of some
particulars beside by the relation of Thalassius, who, as he understood
already, was now remooved and departed after the ordinary course, writing in
very kind manner unto Caesar, by little and little abridged him of the means and
maintenance he had about him, making fair semblant, That himself was much
disquieted, for fear that the soldiers having little or no employment, and
therefore commonly given to be tumultuous, should conspire and complot his
destruction; and so commanded him to rest contented and take up with the
trained companies of the Palatine a soldiers, of the b Protectores, together
with the c Scutarij and d Gentiles: and charged Domitianus, late high e
Treasurer, now Prefect or Justice, that when he was once come into Syria, he
should in gentle and modest terms set forward Gallus in his journey, who, as
he had oftentimes heard say, made have into Italy. No sooner was Domitian
arrived at Antioch, whither he hastened with all the speed he could, in regard
of this Commission, but passing hard by the palace gates, and contemning
Caesar, whom it had well beseemed him to have given the seeing, on he went to
the Praetorium f with a goodly pomp and solemn show: and pretending along
time sickness for his excuse, he neither set foot within the palace, nor went
abroad into the city; but keeping close, plotted many means to bring him to
destruction, putting into his reports some unnecessarie matters beside the
purpose, which otherwhiles he sent unto the prince. At the last, being
entreated and admitted into the Counsel chamber
Consistory g, without any circumstance of words by way of preface premised,
inconsiderately enough, and bluntly: Be gone Caesar (quoth he) as you are
commanded, and know this, That if you make any stay, I will cause forthwith
all the provision for maintenance of your self and of your palace to be
carried away. With this peremptory speech and no more, thus malapartly
delivered, he departed somewhat angry, and came not afterward in his sight,
although he was often sent for. Hereupon the Gallus.
other al in a fume and chafe, as one that suffered injuries and indignities,
committed the said Prefect to ward, under the custody of trusty pentioners of
his guard: which when Montius understood, being at that time or Treasure:
Questor h, a man verily of a rigorous nature, but yet somewhat inclined to
mildness, called unto him the chief of the Palatine trained companies, and
spoke unto them in mild and gentle terms, saying, It was neither meet nor
expedient thus to do: but, proceeding withal to other words in a chiding
accent; That if they liked and allowed of this course, after the Statues of
Constantine were cast down, they might with less fear certainly devise how
to take away [the or Praefects.
Emperours] life also. Gallus taking knowledge hereof, faring as a serpent at
which some dart is shot, or stone flung, abiding his utmost hopes, and seeking
to save himself by any means, commanded all his soldiers to assemble in
arms, and when they stood astonished, he whetting and gnashing his teeth, Be
pressed (quoth he) right valiant men, to assist me in ieopardie together with
you. Behold how Montius in a strange and unwonted humor of swelling pride, by
these muttering words of his charge us as rebels and spurners against the
sacred majesty of the Emperor: displeased for sooth and angry, for that I
commanded in regard of fear only, the malapart and stout Prefect, who made
himself ignorant what the course of the world and State requires, to be kept
inward. This said, the military men, very desirous many times of stirs and
troubles, without any longer stay, first set upon Montius (whose lodging was
hard by) a weerish old man and a sickly, and with hairie cords bound fast to
his legs, drew him stride long without any intermission as far as to the
Praetorium praefecti, i, the house appointed for the Prefect.
Praefects Praetorium. And in the same gary braid they tied Domitian likewise
with his head forward to a sled or ladder, and so harried and hurried them both
together up and down all over the broad streets of the city. And now by this
time that the knitting of their joints and limbs were plucked asunder, they
clambering over their dead bodies, mangled and dismembered in most unseemely
manner, as if now they had taken their fill of revenge, cast them soon after
into the river. Now, these men so outrageous, desperate, and even wood again,
one Luscus, governor of the city, whom suddenly they had a sight of, had
incensed to attempt these wicked designs, and together with him Sthenelaus,
captain or leader of the Porters, inciting and often calling upon them to the
execution and quick dispatch of that which they had begun, who not long after
was therefore burned quick. And because Montius, ready to yield up his vital
breath, under their hands, that like butchers were tearing him in pieces, cried
out diverse times, and laid much blame upon Epigonus and Eusebius, without
naming either their profession, or place and degree; much diligent search there
was, What these persons should be? and that the business might not wax any
thing cool, brought out of Lycia there was Epigonus a Philosopher, and out of
Mysia Eusebius, having his surname of Piety, a quick and vehement Orator:
whereas the foresaid Montius.
Qustor had appeached and charged, not them, but certain masters of forges or
worke-houses i, who promised armor, if happily any commotion and trouble in the
State should arise.

At the very same time Apollinaris, who had married Domitians daughter, late
graund Agens paiarij curum.
Seneschall, or steward of the palace, was sent from his father in law into
Mesopotamia, a man out of all measure inquisitive among the military bands
that abode there, Whether they received any secret letters of Gallus now
projecting and plotting some higher designs? who having learned what had been
done at Antioch, passed through Armenia the less, and went to Constantinople:
and from thence being brought back again by the Per protectores, or Squires
of the Body.
Guard-souldiors, was laid up fast, and kept close prisoner. Whiles these
things were thus a working, intelligence was given of a royal robe woven
secretly in Tyrus, but it was not certainly known who put it forth to be
wrought, or for whose use it was provided. The governor therefore of that
province for the time being, Apollinaris the father, for names sake was brought
in question, as privy thereto, and many others were gotten together out of
diverse cities, who had grievous imputations charged sore upon them of heinous
and horrible crimes: and now, the trumpets resounding aloft intestine miseries
and calamities, his turbulent spirit raged not covertly, as before time, but
turned quite aside from the consideration of truth: and whiles no man enquired
duly and by ordinary course into the truth of matters plainly charged upon
men, or cunningly devised against them, nor once putting difference between
the innocent and the guilty, all right and equity, as thrust out of the
judgment places, was departed and gone quite: whiles also the lawful defense
of causes was put to silence, there was nothing so rife as the Carnifex.
rapinarum sequester.
hangman, sequestring of pillage, hoodwincking, punishing by the purse, and
confiscation of goods every where throughout the East provinces, which I think
it meet and convenient to reckon up, all save Called now Azamia, and Mcredin,
with sundry other names, by diverse Geographers.
Mesopotamia (set already in due place, when I treated of the Parthick wars)
and Egypt, which of necessity I have put over to another time.

CHAP. VII. The description of the East Provinces, all save Mesopotamia and
Egypt.
AFter a man has passed over the tops of the mountain Supposed to be the
greatest in the world: and according to diverse nations is known by sundry
names.
Taurus, which toward the East rise up a great height, Turcomania and Fini^bia.
Cilicia lies far stretched out in length and breadth, a land enriched with
all good things; and unto the right side thereof adjoyneth Isauria, a fresh and
goodly country in like sort, as well for plentiful vines, as abundance of
corn and grain, through the midst whereof runs the navigable river
Calicadnus. And verily this region two cities (besides many other good towns)
do beautify, to wit, Salefica. Nigro.
Seleucia, founded and built by king Seleucus, and Claudiopolis, which Claudius
Caesar erected as a Colonie. For the city Isauria being before time strongly
walled and fenced, and long since subverted as a rebellious place, and wholly
set upon deadly mischief, is hardly able to show the tokens and remains, and
those very few of the ancient glory that it had: But as for Cilicia that
vaunteth it self of the river Carasit. Launcla.
Cydnus, ennobled it is by Terassa. David's Chytrao.
Tarsus, a fair and goodly city (the founder of it, by report, was Perseus,
the son of Jupiter and Danae, or else one named Sandan, come out of
Aethyopia, a wealthy man and a noble;) by Azar, or Acserai.
Anazarbus also, which carries the name of him that first built it; and by
Mamista. Clyca.
Mopsutrehia, the habitation of that famous Prophet or Divinor Mopsus, who in
his return from the warlike voyage and service of the Argonauts with the
Golden fleece that they took away, wandering apart from the rest of his
company, and arriving upon the coast of Afric, died suddenly: and from that
time his heroicke or Relics.
Manes, covered under Punicke mold, as medicinable, and for the most part
causing health, cure and heal sundry griefs and maladies.

These two Provinces long ago in the Pirates war, intermingled with bands of
brigands and rovers, and by Servilius the Proconsul subdued and brought under
subjection, became tributarie. And these countries verily, scituat as it were
in a promontorie, are severed from that part of the world by the mountain
Monte Negro. Postello and Bell^ni^
Amanus. But the frontier bound of the East stretching forth along, and
straight forward, reaches from the banks of the river Euphrates, unto the
borders of Nilus, bounding on the left hand upon the nations of the Saracenes,
and on the right, lying open to the roaring sea: which tract, or coast, Nicator
Seleucus being possessed of, very much enlarged, when after the decease of
Alexander the Macedonian, he held the kingdoms of Persis in right of
succession: Seleucus, I say, a mighty and victorious king, according as his
Nicator.
surname does import. For making use to his own advantage, of the multitude of
people whom he had ruled a long time in peace, of rude and rusticall
habitations he built cities, surely seated for much wealth and strength both;
of which at this present, albeit they bear Greek names, imposed upon them
according to the founders pleasure, yet loose they not their primitive names
quite, which the ancient erecters of them gave out of the Assyrian tongue. And
after Osdroena, which (as has been said) we have put apart from this
description, first Azor. Mar. Nig.
Comagena, now called Euphratensis, greatly rises up by degrees, a country
well known by reason of three great cities, namely Hierapolis, old Ninus, and
Samosata. Then lies Soria.
Syria, spread abroad along a spacious and large plain: and this has much
renown by Antiochia, a city whereof the world has taken knowledge, with which
no other may compare as paragon, for affluence of commodities, as well
homebred, as thither brought: by Laudichia. Ortel.
Laodicia also, and Hamous. Bellon.
Apamia, by Seleucia likewise, most flourishing cities all even from their
first beginning. Next hereunto is Phoenice, bending up toward the mount
Libanus, a region right lovely and beautiful, adorned with great and fair
cities: among which, for pleasantness and name excel Tyrus, Said. Nigro.
Sidon, and Baruti.
Berytus; and matchable to the same, Camula. Nigro.
Emissa and Seham, or Siam.
Damascus, built in ancient times. Now these provinces (which the river Oronz.
Orontes, as it environeth them, and running along the very foot and bottom of
that high hill or Casius. Larissa. Theveto.
Cassius, discharges it self into the An arm or part of the Mediterranean
sea, thought to be the gulf of A^azzo.
Parthenian sea) Cneus Pompeius, after he had vanquished Tigranes, took from
the kingdoms of the Armenians, and laid unto the Romans dominion. The last
of all the Syriae, is Terra-Sancta, or the Holy land
Palestina, stretched forth far and wide, having plenteous storeof grounds
well husbanded, trim and gay, with certain excellent cities also, nothing
inferior one unto other, but striving all as one would say by line and level,
to be alike and equal: as namely, Azor. Pineto.
Caesarea, which the Great.
Herod founded out of the ground, in honor of Augustus.
Octavian the Emperor; Hebron, sometimes, now Cal^l.
Eleutheropolis, and In times past Salem, Sichem, and Ephron. Haebr.
Neapolis: in like sort Ascalon, Gaza, and Iulia, built in the age aforegoing.
In these tracts there is no where to be seen a river navigable, and in most
places hot waters of their own nature arise out of the ground, medicinable
and wholesome for many purposes. But even these countries also, Pompey in like
sort, when he had tamed the Jews, and won Jerusalem, brought into the form
of Provinces, committing the jurisdiction over them to a governor. Close unto
this adjoyneth Arabia, reaching on the other side hard to the Nabataei; a rich
land, flourishing with variety of trade and traffic, replenished also with
strong castles and piles, which for to repel the out-rodes and invasions of
neighbor nations, the men of old time in their watchful care raised along the
streights and passages, in meet places, and advantageous. This region also has
among some towns, cities likewise, to wit, B^tra. (...).
Bostra, Geraza, and Philadelphia, with strong walls most surely fenced. And
this very country, Traian the Emperor, when he had given it the name of a
Province and set a governor over it, enforced to yield obedience unto our
laws, having many a time quelled and abated the swelling pride of the
inhabitants, what time as he made glorious and brave war upon Media and the
Parthians. Semblably, the Isle Cyprus, dissoigned afar off from the firm
land, and full of havens, two cities among other towns standing thick, do
make renowned, namely, Salamis and Paphus: the one in much request and
reputation for the holy alta^s and shrines of Jupiter, the other for the temple
of Venus. Now the same Cyprus abounds in so great and so manifold plenty of
all things, that standing in no need at all of foreign help, by the means
that it has of the own, is able to build a great carricke or ship of
burden, from the very bottom keele beneath up to the highest top-sailes, and
having rigged and furnished the same with all tackling thereto belonging,
shoots it to sea. Neither bash I to say, that the people of Rome invaded this
Isle, rather upon a greedy mind to encroch, than any just title thereto. For,
after that king Ptolome, our confederat and allie, by occasion that our
treasure went low, was by virtue of a decree, without any fault on his part
committed, proclaimed Proscribi.
Outlaw, and thereupon he voluntarily made himself away by drinking poison;
both it became tributarie, and the spoils also thereof, as of an enemy state,
were bestowed in a fleet, and brought into Rome city by Cato. Now will I come
back again to the order of my history.

CHAP. VIII. Certain persons, but principally Epigonus and Eusebius, by the
commandment of Gallus are executed.
AMid these sundry mischiefs and miseries, falling one in the neck of
another, Vrsicinus,
he (on whom upon mine allegiance I was by the Emperor commanded to give
attendance) being sent for from Nisibis, the keeping whereof he had in charge,
was driven to look narrowly into the beginnings and occasions of these
dangerous debates: a man gainesaying and repugning the flatterers that by whole
troops barked at him, and one, that always had been a doutie warrior, both
souldior and captain, but a mere stranger in law cases and troubles at the
bar: who being much perplexed with fear of his own danger toward, when as
he saw those suborned accusers and judges associate and joined with him, newly
appearing and showing their heads out of the same pits; what matters were in
plotting and devising, either under hand, or openly, he by secret letters
informed Constantius of, craving means of aid and assistance, for fear
whereof, the proud and swelling humor of Caesar so notoriously known might
breath out and be spent. But by this overmuch wariness and circumspection of
his, he happened to stick fast among worse snares laid for him, as I shall
show hereafter, whiles his envious concurrents packed and patched grievous
matter to entrap him unto Constantius, a prince otherwise indifferent and
moderate enough; but if any person whatsoever, base though he were, and
unknown, had once put into his head some such matter as this, very cruel and
implacable, and in this Causarum titulo.
matter of causes in trial unlike himself. Upon the day therefore appointed
aforehand for these detestable inquisitions and examinations, there sat him
down as Judge for form and fashion, the Magister equitum to wit, Vrsicinus.
general of the Horsemen, with other assessors to him, who were taught their
lessons, and directed what they should do: and assistant there were on either
hand the Notaries, ready to carry in post have what questions were demanded,
and what answers were made, unto Caesar; by whose commandment, set wholly
then upon cruelty, through the instigation of the queen, laying her ear
otherwhiles out through the tapistrie hangings, many, not permitted once to
clear themselves of the crimes objected, nor allowed any defense, were cast
away and undone. First therefore of all others, came to the bar Epigonus and
Eusebius, laid hard unto and sore wronged for the affinity of their names. For
I have said before, that Montius a little before his death blamed certain
Fabricarum tribanos.
masters of the Forges, who bare these names, as having promised some means
and helps to work revenge when time should serve. And verily Epigonus, a
Philosopher in habit only and apparel, when he had by much entreatie craved
favor in vain, after that his sides were tewed and gashed, yea and the fear
of death was presented unto him, by a shameful confession avouched himself to
be party and accessarie in such plots and projects as never were, whereas he
had neither seen nor heard anything, silly man he, as one altogether
unacquainted in law matters and judicial proceedings. But Eusebius standing
very confidently to the denial of the imputations laid upon him,
notwithstanding he was Suspensus.
hoysed k up aloft upon the rack, persisted long in one and the same state,
crying out, That this was plain robbery, and no lawful judgment. Now whiles
he called very instantly for his accuser, and the ordinary course of trial,
as one skillful in the laws, Caesar informed hereof, and supposing this
liberty and free speech of his to be pride, commanded him to be torn and
mangled as an audacious and malapart slaunderer: who being so rent and
bowelled, as that he had no part of his body clear for to be tormented any
longer, crying up to heaven for justice, and smiling under a grim and angry
look, with grounded resolution continued steadfast and constant, not enduring
to accuse himself nor any man else: and so at length, neither confessing nor
convicted, together with his abject companion, was condemned to suffer death.
And led forth he was to execution, with a fearelesse and unappalled courage
reproching the iniquity of those days, and following the example of that
ancient Stoicke Zeno, who having been tortured a long time, for to express
some lies from him, plucked his own tongue from the very root, and with his
spettle all bloody, spit it at the very eyes and face of the l Cyprian king, as
he questioned with him. After this, the royal garment abovesaid was sought
for: and when the servants that died purple, upon torturing had confessed a
little jacket for the body, woven without sleeves, there was brought in one
named Maras, a Deacon, as the Christians term him, to give evidence: whose
letters written in the Greek tongue unto the Master or foreman of a Weavers
shop in Tyrus, were produced: wherein very urgently he called upon the said
party, to have the piece hastened forward; but what piece he showed not.
Finally, the same Maras, tormented even to danger of death, could not yet be
forced to confess any thing. During this inquisition, which extended to sundry
estates and degrees, when some things appeared doubtful, and others again
were found slightly committed, after the overthrow and undoing of many one,
both the Apollinares, father and son, were banished: and being come as far
as to a place named Crateras, a manor or village of their own, standing four
and twenty miles from Antioch, according to commandment given, their legs
were broken, and they slain. After whose death, Gallus as fierce and cruel as
before, like unto a Lion fleshed with carcasses, made straight search for many
such cheats, the which to report in particular it skilleth not, for fear I
exceed the bounds of my profession, a thing that I must carefully avoid.

CHAP. IX. Constantius highly offended with Gallus, levieth war upon the
Aleman kings: unto whom craving peace, he with consent of the Roman army
grants it.
WHiles the East parts endured this cruel tyranny a long time, so soon as
warm and open weather was come, Constantius in the seventh year of his own
Consulship, and in the second of Caesar's, departed eftsoons from Arelate.
Arles, and went to Valence, a colony or city in Gallia Narbonensis, which
contains Languedoc, Provence, and Daulphine. Ortel.
Valentia, minding to make war upon Gundomadus and Vadomarius, brethren,
kings of the Alemans, by whose often excursions, the lands confining upon the
marches of the Gaulois, were laid wast. And whiles he stayed long there,
waiting for the provision of victual, the conveyance and transporting whereof
out of Acquitaine, was hindered by the Spring raines that fell thicker than
ordinary, and by the rising up of the brooks, Arculanus arrived, one of the m
Guard-band in ordinary, the son of Hermogenes, late master of the Horsemen,
torn in pieces long since in a petty riot and broile of the people, at
Constantinople, as I have above reported: upon whose relation, and that most
truly delivered, namely, what parts Gallus had played; he lamenting sore for
the hurts past, and standing in suspense for fear of those to come, palliated
and stayed the grief of his heart so long as he could. Howbeit, all the forces
in the mean while drawn together unto Cavaillon. Poldo a town in Gallia
Narbonensis.
Cabillo, impatient of delays, grew mutinous and raging, incensed the more,
for that they had not maintenance for their life, by reason that the usual
provision for food etc. was not yet come over to them. Whereupon Rufinus, at
the same time Lord chief Justice, was driven to a very hard extremity: for
compelled he was himself in person to go unto the soldiers thus distempered,
what with hunger, and what with fierceness of their own (who otherwise are
wont, of an inbred disposition, to be always bitterly bent and maliciously
minded against those that are in That exercise civil jurisdiction.
ordinary place of dignity) to give the^ satisfaction, and to show what was the
cause that the convoy of corn and victuals was let. Which was a shrewd
plot, cunningly of set purpose devised, that by this manner of train the
uncle of Rufinus, his mothers brother.
Gallus might come to a mischief, for fear least he, so great and mighty a
man as he was, should whet him on still, and embolden him in his wicked
designs and ungracious attempts. But to prevent this danger, there was great
policy and diligence used. Eusebius, Lord great n Chamberlain, was sent unto
Cabillo with a good sum of gold about him, by the dealing whereof in secret
sort among the principal stirrers of those tumults and seditions, both the
swelling rage of the soldiers abated, and the life also of the foresaid
Praefecti.
Prefect or Justice was saved. And then, after victuals were brought in great
abundance, at the day before appointed the camp removed. And so, when they had
overcome many difficulties, and passed through a number of ways overwhelmed
and covered with snow, being come near unto Where now is Awast, near Basil,
and was sometime called also Augusta Raurico^^m.
Rauracum, a city situate upon the bank of the river Rhene, where a multitude
of Alemans were ready to make resistance, the Romans minding to set a hanging
bridge over the water made of ships linked together, were over-matched and
impeached, by reason that on every side the darts and arrows flew about their
ears: and when this was thought to be an impossible piece of work, the
Emperor casting great matters in his head, stood amazed and doubtful what
course to take. But see, all of a sudden, and unlooked for, there presented
himself unto them a certain guide, skillful in those countries, and upon the
receipt of a piece of money for his good service, he showed unto them in the
night a shallow place full of fourds, whereby the river was passable: and
passed over it might have been, whiles the enemies were busily employed another
way, but that some few of the same nation, who had a more honorable place and
charge of warre-service committed unto them, gave intelligence hereof by secret
messengers unto their own countrymen, as some thought. And with the suspicion
hereof were touched and defamed Latinus, Domesticorum comes.
Captain o of the guard in ordinary, Agilo Tribunus stabuli.
great p master of the Horse, and Scudilo Sc^tarioru^ rector.
Captain q of the Squires of the body, who then were highly esteemed, as those
that bare a chief stroke in the State, and ruled all in all. But the
Barbarians taking counsel according to the occurrents like presently to
ensue, happily, because the r Auspicia either distracted them, or prohibited them
to encounter, now that by the authority of their religion, their rigor, by
which they stood out more confidently, was well mollified, sent in embassage
certain principal persons of mark, to beseech pardon for their offenses, and
to crave peace. The Emperor therefore detaining with him still the
ambassadors of both the kings, and duly weighing a long while this affair in
hand, considering it was but right to have peace granted, upon just and equal
conditions requested; and seeing with a general accord they went all one way,
and approved it as behoofefull and expedient, as the case then stood; assembled
the whole host together, minding to make a brief speech unto them according
to the time: and so standing aloft upon the Tribunal, with a number of the
higher powers and chief officers round about him, spoke and discoursed in this
wise:

Let no man marvel, I pray you (quoth he) that after the painful labors
of long iourneyes spent and past, and plenteous store of victuals gotten
together, now that I approach the territories and towns of the Barbarians (the
confidence that I have in you, leading the way) as suddenly changing my mind,
am diverted to a more mild and peaceable course. For every one of you in his
rank and judgment duly considering with himself, finds this to be true,
That the souldior in all places, although he be strong and vigorous in body,
looks to himself only, and defends his own life: But a General and
Commander of all offices, whiles he, the keeper of other men's lives, is
indifferent unto all, knows, that the regard and consideration of his people
cannot but concern his own defense and safety, and there withal skilleth
remedies that the state of businesses does admit, ought to take hold of all
advantages and good occurrents that by Gods will and providence are presented.
To deliver therefore in few words, and to show for what cause I was willing you
should meet thus altogether, my most trusty fellow-souldiors, lend a
favorable ear to what I shall very briefly declare unto you: for the words
of truth be simple and plain. The high steps and rising degrees of your glory,
which fame growing still in excellent wise spreads among the inhabitants also
even of the utmost coasts of the earth, the kings and nations of the Alemans
standing in dread and fear of, by these Orators whom you behold in place,
crave in humble gesture and lowly manner, forgiveness of faults past, and
peace for time to come: which I, as one taking leisure enough, and a wary
advertiser and adviser of profitable ways, judge meet to be given unto them
(in case you will say yea unto it) considering many reasons and motives
thereto. First, that the doubtful events of war may be declined: then, that
in lieu of adversaries we may gain them to be auxiliaries, which they make
promise of: again, that without bloodshed we might allay the huffing puffes of
stoutnesse and pride, which oftentimes work our provinces mischief: lastly,
pondering and considering this, That he only is not the enemy vanquished,
whose fortune is to die in battle, borne down forcibly with the weight of
armor, and with maine strength; but much more safely, even while the trumpet
is silent, he that voluntarily is subdued and brought to subjection: who by
experience finds, that neither fortitude is wanting against rebellious
spirits, nor clemency toward suppliants. In sum, I rest waiting upon you as
ampiers to know what ye advise, now that I a quiet prince determine and
conclude it meet, upon so happy fortune falling unto us, in temperate wise to
use moderation. For, this that is well resolved upon after due deliberation,
shall not be attributed to your cowardice and want of courage, believe me, but
ascribed to your modesty and humanity. No sooner had he ended his speech,
but the whole multitude, forward enough to effect what the Emperor affected,
commended his counsel, and gave their consent for peace, moved especially
thereunto in this respect, for that they knew full well by many expeditions and
journeyes, That his fortune was watchful over him, and attendant only in
civil troubles, but when soever foreign wars were in hand, for the most
part things fell out heavily on his part.

CHAP. X. Constantius by sundry wily sleights ensnareth Gallus, bereft of his
wife: and when he was by a train brought unto him, puts him to death.
THis done, and a league made after the manner of those nations, with the
solemn complements finished which were thereto belonging, the Emperor
departed to Mediolan^im.
Millaine, there to Winter: where casting off all other weighty cares, he
thought upon Caesar, as the untowardest knurre and difficulty that now
troubled him most, bending his whole endeavor how to shake and overthrow him:
and as he consulted with those favorites next about him in secret conferences,
and by night, what forcible means or cunning devise he might use to effect the
same, before that he in his foole-hardinesse should more eagerly be set upon
mischief, even to the marring and confusion of all, resolved it was, That
laying aside all threats, the said Gallus should under a color of some
public Diet or treaty as touching the State, be sent for by mild and kind
letters, to the end that being destitute of all help, he might without any let
in the way come to destruction. Now whiles all the sort of these weather-cocke
flatterers stood against this resolution, among whom was Arbetio, quick and
sharp set to practice wiles; and Eusebius, then Lord great Chamberlain,
forward enough to do mischief: this came into their heads for to allege,
namely, That Caesar being once departed, a dangerous matter it would be to
leave Vrsicinus in the East, were there none to keep him down, reaching as he
did at higher matters. And with them joined the residue of guelded Eunuchs
within the court, whose covetousness and desire of having more still, was in
those days grown out of all measure, who taking the opportunity of service
and attendance in the privy and bed chamber, conveyed under hand by way of
secret whispering, suggestions of matters, feeding fained imputations: who also
brought into disgrace that right Vrsicinus.
valiant man aforesaid, oppressing him with the heavy load of most grievous
envy, muttering softly, That his sons, grown to be gentlemen of ripe
years, began already to favor of the imperial robe, as being for their
lovely personage and youthful years very gracious and highly favored, to the
manifold skill of arms and agilitie of body trained up and practiced by daily
essaies and proofs of activitie, known also for to be of discreet carriage
and advised counsel: that Gallus of his own nature fell enough, was by
certain persons suborned for the nonce, animated unto cruel acts for this
cause, That after he was become odious, and had incurred the worthy
detestation of all estates and degrees, the ensigns and ornaments imperial
might be transferred unto the Vrsicinus.
master of the horsemens children. When these and the like matters were once
buzzing in his careful and timorous cares, exposed always and open to such
rumors, whiles his mind was swelling and working diverse ways; at the last
upon counsel given he took the best course: and first he commanded Vrsicinus
in very honorable terms to come unto him, pretending this, that, according
as the urgent occasions and affairs of that time required, there might by
joint counsel and consent a good order be set down, and namely, what
increase of forces were requisite to repress the invasions of the Parthicke
nations that threatened open war. And least before his coming he should
suspect any harm toward him, Prosper a s Comes was sent as his vicegerent or
deputy, until he returned: who when he had received letters, and had a
license granted to take up wagons for carriage, he made great journeyes, and
hastened to Millaine. It remained now, that after this, Caesar likewise should
be sent for with speed: and for to put away all suspicion, Constantius by many
fair and flattering words solicited his wife Constantia, or Constantina.
, now after so long time and so much desired and missed as she was, to come
unto him. Who albeit she stood in doubt, as fearing him so often bloudily
minded, yet in hope that she might appease and pacify him her natural
brother, she takes her journey: and when she was entered into Bithynia, in a
certain or baiting place, or lodging.
station named Coenos Gallicanos, she died suddenly of a violent fever. After
whose death, her husband seeing and considering that the trust and affiance
wherewith he thought himself surely upheld was fallen, stood perplexed in
pensive cogitation with himself what way to work. For in the present estate
of his, so troublous, so entangled and brought into the briers, his careful
mind ran ever upon this one thing, That Constantius measuring and weighing all
according to his own will and pleasure, would neither admit satisfaction, nor
pardon offense; but (as he was a prince too much bent to the overthrow of his
kindred) closely lay snares for him, and if he took him once at unawares in a
trip, would be sure to put him to death. Being brought to this hard exigent,
and looking for no other than extremity, unless he watched the better, he
made no more ado, but shot at the highest place of all, if means any way
might have been made unto it. But for want of faithful dealing in his friends
about him, forsaken he was in two respects; both for that they stood in great
fear of him, a cruel and fickle minded prince, and also because they did much
dread the fortune of Constantius, which in civil dissentions usually had the
upper hand. Amid these huge heaps of infinite cares, letters he received
continually from the Emperor, putting him in mind and praying him to come
away, yea and showing (far otherwise than he meant) that the government of
the Commonwealth neither could nor should be divided, but every man ought to
his power for to lend his helping hand unto it, troubled as it was, and waving
to fro; pointing herein at the wasting and spoiling of Gaul: to which reasons
he alleged a precedent and example of no great antiquity, namely, that unto
Dioclesian and his colleague, the t Caesar's not sitting still, but like ^a
Apparitores.
Apparitours, Serieants, and such like ministers running up and down, yielded
their obedience: as also that in Syria, Galerius u in his purple robes went on
foot for the space almost of one mile before the chariot of the Angusti.
Emperor, when he was angry. Well, after many messengers, came Scudilo captain
of the Squires, under the cloak of a nature somewhat rude and uncivile, in
cunning persuasion his crafts-master, who by way of flattering words,
intermingled with serious matter, was the only man of all other that overcame
and won him at last to set forward in his journey, with a counterfeit
countenance many times iterating and redoubling these speeches, That his cousin
Constantius the Emperor.
germane wished earnestly and desired to see him, ready as a mild and
merciful prince to remit and forgive what faults and follies had escaped him:
that he was taken to him as companion and partaker of his majesty, to the end
he should be also a fellow labourer with him, whom both together the Northern
provinces a long time out-toyled and wearied, called for. And, as it usually
falls out when the destinies lay hand on men, that their wits are made blunt
and their senses dulled, by these allurements he was raised up again to the
hope and expectation of better fortunes: and so departing out of Antioch in an
ill hour, and without the guidance of Gods favor, went just as the old
proverb says, out of the smoke into the light fire: and after he was entered
into Constantinople, as in time of prosperity, like one secured of his estate,
he exhibited the games of x horse-running, and adorned the head of Corax the
chariottier as victor, with a crown. Which when Constantius knew, beyond all
measure he chafed: and least peradventure the same Gallus, doubtful of the
future events, might go about in his journey to attempt some means expedient
for his own safety, all the soldiers were of purpose removed, who abode in
the cities that stood in the way. And at that very time Taurus, a Quaestor sent
into Armenia, confidently passed by and balked him, not vouchsafing to salute,
or once to see him. Howbeit, some there came by commandment of the Emperor,
in show of doing diverse duties and services, but ready indeed to observe and
keep him, that he might not be able once to break out nor attempt any stir
secretly. Among whom was Leontius, governor of Rome afterward, as Vt Quaestor
praefectus urbi.
Qustor or Treasurer for the time being; also Lucilianus, as it were Quasi
domesticorum comes.
captain of the guard, and the Scutariorum Tribunus
Tribune of the Squires of the body, named Bainobaudes. Having therefore
travailed a long way in the country, and the same lying plain, when he was
entered into Hadrianopoli.
Hadrianopolis (a city of A Region in Thracia.
Haemimontum) called before time Vscudama, refreshing himself wearied with
travail, for the space of twelve days, he understood that the Thebaeas
legiones.
Theban y legions, wintering in the neighbor towns, had sent certain of
their consorts and companions to encourage him upon their faithful and sure
promises to stay behind. Trusting then confidently in his own strength, he
bestows them in the stations, bordering and confining there together. But
such was the watchful care and observing eye of those about him, that he could
not catch any time or opportunity either to speak ought, or to hear what
intelligences they brought. Then, after more letters still received one in the
neck of another, urging him to be gone, having withal the use of ten
wagons allowed by the State, according to a warrant given, leaving all the
train of the palace, unless it were some gentlemen of the bedchamber, and
servitors at the table, whom he had taken to him to give near attendance; all
sorrowful now, and even made of miseries compelled he was to hasten his pace,
by reason that many drove him forward, cursing ever and anon with shedding
tears his own folly and inconsiderate rashness, which had put him now a
despised and abject caitife under the will and pleasure of weak and feeble
persons. Yet amid these troubles, during the time that nature took her rest,
his senses and spirits were wounded with dreadful specter and fancies
skreaking hideously round about him: and whole companies of those whom he had
killed, with Domitian and Montius leading the way, caught him up, presented him
to the hooks and claws of the Furies, as he imagined in his sleep. For the
soul, loosened from the bonds of the body, being always fresh and in motion,
never wearied, subject also to the cogitations and cares that disquiet men's
minds, gathers night visions, which we call Phantasias. And thus whiles a
most heavy destiny opened the way of fatal necessity, whereby ordained
before it was, that he should be deprived both of life and imperial dignity,
having passed all the journeyes between, by changing of fresh horses, he came
to Pettaw. Lazio.
Petobio, a town of the Bavaria, or Beyerne.
Norici, where the whole knot of covert and hidden traynes laid for him was
discovered: and all on a sudden Barbatio the Comes.
Comes showed himself, he that under him had the charge of the Domesticis
praefuit.
Guard in ordinary (together with Apodemius, a Agentem rebus.
Messenger a or Pursevant) leading a number of soldiers whom the Emperor had
selected, as engaged unto him by the favors and good turns that he had done
unto them, assured that neither for reward nor pity they could be turned
aside. And now went not he to work by way of shaddowed and dissimuled deceit;
but whereas the palace stood without the walls, he did beset it round about
with armed men: and so entering into it before it was full day light, he took
from Caesar all regal garments, and clad him in a coat and common soldiers
cassocke upon it, assuring him and binding it with many an oath, as it were by
the Emperors commandment, that he should not thenceforth sustain any harm:
and forthwith, Rise up, quoth he: and so mounting him ere he was aware upon a
private chariot, led him into Istria, near unto the town otherwise called
Iulia Pietas.
Pola, where sometimes (as I have heard say) Crispus Constantius son was
killed. And when he was kept there most streitly, not worth the ground he went
on, but buried as one would say already (such was the terror of his end so
near at hand) there comes thither unto him in all have Eusebius, at that
time Lord great Chamberlain, with Pentadius the Notarie, and Mellobaudes
captain of the b Armature, by commandment from the Emperor, to compel him
for to say and show particularly for what cause he had commanded every one of
them to be killed that were put to death at Antioch? Whereto changing color,
and looking as pale as c Adrastus, he would have answered to this effect, That
most of them he had murdered through the instigation of his wife Constantina:
not knowing verily, that Alexander the great, when his mother lay hard upon him
to kill a certain innocent person, and said oftentimes withal, in hope of
obtaining afterward what she desired, how she carried him nine months in her
womb; wisely gave her this answer: Good mother ask some other reward and
recompense; for the life of a man is so dear, as no benefit can countervaile
it. Now the Emperor when he understood this, falling into an irreclamable fit
of anger and wrath, reposed all the assurance and confidence he had of
establishing his own security, in making him away. And sending Serenianus
(who as we showed before standing indicted of the crime of Majesty, by means
of certain subtle sleights and juggling casts was acquit) Pentadius also the
Notarie, and Apodemius the Messenger or Pursevant abovesaid, adjudged him to
suffer death, and to lose his head: and so with his hands bound and pinnioned
together, like unto some thief and malefactor, his head was smitten off: thus
when the beauty of his face and head was gone, there lay the trunk of his
deformed carcass left alone, which a little before was dread of cities and
whole provinces.

CHAP. XI. The equity of the heavenly power of God, showed in the variable
fortune and death of some great personages, and of Gallus especially, is here
recommended unto us.
But here the equity and justice of the heavenly power above had a vigilant
eye, as well on the one side as the other. For, not only it surprised Gallus
suddenly with a cruel and bloody end, but also not long after both of them
died a most painful death, who by their forswearing kindly deluding and
beguiling Caesar, an offender though he were, drew him on until he fell into
the net and toil that cost him his life: of which twain, Scudilo by a
distillation or colliquation of the liver casting up his lungs, died: and
Barbatio, who a long time had falsely framed matter of crime against him, when,
after he had been colonel of the Footmen, he was by the secret whisperings
and suggestions of some charged to aspire and reach over-high, and hereof
condemned, to make satisfaction unto Caesar's Manes, that by his fraudulent
practice came to his end, sacrificed his own life by a reproachful death.
These and an infinite sort of such like examples, Adrastia (who has a twofold
name, and is called also Nemesis) the revenger of wicked and ungodly acts, as
also the rewarder of good deeds, works and brings about otherwhiles, and
would God it did so always. A certain high power or authority of the mighty
and operative heavenly Nature she is, according to the opinion and capacity of
men's understandings, placed upon the sphaere of the Moon: or, as some define
her, a substantial Tuition or Defense, by a general power president over the
particular destinies: who, as the ancient Divines or Theologers, faining her
to be the daughter of Justice, do teach, by virtue of a certain hidden
eternity overseeth all earthly things. She as Queen of causes, and Judge of
matters, she also as an umpire to arbitrate, tempereth and shakes the pot of
lots, making alternative turns and changes of accidents: and what our wills
have enterprised and begun, bringing the same otherwhiles to another issue and
end than they aimed at, she shuffleth and rolleth manifold actions together,
by exchange of one for another. And the same power, with the insoluble bond and
hold-fast of necessity, binding the pride of mortal men, swelling in vain,
and turning to and fro, as she knows full well, the weights of increments and
detriments both, of risings and fallings, one while presses down and
weakeneth the stiff necks of high minded men, another while raising up good
men from below, advances them to an happy life. Now has fabulous antiquity
therefore fitted wings to her, that by her flight-swiftnesse she might be
thought present in all places: and given her the helm or rudder of a ship to
carry before her, yea, and put a wheel under her, that it might not be
unknown, how she running through all the elements rules the universal world.
Well, Caesar being weary even of himself, by this kind of untimely death
departed out of this life in the nine and twentieth year of his age, when he
had reigned four years. Borne he was among the Thuscanes in It keeps still
the same name. Ortel.
Massa Veternensis, whose father was Constantius, the brother of Constantine
the Emperor, and his mother Galla, sister unto Rufinus and Cerealis, noble
Consuls in their time, and honorable governors of provinces: a man of a
goodly presence and well favored, of comely shape and feature of body, his
lims straight and proportionably compact: the hair of his head yellow, and
beard soft, by reason that the down was but newly come upon his tender
cheeks, yet so, as that he carried betimes a manly countenance: in manners and
behavior as much difference there was between him and his brother Julian, as
between Vespasians sons, Domitian and Titus. Being lifted up to the highest
degree of honor that Fortune could give him, he had experience of those
mutable motions of hers which play and make good game with men; now extolling
some to the very starrie sky, then plunging them down into the deep pit of
Cocytus: whereof there being innumerable examples, yet will I lightly touch and
run over but some few. This variable and unconstant Fortune, made Agathocles
the Sicilian of a Potter a King: and Dion^sius Tyrant of Sicilie.
Denis, that terror sometime of the world, to be the master of a Grammar
school. This advaunced to an high estate Andriscus the Adramittene, borne in a
or Fulling myll: a Fullers son.
Walke-myll, under the name of The false and counterfeit name of Philip.
Pseudo-Philippus d: and the lawful son of Perseus she taught the Ferrars
craft, for to get his living. The same Fortune, caused Mancinus, after he had
been Lord general of the field, and an absolute Commander, to be subject to
the Numantines: Veturius and Claudius, proud and stout in the highest degree,
to stoop unto the Corsi: Regulus also to yield unto the cruelty of Carthage.
By the iniquity and hard dealing of Fortune, Pompey, after he had gotten the
surname Great.
Magnus, was killed in Egypt, at the pleasure of guelded Eunuchs. And one
Eunus, a very slave, kept hard to work in a house of correction, had the
leading of fugitives in Sicilie. And by the connivencie of this very same Lady
of the world, how many men of high birth and noble parentage, have submissively
embraced the knees of Viriatus or Spartacus? How many heads, that all nations
did fear, have bloody executioners severed from their shoulders? One is led
captive in chains; another is promoted to the rule of some high place that he
never hoped for; another again is cast down from the highest pitch of
dignity. All which examples, if any man would know how many and sundry they
be, and how ordinarily they fall out, he may as well (like a witless fool as
he is) be able to number and tell the sands, or to weigh and peise the
mountains.

THE XV. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Constantius upon the execution of Gallus, become more fierce and
outrageous, and by the wily and subtle devises of sycophants in the Court
undone and overthrown, goes about to kill Vrsicinus, Iulianus, and Gorgonius,
men of especial Nobility.
THus far forth, according as we could search out the truth, and what we
might not for our years see our selves, learn in some sort, though obscurely,
by enquiring of such as were conversant in place, have we reported, declaring
the order and process of diverse occurrents: the rest, which the text ensuing
shall lay abroad, we will to our ability perform and perfect more exactly,
not fearing at all the back-biters and depravers of this so long a work, as
they hold it. For brevitie is then commendable, when cutting off impertinent
and unseasonable delays, it defalketh nothing from the knowledge of necessary
and material points. Gallus was not yet at Noricum, divested out of his royal
robes, when Apodemius, the very firebrand and kindler of all broils so long as
he lived, caught up his shoes, and carrying them away, riding post with quick
change of horses, that through excessive enforcement he might spoil and kill
some, came to Millaine, as a fore runner to tell the news: and being entered
into the palace, threw them down at Constantius his feet, as if they had been
the king of the Parthians spoils. And when sudden tidings were brought,
giving intelligence of this unexpected business, and of so great weight and
difficulty, with such facility fully performed to his mind; those that bare
the greatest sway in the Court employing all their study and desire of
pleasing, as the manner is, to flattery, extolled the virtue and felicity of
the Emperor up to the sky: at whose beck two princes, namely, Veteranio and
Gallus, although at diverse times were in manner of common soldiers, and no
better, thus cassed. With the exquisite and fine affectation of which fair
words, he being lifted up and supposing co^fidently, that from thenceforth he
should be freed from all displeasures and harms incident unto mortal men,
forth with declined from justice so intemperately, that now and then he would
not stick to avouch and maintain that same Eternity so much spoken of; in
enditing and writing with his own hand, termed himself Lord of the whole
world: which if other men had said, he for his part ought to have taken it in
foul skorne and indignity, as who labored withal earnest endeavor, as he
gave it out, to frame his life, and compose his behavior to the example and
pattern of civil princes. For, say that he did rule those infinite worlds of
Democritus his making, which by the inciting of Anaxarchus, Alexander the great
dreamed of, he should have considered this withal, by reading or hearing, that
(as all the Mathematicians with one accord agree) the compass of the whole
earth, which unto us seems unmeasurable, compared to the greatness of the
universal world, is no more than a little prick. And now by this time, after
the horrible fall of Caesar thus put to death, whiles the trumpet of judicial
dangers sounded the alarm, Vrsicinus was accused of high treason, for that
envy, hurtful to all good men, grew more and more to the prejudice of his
life and estate. For, surcharged he was with this one difficulty, in that the
Emperors ears, fast stopped for admitting any equal plea and reasonable
defense, lay open to the secret suggestions of close enemies, who devised, That
the foresaid General, now that the name of Constantius became quite forgotten
in all the tracts of the East, was much missed and wished for both at home and
abroad, as the only dreadful enemy unto the Persian nation. But the
magnanimous knight stood unmooveable against all accidents whatsoever, very
heedfull and wary, that he might not seem overbasely to cast himself down
in despair: yet grieving and groaning at the very heart, that innocence had no
sure place of safe repose; and in this one regard more heavily appaied, for
that his friends, who heretofore flocked about him, were revolted to the
mightier side, much like unto officers and sergeants, that according to the
custom, are wont to go from their old masters to new magistrates their
successors. Moreover, his colleague Arbetio, under a fair show of counterfeit
courtesy, and by calling him many times a valiant warrior (as he was passing
skillful in laying trains for to entrap a man of plain and simple
conversation, and withal in those days of great authority) proved his heavy
friend, and set himself sore against him. For, like as a serpent under the
ground, lying close hidden within his hole, and observing every one that
passes by, fiercely on a sudden assaileth them: even so he, joining his
office also in warfare unto the power that he had to hurt, being neither harmed
at any time, nor so much as provoked by him, polluted his conscience with an
unsatiable will and purpose to do mischief. Well, forced he is, making some
few captains privy to his secrets, closely to break with the Emperor, and
to reveal his mind. Agreed it had been, that in the night following Vrsicinus
carried violently away far out of the sight of the soldiers, should be killed
without any condemnation: even as in times past, by report, a Domitius Corbulo,
a trusty and wise defendor of the provinces, was murdered in that troublous
confusion that happened in Neroes days. This plot thus laid, and the match
set, when those that were appointed to do the feat waited the time aforesaid,
suddenly this counsel turned to be more mild, and commandment was given to
put off so wicked an act unto a second consultation. And so from him, the whole
engine of forging calumniations, was turned upon Julian, newly brought thither
(a renowned prince afterward) and entangled within a twofold crime, as the
iniquity and unjustice of men deemed it: first, for that from Marcelli-Fundus,
a place lying in Cappadocia, he had flitted into Asia, upon a desire he had to
learn the liberal sciences: and again, because he had seen his Ga^^us.
brother as he passed by, through Constantinople. Who when he cleared himself
of these imputations, and showed that he had done neither of these two things
without warrant, yet at the urgent suit of a cursed crew of flatterers, he had
died for it, but that by the gracious favor of the heavenly power, Eusebia the
The Empress.
Queen stood his friend, by whose means he was brought to the town Como.
Comum, near to Millain, and after he had abode there a little while,
permitted to travail into Greece according to his ardent desire, for to study
and apply his wit to learning. Neither wanted there henceforth matters arising
out of these cases, which while they were to be punished by order of law, it
would have displeased them to have had a good and fortunat issue: or else fell
away without effect as void and vain. But it happened sometimes, that the rich
seeking for succor at greater and mightier men's hands, and cleaving close unto
them as yvie does to tall trees, bought their discharge and deliverie at an
exceeding high rate: whereas the poorer sort, who had small means or none at
all to defend their lives, were condemned downright, without all order: and
therefore both truth was disguised and masked with lies, and diverse times also
false and forged matters went current for true. At the very same time was
Gorgonius also brought into question, he that had the charge of Caesar's
bedchamber committed unto him: and when it appeared upon confession, that he
had been a party in those enterprises and designs of his, yea, and
otherwhiles a setter and causer of them, yet through the complotting and
practicing of the guelded Eunuchs, whiles justice was shadowed with lies
finely framed, he wound himself out of danger, and went his ways clear.

CHAP. 11. Those that had taken part with Gallus, together with many innocent
persons, are cruelly punished. Some that in taking their cups liberally had
blurted out some foolish words against Constantius, were therefore put to
dolorous torments, and kept in close prison.
WHiles matters thus pass at Millaine, brought there were to Aquileia out of
the East martial men by whole troops and companies, together with a number of
Belonging to Gallus aforotime,
Courtiers, their limbs ready to fall in sunder among their chains, drawing
with much ado that little breath which remained, and in so manifold calamities
and distresses detesting longer life. For charged they were to have been
Gallus his ministers and right hands, in all his outrages; and by them it was
thought verily, that Domitian was mangled and torn in pieces; that Montius
also, and others after them, were hastily brought to utter destruction. To the
hearing of their cause was Arbora sent, and Eusebius, then chief Chamberlain,
both of them men given to inconsiderate craking and boasting, unjust alike, and
bloudily minded: who having no deep insight into matters, without putting any
difference between the innocent and the guilty, condemned some, after
scourging or other tortures endured, to live in banishment; others they thrust
down to the meanest place of warre-service, the rest they adjudged to suffer
death. Thus, when they had pestered the funeral places with dead bodies, they
returned (as it were) in triumph, relating what worthy acts they had
achieved, unto the prince; who in these and such like matters was openly seen
to persist stiff, resolute, and rigorous. Hereupon and thence-forth
Constantius minding more violently (as one would say) to break and fore-doe
the prescript, order, and course of the destinies, discovering what was within
his breast, lay exposed to the perilous conspiracies of many: whereby there
suddenly showed themselves a number that hunted and listened after rumors,
gaping with greedy bit at the very highest, and such as were in most
honorable places: afterward also at poor and rich indifferently, not licking
in manner of hounds the tribunal of one only Lord Lieutenant, like unto those
b Cybirate brethren that attended upon Verres, but afflicting and plaguing all
parts of the whole Commonwealth, by reason of mischiefs that still happened.
Among whom Paulus and Mercurius were without all question the principal, the
one a Persian, the other borne in A large country, containing in these days
Transylvania, Walachia, and Moldavia.
Dacia; Paulus a Notarie, Mercurius a Minister (...) rationalis minister.
belonging to the Auditors office. And verily this Paulus, as has been showed
before, had the by-name of Catena imposed upon him, for that he was so cunning
in framing and knitting malicious accusations together, that they could not be
undone; sowing pestilent poisons, and sundry ways doing mischief, like as
some skillful wrestlers are wont in their wrestlings to hold fast by the heel.
As for Mercurius, called commonly Captain of Smell-Feasts, for that like unto
a dog softly and closely let in, ready upon an inward naughty property to
give a snatch, and to bite, yet wagging his tail, he used to thrust himself
often into feasts and companies, and if it chanced that any man had told ought
unto his friend that he had seen in his sleep, what time as nature raungeth
at more liberty, the same with his venomous arts he would set a worse color
upon, and so convey it into the open ears of the Emperor: and for this cause
the man obnoxious (as it were) unto an inevitable offense, was troubled with
the heavy load of blame and crimination. Now, when the common bruit made the
most of these things, so far was any one from uttering his dreams in the
night, that men durst scarcely confess in the presence of strangers that they
slept at all: And some of the learned sort lamented, that they had not been
borne among the Atlantaei, where, by report, there are no dreams seen: but
whereof that should come, leave we to them that are of greatest knowledge in
natural causes. During these horrible kinds of inquisitions and executions
there arose in Sclavonia.
Illyricum another mischief; which beginning upon foolish and vain words,
proceeded to the danger of many persons. Within the province of Africanus,
ruling over Now within Hu^^gatie.
Pannonia Secunda, some boon companions in Sirmisch, Ortel.
Sirmium having taken their cups very liberally until they were well whitled,
supposing no man to be by for to hear their talk, fell freely to finding
fault with the present government of the Empire, as most grievous and heavy to
the subjects. Of these good fellows some gave out and affirmed (as it were) by
certain presaging signs which they went by, That the wished-for alteration and
change of the times were at hand: others in an unadvised humor of folly fed
themselves with this conceit, That the Auguries of their ancestors were
significant and meant by them. Out of the number of which men, Gaudentius, a
braine-sicke fellow, and one that in great matters used foolishly to run all on
the head, had given information hereof as of a serious matter unto Rufinus,
then the head and principal in the (...).
office of Praefectus Praetorio, a man at all times affectionately given to
entertain the worst matters; and besides, for his inbred lewdness notorious.
No sooner was he advertised hereof, but immediately (as if he had been winged
to fly) he sped him in all have to the Emperors (...), or Coun^ell.
Court, and set him so hotely on a light sire (being a prince ready enough to
give ear and belief to such manner of suspicions) that without any
deliberation at all of the thing, both Africanus, and all the rest also present
at this deadly supper, were commanded to be hoisted on high upon the rack.
This done, the said detestable informer, desirous still (as the manner is of
men) and more hotely set upon things unlawful and forbidden, had commandment
to continue that business which he had in hand for two years, according as he
required. Well, Teutomeres, a Protector domesticus.
Souldior of the Emperors guard in ordinary, together with his Colleague, was
sent to apprehend them, who according to a warrant and commission brought them
all laden with chains. But when they were come as far as to Aquilcia,
Marinus, Ex campiductore.
late a trainer of Soldiers, and then Vacans.
out e of ordinary, the beginner of that mischievous talk, and otherwise a
man of a hot spirit, whose hap was to be left in a tavern, whiles things
necessary for their journey were a making ready, by chance met with a knife,
and stabbed himself therewith into the side, and presently plucking forth his
vital parts, died. The rest were brought through to Millaine, and after they
had been put to cruel torture, confessing by force of torments, that in their
merriment and among their cups they had uttered some saucy and malapart words,
commandment was given, they should lie fast in prison, with some hope (though
it were but doubtful) of deliverie. As for those of the guard abovesaid, after
sentence pronounced to avoid the country and live in exile, (for that Marinus,
with their privitie, was permitted to die) at the suit of Arbetio obtained
pardon.

CHAP. III. War against the Lentienses, a people of Alemaine. The description
of the Lake Brigantia. The Roman army discomfited and put to flight, having
within a while after vanquished the Alemans, returned to Millaine, there to
winter.
THis matter thus ended, within a while after war was denounced against the
Lintzgoewer. Scudo.
Lentienses, people of Alemaine, who oftentimes brake into the marches of the
Romans, and made rodes all abroad. To which expedition the Emperor being gone
forth, came to the Schwaben and Grawpuntner, or Grisoni. Ortelius reads
rather Cani than Canini.
Rhaetiae and Campi Canini. And after long and sage consultation had, this was
thought to be a course both honest and profitable to all, That Arbetio General
of the Horsemen taking part of the footmen, and coasting along the sides of the
lake Bodensee. Ortel.
Brigantia with the stronger power of the army, should march on thither,
presently to affront and encounter the Barbarians: the description of which
place I will briefly set down, as far as my reason will give me leave.
Between the winding of high hills Rhene running in and out with a mighty
strong stream, holds on his course through the Rhinwalder. Scudo.
Lepontij, and runs by the downe-fals of water in manner of Nilus, with a
swift current swelling immediately from his first head where he begins, and
so with store of his own water violently passes forward in one single
channel, and no more. And now by this time augmented with snow, melted and
resolved into water, and rasing as it goes the high banks with their curving
reaches, enters into a round and vast lake (which the Rhaetians dwelling
thereby, call Brigantia) carrying in length four hundred and threescore The
great furlongs, whereof 8. make a mile.
stadia, and in breadth well near as much; whereto there is no access by
land, for the thick grown, shadie, and unpleasant woods (unless it be where
that ancient and sober valor of the Romans made a broad way) whiles both the
nature of the ground and rigor also of the air impeached the Barbarians. This
Mere therefore, the river, with frothing whirlepooles breaking into and running
through the still and standing water thereof, cutteth quite in the midst as
it were just between two equal sides, throughout to the very end, and like
unto an element severed apart by an everlasting discord, without increasing or
diminishing one whit the stream that it carried in, saving both name and
strength whole, makes an end of his race; neither afterward suffers he the
meeting or fellowship of other rivers, but enters of himself into the gulf
of the maine Ocean. And that which is a very great wonder, neither is the lake
once stirred with that violent stream running through it, nor yet the river
stayed in his hasty course, for all the muddie filth of the lake: and
howsoever they be confounded together, yet are they not mixed into one body,
which if the very sight did not prove to be so, a man would not believe by any
means they could be parted one from the other. Thus Alpheus Orphea, or Rophea.
rising in Arcadia, for love he bears to the fountain Arethusa, cutting
quite through the Ionian sea, runs forward, as fables do report, to the
very confines of his beloved. Arbetio not expecting until the messengers came
to bring word of the Barbarians coming, although he knew that the beginnings
of wars were usually very sharp, fell within the danger of a privy ambush,
and with this sudden and unlooked for mischief was stricken (as it were)
stone dead. Mean while were the enemies discovered leaping forth of their
starting holes, and without any intermission shot and sticked with many kinds
of darts whomsoever they could find: for neither was any of our side able to
resist, nor to hope for other means to save their lives but by speedy flight.
Wherefore, our soldiers being wholly bent to the avoiding of wounds, in a
disorderly march scattering one from another to and fro, offered their backs
to take all blows and harms. Howbeit, the most of them dispersing themselves
through the narrow lanes, and rid out of present danger by help of the dark
night, upon the return of the day light, after they had refreshed their
strength, betook themselves every man to their own ranks and files. In this
so heavy and unlooked for mischance, a very great number of soldiers, and
ten Tribunes besides, were missing: upon which defeature, the Alemans taking
more heart to them, and very stoutly every day approaching near unto the
Romans fortifications, whiles the morning mists dimmed the light, ran up and
down braving with their drawn swords, grating their teeth, and letting fly
big and proud menaces. Then on a sudden the Scutarij.
Targuetiers, who sallied forth, when by reason of the troops of enemies
affronting them, they were driven back, and at a stand, provoked all their
fellows with one mind and resolution to fight it out. But when the greater
part of them were affrighted by the example of the foil so fresh and lately
received, and Arbetio, supposing all behind would be safe enough, held off;
three Tribunes at once lustily issued forth, Arintheus Ag^ns vicem (...)
recto^^^
deputy colonel of the Armature: also Seniauchus, who had the charge of the
(...)
horsemens troops, d belonging to the Comites: and Bappo, leading the e
Promoti Promotos.
, together with those that the Emperor had committed to his conduct. The common
cause as well as their own particular put them forward, whiles they jointly
altogether resolved to resist the force of the adverse part, after the example
of the ancient inhabitants bordering upon the river: and so coming upon their
enemies, not by way of a set battle, but in running skirmishes, after the
manner of Brigands, they put them all to shameful flight: who dispersed and in
disarray upon the opening of their ranks, whiles they make have to escape with
their heavy load encumbred, were forced to disarme and lay their bodies bare,
and so with many a blow and thrust of swords and spears, down they went, and
were slain: and many of them slain horse and man together, even as they lay,
seemed still to sit fast upon their backs. At which sight all those issued by
heaps out of the camp, who made doubt before to go forth to battle with
their fellows: and now unmindfull of taking heed to save themselves, they beat
down and trod under foot the barbarous sort (unless they were such as made
shift, by running away, to escape death) trampling upon the heaps of dead
bodies, and embrued with the blood of their slain enemies. Thus when the
battle was done and ended, the Emperor with triumph and joy returned to
Millaine, there to winter.

CHAP. 1111. The wicked designements of some principal courtiers against
Silvanus, a most valiant warrior and captain.
AFter this, there arises in the afflicted state of the Commonwealth, with
like mischief unto the provinces, a tempestuous whirlewind of new calamities,
like to have destroyed all at once, had not Fortune, the governesse of humane
chances, dispatched a trouble exceedingly feared, by a quick and speedy
issue. What time as Gaul through long neglect endured grievous massacres,
pillages, and wasting by fire, so long as the barbarous nations licentiously
made havocke, and no man did set to his helping hand, Silvanus Pedestris
militia rector.
Colonel of the Infanterie, moved with anger hereat, and of power sufficient to
redress these outrages, first made head against them: and Arbetio was earnest
by all means possible he could to have this service set forward with all
speed, to the end that he might lay upon the shoulders of his concurrent now
absent, and whom it grieved him not a little to continue still quiet, the
charge of a weighty and dangerous affair. The Actuarius sarclnalium principi^
iumentorum.
Clerk or Master of the princes sumpter-horses and carriages [ By that which
follows I am bold to supply thus much.
named Dynamius] had requested of him commendatorie letters unto diverse of his
friends, as one that would seem most inward unto him, and of his familiar
acquaintance. Having obtained this request (for the other suspecting no harm,
had simply granted it) he kept the letters by him, thereby to work some
mischief in time convenient. Whiles therefore the Colonel aforesaid was
employed for the good of the Commonwealth in traversing the country up and
down in Gaul, and repelling the Barbarians, distrusting themselves already,
and put in fear, By this it seems that this whole passage is defective or
corrupted.
the same Dynamius, being of a stirring and unquiet spirit, like unto a wily
fox, and practiced in deceit, devises a godless and fraudulent plot: having
as an abettor under hand and privy thereunto (as the flying rumors went)
Lampadius the Prefect.
Prefect, and Eusebius who had been Comite rei privatae, or keeper of his
privy purse.
Treasurer f of the Exchequer, and was commonly known by the surname of
Mattiocopa, together with Aedilius, late Master g of the Rolls or Records, whom
the said Prefect had taken order for to be substituted Consuls, as his
nearest friends: and having with a sponge wiped out the rewes of the letters,
and left the subscription only untouched, he writes above it another text
far different from the true and original copy; to this effect, as if
Silvanus in dark terms requested and exhorted his friends, conversing within
the palace, or living private (among whom was Thuscus Albinus also, and many
more) to aid him now, enterprising higher matters, and intending shortly to
climb up to the imperial throne. Thus plotted he this counterfeit pack at
his pleasure, meaning thereby to endanger the life of the innocent man. Now was
Dynamius also Prafectus. est.
appointed as chief Commissioner to search into these matters for the Emperor:
who craftily working and contriving these and such like things, enters alone
into the most inward and privy room of the Consistory, hoping by taking
advantage of his time, to bind fast enough the right watchful Silvanus.
keeper of the Emperors life and estate. And after he had read in the
Consistory the contents of the said letters so craftily and cunningly patched
together, the Tribunes were commanded to ward, and those private persons to be
brought out of the provinces, whose names the letters imported. And
streightwaies Malarichus, Captain of the company or band of Gentilium rector.
Gentiles, calling to him his colleagues, took on exceedingly, and cried out,
That men employed in the State, and appointed to place of command, ought not
thus to be circumvented through factions and cunning casts: he requested
withal, That himself (leaving as pledges his nearest allies and dearest
friends, and having Mallobaudes Tribune or Captain of the Armaturarum tribuno.
Armature his surety, to undertake for him, that he should speedily return)
might have commission to go and bring with him Silvanus, who had not gone
about once to attempt any such matter, as those most bitter wait-layers had
raised of him: or, on the other side, he promising the like for his part,
besought, that Mallobaudes might be suffered to take a speedy journey, and
himself would perform as much as he undertook. For, he protested thus much
of his own assured knowledge, that in case any stranger were sent of this
errand, Silvanus, a man of his own nature very timorous, even where there was
no matter of great fear, might happily work some trouble in the quiet State.
And albeit the advice he gave was expedient and necessary, yet spoke he (as it
were) to the winds in vain. For, through the counsel of Arbetio, sent there
was, with letters to call him, Apodemius, a cankred enemy of long time to all
good men: who lighting upon the Principi.
prince in Gaul, and swerving from the directions agreed upon and given unto
him at his setting forth, without sight of Silvanus, or warning him by
deliverie of letters to come, there remained: and joining unto him an Auditor
or Receiver, as if the said Colonel of the Footmen had been already out of
protection and at the point to be put to death, in very hostile rage abused
his tenants retainers and servants. In this time nevertheless, whiles the
presence of Silvanus was hoped for, and Apodemius troubles the peace,
Dynamius, that he might by a stronger argument maintain the truth of his
wicked plot, dispatched other letters (made of purpose agreeable in all points
to those which he had presented unto the Emperor by the Per Praf^^^^^on.
Prfect) unto the Ad (...) Cremenensis.
Master of the Work house or Forge at h Cremona, in the name of Silvanus and
Malarichus; by which the said Master was put in mind (as one privy unto their
secret designs) to provide all things with expedition. Who having read the
same, sticking and doubting a good while what this should mean (for he
remembered not, that these persons whose letters he had received ever communed
with him about any such secret business) returns the very same missives by
the carrier who brought them, and a souldior with him, unto Malarichus, praying
him to explain his meaning openly, and not to write in so dark terms: for
he assured him, that himself being somewhat rude, and a simple man, understood
not what was so obscurely signified unto him. Malarichus, when he had quickly
found out thus much, being even then sorrowful and sad, and grievously
bewailing the hard hap both of himself and of Silvanus his countryman, taking
to him the Frankes, who flourished in numbers at that time in the palace, spoke
now more boldly, and made an uprore, for that the train laid and the faiterous
plot was come to light, by which it must needs be granted, that their blood
was sought. These matters being known, the Emperor gave order (whiles those
of the i Consistory and all the men of war in general considered of the
business) there should be further inquiry and search made. And when the
Judges had enough thereof, and began to loath the thing, Florentius the son
of Nigrianus, in Agens tunc pro magistro officiirum.
place then of under k Master of the Offices, viewing diligently the writing,
and finding certain remains of the old pricks or accents over the letters;
perceived then, that of the former contents new furbished, there was another
made far different from the tenor of that which Silvanus had endited; and the
same set to in lieu thereof, according to the will and pleasure of a pack of
false forgers. Therefore after this mist of fraud and deceit was scattered and
dispatched, the Emperor being truly informed by a faithful relation made
unto him, commands the Prafectum.
Prefect, after he was deprived of his authority, to be brought judicially
into question, and have his trial accordingly: but by the painful travail
and consent of many, he was acquit. As for Eusebius, late Treasurer of the
princes Exchequer, being stretched on high upon the rack, he said, That all
these matters were broached and set on foot with his privitie: For Aedesius
stiffely denying that he knew not what was done, went his way as guiltless.
So this business was ended, and all they discharged, whom the information made
of the crime had caused to be presented and brought into question: and
Dynamius, as one for his excellent skill and cunning made renowned, carried
away with him the dignity of a 1 Correctoris.
Corrector. Thuscus also was commanded to reform the rest of the credulous
prince his military train.

CHAP. V. Silvanus through the unreasonable abuse offered unto him by his
adversaries, was driven to plot and take violent courses, and in Gaul mounteth
up to the imperial dignity, and so at length is slain.
WHiles these matters were thus in handling, Silvanus making his abode in now
Colein.
Agrippina, and taking full knowledge by continual messengers from his
friends, what Apodemius was practicing to endanger his whole estate; knowing
also well enough the pliant mind of the prince, easy to be induced and
persuaded in the said cause; and fearing withal, least absent as he was,
without sentence passed against him, he might be held attaint and guilty;
plunged thus into a very great extremity, thought for to commit himself to
the fidelity and protection of the Barbarians. But when Laniogaisus then a
Tribune (who only whiles he served in the wars as a not yet promoted to
place of command.
Candidat, was, as I have written before, with Constans lying at point of
death) prohibited him, and showed, That the Frankes, from whom he was
descended, would surely either kill, or else for a reward received betray him;
supposing, as his present case stood, there was no safety for him, put
himself upon his utmost shifts: and so, after he had by little and little in
secret wise conferred with the heads or captains of the the chief officers of
the army.
Principia, and they again earnestly endeavored the same, in consideration of
a great reward promised, took forcibly away with him the ensigns of m Dragons
and other banners for the time, and mounted up to the imperial dignity. Now,
whiles these things pass in Gaul, toward the latter end of the day,
unexpected news came to Millaine, declaring in plain words, That Silvanus,
whiles of a Colonel of Footmen he endeavors to climb higher, by soliciting
of the army to his side, was advaunced to be Emperor. Constantius being with
this weighty and unlooked for accident stricken no less than with a
thunderbolt of fatal destiny, called a counsel about midnight, and all the
chief officers and rulers hastened into the palace. And when every man was to
seek what to advise or speak to the point, namely, to make choice what ought
to be done; mention softly was made of Vrsicinus, as a most worthy man for
his policy in war affairs, and one who had been provoked, upon no Frustra.
desert of his, with grievous injury: sent for he was by the chief gentleman
usher, a thing usually done by way of great honor: and no sooner was he
entered into the Counsel chamber, but the purple robe was presented unto him:
and so they set him as a suppliant at the Emperors feet, after the manner of
foreign kings, whereas we read that always before, our Emperors were saluted
like Judges. Thus he, who a little before with malicious and spightfull railing
was termed the Orientis vorago.
Swallowing-pit or Waster of the East, yea, and complained of for aspiring to
usurp the sovereign place by the means of his sons; then (forsooth) became
a most politic and wise leader, as who had been a fellow-souldior with
Constantine the Great: and he alone was called for to quench the fire by good
and honest means (I must needs say) yet covertly and by way of a train. For
great care was had, and diligence used, that Silvanus might be destroyed as a
most strong and arrant traitor to the State: or, if that should miss, yet
Vrsicinus, already exulcerate, and carrying rancour in his heart, be utterly
abolished, to the end that no scruple should remain behind, greatly to be
feared. Therefore, whiles order was in giving to make have and set forward on
his journey, as the said General went about to repeal and confute the crimes
that had been objected unto him, the Emperor by way of prevention with a mild
speech stayed him, saying, It was no time then to go in hand for to traverse
any cause, or put in his plea for defense, considering the necessity of urgent
occurrents, which was to be mitigated before it grew more; enforced rather,
that on both sides they should grow to terms of former concord and old love.
After much debating therefore and long deliberation, this point was principally
handled, What device to use, that Silvanus might think the Emperor had as yet
no knowledge of his designs and doings? there being at length a probable
matter found out to assure him thereof, advised he is by letters penned in
honorable terms, That when he had received Vrsicinus as his successor, he
should return with his whole power and authority untouched. These things thus
digested, straightwaies was this colonel or captain commanded to take his
journey: and forth he led with him in company to assist him in the
necessary and public affairs of the State, ten of the Protectores
domest^os.
Emperors guard in ordinary, according as he had demanded: Of which number,
Am Marcellinus, the author of this History.
I also my self was one, together with my Colleague Verianus; all the rest
were kinsmen, or allies and familiar friends. Now, so soon as he was gone
forth of the country, every man, in fear of himself, accompanied him a great
way off. And albeit we, as those that are to fight with wild beasts, were cast
before untractable savages; yet weighing thoroughly, that this one good thing
yet evil and heavy precedents have, That they substitute and bring in their
place fortunate events; we admired that notable sentence of Tully, delivered
and published even from the eternal Oracle of Truth it self, in this wise:
And albeit (quoth he) most wished it were to be, that our fortune always
continued upright, flourishing and prosperous, yet has not that condition of
life so much sense and feeling of the own good, as when from a woeful and
desperate case there is a return of fortune again to a better and happier
estate. We make the more speed therefore, and take great journies, to the end
that the ambitious Ma^ister ar^oru^. he means Solvarus whom before he called
Rectorem pedestris m^litia, Colonel of the Infanteri^.
Commander of the Forces, before any rumor of his usurping tyranny passed by
the Italians, in the coasts and marches suspected might appear. But for all
the running have we made, a certain wandering and flying fame had gotten the
start of us, and bewrayed the thing; so that being entered into Agrippina, we
found all above our reach. For by reason of a multitude of people, who (from
all parts thither assembled) were in grounding sure the enterprises so hastily
begun, besides other great forces gathered together, as the present state
required; we took this to be the better way, That our pitiful and lamentable
leader Vrsicinus.
should be framed and accommodate to the mind and will of this new Emperor,
who assured himself by vain mockeries of prsaging signs, that his strength
increased: and all to this end, that whiles with sundry counterfeit shows of
flattery his security proked him forward to a milder course, he fearing no
hostility at all, might be deceived. But the issue of this our project seemed
difficult and dangerous. For, indeed, it would have stood better with good
policy and our safety, to take heed that our desires might have had a
correspondencie with opportunity, neither running before nor lagging behind it:
which if they should break out before their due time, sure we were all, by
virtue of one writ or word, to suffer death. Howbeit, the said captain of ours
being mildly received, and forced (the present business it self requiring no
less) to bow down and stoop, yea, and to adore in solemn wise (as the
manner is) him that aspired so high to the purple robe, was especially regarded
and made much of: and being now most inward (as having easy and ready access
unto him and the honor to sit at his royal table) such pre-eminence he had
above others, that by this time he was used in secret consultation about the
maine points of importance, and the very Empire it self. Silvanus took it to
the heart, that when unworthie persons were advanced to the dignity of
Consuls, and other honorable places of high government, himself and Vrsicinus
alone, after so great and manifold pains endured for the weal public, were
so despised; that he for his part cruelly abused by sifting and examining his
familiar friends, and that under a base manner of proceeding and trial, should
be accused of treason: and the other again, through the malice and hatred of
his enemies haled out of the East, and brought home. These continual
complaints made he both secretly and in open place. And yet for all these and
such like speeches, terrified were we with the mutinous grumbling on every side
of the soldiers, alleging their want, and hotely set in all the have to
break through the streights of the Monte Genebre, or Mont Cenis.
Cottian Alps. In this perplexity and doubtful trouble of heart we closely
cast about and sought for some device like to take effect; and in the end,
after many alterations of our mind by reason of fear, resolved thus, That when
we had with great industry gotten wary ministers, and bound our
communication with a religious oath and protestation, there should be
solicited the Braccati and Cornuti n, companies wavering in their allegiance,
and for large hire mutable and ready to turn every way. After therefore that
this business was made sure, by means of certain base mediators and brokers
between, who for their obscure condition were meet to work the feat, and set
on fire beside with the expectation of rewards, when the Sun was now arising,
suddenly a crew of armed men breaks forth: and as it falls out in such
doubtful cases, being more bold and hardy after they had slain the warders,
entered into the palace, plucked Silvanus forth of a little chapel, whither
he was fled all amated and breathless, and as he was going to a congregation
of the Christian Religion, with many strokes of swords slew him outright. Thus
a brave leader, and a man of no mean desert, died this kind of death, even for
fear of slanderous accusations, wherewith by the faction of his enemies he was
in his absence ensnared and entangled; so that for the safety of his life he
was driven to proceed unto the utmost extremity of all shifts. For, albeit in
regard of that issuing forth of his so seasonably with young and gallant
soldiers before the battle at Mursa, he held Constantius obliged unto him
for a good turn, yet feared he him as a prince variable and uncertain;
although he might pretend the valiant acts of Bonitius also his father, a
Frank verily, and who in the civil war behaved himself many times right
manfully, taking part with Constantine against the The faction of Licinius the
usurper.
Licinians. Now, it happened so, that before any such matter was a working in
Gaul, the people in the greatest Cirque or Shew-place at Rome (whether upon
any ground of reason, or moved by some prsage it was unknown) cried out with
loud voice, Silvanus is vanquished.

CHAP. VI. Constantius through the great and glorious words of Flatterers,
exalted now as it were up to the sky, exercises cruelty upon noble
personages. Leontius represseth a seditious uprore raised in the city. A
Roman bishop named Liberius, for favoring Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, is
put from his See, and expelled the City.
WHen Silvanus therefore was thus slain, as has been related, at Agrippina,
and the Emperor had taken knowledge thereof with exceeding great joy (as he
was a prince made altogether of insolent pride and vanity) he ascribed this
also to the prosperous train and course of his own felicities; holding on
still his old manner, which was evermore to hate men of action and valiant, as
Domitianus did in times past yet desirous by any contrary slight whatsoever to
overthrow them. Nay, so far was he from praising his industrious acts, that
he wrote how he had intercepted somewhat out of the treasure in Gaul, which in
truth no man ever had once touched. And this commanded he to be searched
narrowly into; questioning about it with Remigius also, then Rationario
apparitio^^ armorum magistri.
Auditor or Receiver to the office belonging to the said colonel [Silvanus]
whose fortune it was long after in the days of Valentinian to loose his For he
hanged himself.
life by the halter, in the matter of the embassage of Tripolis. These things
thus finished, Constantius, as one that now touched heaven with his head, and
were to command all humane chances, was puffed up with the lofty speeches
and big swelling words of flatterers, the number of whom himself increased,
and namely by despising and rejecting those that were not so cunning as others
in that kind: as we read of Croesus, that he therefore thrust Solon by the head
and shoulders out of his kingdom, because he could not skill of soothing him
up in his humor: also, that Dionysius.
Denis threatened to put Philoxenus the Poet to death, for that when all others
praised him as he recited his own absurd verses and such as carried no grace
with them, he alone was never moved at the hearing of them: a thing that is a
most pernicious fostresse of vices: for that commendation only in very deed
ought to be acceptable unto a great potentate and person of high place, when
otherwhiles also there is rowme allowed for to entertain dispraise of things
done amiss. And now, after this care was past, and security obtained,
inquisitions (according to the manner) and judicial trials were holden;
whereby a number after imprisonment in chains and yrons, were punished as
guilty malefactors. For then Paulus that divellish promoter, who could hold no
longer, but break out for very joy, rose up to practice more licentiously his
venomous and pestiferous arts: and whiles both the Consistorianis.
Counselors of State and martial men also enquired into the business, as
commandment was given, Proculus, one of Silvanus his household, was put upon
the rack: and being a thin bodied man, and a diseased, all men feared, least
when his poor carcass had been wearied out with extremity of excessive
torments, he would cause many a man, one with another, indifferently to be
called into question, and charged with heinous crimes: but it fell out with him
far otherwise than was expected. For remembering his dream, whereby forbidden
he was, lying asleep, as himself affirmed, to hurt any innocent person,
notwithstanding he was tortured almost to death, yet named not he nor
appeached any one, but constantly avowed the fact of Silvanus, showing by
evident proof, that he attempted that enterprise not upon any ambitious
desire, but merely constrained upon necessity. For he alleged a probable
reason inducing him thereunto, and the same well known by the testimonies of
many, that upon the fifth day before he took upon him those princely Infules
or ornaments, when he had given his soldiors their pay, in the name of
Constantius he spoke unto them, To continue valiant and faithful. Whereby it
appeared, that if he had gone about then to take presumptuously the ensigns of
an higher estate, he would have expended such a weighty mass of gold, as his
own. After him, Poemenius having his part with condemned persons, was haled to
execution, and died: him I mean, who as I have related before, what time as
the men of Treviri.
Triers had shut the gates of their city against Caesar o Decentius, was
elected to protect and defend the Commons. Then Asclepiodotus, Lutto, and
Maudio, all Comites, were killed, with many more besides. This was the
obstinate self will of the time, searching narrowly upon ambiguous terms and
presumptions into these and such like matters: and whiles some deadly and
pestiferous whirle-puffe raises up still these miseries of common mischiefs
in the State, Leontius governing Aeternam urbem.
Rome, gave many good testimonies and proofs of an excellent Judge, in hearing
of causes quick, in deciding and determining most just, of his own nature
friendly and favorable (howsoever he seemed to some for the maintaining of
authority sharp and severe) and withal very much inclined to love. The first
device therefore to stir up a seditious tumult against him, was most base and
vile: For when Philoromus the or runner.
Chariot-driver by commandment was to be drawn and harried away, all the
commons in general following after, as ready to rescue and defend their own
dear child, with terrible violence did set upon the said p Praefectum.
Governor, taking him to be a timorous man: but he persisting firm and
resolute, sent in his sergeants and officers among them; some being attached
and put to painful torments, he confined to the Islands, neither gainsaied
him any man, nor made resistance. Some few days after, when the communaltie
likewise chafing all in a broile, as they were wont, and complaining of the
want of wine, met together at Settisonio.
Septizonium, a place of much resort, where Marcus the Emperor built his
Baine, a sumptuous and stately piece of work: the said Governor going thither
of purpose, was very earnestly entreated by all his gowned followers and
sergeants, not to put himself into the throng of so malapart and menacing a
multitude, set upon raging still, ever since the former commotion: But he,
hardly moved to be afraid of doing right, went forward; insomuch as a sort of
his said attendants and followers forsook him, albeit he hastened apace to
enter into a shrewd and sudden danger. Sitting therefore in his chariot with
a lovely show of boldness and confidence, he beheld with piercing eye the
faces of those unruly crewes (as if they had been so many serpents) ruffling
with a foul noise, and cry on every side: and taking knowledge of one fellow
above all the rest, big and huge of stature, and with a reddish or yellow head,
him he asked, Whether he were not Peter, surnamed (as he had heard him called)
Valvomeres? and when he answered, and that in a kind of chiding accent, that he
was the man, him he commanded (as one whom he had known of old to be the
chiefetaine and ringleader of seditious rebels) for all the contradiction and
gainesaying of many, to have his hands bound behind at his back, and so to be
hoisted and hanged Upon a kind of rack.
up in the air. Who being seen once aloft, calling hard, but in vain, for
the help of those that were of his own sept and tribe, all the whole
multitude, that a little before stood so thick thrust together, dispersed now
into sundry parts of the city, vanished out of sight, so as that this hot
and busy stirrer of commotions having his sides racked and torn, as it were
in a secret judicial place of torture, was expelled and sent away into Marca
Ancona.
Picenum: where afterward, daring to offer abuse and dishonor to a virgin of
no mean patronage, he was therefore upon sentence given by Patruinus the
Consulari.
President, judged and condemned to loose his head. During the government of
this Leontius, Liberius a bishop of the Christian Religion, was by a precept
directed from Constantius sent to the Ad Conutatum.
privy Counsel, as one opposing himself against the Emperors
commandments, and the decrees of many his own consorts, in a matter which I
will briefly run over. Athanasius bishop at that time of Alexandria, bearing
himself too high above his profession, and one who went about to enquire into
matters that to him belonged not (as the daily bruit and rumor went of him) the
congregation (or the Synod, as they term it) of the same place,
excommunicated and remooved from the sacramental dignity, which he held and
celebrated. For reported it was, That being passing skillful in Necromancie,
and expounding the truth of oracles and prophecies, as also well seen in those
things which the Augurall birds portended and praesaged, he had diverse times
foretold future events. Over and besides these matters, charged he was also
with other points, disagreeing from the purpose and meaning of that Law or
Religion, whereof he was Prelate. This Athanasius, Liberius the bishop being of
the same mind and opinion with the rest, was by commandment from the Emperor
warned by his subscription to depose from his sacerdotall See: but he stiffely
withstood and denied so to do, often crying out, That it was unlawful even in
the highest degree to condemn a man unseene and unheard; openly (as one would
say) spurning against the Emperors will and pleasure. For he, an enemy
always bitterly bent against Athanasius, although he knew the thing was
performed accordingly, yet earnestly desired, that the same might be confirmed
and ratified by that authority which the bishops of Rome enjoy. Which for that
he could not obtain, Liberius, without much ado and great difficulty even at
midnight (for fear of the people that loved him exceedingly) could not be
carried away. And thus verily stood the affairs at Rome, as this former text
has showed.

CHAP. VII. By reason of Gaul inclined to revolt, Constantius not able to
undergo the charge, minding to take Julian to him as his companion in the
Empire, is hindered by flatterers: but in the end declares Julian his
Colleague, and investeth him in the purple Robe, with exceeding applause of the
whole army.
AS for Constantius, disquieted he was with news continually, reporting how
Gaul was now in a desperate case, while the barbarous enemies made wast and
spoil of all, killing and sleying in every quarter, and no man there was to
withstand them. Now, as he tossed to and fro in his mind, what force to use for
the repressing of these troubles, resiant still himself in Italy, as he
desired, (for he thought it a matter of danger to thrust himself into parts
far remote) he hit at length upon the right way and means to effect the
same: and it came in his mind to join with him as companion in the Empire his
cousin ^atruelem fratre^.
germane Iulianus, not long since sent for and brought out of Achaia, and even
yet in his students cloak or gaberdine. When he had upon the urgent occasion
of so many imminent calamities bewrayed thus much to his favorites and friends
next about him, showing in plain terms, That himself, but one, shrunk now
(which he never had done before) under the burden of so many necessities and
troubles coming so thick upon him: they being thoroughly taught how with
excessive flattery to bear him up, foolified and gulled the man, telling him
ever and anon, That there was nothing in the world so adverse and difficult,
but his powerful virtue and heavenly fortune together were able (as ever
heretofore) to overcome: and many of them pricked in conscience for their
offenses committed, said thus much moreover, That he was from henceforth to
beware of the name of Caesar; rehearsing therewith the lewd parts committed
under Gallus. Against whom laboring hard upon this point, the Queen alone
opposed her self, were it for very fear to flit into so far countries; or
that in her own natural wit and wisdom she thought it good policy for the
State, I wot not: but she said, That a kinsman ought to be preferred before
all other. And after much debating of the matter, by way of deliberation to and
fro, this resolution stood firm: and so setting aside all frivolous and
bootlesse disputations, he fully determined to take unto him Iulianus, as his
compartener in the imperial government. Now, when he was sent for and come at
the day prefixed, the Emperor, after all the companies of fellow soldiers
there present were called together, and a Tribunal erected upon an high bank,
above which stood the maine standerds of Eagles and other ensigns, he mounted
up unto it, and holding Iulianus by the right hand, thus by way of a mild and
gentle speech began to say. Here stand we before you, right valorous defendors
of the Weal public, to maintain in manner all with one breath and spirit
the common cause, which I, being to plead, as it were, before equal Judges,
will briefly declare unto you. After the death of rebellious tyrants, whom
rage and fury moved and egged on to attempt these designs which they
proiected, the Barbarians, as if they meant with Roman blood to sacrifice unto
their wicked Manes, invade Gaul, and overrun it, having broken the peace of
the marches; encouraged upon this confidence and assured persuasion, that
extreme necessities bind us fast enough, by occasion of lands so far
dis-ioyned asunder. This mischief therefore, which incrocheth already beyond
the frontiers hard adjoining, if (while time permits) our help and yours
together, after consultation had, shall jointly with one accord meet with; both
the necks of these proud nations will not swell so big, and the bounds also of
our Empire shall remain entire. It rests now, that the hope of our affairs
which I do conceive, ye also strengthen with fortunate effect. This Iulianus
here, mine unckles son by the fathers side, well approoved (as ye know well
enough) for his modesty, in regard whereof, as well as of neerenesse in blood,
he is dear unto us; a young gentleman of industrious action, which already
appears in him, I wish to join with me, in the place and power of a Caesar:
Which motion of mine, if you think the same profitable and expedient is to be
confirmed also by your grant and allowance. As he was about to say more to
this effect, the assembly interrupting his speech, in gentle manner stayed him,
saying in a foreknowledge (as it were) of the future consequence, That this
was the will and choice of mighty Jupiter, and not of man's wit and
understanding. And the Emperor standing still without stirring, until they
were silent, went more confidently through with the rest of his speech: For as
much as (quoth he) your joyful acclamation shows, that there is a
correspondencie of your favorable assent, let the young gentleman endued with
a peaceable vigor, and whose temperate behavior is to be imitated rather than
commended, rise up to this honor, seconded with your fortunate favor; whose
singular towardness, instructed with good arts, even herein, me thinks I have
fully showed, in that I have chosen him. Him therefore, by the grace and
present direction of the heavenly God, will I clad in his princely robes. This
said he, and soon after, when he had put upon Julian his grandfathers purple,
and declared him Caesar with the joy of the army; he speaks unto him
somewhat sad and carrying a demisle and lowly look, in this manner: Thou have
in thy prime, brother mine, and the most loving brother that ever I had,
recovered the glorious flower of thy parentage and original: augmented (I
confess) is mine own glory, who take my self more truly advaunced, by
conferring a superior power upon a noble prince of mine own blood than by the
sovereign power it self, which I enjoy. Come on therefore as partaker of
pains and perils, undertake the defense and service of Gaul, as one ready by
all bountifulness to ease the parts afflicted: and if need require to join
battle with the enemies, stand to it with sure footing among the very
ensigne-bearers themselves, a considerate exhorter and encourager to adventure
in due time; by leading the way with advised wariness heartening and
emboldening them that fight; with succors and supplies strengthening those
that be troubled, and in disarray; in modest terms rebaking the slothful; a
present and most true witness, as well to the industrious souldior as to the
idle coward. Therefore, as urgent service requires, on forth like a valiant
Knight to lead likewise as hardy soldiers: we will be assistant one to
another in our turns by course, with firm and steadfast love: serve we will
together, and another day (if God grant our request) jointly govern the world
with equal moderation and piety. You for your part shall be in all places
even present with me, and I again in whatsoever you shall go about, will not
be wanting to you: Hasten for my sake unto the highest enterprises, as having
all men's wishes and prayers to join with you, and purposing to defend by
vigilant care the station (as it were) and ward assigned unto you by the very
Commonwealth it self. These words once ended, no man afterward held his peace:
but the soldiers all, with a terrible clattering, knocked their shields and
knees together (which is a full sign of prosperity and contentment: for
contrariwise when they smite their shields with their spears, it is a token of
anger and dolor) and a wonder it was to see, with what and how great joy they
all, except some few, approoved the judgment and election of the Emperor, and
with worthy admiration they entertained Caesar, glittering in his resplendent
imperial robe: whose eyes carrying with them a terror and amiable loveliness
withal, whose pleasing countenance also, with an extraordinary quickness and
lively vigor, as they wistly a long time beheld, they gathered what a one he
was like to prove, as if they had thoroughly perused the old books, the reading
whereof declares by bodily signs the physiognomie or inward indewments of the
mind. And to the end that he might be regarded with better respect and
reverence, they neither commended him above measure, nor yet less than was
meet and becoming: and therefore esteemed they were as the voices of Censours,
and not of soldiers. In the end, being taken up to sit with him in the
chariot, and received into the regal palace, this verse out of Homers Poem
he softly whispered to himself: (...).
As if he should have said, I enter upon my death, in robes of gold and purple
Now purple death has seized on me,
And powerful strength of destinic.


These things passed thus, the The sixth of November.
eight day before the Ides of November, that year in which Arbetio and
Lollianus were Consuls.

CHAP. VIII. Iulianus having wedded the sister of Constantius, came to Vienna:
where by a certain old wife his future acts as touching Religion are foretold.
WIthin few days after this, when Helena the sister of Constantius, a virgin,
was joined in marriage to the same Caesar, and all things put in readiness
requisite for his speedy journey, taking with him a small train in his
company, he set forth the first day of December, accompanied on his way by
the Emperor himself as far as to a place marked with two Columns, and it
lies between Lamello, a city in times past, now a small village.
Laumellum and Pavia.
Ticinum; and so holding on his journey straight forward he came to the Piemont.
Taurini: where he was stricken with heavy news, which having been brought
lately to the Com^tatum, or Court.
Emperors Counsel, was notwithstanding of purpose concealed, for fear least
all the preparation made for his voyage, should have been lost and come to
nothing. Now it purported thus much, That Colonia Colein.
Agrippina, a city of great name and importance in the second Nether Dutchland.
Germany, was upon continual siege laid to it by the Barbarians, laid open
and with great forces destroyed. With which woeful tidings being sore astonished,
as if it were the first hansell and beginning of evils coming toward him,
muitering softly with monefull words hd was often heard to say, That all which
he had gotten was no more than this, To die and perish in more employment and
trouble. And when he was come to Vienna, in his entrance thither, the people of
what age and degree soever, came running to receive him honorably, as one
wished for, I assure you, and their natural Emperor: and the whole
comminaltie together, with the neighbor nation bordering upon them, seeing him
a far off, and saluting him as a mild and fortunate Emperor, as they went
before entertained and honored him with correspondent praises, beholding with
more affectionate desire such royal pomp in a prince so lawfully elected: and
in his coming reposed the remedy and redress of common calamities, crying
out with one voice, and thinking no less, that now there shone upon them a
certain blessed and comfortable Genius. Then a certain old woman that had
lost both her eyes, having learned by inquiry, who came into the city? that
it was Iulianus Caesar, cried out, That he it was who should repair the
temples of the gods. Considering therefore that as that lofty Poet of Virgil.
Mantua said before time, Maius opus moveo, and mayor mihi nascitur ordo
Rerum --
A greater work I am to enterprise,
As greater train of matters does arise:


I think it now a convenient time, to show the tracts and situation of Gaul,
least if I should when armies are ready to encounter, and among the variable
chances of battles cursarily tell of such things unknown unto some, I might
seem to follow the example of slothful sailors and mariners, who when their
worn sails and fretted gables might have been at more leisure prepared and
repaired, are forced to mend and trim them up in the midst of waves and
tempests.

CHAP. IX. Of the first original of the Gauls. Their Bardi, Eubages, and
Druidae. The nature of the air and soil among them: and the description of
the Alps.
THe ancient writers doubtful as touching the original of the Gaulois, left
the knowledge of this business unperfect: but afterward Timagenes, both for
his diligence and language a Greek, collected out of many and sundry books
those things which lay long unknown: whose credit and authority we
following (now that all obscurity is remooved) will declare the same
distinctly and plainly. Some have affirmed, That the people first seen in
these regions were In borne, Homelings, Homebred.
Aborigines, called Celtae, after the name of an amiable king; and Galatae,
according as his mother was named: for so are the Gaulois in the Greek tongue
termed. Others have reported, That the Dorienses, followers of that more
ancient Hercules, inhabited the coasts confining along the Ocean. The Pith^us
reads Diuides.
Drasid record, That a part in very deed of the nation were homelings,
in-borne, and there bred: but others also from the utmost Islands and the
tracts beyond Rhene, driven out of their own native seats, what with
continual wars, and what with the inundation of the swelling sea, conflowed
thither. Some say, That after the destruction of Troy, a few that fled from the
face of the Greeks, and were every where dispersed, possessed themselves of
these places then lying void. But the inhabitants of these countries vouch this
above all other, (which also we have read engraven in their monuments of
record) That Hercules the son of Amphitryo made have to destroy Geryon and
Tauriscus, two cruel tyrants; of whom, the one infested Spain, the other
Gaul: And after he had vanquished them both, that he lay with the gentlewomen
of the country, on them begat many children; and that they called after their
own names those parts which they had rule of. As for a people of Asia, from
out of Phoca, they to avoid the cruel rigor of Harpalus, a lieutenant general
or captain under king Cyrus, sailed into Italy. Of whom, one part built
Veleis.
Velia in Basilic^^^.
Lucania; the other, (...).
Massilia in the province of Vienna. Then afterward in the ages ensuing, they,
as their puissance increased, founded many towns: But I must forbear such
variety, which oftentimes has satietie joined with it. Mean while, as the
men of this place were grown by little and little to civilitie, the studies of
laudable sciences, begun by the Bards, Eubages, and Druides, mightily
flourished here. And verily the Bards sung unto the sweet music of the Harp
the valorous deeds of worthy men composed in heroicke verse. But the Eubages,
searching into the highest altitudes of natures work, endeavored to lay open
and declare the same. Among these, the Druidae of an higher wit and conceit,
according as the authority of Pythagoras decreed, being tied unto societies
and fellowships, were addicted wholly unto questions of deep and hidden
points, and they despising all humane things, pronounced, that men's souls were
immortal. This climate of Gaul, by reason of the high and difficult risings
of mountains, and those always covered over with hideous heaps of snow,
before time unknown almost to the inhabitants of all the world beside, unless
it be where it coasteth upon the sea, is enclosed on every side with fences
that environ it naturally, as if it were by art of man. And verily, on the
South side the Mar Tosco, or Mar de Marseille.
Tyrrhene and Gaul seas both run close by it: toward the North divided it is
from savage nations by the river Rhene: and Westward with the Ocean and the
high mountain Which now has many names according to diverse parts thereof.
Pyrenaeus: And what way it begins to mount up Eastward, it gives place to
the high banks of the Cottian Alps: which king Cottius, after that Gaul was
conquered and subdued, lying hidden alone close within the streits, and
trusting upon the unaccessible roughness of the craggie places, when his fear
was well at length allayed, and himself received into the friendship of the
Emperor Octavian, in lieu of a memorable gift, with great and labourious
works made to serve for a compendious way, and commodious to travailers, as
standing just in the midst betwixt the other old Alps: as touching which I
will report anon what I have learned and known. In these Cottian Alps, which
begin at the town or Regusio. Susa Leandro.
Segusio, there peaketh up a mighty high mount, that no man almost can
Penetrabile.
pass over without danger. For, as men come out of Gaul, it bends steep
forward with a great downe-fall, terrible to behold, by reason of the cliffes
hanging on either side, especially in the Spring: what time as the frost and
ice thaweth and the snow melts with the hot breath of the winds, by the
streits broken on both sides, and the holes or ditches hidden with heaps of
frozen ice, men verily with staggering and staying their feet make some shift
to come down; but horses and carts fall headlong forward. Now, for to put by
this mischief, one remedy alone has been devised: namely, that most of the
wagons with mighty great ropes tied fast unto them, and a maine strength of
men and oxen both, straining behind to stay the same, scarcely with a creeping
pace, somewhat more safely come rolling down. And this, as I have said,
happens in the Spring time of the year. But in Winter, the ground charged
all over with a coat of ice, and (as it were) smoothed therewith, and thereby
slipperie under foot, sets men forward in their gate to run upon their
noses; and the open valleys along the broad and wide plains, not to be
trusted, by reason that the ice will not bear, swallow up otherwhiles folk
passing thereupon. In regard of which dangers, those that be cunning in the
ways, and know the country well, pitch down fast certain piles or maine
stakes of timber, bearing their heads above the ground all the way along the
safer places, to the end that the way faring man directed by them, as they
stand in a row, may pass without harm: which if they happen to lie hidden and
hilled with snow; and namely, being overthrown before with land floods or
rivers falling down from the mountains, hardly are they passable with the
guidance of the rusticall people, leading the way. Now from the very pitch of
this Italian cliffe, there reaches a plain for the space of seven miles unto
a station named Martis: and from hence another high hill more upright, and with
much ado to be passed over, stretches forward as far as to the head or top
of Matrona; the occasion of which name came by a chance that befell unto a
noble woman: From whence the way verily lies steep down, but yet more easy
and travaileable, as far as to the Fort or Brigantium, about which stands
the town Brianson.
Virgantia. The Sepulcher of the said petty king, who I have reported made
those ways abovenamed, is at Segusio, very near unto the walls, and his Manes
for a twofold reason are devoutly honored, both for that he had ruled his
own subjects by way of a just and moderate government; and also because he
being received into alliance with the Roman state, procured perpetual peace
and rest unto that nation. And albeit this way which I have spoken of, be the
middle one, and therefore compendious, and the shorter yea, and more haunted,
yet others also have been made long before at diverse times. The first of them,
Hercules of Thebes, marching in a milder manner to destroy Geryon (as has
been said) and Tauriscus caused to be wrought near unto the maritime Alps,
and this Hercules gave them their name: Semblably, the castle of Monoecus, and
the haven, he consecrated to the everlasting memorial of himself. Then, after
the revolution of many ages, upon this occasion were the Alps Poeninae
devised. Publius Cornelius Scipio, father of the elder Africanus, when the
Saguntines, memorable for their miseries and fidelity both, were upon a
constant resolution of the Mores besieged, being about to go into Spain for
to aid them, transported over a fleet, manned with a puissant power of
soldiers. But when the city Morvedre.
Saguntum was by mightier forces destroyed, he not able to reach and overtake
Anniball (who having three days before passed over Rhoine.
Rhodanus, marched apace to the parts of Italy) crossed over between with
swift sail an arm of the sea, which was no long cut, and watched for him at
Genoa.
Genua, a town of Riviera de Genoa. Oriel.
Liguria, as he should come down the mountains; to the end he might, if
fortune had given him leave and opportunity, encounter him in the plain,
wearied with the roughness of those comberous ways. Howbeit, having regard to
the maine chance and common good, he advised his brother Cn. Scipio to go
into Spain, for to keep back Hasdruball, who was likewise to get out and
come from thence. Whereof Anniball having intelligence given him by fugitives
(as he was a man of a nimble and crafty wit) taking the Those of Piemont
Taurines, who dwelt hard by, to be his guides, came by the way of the
^ntrecasteux in Provence. (...)
Tricastines and the utmost coast of the The County of Be^ifort
Vocontians to the chase and forests De Craux.
Tricorij: and there beginning his work, he made another way, which before had
been unpassable: for having hewed out the rock that stood up on a huge
height, which with making mighty fires, and pouring vinegre upon it, he had
broken and dissolved, he marched along the river (...).
Druentia, that runs winding with a wandering stream, and seized upon the
regions of Tuscane. Thus much as touching the Alps: Now come we to that which
is behind.

CHAP. X. Gaul called Celtica, Aquitanica, and Belgica, the principal parts
thereof, together with the shapes and manners of the people, are described.
IN ancient times, when these parts lay hidden as barbarous, thought they were
to have been three sorts of people, divided into the Celtae, (who are the same
that the Galli) into the Acquitani, and the Belgi, all different in language,
orders, and laws. And verily the Gauls, who also are the Celts, the river
Garonne.
Garumna severeth from the Those of Guienne, according to Marlianus.
Acquitances: which river springing from the Pyrenaean hills, after it has
passed by many a town, hides himself within the Ocean. The same nation also
is separated from the Belgae, by Marne.
Matrona and Seyne.
Sequana, rivers of a or equal: gemina magnitudinis.
duple bigness; which running through the province of Lions.
Lugdunensis, after they have enclosed and compassed round about in manner of
an Island, a castle of the Parisij, named Pans.
Lutetia, meet in one channel, and keeping on their joint course together
forward, near unto Constance in Normandy.
Castra Constantia, fall into the sea. Of all these nations, the Belgae had the
name in ancient writers to be most valiant, for that being far remooved from
a civil kind of life and behavior, and not made effeminate with dainty
delights brought in unto them, they warred a long time with the Germans beyond
Rhene. For the Acquitanes, (unto whose coasts, as being next at hand, and
peaceable, merchandise used to be brought from other parts) after they fell
once in their demeanor and carriage to be delicate, were soon brought under
the Romans dominion. Now, the whole country of Gaul, ever since that they
were driven by so many urgent wars to yield unto Julius Dictator, has been
ruled by a or a Tetrarchie.
government divided into four parts. Whereof Narbonensis the first, contained
within it Viennensis and Lugdunensis: the second, had the rule wholly of the
Acquitanes: as for the upper and lower Germany, together with the Belgae, two
jurisdictions governed at the same time. But now are reckoned within the whole
circuit of Gaul, these provinces, to wit, the second Germany, beginning first
at the West coast, fortified with Colein.
Agrippina and Tongeren.
Tungri, great cities and wealthy: then, the first Germany; where besides
other free towns or boroughes; is or Magontiacum. Mentz.
Magontiacus, Wormz.
Vangiones also, the Speyr.
Nemetes and Strasburg, some read Argentoratsi.
Argentoratus, renowned for the overthrowes and defeatures of the Barbarians.
After this, the first Belgica has in the frontiers thereof Metz.
Mediomatrici and Triers.
Treviri, famous for the Emperors resiance there. To this adjoineth the second
Belgica, wherein stand Amiens.
Ambiano, an eminent city among others, Chalons in Champaigne.
Cathelauni also, and Rhemes. Burgognor^.
Rhemi. Among the Besanson.
Sequani, I have seen Augst, near unto Basile.
Bisontij and or Lugdunum. Lions.
Rauraci, of greater note and estate than many other towns. As for Lugdunensis
the first, adorned it is with Cavailon.
Lugdunus, Sens.
Cabillones, Bordeaux, or Bourges rather.
Senones, Autun.
Biturigae, and Rovan, or Roan.
Augustudunum, of note for mighty and ancient walls. For Touraine.
Rothomagi make show of the second Lugdunensis, and Saints, or Mechelen, as
some think
Turini, of Avenche.
Mediolanum: also the Tricastini, the Alps both Grai and Poenin besides more
obscure towns, have Bourdeaux.
Aventicum also, a city verily now desolate and forsaken, but of no base
account in times past, as appears even at this day by the buildings decayed
and half down. These I say are the goodly provinces and cities of Gaul. In
Aquitania, that lies toward the mountains Pyrenaei, and that part of the
Ocean which reaches unto Spain, is the first province Acquitanica, very well
inhabited and beautified with fair and great cities; but letting many others
go by, Bourdeaux.
Burdegala and Avergne.
Averni do pass; likewise Xainctes.
Santones and Poicters.
Pictavi. Auchx.
Ausci and Bazadois.
Vasarae commend unto us ninenations. In the province Narbonenfis is comprised
Narbone.
Narbona and Tolou^e.
Tolosa, which carry the chief name of the cities. Viennensis joyeth in the
beauty of many cities: of which, those of the better sort be, Vienna it self,
Arles
Arelate, and Valence.
Valentia: whereto Marseiles.
Massiilia is annexed, by the society and power whereof, we read, that Rome
otherwhiles in great dangers and distresses has been relieved and supported.
Near unto these, are Aix, near unto Solies.
Salluvij, Nizza.
Nicea, Antibe. Pineto.
Antipolis, with the Isles Isles de Hyerres, ve^ d' Or. Ortel.
Stoechades. And for as much as by the train of our text and historical
work, we are come to these parts, it were unfitting and absurd to say nothing
of Rhodanus, a river of the greatest name. This Rhosne.
Rhodanus flowing from the Poenine Alps, with store of Springs gushing forth
in great plenty, and running down apace directly toward the plain country
with his own stream, and no more, hides the banks, and so engorgeth
himself into the lake named Lac de Lozanne and de Geneve.
Lemanus: and albeit he runs within the same, yet entermingled he is no
where with other waters besides his own: but gliding of the one side over the
slower and more still surface of the water, seeking an issue, with a swift
current makes way forth of it. From whence, without hurt of any thing, he
runs through the thick fennes, and the Eurgognons.
Sequani, and after he has gone a great way forward, passes lightly hard by
the province Viennensis on the left side, and Lugdunensis on the right. Having
thus rid a great ground with his wavie stream, he takes unto him Saone.
Araris, which they call Sauconna, running within the first Germany, and
gives it his own name. In which place begins Gaul. From thenceforth they
use to measure their journeyes, not by miles, but by leagues: and there
Rhodanus grown bigger, and charged with other rivers falling into him,
carries exceeding tall and big ships, that use oftentimes to be tossed with
gales of wind: and ending among the vales which nature has ordained to be his
prescript limits, frothing now and foming, is incorporate into the Gaulish sea
by an open frith or gulf called otherwise called Gallious Sinus.
Ad gradus, lying from Arles almost ten miles. Thus much as touching the site
of the places. Now will I describe the shapes and manners of the people. The
Gauls in manner all be of stature tall, of complexion clear, white, and of
ruddie hair, carrying in the cast of their eyes a kind of terrible and stern
grimnesse, given much to brawles, and exceeding insolent: for if any one of
them be set a chiding and brawling, having the shrew his wife (who commonly of
the twain is the stronger by far, and of a sallow hew) to take his part, a
whole band of others that be strangers, is not able to match him: especially
when she, setting out her neck with big swollen veins, falls a grating of her
teeth, and levelling her snow white arms, and those of a mighty big size,
begins once to lay about her with fists and heels together, as if they were
bolts and darts discharged violently from the writhed and wrested strings of a
brake or such like engine: the ordinary words of most of them, as well when
they are pacified as angry, are dreadful and full of menacing. But all of
them, with like diligence and curiosity, are neat and clean: neither in those
tracts, and especially in Acquitania, shall you see a woman (be she never so
poor) in foul and ragged clothes, as in other places. Every age among them is
most meet for warfare: and with like courage and hardiness of heart is the old
man brought into the field, and the lusty youth carrying about him limbs
hardened with frost and continual travail, resolved to contemn many and
those fearful occurrents: Neither is there ever known any one of them (as in
Italy) for fear of going to the wars, to cut off his own thumb, and such
as so do, they term merrily by way of jest, Murcos. A nation greedily given
to wine, affecting to make sundry sorts of drink resembling wine: and some
among them, of the baser sort, having their wits and senses dulled by
continual drunkenness (which Cato by his sentence has defined to be a
voluntary kind of fury) are ravished and bestraught with wild and wandering
cogitations: so as that may seem to be true which Tully pleading for Fonteius
says, That the Gaulois from henceforth would drink their wine more delayed,
because they thought it to be poison. These regions, especially those that
confine upon Italy, abhorred not much to come by little and little under the
Romans Empire; first attempted and tried by Fulvius; then afterward in small
battles sore shaken by Sextius; and last of all, tamed and subdued by Fabius
Maximus: unto whom the complete effecting of this business, namely, after he
had vanquished that fell and stout nation of the Allobroges, gained him that
surname. For all the Gauls, unless they were the quarters unpassable by
reason of meeres and marshes, as Salust mine author tells us, after mutual
overthrowes given and taken for the space of ten years war together,
Caesar by a perpetual covenant of league joined unto us in perfect society. I
have flowne out very far, but return I will at length to the matter which I
have begun.

CHAP. XI. The state of Gaul in the time of Constantius and Iulianus Emperors.
AFter that Domitianus abovesaid by cruel death was dispatched out of the way,
Musonianus his successor governed the East in the place and authority of
Pratoriani Praefecti.
Praefectus Praetorio, or Lord Justice, a man renowned for his eloquence in
both languages: whereby he arose to an higher degree than was expected. For
Constantine, what time as he searched very narrowly into the superstitious
sects of the q Manichees and such like, and no meet interpreter could be found,
made choice of him, as commended for a sufficient man in that behalf: whom,
for performing that office and function skilfully, he would have to be named
Musonianus, whereas before he was wont commonly to be called Strategius: and
from this beginning having run through many degrees of honors, he mounted up
to this dignity of Praefecturam.
Praefecture, or Iusticeship; a prudent man otherwise, and well enough endured
of the provinces; mild also, and fair spoken: but upon any occasion
whatsoever, and especially upon suits and actions in law (which is an
abominable thing) wholly set upon filthy gain and lucre, (whereby he grew
base and odious) as it appeared evidently among other things in the commissions
and inquisitions holden about the death of Theophilus, a So called, not for
that he had been Confull, but bare the Consuls ensigns.
Consulare Governor or Lieutenant in Syria, who for betraying of Caesar Gallus
was in a confused tumult and uprore of the people torn in pieces: in which
affair poor men were condemned, even those who were known for certain to
have been forth of the country when this outrage was committed; but the rich
ones, authors in deed of this foul act, with the turning out of their livings
and estates were let go. Equal unto him was Prosper, who had the command of
the soldiers, in lieu of the general of horsemen abiding then in Gaul, a
base coward and abject person, and such an one (as the Comicall Poet says) as
despising the art of close theeverie, used open extortion and violent
oppression. And whiles these two agreed together, and enriched themselves by
mutual commerce and reciprocal bringing of cheats to one another hand, the
Persian captains bordering upon the rivers, while the king was busied in the
farthest marches of his own lands, by companies and crewes of Brigands made
foul work in our pale, boldly invading one while Armenia, another while
Mesopotamia, taking their vantage whiles these Roman Commanders were employed
in gathering together the spoils of them that died.

THE XVI. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Reports in commendation of Iulianus, who setting behind all
delightsome pleasures, and having quickly dispatched a long voyage, subdueth
certain parts of Gaul, and forces them to be quiet.
WHiles these things thus pass in the Roman world, at the dispose of that
linked course and order of the destinies, Caesar at Vienna, being by the
Emperor (now the eighth time Consul) called to the fellowship of that degree,
and entered into the calendar thereof (as his inbred and natural vigor did
put him forward to action) dreamed of nothing but the crashing noise of
battle, and slaughter of barbarous enemies, preparing now already to gather
up the broken fragments of the province, if he might once at length have been
seconded with a forward gale of favorable fortune. For as much as therefore
those notable matters which throughout Gaul by his virtue and felicity both,
he redressed, surpass many valiant deeds of men in old time, I will show them
every one particularly in the progress and train of this story, minding to
this purpose for to strain all the strings that my mean wit can afford, if
happily they will serve the turn. Now whatsoever in this narration shall be
delivered, that no subtle falsitie forgeth, but the sound truth of matters
fully relates, and the same resting upon evident proofs, shall pertain in
manner to alaudative argument. For it seems, that a certain set law and
canonical rule of a better life, accompanied this young gentleman from the
very rocking of his cradle unto his dying day. For in his speedy growth and
quick proceedings he made such a bright and shining show both at home and
abroad, that for wisdom he was esteemed a second Titus, the son of
Vespasian; for the glorious menaging and carriage of his wars, like for all
the world to Traianus; mild and merciful as Antoninus; in searching out the
true and perfect reason of things, suitable to Marcus; to the resemblance and
imitation of whom he framed all his actions and whole deportment. And for so
much as (according as we be taught by Tully a grave author) we take delight in
the height of all noble arts, as we do of trees, but not in their roots and
stocks: even so the rudiments and beginnings of this singular towardness were
then covered with many things that shaddowed and darkened them, which ought of
right to be preferred before many and those wonderful deeds of his
afterward, in this respect, That in the prime of his youth being fostered like
a Erichtheus in a retired place of Minerva, and fetched out of the quiet bowers
of an Academie, and not out of a military pavilion, to the feats of arms, and
fighting of battles; after he had quieted Germany, and allayed the stiff
stirs and troubles of Rhene, in one place he drew blood of bloody minded
kings, and in another hung chains on their hands. Well, whiles he passed a
toilesome Winter in the Vienna.
town aforesaid, among other flying rumors that ran abroad continually, he
understood, That the walls of Autun in Butgundie.
Augustudunum, an ancient city, carrying a large and spacious compass, but
for very rottenness by long continuance of no strength, were on a sudden
forcibly besieged with a strong power of the Barbarians; That whiles the
companies of soldiers there in garrison sat still and did nothing, the old
beaten servitors in right watchful care assembled themselves and defended the
place; as oftentimes, utter despair is wont to put back most imminent dangers
of life and safety. Wherefore, remitting no whit of his provident cares, and
casting behind him all servile flattery that attended upon him, whereby those
about him would have drawn him to delights and riotous life, after all things
were provided sufficiently, upon the 24. of Iun^.
eighth day before the Calends of July, he came to Augustudunum aforesaid;
like as if he had been a leader of long continuance, and of great name above
others for courage and policy; ready to set upon the Barbarians straggling here
and there, whenever he could see his opportunity and advantage. After
deliberation therefore had, together with the assistance of those that were
skillful in the Countries, what way he might make choice of to march with
safety, much was said to the point, to and fro: while some opined, That they
must go by Arbois in Butgundie.
Arborosa, others again, by the country of the Leuci Those about Toul.
: But when certain of them secretly suggested, That Silvanus late colonel of
the footme^, passed venturously, though hardly, with eight thousand
aid-souldiers by more compendious and shorter ways, howbeit suspected because
they are dark and much shaded; Caesar strived and strained much to imitate
with all his might the venturous boldness of that hardy leader; and, because
no delay might impeach this project, taking with him none but the men of or
corselets, footmen heavily armed at all pieces.
arms and balistiers, unmeet soldiers to protect and defend their ruler,
passed the same way through, and came to Auxerre. Ortel.
Autosidorum. Where after he had with short rest, (as his manner was) refreshed
himself and his soldiers, he marched on to the Tricastines; and as the
Barbarians came violently upon him by troops, part of them (for he feared them
as far more in number) he observed with strong wings and flancks standing
close together; some again by taking the advantage of the higher ground
before, he easily ran down upon and trod underfoot; others, for fear
yielding themselves he took prisoners; the rest whose care was altogether
employed to make shift with quickness to escape, because, encombred as he was
with heavy armor, he could not follow in chase, he suffered to go away
without harm. Now therefore upon a more assured hope, being confirmed in his
resolution to resist all violent occurrents, through many dangers he came to
Troics. Ortel.
Tricassae, so unlooked for, that whiles he was in manner rapping at the gates,
such a multitude of Barbarians were spread all about, that for dread of them
there was no entrance into the city without much ado, and many a curious
circumstance of consultation. And when he had stayed there a little time, while
he provided for his wearied soldiers, thinking it not good to slack his
business, he goes straight to the city of Rhemes: Where he assembled his
whole army together, and charged them to give attendance, and wait his coming
at Besanson.
Vesontium: the governor whereof was Marcellus, who succeeded Vrsicinus; and
Vrsicinus himself was commanded to abide in those parts unto the end of this
expedition. Wherefore, after many and sundry opinions delivered, when it was
agreed once to set upon the people of Alemaine in ten territories, the
soldiers in thick squadrons marched thither more willing and cheerful than
they had wont: and for that the day was so foggie and dark, that they could
not see a very small way before them, the enemies having this advantage, that
they knew the coast of the country, traversed a cross crooked way behind
Caesar's back, and charging upon two legions as they were gathering their
armor together, they had put them all well near to the sword, but that a
sudden outcrie made, caused the aid-forces of our associates to assemble
themselves. From hence forward, supposing that he could not pass either ways
or waters without ambushments, he became very provident, took leisure, and
cast more doubts: a special point of good policy in great Commanders, and
which is wont both to help and save whole armies. Hearing therefore, that the
Barbarians possessed of the cities Strasburg.
Argentoratum, Brucomat.
Brotomagus, Tabern. Simlero.
Tabernae, A town between Strasburg and Triers.
Saliso, Spcir.
Nemetae, Worm^.
Vangiones, and Mentz.
Maguntiacum, inhabited the territories lying about them (for the towns
themselves they avoid, no less than dens and places beset round about with
net and toil) he seized first into his hands Brotomagus: and as he advaunced
toward it, a power of Germans encountered him in the way, and offered him
fight. Now, having arraunged his men in a two cornered-battaile, when they
began once to cope the other, and the enemies were driven upon a twofold
mischief, whiles some of them were taken prisoners, other slain in the very
fury of the medley, the rest made shift with speedy footmanship to escape and
get away. When as no man therefore after this was seen in the field to make
head, thought good it was to set forward and recover Colcin.
Agrippina, which before Caesar's coming into Gaul had been raced and
destroyed: through all which tracts there is neither city to be seen, nor
castle, unless it be at the Cobolen^x.
Confluentes, a place so called, where the river Moesell.
Mosella and Rhene meet together, and there stands Rigoll.
Rigodulum a town, as also near unto Colcin.
Colonia it self one tower. Being therefore entered into Agrippina, he stirred
not out from thence, before such time as the kings of the Frankes being
terrified, and their fury well delayed, he both established a peace for the
good (in the mean while) of the Commonweal, and also recovered the said
city, most strongly fenced. He joyous of these good hansels and overtures to
conquest and victory, departed by Triers.
Treviri, minding to Winter at Apud Sen^^as.
Sens, a town then of good importance: where carrying (as they say) upon his
shoulders a world of wars, coming like a flood upon him, distracted he was
with manifold cares, namely, how the soldiers which had forsaken their wonted
garrison towns, might estsoones be brought to suspected places of danger: how
he might discomfite and scatter the nations that had laid their heads
together, and banded themselves to work the Romans mischief: and how to
foresee, that his army like to raunge diverse ways wanted not victuals. As he
pondered and carefully cast these matters in his mind, a multitude of enemies
gives an attempt upon him, mightily enstamed with hope to win the town; and
the more confident in this their enterprise, because they had learned by the
information of certain fugitives, that neither the band of the b Scutarij nor
e Gentiles were there, as being bestowedin sundry townships for their better
feeding and diet. When he had therefore shut the city gates, and fortified
that part of the wall which was weak and undefensable, himself in person,
together with the armed soldiers, was usually seen both day and night among
the bulwarks and battlements, in boiling heat of anger fretting to himself,
and gnashing his teeth, That having many times gone about to sally and break
out upon the enemies, he was ever checked and impeached, by reason of the small
forces that he had presently about him. But in the end, after thirty days the
Barbarians went away ill appaied and sad, mumbling softly to themselves, That
vainly and foolishly they had ever thought of besieging the city. Besides all
this (a thing that must be imputed as a great indignity) whiles Caesar was in
this jeopardie, Marcellus General of the Horse, who abode then but in the next
stations, drove off to aid him: whereas, albeit the city had been distressed
without the princes being there, it ought to have been rescued and delivered
from the calamities that follow a siege, by making head again with another
power.

CHAP. II. The virtues of Iulianus, beseeming a magnanimous prince, Ammianus
Marcellinus exactly describes.
CAesar, a prince right puissant and of wonderful action, was no sooner freed
from this fear, but in that constant carefulnes which he always carried, he
provided for his soldiers, that after their long travail they might have some
rest, though but short, yet sufficient to refresh their strength: albeit those
lands, soulely out of order by reason of extreme want (as having been so
often wasted) affoorded but small means meet for the maintenance of life. But
when with watchful diligence order was taken also in this behalf, his mind
being lifted up with a sprinckling of more plentiful hope of prosperous
success, he bent the same to the practice and performance of many worthy
parts. The first thing therefore that he did (hard though it were) was this,
that he enjoined unto himself temperance, and kept the same still living, as
if he had been tied to the d Sumptuarie laws; which being from the Rhetris.
Oracles of Lycurgus (that is to say, The shing les or tables of wood called
Wherein those Oracles or Laws were written.
Axones) brought over to Rome, long time observed, and beginning to grow out of
use, Sylla the Dictator by little and little restored, making this account, and
that out of the prophesies or sage sayings of Democritus, That Fortune sets
out a sumptuous and superfluous table, bat Virtue, a scant and frugall. For
Cato Tusculanus also, who in regard of his severe and precise life came to be
surnamed Censorius, wisely defining of this point: Great care thou have (quoth
he) of trim furniture, and as great carelessness of virtue. Furthermore,
reading continually as he did a little book, which Constantius sending his His
wives son.
son in law to the University, had written with his own hand, setting down
an order over-liberally, What should be the expense of Caesar's board; he
expressly forbad, That Fesant, and the dainty meat made of the mother and
Vulvam and sume^
udder of a young sow that newly farrowed, should be called for and served up
to the table, as contenting himself with the course meat and such as came next
to hand of a common laboring souldior. Hereupon it happened, that he divided
the nights according to a tripartite or threefold function, For sleep, for
affairs of State, and for his book: a course that Alexander the Great, as we
read, used to take. But this our prince did the same more stoutly of the
twain. For Alexander having a basin or pan of brass set beneath by his beds
side, held with his arm stretched out of the bed, a silver ball, that as
sleep came upon him, and had let loose the stiff sinews of his joints, by
the ringing sound that the said ball made when it fell down, he might break
off his sleep: But Julian, without any such devise or means, wakened as often
as he would; and rising always at midnight (not out of a featherbed, or from
under coverings of silk, glittering again with sundry bright colors, but
from a quilt or tapistrie carpet spread on the ground, or some homely rugge,
which the simple common people term Susurna) secretly did his devotions, and
prayed unto Mercury, who (as we are taughtout of the learning of Theology) is
the swift intelligence of the world, stirring up the motion of our minds; and
in so great want of things, upon sure advertisements provided for the
Commonweal. After which high and serious businesses ended, he turned himself
to the exercise of his wit: and a man would not believe with how great and
ardent desire in seeking after the profound knowledge of principal matters,
and in gathering together certain forage and stoovet (as it were) for to feed
his mind, climbing up still unto higher points of learning, he by way of wise
disputation ran through all parts of Philosophy. But yet how effectually and
fully soever he got the furniture hereof, he did not cast at his heels the
meaner sciences, as having an indifferent good insight into Poetry and
Rhethoricke (as may appear by the incorrupt elegance and mildness of his
Orations and Epistles, joined with gravitie) as also into the manifold
histories both of our own and also of foreign acts. Besides all this, he was
able to discourse and deliver his mind sufficiently in the Latin tongue. If
then it be true which diverse writers report, That king Cyrus, Simonides the
Lyricke Poet, and Hippias Eleus that most quick and eagre Sophister, had
excellent memories, for that they attained thereto by drinking certain
medicines; we are to think verily, that this man also being then come to his
full growth, drank up a whole tun of Memory, if possibly it might any where
be found. And these truly were the nightly signs of his modest temperance, and
other virtues. But as touching that which he delivered by way of gallant
speech, or pleasant conceit; or how he behaved himself in the preparation for
fight, or in the very conflict of battle it self; as also, what enormities
in the civil State he resormed by his magnanimity and the liberty that he
took, it shall be showed particularly in due place. When he was compelled,
being a student yet in Philosophy, to exercise the first essays and
introductions to military knowledge, as a prince, and learned the artificial
feat of footing with measures the warlike dance in arms, to the music of the
fife and flute; he often naming Plato, came out alowd with this old proverb,
This is right, A pack-saddle on a Cowes back; surely this is no burden fit
for my shoulders. When by a certain solemn order or custom there were
certain Ag^^^ibus in robus.
Messengers or Pursivants brought into the Consistory, to receive For their
pay or reward.
gold, among others, one of their company took it not, as the manner is,
within the lap of his mantle spread abroad, but with the hollow ball of both
hands: and with that, These Pursivants or Intelligencers (quoth the Emperor)
can skill how to catch, and not to latch [mony.] Being given to understand by
certain parents, That their daughters, young virgins, were forcibly ravished,
he passed a decree, That he who had abused them, upon conviction should be
confined and sent away. Now, when the said parents of the maidens complained of
the indignity they suffered, in that the party was not put to death, this
answer he made: Thus far forth (quoth he) let the laws blame my clemency:
but as for an Emperor, he ought to excel others in the lore of a most mild
and gracious mind. He was on a time about to go forth to a certain warlike
journey or expedition, and many called upon him by the way for justice, as
having sustained some wrongs; whom he put over and commended to the rulers of
provinces, to have their complaints heard: and after his return, he enquired
what every one of them had done, and according to his gracious mercy that
naturally he had, he mitigated the punishments of their offenses. Last of all,
setting aside his victories, whereby he put to flight or defeated the
Barbarians, whom he slew in battle, without touch many times of any
contumacie, hereby most of all it appears, what good he did unto the Gaulois,
laboring (as it were) for life in extreme penury, in that when he entered
first into those parts, he found there was demanded by way of tribute five
and twenty pieces of gold for every poll, but at his departure thence, seven
only for full satisfaction of all duties: in regard whereof, they rejoiced
with cheerful mirth and dancing, as if the clear Sun after ugly
darkness had shone upon them. To conclude, we know, That unto the very end
of his Empire, and to his dying day, he observed this one thing right
profitably, that in matter of paying tribute he remitted not the overplus
remaining and arrerages, by way of indulgences, as they call them: for well he
wist, that in doing so, he should somewhat mend and better the estate of the
rich; whereas well known it is, that the poor every where, in the very
beginning of the Dictoru^ exordia.
taxes and imposts, are compelled to make full payment, without any easement or
relaxation at all. Howbeit, amid these courses and ways that he took, to
rule and govern with moderation, which good princes are to strive to imitate,
the rage and fury of the barbarous nations brake out into a flaming fire: and
like as wild beasts, wont to live of ravine and prey when keepers be slack and
negligent, use not to depart and leave their wont when these are removed, no
not if stronger be set in their place, but growing outrageously wood for
hunger, without regard of life, run upon whole herds and flocks of cattle:
even so they also, when all was spent which they had gotten by spoil and
pillage, as hunger urged them, diverse times raised and drove booties away, and
otherwhiles again, before they could meet with ought, came short and died for
it.

CHAP. III. Troubles in the Court of Constantius, whose ears lay open to all
accusations. Arbetio brought into question by some, escaped without harm.
Iulianus himself being accused, had for his patron Eutherius the Eunuch: the
singular gifts of whose mind are here declared.
THus for that year went these affairs in Gaul, doubtful in hope, yet
luckie enough in the event. But in the Emperors (...), or Court.
train envy ceased not to bark and carpe on every side at Arbetio, as one
that made way already to the imperial purple robe, and would shortly attain
to the highest dignity it self. And a certain C^mes, or Counselors.
Courtier, by name Verissimus, came hotely upon him, letting fly with open
mouth exceeding heinous matters, and namely charging him openly, That being of
a common souldior raised to an high place of service in the army, he nothing
contented therewith, as being but a small advauncement, aspired to the chief
and sovereign honor of all. But especially one Dorus, who had been Physician
or Chirurgian to the Scutarij, was the man that challenged and followed him
most, who being under Magnentius preferred at Rome to be Centurion of the e
Niceterio^^m.
Niceterij, had (as I related before) accused Adelphius, governor of the Vrbi
praefectum. Rome.
city, as one that began to shoot at higher designs. Now, when the matter
came to the sifting and judicial examination, and his inward friends were
about this business detained in prison, so that now there was expected some
proof of crimes objected; suddenly as it had been in a mask or interlude,
by the help of some gentlemen of the bedchamber (as the constant rumor made
report) both the persons attached and imprisoned, as accessarie and privy to
the thing, were delivered out of bands, and Dorus also vanished out of sight;
Verissimus likewise quickly held his peace, and all was hushed, like as upon a
stage, when the play is done, and the hangings are taken down. At the very
same time Constantius being informed at the mouth of such as chanced to come to
the Court, that Marcellus succored not Caesar when he was besieged at Se^^.
Senones aforesaid, him he discharged of his military oath, and commanded to
depart home to his own house: who, as if he had received some grievous
injury, plotted and practiced somewhat against Iulianus, presuming upon the
Emperor, whose ears were open to every accusation. And therefore, when
Marcellus was in his departure, Eutherius Praposit^^s cu^iculi.
chief Chamberlain, was streightwaies sent after him, ready to confute and
evict him, in case he should forge any untruths. But he not ware thereof, came
shortly after to Millaine, bustling and keeping a foul stir, (as he was a
vain talkative fool, and more like a mad man than otherwise) where being
admitted into the Consistory, he charge Julian to be a malapart person, and
one that fitted himself already with stronger wings, that he might sore up
higher, for these were the very words that he spoke, and that with a great
gesture and motion of his body. Whiles he fell a forging of these imputations
in licentious manner, Eutherius (according to his own request) was brought in
place, and commanded to speak what he would; who in modest terms and few
words shows, how the truth was colored and covered with lies: For Caesar
(quoth he) having been long besieged in Senones, while the Marcelius.
Captain f of the Forces slacked his service and sat still (as it was verily
thought) of purpose, by provident and watchful industry Magistro armoru^.
drove back the Barbarians: and withal he undertook even with the pawning of
his own head for it, that the said Julian should continue during his life a
loyal minister and dutiful servitour to his first founder. This present
matter has put me in mind to insert somewhat briefly as touching the same
Eutherius; for that if Numa Pompilius or Socrates should give some good reports
of a guelded person, and bind the same with a religious oath, they would be
charged to have swerved much from the truth: but, among brambles there grow
roses, and of wild beasts some wax tame and tractable. Wherefore, I will
summarily declare the principal things that have been known concerning him.
Being borne in Armenia of free parentage, and taken prisoner by the enemies
borderers, and even whiles he was a very little one carried away, sold he was
unto a couple of Roman merchants, and brought to the palace of Constantine:
where by little and little, what with skillful training, and what with good
government, he gave sufficient proof of an honest course and carriage of life,
as also of wit and knowledge: as being instructed in literature as much as
might suffice one of that state and calling, passing quick of conceit in
devising and inventing of doubtful and scrupulous questions: it exceeded also,
what an excellent memory he had: very desirous to do good, and full of
righteous counsel: whom if Constantius the Emperor would have regarded in
times past, when he was in his growth and youthful years, he might have heard
him as one of maturitie and stayed ripeness, giving many precepts and lessons
tending to honesty and justice, and then had he not sinned at all, or at
leastwise committed but venial trespasses. This Eutherius being
Praposituscubicul^
principal Chamberlain, now and then would seem to reform even Julian also,
nuzzled and engraffed in the manners of Asia, and therefore vain and
unconstant. Moreover, having retired himself aside to a quiet life, and
afterward being taken eftsoons into the palace (as he was of sober behavior
always, and passing well stayed) two notable and singular virtues,
Faithfulness and Continence, he embraced so, as that he was not challenged at
any time, as the rest have been, either to have disclosed a secret, unless it
were to save another man's life, or to have burnt in greedy desire of getting
and having more. Whence it came to pass, that withdrawing himself anon after
to Rome, and there settled and resiant until he was well stepped in years,
carrying about with him a good conscience to keep him company, esteemed he
is and loved of all degrees: whereas such kind of persons are wont commonly,
after they have gotten riches by unjust and indirect means to seek for secret
corners, as flyers of the light, shunning the sight of the multitude whom they
have wronged. To which of all the guelded Eunuchs in old time I should compare
this Eutherius, in perusing many a time the monuments of antiquity, could I
never find. For there were long since in our ancestors days, some of them,
though very few, trusty and profitable [to their lords,] yet stained and
spotted with certain vices: For with those special good qualities which any
one of them had gotten by studious endeavor or natural wit, he was either
given to greedy extortion, or over-fiercely and felly bent, or hotely set upon
doing mischief, or too too kind and pleasing to those that loved him, or else
excessive proud in the overweening of his own greatness: but of any one
Eunuch, every way so skillful and well qualified, I confess I never read nor
heard, notwithstanding I have presumed upon the sufficient testimony of our
age. But if happily any curious reader of Antiquities, set in opposition
against us Menophilus, an Eunuch to Mithridates king of Pontus, let him upon
this advertisement call to remembrance, That nothing has been recorded of him
but this only, which he gloriously showed in his utmost extremity: The
foresaid king, after he had in a mighty great battle been vanquished by the
Romans and Pompeius, flying to his ancient inheritance the kingdom of or
Colchis, now called Mengrelia and Lavia. Nig.
Colchi, left within the castle Sinhorium his daughter named Direptis,
grievously afflicted with sickness, as committed to the charge of this
Menophilus: who keeping this virgin most safe for her father, now that she was
by all the means that physic could afford, perfitly cured, what time as the
said fort wherein she was enclosed began to be besieged by Manlius Priscus, the
Lord generals lieuten^nt; when he perceived that the defenders of the place
were minded to render it up, fearing least to the shameful reproach of her
father the young maiden now marriageable should remain a captive, and her
body be abused, killed her first, and soon after with his sword stabbed
himself into his very bowels.

CHAP. IIII. Other examples of Tragoedies acted in Constantius his Theater. The
confident and fortunate liberty that Vrsulus an honorable person used in
defense of the truth. The stupiditie of Constantius makes way to civil
troubles and calamities: whereof there be examples laid open worth the
observation.
NOw let me return from whence I have digressed. After that Marcellus (as I
have said) had taken the foil, and Serdica (the place of his nativitie) was
destroyed; within the Emperors or Court: for military terms were
allegorically there taken up.
Camp many horrible acts, under pretense of maintaining his imperial majesty
were committed: For if one had sought for counsel unto any of these cunning
men or wisards about the squeaking of a rat, the meeting of a weazill in the
way, or for any such praesaging sign; or if he had used any old woman's charm
and enchantment to mitigate pain (a thing that by the warrant of physic may
be avowed) the party being hereof informed against (how and by what means he
could not guess) and thereupon in all have endited and arraigned, suffered
death for it. About the same time the report went, there was a certain man
named Danus, whom his wife only upon a fear and terror had accused of slight
matters, guilty indeed or unguiltie whether he were, I list not to avouch;
but for want of defense he was by Rufinus insulted over and beguiled: who gave
information of some particulars that he knew, by Gaudentius, a Pursivant or
Intelligencer, and by Africanus the Consularem.
Consulare governor then of Pannonia, when they had given notice of the
principal in the office belonging to Praefectus Praetorio, whiles also I
greatly suspect this place to be very corrupt and defective: until therefore a
more perfect copy may be found, it must pass in this manner.
he as chief actor by way of vow and earnest promise, twice, as the speech
went, induced and brought the wavering and fickle minded woman, after he had
filthily lain with her, into danger of doing her self hurt, and persuaded her,
by packing a number of lies together, for to accuse her guiltless husband of
treason, and namely to forge thus much, That he had stolen a purple garment or
covering out of Dioclesians sepulcher, and with the privitie of some hidden it.
Having thus framed these matters to the utter destruction of many, Rufinus.
himself (in hope of greater booties) hies apace to the Emperors camp, there
to raise false slanders after his wonted manner. Knowledge being taken of this
thing, commandment was given, That Mavortius, then Praefectus Prator^o.
Lord chief Justice under the Emperor, a man of high resolution, should with
straight inquisition look thoroughly into the crime, having joined with him in
commission to hear the case, Vrsulus (...)
high Treasurer to the Emperor, a man likewise of commendable severitie. After
this matter therefore was aggravated according to the condition and good liking
of those times, when nothing upon the torture of a great many could be found,
and the Judges were at a fault, and to seek what to do; at length the truth
(which had been overmuch oppressed and smoothered) breathed again, and upon
the very point of necessity the woman confesses Rufinus to be the author of
all this machination, neither suppressed she the filthy adultery committed:
and howsoever presently with contempt of laws much debate and canvasing there
had been to and fro, yet at length by order and justice both of them had
sentence of condemnation given, to dye. Constantius having intelligence hereof,
fared and fumed; lamenting also, that the protector (as it were) and defendor
of his life was perished, sent out horsemen post, and commanded in th
reatening manner Vrsulus to return unto the Counsel. And he verily rejecting
those that would have stayed him, brake through them fearelesse: and being
entered into the Consistory, with free speech and bold heart declared what had
been done: and thus having stoutly stopped the mouths of all flatterers, that
they had not a word to say, delivered both the Prfect or Justice abovesaid and
himself out of a great danger. Then happened that in Aquitaine which fame
bruited farther abroad: A certain crafty cousener being invited to a
sumptuous feast (whereof there be many in these countries) seeing a pair of
fine Toralium, or table cloth.
linen counter-points, with two buttons so exceeding Neither is this passage
as sound as it should be.
large, as that by the skill of the servitors they might meet and close
together, and a table spread with the like naperie, carrying in both hands the
forepart of his cloak, the whole furniture within, as the clothes had adorned
and set it out, together with the principal things; a rich patrimony (I
assure you) he Evertit, or Everrit.
swoopt away. With like malicious naughtiness a certain Pursivant or
Intelligencer employed in Spain, bidden semblably to a supper, when he heard
the boys that were bringing in lights at evening cry out as the manner is,
Vincamus, i. Let us win, making a wicked and heinous interpretation thereof,
brought to ruin and destroyed that noble house. These and such like prankes
were played every day more and more, for that Constantius being exceeding
timorous, feared always, that he was the mark they shot at, even as Denis
that tyrant of Sicilie: who upon the very selfsame infirmity taught even his
own daughters to play the barbers, because he would not commit his face to any
stranger for to be shaven and made smooth; and that little house or rowme in
which he was wont to lie, he environed about with a deep ditch, and made over
it a drawbridge, that might be unjointed and taken asunder every piece, the
dis-joined planks and pinnes whereof he carried over with him when he went to
bed, and the same he set together again in their joints when he was to go
forth in the morning betimes. To these trumpets that sounded the al'arme of
civil troubles, the great men likewise in the Emperors house gave blast, to
the end that they might beg the goods of condemned persons, and unite them to
their own. For as it appeared by manifest proofs, Constantine was the first
of all that opened the jaws of these favorites: but Constantius was he that
fed them fat with marrow of the provinces. For under this Emperor the heads
and principals of every state and degree were infinitely enflamed with a
greedy desire of riches, without respective difference of justice and right:
among the ordinary That exercise clvile jurisdiction.
Judges, first Rufinus, Prafectus Pratorio
Lord chief Justice, and among the military and martial men, Arbetio,
Equitum magister
Master or General of the Horsemen, and Prafectus cubicul^
Provost of the bedchamber, Vrsicinus also, Praefector Equestris (...)
Prafectus.
Captain of the Knights order, and in the Rome.
city Anitius, the Quaestor.
Quaestor, or Treasurer: who aiming in his posterity at a prince-like and
royal port, could never be satisfied with extraordinary possessions. But the
Persians in the East, by theeving and robbery, rather than (as their usual
manner was) by encountering in the field and by battle, raised booties both of
people and of cattle, by which sometimes they gained, as coming upon a
sudden, and otherwhiles over-matched with multitude of soldiers, they lost.
Now and then also they were not permitted once to have sight at all of that
which might be carried away. Howbeit, Musonianus Prafectus Prat^rio
Lord chief Justice, in those parts, furnished (as I have said before) with
many good arts, yet a corrupt man, given to briberie, and for money easy to be
turned from the truth, by means of certain spies suborned and sent out of
purpose, cunning artisans in deceiving and juggling, enquired after the projects
and plots of the Persians, joining with him in such consultations Cassianus
Duce.
Lord g Warden in the marches of Mesopotamia, a warrior hardened in sundry
services and dangerous exploits. Who notwithstanding plain intelligence given
unto them by the faithful relation of the said spies, agreeing all in one
talk, that [king] Sapor in the utmost marches of his kingdom, after much
slaughter and blood shed of his people could hardly repel the nations that
infested his dominion; yet by the means of base and obscure soldiers in
secret conferences, they were in hand with [the Ducem, or Marquess.
Lord Warden] Sapor, who lay very near unto our province, that if opportunity
might serve, he would by letters advise the king to make a firm peace, now at
length with the Roman Emperor; whereby, he being secured on every side, might
tame and subdue his enemies that continually molested him. Sapor the said Dux,
or Marquis
Warden condescended hereunto, and having gotten thus much, and trusting
thereupon, enformeth the king, that Constantius much encumbred with most
grievous wars, by way of entreaty required to have a peace. And whiles these
letters were sent unto the Chionites and Halani, in whose confines king Sapor
wintered, a long time passed between.

CHAP. V. Constantius, a cowardly prince, thinks upon a triumph: and with a
mighty long train, which is here as largely described, in great pomp enters
Rome.
WHiles these matters were in disposing thus, according as the times required,
as well in those parts as in Gaul, Constantius having now made peace with the
whole world.
shut up the temple of Ianus, and vanquished all his enemies, was very desirous
to see Rome, and to triumph without any glorious matter of name, (after
Magnentius his overthrowe and death) even over Roman blood: for neither
vanquished he by himself any nation that made war, nor understood of any
conquered by the valor of his own captains, nor laid aught unto the Empire,
ne yet was seen in extremity of dangers, either foremost, or among the
foremost: but only forsooth, that he might show a goodly pomp (reaching out a
mighty length, his banners stiff again with goldsmiths work, and a
beautiful train of his guard,) unto the people living now in much
tranquillity, and neither hoping nor wishing ever to see the like sight
again: as he that knew not peradventure, that some of the ancient princes in
time of peace verily contented themselves with the attendance of their
sergeants and officers; but when the heat of battles could abide no
slacknesse, one An^e lanter.
in all have to have committed himself with a forward gale of winds to a
fishers boat; another after the example of the Decij to have given away his
life for the Commonwealth; another again, in his own person among the meanest
soldiers to have viewed the enemies camp as a spy; and in one word by diverse
noble and valiant acts, to have grown famous; to the end that by a renowned
memorial they might commend their glorious acts unto posterity. So soon
then, as he had disbursed much in preparation of royal furniture and bestowed
gifts upon every man according to their deserts, in the second (...): When
(...) was now the sec^^d Praef^ct ^^ Lo^^ Iust^ce of (...).
Praefectship of Orphitus, after he had passed by (...)
Ocriculum, lifted up on high with great honors, environed also and guarded
with a train of admirable troops, conducted he was, as it were, in battle
array, and all men's eyes became wholly fixed and bent in the beholding of this
sight. Now when he approached the city, as he beheld with a gracious
countenance the Senators according to their places giving attendance in
dutiful wise, and the reverend presence of the noble Patricians; he thought
not as Cyneas that ambassador of Pyrrhus did, that a number of kings were
assembled together, but the very temple and sanctuary of the world was there
in place. From whom, when he had turned himself toward the common people, he
wondered exceedingly, how quickly all the men in the world thus conflowed to
Rome. And as if he had been to terrify Euphrates or Rhene with a show of
armor, as the ensigns went on both sides before, himself was mounted alone
upon a chariot of gold, glittering again with bright precious stones of
sundry sorts; with whose shining there seemed to be a certain mingled light,
and manifold degrees, in an alternative course, of high powers in authority:
whiles others again were compassed about with the Dragons, wrought with woufe
of purple thread, and those fastened to the tops of spears, all gold, and set
with costly gems, gaping and blowing with wide mouth, and therefore hissing as
if they were angry, and therewith leaving their winding tails to wift in the
wind. And on both sides marched a double rank of armed men, with targuets and
crested helmets, sending rays and beams from them of brandishing light,
wearing upon them fine or shirts of maile
habergeons: and the men of arms here and there entermingled on bard horses,
whom the Persians use to call Clibanarij, harnessed all over with good
corselets, and bard about with guards of steel: so as one would have taken
them for Images finely polished by the hand-worke of Praxiteles, and not for
men indeed: about whom also there went thin plated hoopes, made fit and
handsome for the bending of their bodies, and running all over their limbs; so
that which way soever they had need to stir and moove their joints, the
apparel or habiliment would agree thereto, the joining thereof was so meet,
and served so well every way. He therefore being saluted with luckie
acclamations by the name of Augustus, whiles the noise of voice and trumpet
together thundered out a broken sound, trembled again, showing himself just
in that sort, and so unmooveable, as he was wont to be seen in his own
provinces. For both he bowed down his body (and that was very low) as he
entered in at any high gates; and also with a stiff neck, as if both head and
it had been of one piece all armed, casting his eye directly before him, he
turned his face neither on the right hand, nor the left, as if he had been the
image of a man: neither was he seen so much as to give a nod with his head,
when the wheel shogged, nor to spit or wipe his lips, or blow or rub his nose,
no, nor once to wag his hand: which albeit he did with an affectation, yet were
these gestures and some other besides which he used in the rest of his life, no
small tokens of patience and special gifts that he alone had, as it well might
be thought. Moreover, that during all the time of his Empire he neither took
up any man to sit with him in his carroch, nor admitted any private person to be
his companion in the honorable estate of Consul, as princes have been wont to
do: as also many other things, which but always those of the blood royal
he (raised though he were to an high conceit and pride of himself) observed as
most equal and indifferent laws, I omit to set down, remembering well that I
related the same when they occurred.

CHAP. VI. What deeds and words passed at the same time in that city. Eusebia
the wife of Constantius reaches at the person of Helena, Iulians wife, by
wicked arts. Constantius terrified with continual and certain news, as
touching the wasting and robberies that some Nations made, leaves Rome.
WHerefore, being entered into Rome, the very seat of the Empire, and habitation
of all virtues, and come to the Rostra, that most renowned Hall of justice in
time of ancient rule and government, he became astonished: and being dazeled
with the sight of so many wonders of the world, on what side soever he cast his
eyes, after he had spoken unto the nobility in the Senate House, and to the
people before the tribunal and judgment seat, received into the palace with
much favor and applause, he was fully possessed now of his wished-for joy. And
oftentimes, as he exhibited the games of horse and charriot-running, he took
much delight in the merry jests and scoffs of the common people, as long as
they were not proud and insolent, nor swerved from the manner of their inbred
and native liberty, himself also in good respect and reverence keeping a due
mean: For he suffered not (as in other cities) the games to be ended at his
own pleasure, but (as the manner is) permitted many things, and yielded unto
diverse chances. Afterward taking a full view as well of all parts of the
city, situate within the tops of the seven hills, partly upon the bending of
them, and in part on the plain beneath, as also the suburbs without the walls
by the city side; whatsoever was presented to his sight first, that thought he
to surmount all the rest; and namely, the temples of Jupiter Tarpeius, as far
surpassing as heavenly things excel the earthly: goodly Baines built in manner
of provinces: the huge frame of the Amphi-theatre strongly raised up and
wrought with Tiburtine stone, closely laid and couched together; up to the top
and loover whereof hardly can a man see: the Pantheon, like unto a round region
supported with arch-worke right beautifully, of a great height: also the lofty
pulpits and mounts, elevated with ascents up to them by winding stayres,
carrying the counterfeits and personages of Consuls and former princes:
likewise the Temple of the city, the Hall of peace, the Theater of Pompeius,
the The Theater of Music and Poetry.
Odeum h and Stadium, i. the Race; besides other stately buildings and
beauties, among these, of that eternal city. But when he was come to the
goodly Hall of Traianus, the most singular piece of work under heaven (as we
think, yea, and by the assent of the very gods admirable) he stood still as
amazed, whiles he considered and thought of those giant like works round
about, so ineffable, and not of mortal men to be reached at and attempted
again. Without all hope therefore to endeavor or attempt any such thing, only
the horse of Traian, standing in the midst of the Court yard, on which the
Emperor himself is portraied sitting, he said: That he both would and also
could imitate: whereat Hormisda, a prince of the of Persia, or a Persian
Courtier.
blood royal, standing hard by him (whose departure out of Persis I declared
before) shaped him this answer, and that after the manner of his country
gesture: Command O Emperor (quoth he) the like stable to be built before, if
thou be able: then the horse which thou art disposed to make may come after and
take up as large a rowme as this does which we behold. This very potentate
being asked, What he thought of Rome? said; He took contentment in this
only, that he had now learned, How even there also men are mortal. The
Emperor therefore, after he had seen many things that struck him into a
dreadful astonishment, complained of Fame, as if she were either of small
force, or else maliciously disposed, which using always to make every thing
more than it is, yet in the blasing abroad of these monuments in Rome, fails
of her strength: and after long deliberation, What he should do? he determined
in the end to add somewhat to the ornaments of the city, namely, to erect in
the Cirque or shew-place that stood next, an Obeliske, the original and form
whereof I will show in place convenient. In this mean while Eusebia the or
Empress.
Queen, being her self barraine all her life time, practiced even then
against Helena, the sister of Constantius, and wife of Iulianus Caesar, who was
brought to Rome under a color of love and affection, and by a wyle drew her on
to drink a medicine little better than poison, which she had gotten for her,
to this end, that so often as she was conceived with child, she might
miscarrie, and cast an untimely fruit: For before time also in Gaul, when she
had brought forth a man child, she lost it by this deceitful cast: for that
the midwife (bribed for a piece of money) by cutting away the navell-string of
the newborn babe (more than was meet) killed it: so great care and such
diligence was used, that the issue of so valiant a man might not come to light,
or grow to good proof. Well, the Emperor very willing and desirous to make
some long abode in this seat, of all others most full of majesty, to the end
he might thereby enjoy more pure repose and pleasure, was terrified with
continual news, and those reported for certain, which gave him to
understand, That the Suevians made roades into the Rhaetiae, that the Quadi
also invaded part of Pannonia
Valeria, yea, and that the Tartarians.
Sarmatians, a people most expert in theeving and robbery, wasted the upper *
Maesia, and the second part of Hungary.
Pannonia. Moldavia of some.
Wherewith he being much moved, upon the thirtieth day after he entered into
Rome, to wit, the 29. of May.
fourth before the Calends of June, took his journey from the city, and
hastened by the way of per Tridentum.
Trent into Illyricum. From whence, after he had in the place of Marcellus sent
Severus, an experienced warrior and by long continuance grounded, he
commanded Vrsicinus to repair unto him: and he having received these letters
gladly, came to Sirmisch. Ortel.
Sirmium, accompanied with his fellows: and after long pondering and
consulting about the peace, which (as Musonianus had related before) might be
established with the Persians, sent back he is again into the East with the
authority of Magisterij.
General of the Cavallerie: and when the elder sort of our company were
Provectis, forte Profectis.
advaunced to the conduct and rule of soldiers, we the younger men had
commandment to attend upon his person, ready to perform whatsoever he
should command, in the behalf of the Commonwealth.

CHAP. VII. Julian having passed the Winter at Senones, invadeth the Alemanes,
raging above their wonted manner, passes over the Rhene at a foord, and after
he had with many foiles and overthrowes weakened them, forces them to retire
out of the Islands of Rhene into the further parts.
But Caesar having passed a troublesome Winter at (...).
Senones, in the year that the Emperor was the ninth time Consul, and
himself the second, by occasion that from Germany there were menaces
thundered out on every side, remooved in a fortunate hour and with good
prsaging tokens, and made have to Rhemes, more cheerful and joyous, because
the government of the army was committed to Severus, a man neither given to
discord, nor yet arrogant, but of approoved frugalitie a long time known in
warfare, and the soldiers were ready to follow him directly going before, as
being a leader also himself guided by his commission. In another part,
Barbatio after the death of Silvanus preferred to be Colonel of the
Infanterie, by commandment from the Emperor, with a power of five and
twenty thousand armed men came to Rauraci. For devised it was, and carefully
ordered beforehand, That the Alemanes, who raged above their wonted manner, and
raunged all abroad, by a redoubled power of our forces marshalled in manner of
a pair of tongs, being driven into a strait, should be beaten down and hewed
in pieces. Howbeit, whiles these projects, so well thought of and digested in
good order, were hastening forward to the execution, the Barbarians right
joyous, and as cunning to take their times for to steal and rob, passed by in
secret wise between both armies where they lay encamped, assaulted Lyon^.
Lugdunum at unawares, and after the sacking thereof they had in a greedy
endeavor burnt it quite, but that by blocking up the avenues they were driven
back, and so they made havocke of whatsoever could be found without the town.
Which damage and loss was no sooner known, but Caesar sent out three cornets
of light armed, and those right valiant, horsemen, and observed three ways,
knowing that by them (without all doubt) these robbers would break away and
escape. Neither failed he of effecting that which he projected: For all they
that went out by those ways were cut off, and the whole pillage recovered
untouched: they only escaped clear without harm, who passed in security by
the fence and fort where Barbatio lay, suffered to slip away, because
Bainobaudes a Tribune, and Valentinian (Emperor afterward) with troops of
horsemen which were in their regiment, ordained for the execution of that
charge, were by Cella, Tribu^e scutariorum.
Tribune of the Scutarij (who joining with Barbatio, came to that piece of
service) forbidden to observe that passage, by which they had intelligence the
Germans would return. The Colonel Barbatio.
of the footmen not content herewith, being himself a coward, and an
obstinate backbiting depraver of Iulianus his glorious deeds, knowing that
himself had given that commandment against the good of the Romans (for so
much confessed Cella, when he was charged with this point) deceived Constantius
in making relation thereof; and he fained, That these very same Tribunes came
with a pretense of some public negotiation of the state, to solicit the
soldiers whom he had conducted. For which cause, being deprived of their place
of command, they returned home to their houses as private persons. At the same
time the Barbarians (who had seated themselves on this side Rhene) affrighted
with the coming of these armies, some of them skilfully by hewing down mighty
strong and big trees, stopped up the ways quite, which otherwise were hard to
travail in, and of their own nature full of steep cliffes, and well near
unpassable: others having gotten the Islands lying thick scattered along the
river Rhene, making a piteous yelling and howling, rayled a good both at the
Romans, and also at Caesar: who being highly displeased and wroth for to
catch and attach some of them, craved of Barbatio seven of those ships, which
he (as minding to pass over the river) had provided to put and join together
for bridges: who, because nothing might be obtained at his hands, set them all
on a light fire. At the last, advertised by the information of spies and
discoverers newly taken prisoners, that being now the hot season of Summer,
the river might be waded over, after exhortation given, he sent the auxiliarie
light armed soldiers, together with Bainobaudes, Tribuno Corm^torum.
Tribune or Captain of the Cornuti, with the favor of Fortune minding to
atchieve a memorable exploit: who one while wading through the shallow fourds,
and sometimes bearing themselves upon their shields in manner of troughes, or
small punts, swam over to an Island near by: and being landed, they killed all
they found one with another, without any regard of sex, male or female, and of
age, old or young, as if they had been so many sheep. Now, after they had
gotten to them some empty boats, rowing by the means of them, tottering
though they were, they brake into many of such places; and when they had their
fill of slaughter, being laden with rich spoil (a part whereof they lost by
the violence of the river) they returned all in safety. And upon the knowledge
hereof, the residue of the Germans abandoning the Islands as an untrustie
place of defense, got away their wives, children, and dearest friends, together
with their corn and barbarous richesse, unto places further remote.

CHAP. VIII. A Fort named Tres-Tabernae he reedifieth. Chonodomarius and
Vestralpus, Aleman kings, after they had put to flight Barbatio, Colonel of
the Roman footmen, and chased part of the army with a puissant army, sat them
down near unto Argentoratum, and by their ambassadors insult over Iulianus.
CAesar turning from hence to the reedifying of Tres-Tabernae, a fort so
called, not long since, by the obstinate assault of the enemies destroyed,
which if it were once rebuilt, sure he was, that the Germans might be kept off
from entering into the inland parts of Gaul, as they had wont, he both
finished this work sooner than was looked for, and laid up for one whole year
for those that were to be placed there, to defend the place, food sufficient,
which had been gathered together by the soldiers hand, not without fear of
danger, even out of the Barbarians harvests. And verily, not content herewith
only, he purveyed also for himself victuals to serve twenty days. For
these warriors the more willingly made use of that which they had gotten with
their own right hands, as taking great snuff and indignation, because they
could have nothing of that provision of corn which was newly brought unto
them: for that Barbatio, when he passed hard by, prowdly caught it up before
hand, and the residue which remained behind, he laid, upon an heap, and burnt
it every jot. Which, whether he did like a vain and braine-ficke fool, or
boldly enterprised many wicked attempts by commandment from the Emperor, was
not then known. Howbeit, this was bruited abroad in all places, and rife in
every man's mouth, That Julian was not chosen [Caesar] to give easement to the
distressed state of Gaul, but that he might by most cruel wars there come
to his end, being then (as it was thought) but a fresh water souldior, and one
that could not endure so much as the clattering noise of armor. Well, whiles
the work about the said fort goes apace forward, whiles part of the soldiers
makes fore-fences abroad in the fields, and others again gather corn warily,
for fear of ambushments, the barbarous multitude preventing with exceeding
celeritie the rumor of their coming, having violently on a sudden set upon
Barbatio and the army which he had the conduct of (as has been said)
divided and severed from them by a Gaulish fortification, and following them in
chase as far as to the Rauraci, yea, and further as long as they could, after
they had carried away the greatest part of their carriages, laboring beasts,
and camp slaves, returned home again. And he, as if he had performed a
notable and fortunate expedition, bestowed his soldiers here and there in
their Wintering harbors, and returned to the Emperors Court, minding to frame
an action and accusation against Caesar, as his manner was, ready at all times
bitterly to assail and vex him. When this foul foil and terror was once
dispersed and spread abroad, the Aleman kings, Chonodomarius and Vestralpus,
Vrius also, and Vrsicinus, together with Secapio, Suomarius, and Hortarius,
assembling all their forces and power together into one place, sat them down
near unto Argentoratum, supposing that Caesar was retired for fear of utter
extremity, whereas he continued still busily employed about the finishing of
the fort abovesaid. Now, that which made them the bolder to bear their heads
more confidently, was a certain false and fugitive ( One of the band Scutarij.
Scutarius) who fearing punishment for a crime committed, fled unto them after
the departure of his captain put to flight, and declared, that there remained
not above fifteen thousand armed men with Iulianus: for that number (indeed)
followed after, whiles the fierce and cruel Barbarians were on every side set
upon rage and furious fight. Upon whose constant avouching still of the same
tale, they were pricked on with boldness to dare greater matters; and so
sending their ambassadors away, imperiously enough commanded Caesar to depart
out of those lands which they had conquered by their valor, and at the swords
point.

CHAP. IX. Whiles the enemies thus proudly brave it out, Iulianus politiquely
looking to himself, exhorts his army to fight. The soldiers and captains
of the Forces cheerfully approove the counsel of their General and
Commander.
CAesar, who could not skill of cowardly fear, was neither driven into a fit
of anger, nor stricken down with grief and sorrow, but laughing at the vain
presumption of the Barbarians, kept these ambassadors until the work of the
fortifications was fully ended, and persisted still in the same degree of
resolution, and stirred not a foot. Moreover, king Chonodomarius bearing
himself big in every place, and the chief setter of dangerous enterprises,
kept a great stir, and made a trouble and confusion of all beyond measure,
lifting up his brows aloft with a proud look, as one highly conceited, in
regard of the fortunate success many times of his affairs: for not only in a
plain pitched field he encountered Decentius Caesar, and gave him the
overthrow, but also rased and sacked many wealthy cities, yea, and for a long
time invaded and overran Gaul at his pleasure, whiles there was none to
gainesay or withstand him. And that which confirmed yet more his confident
boldness, was the fresh discomfiture and flight of a great Barbatio.
Leader, who for number and puissance had the ods. For the Alemans beholding
the badges and arms of their shields, knew them to be the same soldiers, who
had let some few of their brigands and robbers enjoy land, for fear of whom,
sundry times when they buckled in close flight, with loss of many, they went
away dispersed and in disarray. Whereat Caesar was very pensive, and took the
matter grievously, that having (upon urgent necessity driving him thereto)
escaped such dangers, he was now enforced with a few (though valorous men) to
affront and encounter so populous nations. And now that the bright Sun beams
began to appear, and the trumpets to sound the footmen were led forth
marching fair and softly, and the troops of light horsemen flanked them on
the sides as wings, between which were bestowed the Cataphracti, in complete
harneis, or armed at all pieces.
Corselettiers and the Archers, a dreadful kind of armed soldiers: and for as
much as from the place whence the Romans advaunced their standerds unto the
Barbarians fort, it was fourteen leagues, that is to say, one and twenty
miles, Caesar, in good regard as well of vantage as of security, called back
the forerunners that pricked forth before, and after silence proclaimed by the
usual Oyes unto his soldiers, standing about him by bands and companies, made
according to his natural disposition this mild speech: The regard of
maintaining the common safety, urges Caesar (to speak most sparily) a man of
no base and abject mind, for to exhort and beseech you my fellow soldiers,
that presuming as you do upon your well grown and stout valor, you choose
rather the wary way either to endure or to put back the perils feared, than
that which is over-hastie and doubtful. For as in dangerous adventures meet it
is there should be a forwardness of manhood and boldness; so (if occasion
require) the same ought to be regible, advised, and considerat. What mine
opinion is therefore, if your judgment shall accord thereto, and just
indignation endure, I will in brief declare. The day grows well now to
noonetide, and we (tired out and wearied with a tedious journey) shall be
welcomed with stony and blind ways, the night in the wane and old of the
Moon, not like to have help of any shining stars, the lands before us burnt
up with heat, have no comfort or succor of waters: which if any man should
make good and effect, that we may well and with ease pass through, when whole
troops of enemies after rest and refection of meat and drink come rushing
violently upon us, where are we then? What vigor can we have (seeing our
bodies are enfeebled with hunger, thirst, and travail) to make resistance? For
as much therefore, as against most difficult businesses a dispose and order
thought upon in time has oftentimes affoorded remedy, and when right counsel
given has been taken in good part, divine means even from heaven above
sometimes have recovered and set upright the tottering estate of men's affairs;
here, I beseech you, let us (empaled within a rampire and trench) take our
rest, dividing the watches by turns: and having for the time enjoyed the
benefit of sleep and food convenient, advaunce forward (with the leave of God
be it spoken) at the break of day our triumphant standards and victorious
ensigns. The soldiers, that could not well endure until the end of his
speech, gnashing and grinding their teeth, and showing their hot desire to
fight by knocking their sheilds and spears together, besought him earnestly,
That they might be led forth to give the enemy battle, who now was within
sight, trusting upon the favor of God in heaven, confident also in themselves,
and presuming upon the approoved virtues of their fortunate leader and
director, and (as the end showed) a certain comfortable or Angel.
Genius there in place ready, so long as he was present, excited them to
fight. To help forward this alacrity and cheerfulness of theirs, there was
the full assent also of the great captains and high officers, especially of
Florentius, Praefecti Praetorio.
Prefect of the Praetorium; who all with one accord agreed, That great reason
they had on their side to fight, (though it were with much danger) whiles the
barbarous enemies preassed on all in plumpes and heaps; who if they once
should turn aside out of the way, he said, that the stirs of our soldiers
(given too much upon an in bred heat of theirs to seditious commotions) would
be intolerable, as who could hardly endure, without the attempt of some
extreme course, the victory (as he thought) wrested out of their hands.
Furthermore, a twofold consideration there was, that encouraged and emboldened
our men, calling to remembrance, that the year last past, when the Romans
raunged at their pleasure all over the countries beyond Rhene, there was not
seen any man to defend his own dwelling house, or to make resistance: but when
the lanes and ways on every side were stopped up with the lopping and cutting
down of trees lying thick together, during the nipping cold of mid Winter,
the Barbarians thus remooved far off, had much ado to live: as also, that
upon the Emperors entry into their lands, they not daring either to resist or
to show their heads, upon their humble request and entreatie obtained peace.
But no man considered all this while, that the case of the times was altered,
for then they were combred and kept down with a threefold mischief: namely,
while the Emperor lay sore upon them in Rhaetia, Caesar hard by, permitted
them not to escape any where, and the next borderers (whom civil discords
caused to be their enemies) were ready in a manner to tread upon their necks
behind, being thus hemmed in on every side. But afterward, upon a grant of
peace the Emperor being departed, those neighbor nations now after the matter
and cause of their brawles allayed, were reconciled and grown to agreement:
and withal, that most dishonorable departure of the Barbatio.
Roman leader, much increased their pride and stoutnesse naturally in bred in
them. Likewise it went worse on the Romans part by another means, and that
upon such an occasion and occurrent as this. Two brethren there were of the
blood royal, who being fast tied by virtue of that peace which they had
obtained from Constantius, durst neither raise any uprore, nor so much as once
stir. But within a while after, when one of them, named Gundomadus, the
greater person of the twain, and more firm of his word, was by a train
murdered, all his people conspired and banded with our enemies, and presently
withal the common sort also of Vandomarius his subjects (as it was affirmed)
joined themselves to the forces and regiments of the Barbarians that made
war. Well, when all the army from highest to lowest gave their allowance,
that it was even then a convenient and meet time to join battle, and slacked
nothing of their resolute minds fully bent to fight, all on a sudden the
Standard Bearer cried out in these terms. On forth most happy and fortunate
Caesar, whither the kind favor of fortune leads thee. By thee at length we
have a sense of valor and military policy. Advaunce forward, and lead the
way, as a luckie and valiant warrior, marching in the vaward hard before the
standards. Good proof thou shall have, what soldiers (in the sight of a
warlike leader and an individui.
inseparable witness of service to be performed) will be able upon these
motives and encouragements to do, in case it may please the God of heaven to
assist them.

CHAP. X. The order of the Alemans army, and the principal commanders
thereof. Iulianus a second time wisely encourages as well his ownemen as
strangers to give battle.
WHen they heard this, without any further respite or delay the whole army
marched on, and approached an hill of a pretty height and easy ascent, spread
all over with standing corn, now ripe and ready for harvest, not far
distant from the edge or banks of Rhene. From the top whereof, three horsemen
of the enemies lying there in espiall, rose up, and ready to give notice
suddenly, that the Roman host was near at hand, made have to their
company. But one footman, not able to follow, was taken by the quick pursuit
of our men, who told us, That the Germans for three days and three nights
together passed over the river: whom, when our leaders espied hard by
arraunging themselves thick and close together into squadrons, they made a
stand, and stirred not a foot, whiles the those of the maine battle.
Antepilani i, the Pikemen.
Hastati and the foremost of every rank in the vaward stood firm and fast,
like a strong and insoluble wall: and with semblable wariness the enemies kept
their ground, and made no have forward. And when (according as the foresaid
fugitive had told) they saw all the Cavallerie on the right side opposite unto
them, the very flower of their horsemen they bestowed thick thronged together
in the left wing; and among them here and there they entermingled skirmishers
and footmen lightly appointed. For well they wist, That an horseman of theirs
(though a skillful souldior otherwise) fighting with our man of arms in
complete harneis, whiles he holds his shield and reins of the bridle, by
shaking and casting his spear with one hand, can do no hurt unto a warrior
hidden wholly under an iron armor of proof: but that a footman in the very
point and heights of dangers (when no man is wont to take heed of aught but
that which comes in his way and encountereth him) as he creeps close to the
ground, by digging into the horse side is able to throw the rider over his
horse head, ere he be aware, and then may he with small ado be killed. Having
marshalled the matter thus, the right side of the battle they flanked and
made sure with secret and blind ambushments. Now, the chief leaders of all
these warlike and fierce nations were Chonodomarius and Serapio, in higher
place of power and authority than the other kings. And Chonodomarius verily,
the mischievous firebrand of the whole war, with a flame-colour wreath or
tassell fitted to his crest, advaunced before, and led the left wing (a man
bold, and trusting upon his wonderful strength of bone and brawne) where the
heat of battle was looked for, mounted on high upon a lusty frothing
courser, bearing with him a great breadth, and bigness of bulk, with his
lance in rest, and that of a terrible bigness, all bravely to be seen in
glittering armor, both an hardy souldior aforetime, and also a good leader
above all others. But the right side was conducted by Serapio, even then a
lusty gallant, with tender down growing on his cheeks, but for action more
forward than his years, the son of Chonodomarius his brother, Medericus, a
most perfidious wretch all his life time; so called, for that his father, kept
as an hostage or pledge a long time in Gaul, and having learned certain
hidden Greek mysteries, changed the name of this son of his (who originally
at the first was cleped Agenarichus) into Serapio. After these followed kings
or potentates, next in power unto them, in number five, and princes of the
blood royal ten: also a great train and rank of nobles, with five and
thirty thousand fighting men all armed, levied out of sundry nations, partly
for wages, and partly upon covenant and agreement to have the like service
tendered unto them again. By this time terribly sounded the trumpers al'arme;
and then Severus, a Roman leader, who had the command of the left wing, when
he drew near unto the trenches above said full of armed men (from whence order
had been given before, that lying there close and hidden, they should start up
of a sudden, and break the arraies) he stood still without all fear, and
being somewhat suspicious of blind ambushments, he attempted neither to recule
back, nor to step forward any further. Which when Caesar saw (as he was
courageous to enter upon the services of greatest danger) guarded with a troop
of two hundred horse, according as the heat of the service required, and riding
swiftly among the footmen where they stood embattailed, he gave them
comfortable words of encouragement. And considering that to speak unto them
all at once, neither the large ground that they took up stretched forth in
length, nor the number of so great a multitude assembled would permit; and
otherwise, he avoided the heavy load of envy and displeasure, for fear he
might be thought to affect that which the Emperor supposed due to himself
alone, taking good heed unto himself, and riding apace without the shot of the
enemies, with these and such like speeches he animated the soldiers, known
and unknown, one with another, to play the men, and do their devoire
valiantly. Now (quoth he) is come the full time of fighting (my good friends
and companions) which you and I have long since wished for, and which
heretofore ye required, calling for arms after an unquiet and mutinous
manner. Likewise, when he was come to others behind the Post signan^s.
Ensigns, and placed in the rereward: Behold (says he) my fellow soldiers,
the long hoped for day is now here, which compels us all to wash away the
former stains and blots received, and so to recover unto the majesty of the
Roman Empire their own due honor. These are the Barbarians, whom excessive
fury and rage, to the utter overthrow and destruction of their whole estate,
has forced to come in the way of our puissance, to be foiled and trodden under
foot. Semblably, others well experienced by long practice in the war, as he
arraunged them in better order, he encouraged with these and such like
exhortations: Let us rouse up and bestirre our selves, right hardy knights,
let us put away by that fortitude which is fit, the shameful reproaches
fastened upon our associates, which as I beheld (with much doubting and
delay-making though it were) I yielded to take upon me the name of Caesar. But
whomsoever he perceived inconsiderately to call for the signal of battle,
and with unruly stirs like to break his commandment: I beseech you (says
he) do not mar the glory of our future victory, by following over-greedily
the enemies, whom ye are to put to flight; nor any of you give ground and
yield before extreme necessity. For such as shall be about to fly,
doubtless I will forsake: with them that are to wound the enemies backs I
will be present, without any difference, and even as one of you, in case this
may be done with moderate and wary advisement.

CHAP. XI. A bloody battle fought between the Alemans and Romans, wherein
the wisdom, valor, and invincible courage of Julian especially appears.
AS he often iterated these and such like words after the same manner, he
opposed the greater part of the army full against the forefront of the
Barbarians: and suddenly there was heard a noise of the Aleman footmen, mixed
with indignation, crying out with one accord and voice, That the princes of the
blood royal leaving their horses, ought to converse and keep company with
them; for fear, that if ought should happen but well, they would leave the
miserable common soldiers, and make shift easily to be gone out of the field.
Which being known, Chonodomarius quickly alighted from his beast on foot, and
the rest following his example without delay did the same: for there was not
any one of them made doubt that their side should win the day. When as the
signal therefore of battle was by sound of trumpets solemnly given, they
encountered one another with great violence. Then were the darts and arrows
discharged and seen flying in the air: and the Germans running with more have
than good speed, and drawing weapons with their right hands, with hideous
gnashing of their teeth flew upon the troops of our horsemen: and as they fared
and raged above their wonted manner, their long shag hair made a terrible
sight, and from their very eyes a certain fury sparkled forth: against whom
the [Romane] resolute soldiers covering their heads by putting their shields
between, what with holding out their swords, and what with brandishing their
darts threatening death, greatly terrified them. And whiles at the very point
of the medley on both sides, the horsemen strongly entrouped themselves, and
the footmen stoutly fortified their own sides, making a front by joining their
bucklers most close and fast together, there were raised up clouds of thick
dust: much running there was, and traversing of the ground between them diverse
ways, whiles our men one while made head, and another while gave ground: and
some of the Barbarians (as most skillful warriors) striving to oppose and set
their knees forward, labored hard to repel the enemy. But such was the
exceeding resolution of them on both sides, that presently they came to handie
strokes, and their buckler pykes thrust one another; so that the sky rang
again with the loud voices, as well of them that shouted, as those that were
feld and ready to die. And when our left wing advauncing forward still with
full pace, had by maine force driven from them so many bands and companies of
the Germans, preasing hard upon them, and with a great noise in angry mood
charged upon the Barbarians, our horsemen which kept the right wing, in great
disarray beyond all expectation left the battle: and whiles the foremost of
them that fled hindered the hindmost, so soon as they were within the
protection of the legions bosom, they stayed and renewed the fight again.
Now, this fortuned upon this occasion, that whiles the broken ranks and files
were a setting again in order, the men of arms in their complete harneis
seeing their captain lightly wounded, and one of their consorts killed with
the weighty armor of his horse fallen upon his neck, slipped out of the way,
and made shift every man as he could: and with treading the footmen down, they
had put all in rout, but that they, close thronged together, and bearing one
upon another, stood their ground sure, and moved not. When Caesar therefore
perceived a far off, that the horsemen looked all about them, for nothing but
how they might make means to escape by flight, he gallopped his horse toward
them, and like a bar in the way restrained them. Whom when they had taken
knowledge of, by the purple ensign of a dragon fitted to the top of a very
high lance, as if it had been the pendant slough of a serpent, a certain
Tribune of one troop stood still, and being stricken with fear, and looking
pale upon the matter, rode back again to renew the battle: and, as men love
to do in doubtful cases, Caesar after a mild manner rebuking them: Whither
go we back (quoth he) most valiant soldiers? Know ye not, that flight
(which never found safety) bewrays the folly of a vain attempt? Return we
to our company, to be partakers at leastwise hereafter of glory, how ever we
forsake them inconsiderately, whiles they are fighting for the Commonwealth.
By these words which he spoke with good respect, he brought them all back
again to undergo the offices of warfare, having followed herein the example
of old Sylla; who when he had brought forth his forces into the field against
Archelaus, a captain under Mithridates, and was in a hot battle wearied out
and forsaken of all his soldiers, ran to the foremost rank in the vauntguard,
caught up a banner, and when he had flung it to the other side against the
enemies: Now go your ways (said he) you that were chosen to be my fellows in
all dangers, and to as many as shall ask you, Where I your General am left?
answer thus, and fail not, He is left alone in Boeotia, fighting for all us
with the spending of his own blood.

CHAP. XII. A most sharp conflict of the footmen fighting close at hand
strokes, and that with variable fortune. At length the Alemans put to flight,
are defeated, and suffer afearefull overthrow.
THe Alemans therefore, after they had discomfited and disbanded our horsemen,
charged upon the foreward and front of the footmen, minding by casting away all
mind and purpose of resisting, to make head first, and cause them to recule.
But after they were come once to cope at hand-strokes, the fight was maintained
a long time in equal terms. For the Cornuti and Braccati (redoubted
soldiers through long experience of wars) manfully received them, being now
at the point to set up a mighty great shout, called Barritus: which outcrie in
the very heat of the medley, beginning with a small humming, and growing bigger
by little and little, rises higher, in manner of waves beating against the
rocks. After this, as the arrows and darts flew thick to and fro with a
singing noise as they flew, the dust that arose by the equal stirring of both
sides, took away the eyesight, and caused them to run their armor and bodies
one upon another. But the Barbarians without all order, what with violence and
what for anger, burnt like a flaming fire, and the close jointed shield-fence
which defended our men in manner of a roufe, they hacked and hewed with many a
stroke of the sword. Which being known, the Batavi, together with their kings
(a puissant and terrible troop) ran in with speed to help their fellows,
ready to rescue and deliver them (with the assistance of fortune) in that
extremity, compassed in, as they were, round about. But the Alemans, as they
began fiercely to fight, puffed and blowed hard, as if in some furious fit they
would have utterly destroyed all that stood against them in their way: Yet gave
not over the javelines and casting-darts, yea, and the iron headed arrows were
let fly, although in close fight also one weapon struck upon another, and the
habergeons were cloven with swords; and such as were wounded, before all their
blood was shed out, rose up again to do some service before they died, for
they were after a sort very even matched: the Alemans strong and the taller;
our soldiers by long experience and practice cunning: those, fierce, fell, and
turbulent; these, quiet and wary: the Romans bold of heart and courageous,
the other presuming upon their mighty big bodies. Howbeit, otherwhiles the
Roman with the weight of armor driven back, rose up again: and the Barbarian,
when both his knees were wearied with stepping and pressing forward, bowing his
left ham back, would ease himself, and lie close behind, ready yet to give
an assault upon his enemy; which is a token of obstinacy and stiff
resolution in the highest degree. And so there leapt forth suddenly a
gallant troop of the nobles, among whom the kings also fought, and having the
common sort following after, before all other brake within the battaillons in
the vantguard of our men, and so making themselves way, came as far as to the
legion of the 1 Primani, the main battle.
placed in the midst, which guard and strength they use to call Castra
Praetoria; where our soldiers thicker arranged in many ranks and files, and
therefore in manner of towers standing their ground firm and fast, with
greater courage fell to fight again: and so carrying an heedfull eye, how to
ward all venies, and covering themselves close in manner of a m sword-fencer,
with their drawn swords ran their enemies into the sides, where by reason of
their hot and furious anger they lay most open. And the Barbarians again,
fully bent to spend their lives for to gain victory, assayed to leuse our
battle so jointly knit together: but seeing a number lying dead in rewes all
the way before them (whom the Romans now, upon taking better heart unto them,
had laid along) followed on (as many I mean as remained alive) in place of
the slain: and when they heard many a groan of those that lay a dying in the
place, for exceeding fear they were stricken astonished. Outwearied at last with
so much painful toil, their strength served them thenceforth only to fly,
and so by diverse and sundry lanes they made shift with all the speed they could
to get away; much like unto mariners, who make have from out of the midst of
surging waves in a boisterous tempest at sea, to be cast upon land which way
soever the wind carries them. The Romans then upon this victory (a thing
rather wished than hoped for, as any man will confess that was there present)
worship the gracious power of God, so propice and merciful unto them. Howbeit,
our soldiers without all mercy slashing and hewing them upon the backs as
they fled, when otherwhiles, by reason their swords were bent and rebated, they
had not wherewith to strike any longer, thrust the Barbarians to the very heart
with their own weapons: neither was there one of them that for all this
wounding satisfied his anger with bloodshed, nor thought his right hand had
enough yet of slaughter, or for any humble entreatie and supplication would
take pity and give over execution. Thus therefore lay a mighty number of them
thrust through the body to death, craving none other remedy, but quickly to
be dispatched of their lives. Some half dead, when their breath began now to
fail, sought about yet with dying heavy eyes for means to live longer:
others had their heads cut in manner quite off with huge weapons, so as they
hung down, and had no more hold than by the very throats: a number of them in
the mierie and slipperie ground chauncing to slide and fall down in the blood
of their fellows, although no weapon touched their bodies, were overwhelmed
with the soldiers rushing and running over them by heaps, and so killed. The
winners having got so good an hand of their enemies, yet preassed on still more
forcibly, so that the points and edges of their weapons waxed blunt and dull
with striking so thick, and the bright helmets and shields together lay
tumbled under their feet. The Barbarians at last seeing themselves driven to
this utmost extremity, and that the heaps of dead carcasses rose so high,
that they stopped all passage out, sought for the only help that remained,
even of the river, which now ran hard at their backs. And because our
soldiers (running a great pace even under their armor) were not weary, but
preassed still upon them as they fled, some of them supposing that by their
skillful swimming they should be able to rid themselves of all danger,
committed their lives unto the waves of the river. In which regard, Caesar
together with the Tribunes and captains, in a quick forecast, foreseeing
what dangers might ensue, cried out after a rebuking manner, and gave straight
charge, That not one of our men, in hot pursuit after the enemy, should
venture upon the stream, so full it was of whirle-pits. Whereupon this order
they took, that standing upon the banks of the river, with sundry sorts of
darts and casting-weapons they sticked the Germans: of whom, if any one
happened by swift nimblenesse to get away from the deadly dint of shot, with
the weight of his body thus plunged, he sunk down to the bottom of the
river: and like as it is in a certain Theatricall spectacle (where the
hangings make show of strange wonders) a man might now without fear have seen
many sights: some, that could not skill of swimming, to stick close and take
hold of them that were good and stout swimmers: others, to float aloft like
logs of wood, when they had spent their strength and became faint: a sort of
them wound within the waves, and devoured with the violence of the stream,
striving (as it were) against them: and some again carried upon their shields,
declining by crooked turnings aside the high surges of the mighty billows
ready to come full upon them, after many a peril passed gain the bank on
the further side. To conclude, the very foming channel of the river stained
and died with the Barbarians, blood was even amassed to see such strange and
uncouth sights.

CHAP. XIII. Chonodomarius fetched back out of his flight, and brought unto
Julian, was with clemency received and sent to Rome, where he ended his days.
The sycophants in court eclipse the light of Iulians victory, the glory
whereof (like as of all other exploits valiantly and happily achieved against
the enemies of the Empire, in far dissite places) Constantius then being in
Italy, arrogantly and fondly durst attribute to himself.
Mean while, king Chonodomarius having found means to get away slipped
through the heaps of dead bodies, and with some few of his guard hastened with
all the quick speed he could make, unto the camp; which, near unto Tzum
dieyen duchen
Tribunciand Rochersherg.
Concordia, two forts of the Romans, he had pitched when he was in no fear,
to the end, that embarking himself into those vessels which were in readiness
for him within secret coves and noukes, against all doubtful accidents that
might befall him, he might escape. And for that he could not possible go into
his own territories without he passed over Rhene, he covered his face for
fear of being known, and so fair and softly retired. Now, when he drew
near unto the banks of the river, going about a certain ditch standing full
of moorish water, to see where he might pass over, he ventured upon it, and
after his horse had flounced and floundered with his heels in the soft and
clammie mud, he got out of it at length: and streightway, a fat corpulent and
heavy man though he were, he recovered for his succor a pretty hill hard by:
and then, being known (for it could not be concealed who he was, the
greatness of his former estate so bewrayed him) streightwaies, a cohort of
horsemen with their Tribune riding as fast as their wind would serve, after
they had compassed with armed men the hill, all over-spred with woods, beset it
round about right warily, but durst not break in, for fear least by some
deceitful stratageme and hidden ambush among the dark shadie boughs, they
might be welcomed to their cost. Which when the king saw, and how he was
driven to the utmost extremity of fear, forth he went alone, and of his own
accord yielded himself. Now, those of his train and company, to the number
of two hundred, and three of his most inward friends, supposing it a foul
shame for them to live after their king, or not to die in his quarrel, if the
case so required, delivered themselves up to be bound as prisoners. And as the
manner naturally of these Barbarians is, to be humble in adversity, and of a
contrary humor in prosperity, drawn he was as a vassale and servant to the
will of another, with a pale look and abashed, tongue-tied also and silent, by
reason of a conscience guilty of foul offenses: a wonder how much changed and
different from that man, who after cruel and woeful outrages insulting over
the ashes and relics of Gaul, threatened to do many and horrible mischiefs.
These exploits thus by the favor of the God in heaven achieved, at the end of
the day, upon the sound of retreat the most invincible soldiers were called
back, and marched near unto the side of Rhene; where fortifying themselves
with a rampire (as it were) of many courses of shields set together, they took
their repast and repose. There died in this battle of Romans 243, and
Commanders four, to wit, Bainobaudes Tribune of the Cornuti, and likewise
Laipso; also Innocentius, who had the leading of the horsemen, armed at all
pieces; and a certain Tribune Vacant.
out of ordinary, whose name I do not remember: but of the Alemans found
there were lying along in the field six thousand bodies, and whole heaps of
dead corpse that could not be reckoned were carried down among the waves of
the river. Then Julian, as he was a man of greater mark for his place and
fortune, yet more powerful in his deserts than in his command, being by an
uniforme acclamation of the whole army saluted Emperor, rebuked and rated the
soldiers as overbold and malapart, binding it with an oath, That he neither
hoped for that name, nor was willing to have it. And to enlarge the joy of this
happy event, he commanded Chonodomarius to be presented unto the counsel of
war there assembled: who at the first bowing his body down, and afterward
humbly prostrating himself upon the ground, and craving pardon G^^tilipace.
peaceably after his country manner, was willed to be of good cheer. And
within some few days being brought to the Emperors court, and from thence
sent to Rome in the Castris peregrinis.
mansion of strangers, which stands upon the mount Caelius, died of a
Lethargy. After these and such like exploits fortunatly performed, within the
palace of Constantius, some finding fault with Julian (to give delight and
contentment to the Emperor himself) termed him Victoria, or Victorinus,
because that in modest wise making his relation, as often as he gave charge and
command, he declared many times that he had vanquished the Germans. And in
the heaping up of vain commendations and ostentation of things seen openly
enough, they puffed up (as their usual manner was) the Emperor, of his own
nature too high minded, ascribing whatsoever was in the world fortunatly
exploited, unto his auspicate direction and happy government. Wherefore, being
lifted up on high with the glorious words of these flatterers, both then and
thenceforth in his edicts that he published, full arrogantly he made many a
loud lie, writing sometimes, that he alone (forsooth) when God wot he was not
in the action at all, both fought the field and won the victory, yea, and
raised kings of whole nations up on their feet again, when they humbly made
supplication to him upon their knees: and if, for example sake, some great
captain, even whiles himself abode in Italy, had performed any valiant piece
of service then against the Persians, he would send his letter dight with
laurel unto the armies lying in the provinces, without any mention made of the
said captain in all that long tenor thereof signifying (and that with a most
odious vaunting of himself) how he personally fought in the vaward. Finally,
there be yet extant his edicts in the public records of the Emperors, truly
engrossed, telling memorable reports, and exalting himself up to the sky.
What time this field was fought at Argentoratum (from whence he was forty
days journey off) he taking upon him to describe the manner of the fight,
untruly relates, That himself arraunged the army in order of battle, stood
among the standard-bearers, discomfited the Barbarians, and caused them to run
headlong away, yea, and encountered Chonodomarius hand to hand: o shameful
indignity! without one word speaking of the glorious acts of Julian, which he
had quite buried for ever, but that fame could not skill of concealing such
brave deeds, howsoever many would seem to darken the same.

THE XVII. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Julian infesteth the Alemanes, and after he had put them to sundry
losses, forces them to crave a truce, which for ten months they obtain.
THis variety of occurrents which I have now in order set down thus achieved,
the martial knight [Iulian] (now that Rhene after the battle of Argentoratum
carried a quiet stream) void of fear, yet careful withal, least the cursed
fowls of the air should devour the bodies of them that lay slain in the
field, commanded, they should all indifferently one with another be interred:
and after he had released and dismissed those ambassadors, who before the
said foughten field (as I related ere while) brought certain proud messages,
he returned to the fort of Tres-Tabernae: from whence he gave commandment,
That together with all the captives, the pillage also should be brought unto
Met^.
Mediomatrici, there to be kept until his return: and himself intending in
person to go to Mentz.
Maguntiacum (that when he had passed over the river by a bridge framed and set
together, he might seek out the Barbarians in their own territories, since he
had left none behind him in ours) was by the clamorous gainesaying of his army
prohibited: howbeit, with sweet words and eloquent speeches he wrought them so,
as he brought them to his own will and pleasure. For, such was their love,
grown now (after trial and experience had of him) more affectionate, that it
inci^ed them willingly to follow him a painful and diligent fellow-souldior
with them, a brave leader and commander of them, yea, and wonted, as it
evidently fell out, to enjoyne himself more toylefull labor than the very
souldior. And soon after, when they were come to the place aforesaid, they
passed over the river upon a floored bridge of ships, and possessed themselves
of the enemies land. But the enemies, who then feared little that they could
possibly be disquieted, living as they did in such rest and repose, were
stricken with this so great an accident; and thinking carefully by the
mischief befallen unto others, what might hang over their own heads, under
semblance of craving peace, to decline the violent brunt of the first tempest,
sent ambassadors with words in their mouths so framed and placed, as that they
pretended and showed no other but a firm assurance of league and concord: but
upon what policy, or to what purpose I know not, they changed their minds, and
by other ambassadors dispatched in all post have, they menaced our men most
cruel war, unless they departed out of their countries. Hereof certain
intelligence being given, Caesar in the very beginning of the night embarked in
small and swift pinnaces eight hundred soldiers, giving charge, that I suspect
this place: For what might 20. effect? and what should the rest of the 800. do
the while?
twenty of them, after they had sailed and made way up the river, should set a
land, and with sword and fire destroy whatsoever they could meet withal. Thus
order being given, at the very Sun rising, when the enemies were discovered
upon the hill tops, he led the soldiers now more cheerful and forward up to
the higher grounds: but finding none there (for the enemies imagining as much,
were departed) behold forthwith they saw afar off a mighty deal of smoke
waulming up into the air, declaring plainly, that our soldiers had broken
into the enemies territories, and began to wast and spoil the same. This
object daunted the courages of the Germans very much, so that forsaking their
ambushments, which along the narrow straits and luiking places they had
addressed against our men, they passed in all have over the river named Mein.
Maenus to succor their dear friends. For as it usually falls out in such
doubtful times of trouble and danger, being affrighted on the one side with
the sudden rode of our horsemen, and on the other with the violent invasion
of our other soldiers that came embarked thither, they (skillful in the coasts
of the country) found speedy means to get away and escape: upon whose
departure, our soldiers marching on at liberty, rifled rich villages full of
corn and cattle, making spare of none: and when they had fetched the
inhabitants as prisoners out of their houses (built somewhat curiously after
the manner of the Romans) set fire thereupon, and burnt them down to the
ground. And thus having overrun the country for the space by estimate of
ten miles, so that they were come near unto a wood that carried an hideous
and fearful show of darkness, they stood lingering a long time, as being
advertised by a fugitive, that within certain hidden caves under the ground,
and trenches running out many ways, there were a great number secretly
bestowed, ready to issue forth when they espied their opportunity. Howbeit,
they adventured all of them most boldly to approach the place, and found the
foot ways over-layed with holmes and ashes cut down, yea, and a mighty
barricado made against them. And therefore marching back more warily, they
perceived (and that with such indignation and anger as their hearts could
hardly hold) that they could not go forward beyond it, but by fetching long
circuits and hard turnings about. Now, for as much as by reason of the rigorous
and piercing air they strugled in vain with most difficult extremities (for
now was the Aequinox of the Autumn past, and in those tracts both mountains
and champion plains were covered with deep snow) they took in hand a
memorable piece of work: And whiles there was no man to withstand their
enterprise, a certain strong fortress (which being built upon the Alemans
ground, Traian would have to bear his own name, and had of late been very
forcibly assaulted) was by them in hasty manner suddenly repaired; where for
the time were placed soldiers to defend the piece, and thither the victuals
were conveied which they had gotten out of the very bowels and heart of the
Barbarians country. Which preparation, when the enemies perceived so speedily
brought about for their destruction, fearing least the thing indeed would come
to pass and take effect, they assembled themselves together in all have, and
by way of prayer in most humble manner sent their Orators and craved peace;
which Caesar (directed by all policy to take the surest way, and alleging
very many motives that carried good probability with them) granted for ten
months; and namely making this account, as he was a prince of provident
forecast, That those holds and fortresses which he had seized into his hands,
even beyond his hope, and more than he could wish for, without impeachment
aught to be fortified with offensive engines planted upon the walls, and other
strong ordinance and munition. Presuming confidently hereupon, there came in
from among those that had sent aid to them which were vanquished before
Argentoratum, three most fell and cruel kings, fearing now at length their
own estates, who took an oath in a set form of words after the manner of
their country: That they would not stir nor trouble the peace, but truly
keep the covenants agreed upon to the prefixed time expired (because that
stood with the will and pleasure of our men) together with the fortress above
said safe and whole, yea, and bring corn thither even on their shoulders, in
case the defendants thereof made it known that they wanted: and verily, by
reason that fear was a bridle to curb their perfidious disloyalty, they
performed both the one and the other.

CHAP. II. The Frankes keeping foul rule about Colonia Agrippina and Iuliacum,
he represseth, having besieged and recovered the town Castellum. Then he
takes order, that provincial people should not unreasonably be overcharged
with new taxes and tributes, which the Lord chief Justice thought to levy and
gather of them.
IN this memorable war, worthy to be compared verily with those against the
Carthaginians and Teutones, and achieved with the least expense and hurt of
the Roman estate, Caesar rejoiced and magnified himself as a fortunate and
happy prince: and well might a man have believed his backbiters, who devised
this and gave it out, That therefore he demeaned himself so valiantly in
every place, because he wished rather to die a glorious death, than in the
rank of condemned persons, like unto his brother Gallus (as they hoped) to be
put to death; had he not with semblable purpose and resolution after the death
also of Constantius, become renowned for his admirable exploits. Well, these
affairs thus firmly settled, as in such case might be, returning to his
Wintering place of abode, he found the remains still of his laborious
achievements standing in these terms. Severus General of the Horsemen,
going by the way of Agrippina and Colein and Gulich.
Iuliacum toward Rhemes, lighted upon right strong companies of the Frankners,
consisting (as afterward appeared) of six hundred light armed skirmishers, as
they wasted and spoiled the quarters that were without garrisons; who took
this opportunity to actuate their boldness in doing mischief, because whiles
Caesar was busily employed out of the way in the secret parts of the Alemans,
and none at hand to give them the check, they thought verily to make up their
mouths and fill their hands with rich booties: but for fear of the army now
returned, they possessed themselves of two forts, which in times past were
abandoned and left void, and there defended themselves as well as they could.
Iulianus much troubled with this new occurrent, and guessing whereto it might
turn, in case he passed by them undealt withal, kept his forces still about
him, and determined to beleaguer the town Kessel in Cuyck.
Castellum, hard by which the river Maese, or Meuse.
Mosa runs: and so for the space of four and fifty days, to wit, during
the months of December and January, he stayed about the siege, whiles the
Barbarians with stout hearts and incredible resolution held out and withstood
him. Then Caesar a most prudent prince, fearing much least the Barbarians by
taking advantage of the night should pass over the river hard frozen, upon the
ice, took order, that certain soldiers should every day from time that the
sun began to set until the break of day in light barges and whirries to and
fro scud up and down upon the river, to the end that by breaking evermore the
ice as it began to gather to a coat none of them might easily have means to
break away from him. And by this stratageme being wearied out with hunger,
long watching, and utter despair, they yielded themselves of their own
accord, and were sent out of hand to the Emperors counsel: for the rescue of
whom out of this danger, a multitude of Frankners went forth, but when they
understood how they were taken prisoners and carried away, without adventuring
any further they retired to their own holds. Then Caesar having performed
these acts, returned to Paris, there to Winter. Now for that it was feared,
that many nations would with greater force make head together, this well
advised governor casting how deceitful the issues were of wars, was much
perplexed with huge heaps of care. And whiles he verily thought, that during
the truce and cessation of arms, short though it was, and full of business,
he might remedy the miserable losses and burdens that landed men or farmers
sustained, he disposed and set in order the accounts of tribute: and whereas
Florentius, Praefectus Praetorio.
Lord chief Justice, having taken a survey and review of all as he endeavored,
did avouch, that whatsoever was wanting in the or head-silver.
poll-tribute, he supplied out of the goods gotten by conquest; he being ware
of such dealings, said plainly, That he would forgo his life sooner than
suffer this to be done: for well he wist, that the incurable wounds of these
and such like provisions or eversions rather, to speak more truly, brought
provinces many times to extreme poverty: which very thing, as afterward
shall be showed, was the utter overthrow of Sclavonia.
Illyricum. Hereupon the said L. Justice Florentius, crying out that he could
not endure thus on a sudden to be made an unfaithful officer, unto whom the
Emperor had committed the immediate managing of the state, Julian after a
temperate and sober sort appeasing his mood, by an exact and true computation
proved, That the reckoning and sum taken of the foresaid poli-tribute was not
only sufficient, but yielded also an overplus to the necessary provision of
victuals. Yet nevertheless, for a long time after, when an augmentation of
tax and impost was presented unto him, he could not endure either to read or
subscribe, but flung it in the floor. And when he was advertised by the
Emperors letters, upon information that the said Justice had given, not to
deal so strictly and precisely as that Florentius might seem to be touched in
his credit, he wrote back again, That they were to rejoice and be glad, if
the provincial inhabitants, wasted so as they were on every side, might yield
at leastwise their ordinary and customable tributes, if not increment and
augmentation, which no punishment is able to extort from the poor and needy.
And so it came to pass then and thenceforth, through the stout courage of him
alone, that no man went about unjustly to fetch from the Gauls nomine
Camelage: happily ^^ll for Camels carriage
Camelasij, any thing but the usual customs. And without any example
precedent, thus much by way of entreaty had Caesar obtained at the or chief
Justice.
Praefects hands, That the ordering and dispose of the second Belgica, which
had bin overwhelmed with many sorts of calamities, should be committed unto
him, and namely with this condition, That no minister or officer, belonging to
Prefect or President, should urge any man to pay. By which comfortable order
taken, they being all eased, whom debt distracted apart to take care for
themselves, without any calling upon paid their duties before the day
appointed came.

CHAP. III. A long narration at touching the Obeliske, which was erected in the
greatest shew-place at Rome.
IN these good beginnings of easement and refreshing given unto Gaul, whiles
Orphitus as yet at Rome.
governed the second time as much like to a Lord Justice or Mayor.
Prefect, the Obeliske was erected at Rome in the great Cirque or Shew-place:
concerning which, I will now, because it is a fit time and place therefore,
make some brief discourse. The city in Egypt.
Thebes in ancient time built, famous for the sumptuous and stately wall, as
also for the entry into it at an hundred gates, the first founders thereupon
termed Hecatompylos, after the denomination whereof there is a province at
this day called Thebais. This city, what time as Carthage began to spread her
dominion far, the Carthaginian captains by a sudden and unexpected rode
surprised and destroyed: and afterward when it was reedified, Cambyses that
renowned king of Persia, a prince all the while he lived encroching upon the
territories of other kings, and cruel withal, after he had broken into
Egypt, gave the attempt to assault it, that from thence he might carry away a
mighty mass of riches and pillage, forbearing not so much as the temples and
the gifts offered there unto the gods: who whiles he busily bestirred himself
among those that fell to spoil and saccage, chanced by occasion of his loose
and large garments that entangled him, to catch a fall forward: with which
sudden and forcible fall, his own or Rapiar.
dagger that he wore close unto his right thigh happened to be unsheathed, and
so dangerously to wound him, that he had like thereof to die. Long time after,
Cornelius Gallus procurator of Egypt, whiles Octavian was Emperor of Rome,
pilled and beggered this city, taking to his own use the most part of the
wealth thereof: and upon his return home, when he was judicially accused for
his robbery and wasting of the province, fearing the nobility, unto whom the
said Emperor had committed this matter to be enquired into and examined, who
also were highly offended and bitterly bent against him, he fell upon his own
sword, and killed himself. This is that Gallus the Poet, if I take not my
mark amiss, whom Virgil bewailing after a sort in the latter end of his
Bucolickes, in a mild kind of verse makes a dittie of. In this city among
mighty great cisternes, and sundry huge massy pieces of work, expressly
resembling the images of the Egyptian gods, we saw many Obeliskes standing,
and others lying along and broken, which the ancient kings, after they had in
war subdued other nations, or grown proud of their prosperity and high
estate, hewed out of the bowels of mountains (which they stuck not to search
for, even among the utmost inhabitants of the earth) erected on high, and in
their religious devotion dedicated to the Gods in heaven. Now an Obeliske is a
most hard and rough stone, broad beneath, and sharp above, rising by little
and little to a mighty height, and because it might resemble a ray or
sunne-beame, waxing smaller and smaller, it is with foure-faces brought up to a
narrow top, and the same is smoothed also artificially by the workemans hand.
The infinite number of Characters and marks of sundry shapes, termed
Hieroglyphickes, which we behold cut every where into it, the ancient
authority of sacred wisdom from the very first beginning has ennobled. For
they engraving many kinds of birds and wild beasts, even those of another
world, by reason that the memorial of their Emperors more publicly reached
to the ages of future times, showed thereby the vows of kings either promised
or performed: for not as now adays a certain set and expedite number of
letters utters and declares whatsoever man's mind is able to conceive, so did
the Egyptians in old time use to write; but for every nowne or name they had
one several letter, and sometimes under one verb or word they signified whole
sentences and full meanings. For the knowledge and skill whereof, this example
for the while in these two instances may serve. By a Vulture or Gripe they
represent the vocable or name of Nature; because our Naturalists do report,
there can be no males found among these fowls: and by the form of a Be
making honey, they show a king, declaring by these signs, That in a ruler
there ought to be with sweetness a sting also growing: and of this kind there
be a great number. And for that a sort of flatterers, as the manner is, puffing
up Constantius, buzzed this without all measure into his ears, That whereas
Octavianus Augustus had translated two Obeliskes from the city The city of
the Sun, in which sense it is at this day called Beth^emes.
Heliopolis in Egypt, whereof the one was placed in Circus Maximus, the other
in Campus Marcius; but as for this one now newly brought over, he durst not
once meddle with, nor stir it, as affrighted with the greatness and
difficulty of the work: know they thus much, who are ignorant of the thing,
That the said ancient prince, when he had transported some of them, passed by
this, untouched and undealt withal for this reason, That being by a special
gift dedicated unto the god Sun, and set fast within the sacred or places.
chapels of a sumptuous and stately temple, which might not once be touched
and profaned, it mounted up aloft as the head and top of all the other. But
Constantine [the Great] making small account of that, displaced and unseated
this huge mass, yea, and thinking truly, that it was no breach nor offense of
religion, if taking this admirable monument out of one temple, he consecrated
it in Rome, that is to say, the temple of the whole world, suffered it to lie a
long time, whiles necessary means for the translation thereof were a
providing. Which being conveyed along the channel of Nilus, and landed at
Alexandria, there was a ship of huge and strange bigness built, and the same
to be rowed with three hundred oars. After which provision thus forecast, and
the abovesaid Constantine.
prince departed this life, the urgent have of effecting this business was
slacked: and at length (late though it were) being shipped, partly by sea, and
partly up the stream of Tibris (fearing, as it were, least that which Nilus
almost unknown had sent, himself should hardly be able under danger of his
own course to bring up to the walls of his own foster city) conveyed it was
into Vicus Alexandri, a town situate three miles from Rome: from whence being
laid upon certain draught-vices and engines, it was fair and softly drawn
by the gate Ostiensis and the public watering poole, and so brought into the
Circus Maximus. After all this, there remained only the rearing thereof, which
unneath or not at all was thought could be effected: and after they had
erected high posts with danger enough (a man that had been there, would have
thought he had seen a very wood of frames and engines) fastened there were to
them huge and long ropes, in manner of manifold threads or strings spread so
exceedingly thick together, that they hid the very sky: whereto the massy
stone it self with images portrayed in it, like so many letters written upon
it, was bound, and by little and little strained aloft and held in the air
between heaven and earth, and so hanging a long time, whiles many thousands of
men swung about and turned it round, as they would do myll-stones, placed it
was in the midst of the shew-place, and upon it a bowl or globe of brass
set, glittering with thin plates of gold; which being forthwith smitten with a
violent blast of lightening, and therefore taken away, the counterfeit in
brass of a torch or firebrand, laid over likewise with gold-foyle, sparkled
and shone again as it were a mighty flame. The ages also next ensuing brought
over others; whereof one was erected in the Vaticane, a second in the Hortyards
of Salustius, and two in the monument of Augustus.

CHAP. IIII. A Greek and English exposition of those characters which were cut
and engraven in this Obeliske.
MOreover, what was the text of characters cut in that old Obeliske, which we
see now in the said Cirque, I have put down here, expounded as it is in
Greek, following herein the book of Hermapion.

(...).

That is to say, beginning at the South side, This is the interpretation of the
first text or rank [of Hieroglyphics.] These are the things which we have
given to king Ramestes, whom the Sun loves, which with joy rules the
universal habitable world, and powerful Apollo, lover of truth, the son of
Heron, begotten of the gods, the founder of the world habitable, whom the Sun
has chosen, the hardy son of Mars, king Ramestes, unto whom the whole earth
is subject with valiant strength and boldness. The second text. Powerful
Apollo seated upon truth, Lord of the Diadem who has gloriously honored
Egypt as his peculiar possession: who has beautified Heliopolis (i. the city
of the Sun) and built the rest of the habitable world, and adorned with
manifold honors the gods erected in Heliopolis, whom the Sun loves. The
third text or rank of Hieroglyphics. Apollo mighty, the son of the Sun,
all full of light, whom the Sun has chosen, and valiant Mars endowed: whose
good things shall continue for ever: whom Ammon loves, as having filled his
temples with the good fruits of the Date tree: unto whom the gods have given
long time of life. Apollo potent, the son of Heron, Ramestes king of the
world habitable, who with his victories has preserved Egypt from other
nations: whom the Sun loves; to whom the gods have granted long time of
life, Ramestes, Lord of the habitable world, ever living. Another text or
rank, the second. The Sun a great God, Lord of heaven, I have given unto
thee life, void of fatietie and tedious wearisomeness^ Apollo powerful, Lord
and Patron incontectable of the Diademes, unto whom the Lord of Egypt has set
up Statues in this kingdom, and adorned Heliopolis likewise, and the very
Sun himself Lord of Heaven: the son of the Sun, a king living ever has
finished a good work. The third text. The God Sun Lord of heaven, has given
unto king Ramestes rule, and power over all men, whom Apollo, a lover of truth,
Lord of times, and Vulcane, father of the gods, has chosen for Mars: a King
full of all mirth, son of the Sun, and beloved of the Sun. From the East
part, The first text. The great God of Heliopolis, heavenly, mighty Apollo,
the son of Heron, whom the Sun loved, whom the Gods have honored, King of
the universal earth, whom the Sun has chosen, a valorous King for Mars,
whom Ammon loves, and he that is wholly full of light, has procured to be a
King eternal.

CHAP. V. The embassage of Sapor king of Persia unto Constantius, as touching a
peace upon certain conditions to be concluded.
WHen Datianus and Cerealis were Consuls, whiles the affairs of State
generally throughout Gaul were with more careful and wary endeavor, in
reducing to a better frame; and the fear which possessed the Barbarians for
their losses past, quailed their out-rodes: the king of the Persians making his
abode still within the confines of the frontier nations, and having now made a
sure league and amity with the Chionit and Halani, most fierce and ^agre
warriors, was minded to return into his own kingdom, then received the
letters of Sapor, giving intelligence, That the Roman Emperor by way of
entreatie desired peace: and thereupon imagining that he went not about such
matters, but that the puissance of his Empire was abated and grown weak, bare
himself very big, and took highly upon him, as seeming to embrace the name of
peace, but withal propounding hard capitulations and conditions. Having
dispatched therefore in embassage one Narseus with presents, in that inbred
humor of pride which accompanied him in all places, he sent his letters unto
Constantius, the tenor whereof, as I have heard, was to this effect. Sapor,
King of Kings, partner with the Stars, brother to the Sun and Moon, unto
Constantius Caesar my brother, in most ample manner greeting. I rejoice and
take much contentment now at length, that you have betaken your self again to
the best way, and acknowledged the incorrupt sentence of equity, as having by
experience found what havocke and slaughter the obstinate desire of other men's
territories has diverse times caused. Because therefore the words of truth
ought to be at liberty and free, and it beseems persons in high place and
estate to speak and think the same, I will in few words deliver what my
purpose and intent is, as calling to my remembrance, how often I have repeated
whatsoever I am now to say. That my ancestors Seignorie has reached as far
as to the river Strymon and the marches of Macedonia, even your own ancient
records do bear witness. These territories and dominions meet it is that I
(without arrogance be it spoken) who excelling glory and number of brave
virtues the ancient kings my progenitors, should claim and demand. But
evermore and in all places it does me good, to call to mind and remember, that
from my very youth and childhood I have been so bred, as that I never did any
thing whereof I had cause to repent: and therefore I ought to recover Armenia,
together with Mesopotamia, which by fraudulent packing was caught from my
grandfather. As for this principle which ye joy so much to affirm, namely,
That all fortunat events of war (without difference of virtue and deceit)
should be praised, it has been never accepted or entertained among us. To
conclude, if you will be ruled by me that give you good and wholesome
counsel, set naught by this small parcel which has always wrought much woe,
and cost bloodshed, that you may rule the rest in security: wisely considering
also, that even expert Physicians and skillful Chirurgians proceed otherwhiles
to cau^arize and lance, yea and cut away some parts of the body, to save the
rest whole and sound for use: yea, and that wild beasts are wont to do the
like; who when they perceive wherefore especially they are hunted and taken,
forgo the same willingly of their own accord, to the end they may live
afterward void of fear. And this assuredly I intimate and pronounce, That if
this my embassage speed not, but return without effect, after the time once
past of Winters rest, with all my forces put in readiness (considering that I
ground the hope of good success upon fortune and the equity of conditions
offered) I will make have, as reason shall permit, to come into the field.

CHAP. VI. The answer of Constantius unto Sapor his letters: The Iuthungi,
certain Alemans, are vanquished by Barbatio.
AFter these letters were a long time well pondered and weighed, answer was
returned with an upright heart (as they say) and considerately in this wise:
Constantius, always Augustus, conquer or both by land and sea, unto Sapor my
brother, in ample manner, greeting. For your health verily and welfare I
rejoice in your behalf, as minding (if your self will) to be a friend
hereafter: but this greedy desire of yours always unreclaymed and still more
and more encroching, I mightily blame. You demand Mesopotamia as your own,
and semblably Armenia: you advise me also, where the body is sound, to take off
some members thereof, that so it may afterward continue safe and whole: which
counsel of yours is to be refuted rather than by any consent of mine
approved. Hear therefore from me the truth, not covered with any subtle
delusions, but apart and open, not to be terrified with any vain threats
whatsoever. My chief Justice [ Prafectus Pratorio
Musonianus] thinking to enter upon a business for the behoof of the Weal
public, had conference and speech without my privitie and advice by the
means of certain ignoble and base persons with a cum Duce tu^.
Marquess of yours, about a peace: which we neither refute nor refuse, if so
be it may stand with honor and honesty, and not prejudice any ioteither our
modesty or majesty. For absurd it is and undecent, when by the orderly course
and train of our exploits achieved, the worlds ears are opened, which envy
has many ways enclosed against us, and when by overthrow of tyrants and
usurpers, the whole Roman world is brought under our obeisance, to betray and
surrender those Seignories, which we being drawn into the streits of the East
parts, have kept so long untouched. But give over I pray you those fearful
manaces, which (as the manner is) be denounced against us: considering no doubt
can be made, that we not for sloth and cowardice, but upon mere modesty,
have now and then made defensive wars rather than offensive, and use so often
as we are provoked, with a most valiant spirit of courage and resolution to
hold and maintain our own: as knowing thus much both by experience and
reading, that in some particular battles the Romans have otherwhiles though
seldom received a foil, but in gross and in the maine managing of wars
never been overthrown and defeated. Upon this embassage, sent back again
without any thing obtained (for there could be no answer made more fully to
the kings unbridled and unmeasurable desire) there followed some few days
after Prosper a Comes.
C^^es, and Spectatus a Tribune and Notarie: likewise, by the suggestion of
Musonianus the Philosopher, Eustachius, one that for persuading was his
crafts-master, carrying with them missives from the Emperor, and gifts beside,
ready with all their best endevors by some cunning fetch to stay the
preparations that Sapor made, to the end that the provinces in the North might
be extraordinarily fortified. Whiles things stood in these doubtful terms,
the people in the county of Tyroll.
Iuthungi, a nation of the Alemans bordering upon the tracts of Italy,
forgetful of the peace and league which they had by entreatie obtained, in
turbulent manner wasted Rhaetia, in so much as beyond their wonted guise they
attempted the besieging of towns. To the repressing of whose invasions,
Barbatio promoted in the place of Silvanus to be colonel of the footmen, was
sent with a puissant army: who albeit he was a coward, but full of big and
bragging words, yet such was the forward resolution and courage of his
soldiers, that most valiantly he overthrew a number of them, in so much as a
small portion of them, which for fear of danger fled, hardly escaped, and with
weeping eyes and lamentations saw home again. In this battle, Nevita a
captain of the horsemens troop, who afterward became Consul, both was (by
report) present, and also fought right manfully.

CHAP. VII. A Report or History as touching the dreadful Earthquakes which
shook the mountains and many towns of Macedonie and Pontus, together with a
Physical consideration of these Earthquakes.
IN those days there were terrible Earthquakes in Macedonie, Asia, and Pontus,
which with continual thumping shook many towns and mountains. But among the
examples of manifold calamities, the fall of Comidit. Na^^.
Nicomedia, the mother-citie of Bithynia, was remarkable, the accident and
event of whose ruin I will both truly and briefly relate. Upon the the 24 of
August.
ninth day before the Calends of September, early in the morning by
Sunne-rising certain thick gatherings or globes of black clouds over cast
and darkened the face of the sky, which a little before was clear and
lightsome; whereby the bright shining of the Sun was chased so away, that
things near at hand, or standing hard by, could not be seen: and thus the
eyesight being dazeled, a hideous bleakenesse of a thick and mirke mist
settled upon the ground and over-spred it: then, as if the highest power of
heaven discharged and shot off fatal and deadly thunderbolts, raising withal
the winds from the principal points and poles of the world, there fell a
mighty tempest of raging storms; by the violent force whereof, the mountains
were so beaten upon, that they groned again, and there was heard the crashing
noise of the sea shore dashed violently upon. After all this followed horrible
whirlewinds and fiery impressions, together with a fearful trembling of the
earth, which over-turned the city and suburbs from the very foundations. And
for that many houses standing upon the rising of hills were carried on end, one
fell upon another, and all places clattered again with the monstrous noise of
their ruins. Mean while the high and stately tops of buildings resounded with
the sundry outcries of those that sought for their wives, their children, and
what near kinsfolks and dear friends belonged unto them. In the end, after
the second hour of the day, and long before the third, the air now become
fair and clear, discovered all the woeful and deadly downefals that were
hidden before. For behold, some folk thrust and crushed together with an huge
deal of rubbish falling upon them, were under the weight thereof pressed to
death: others, that stood up to their necks buried (as it were) within heaps
thereof, whereas they might have been saved, if any had come to help them,
for want of succor perished: others again stuck fast, hanging at the sharp
ends of timber-logs bearing out. With one blow were a number seen slain, men
and women but a little before, but then confused heaps of dead carcasses pell
mell huddled together. Some there were, whom the finials of houses leaning
forward, bare up, otherwise unhurt, but that they were to die with anguish and
hunger. Among whom, Aristaenetus (governing and taking charge as deputy
lieutenant of that diocese or province so affectionately loved, and which
Constantius in honor of his wife Eusebia had named For so much does Eusebia
signify in Greek.
Pietatis) by this mishap, after long dolor and pain yielded up his vital
breath. Some, having their heads bruised and squized together, or their
shoulders or legs severed from their bodies, lying thus in doubtful plight
between life and death, piteously crying for Gods sake unto others in the same
case, to help them, were quite forlorn and left unto themselves. And verily,
the greater part of sacred churches and private houses, yea, and of people also
might have been saved, had not the outrageous flames, dispersed here and there
for fifty days and nights together, burnt up and consumed whatsoever was
combustible. And now I think it a meet and convenient time to report as
touching Earthquakes what ancient writers have by way of conjecture collected:
for, the hidden depth of the truth it self, not only this vulgar ignorance of
ours, but the very everlasting wits also of natural Philosophers, after long
study upon this point not yet exhaust or worn out, could never reach unto.
Whereupon provided it is both in the ceremonial books and also in the rites
under the pontificiall priests and their Colleges, That by naming one god for
another (since unknown it is which of them thus shakes the earth) there be
no heinous scandale and damnable sin committed. But according to the
Philosophers opinions, among which Aristotle is much perplexed and troubled,
these earthquakes fall out to be either within the small caves of the earth,
which we [in Greeke] call Syringas, whiles with thick and often beating the
waters wave to and fro, and cast up surges: or else verily, as Anaxagoras
affirms, by reason of violent winds getting close within the ground below;
which when they happen to hit and beat upon the sides thereof, hard baked or
felted together, finding no way of issue, shake those parts of the earth at
which they entered when they were moist. Whence it is, that men observe for the
most part, that during an Earthquake, we above the ground perceive no winds to
blow, because they are busy in the most remote nookes of the earth beneath.
Anaximander is of opinion, That the earth waxing dry upon a long and
extraordinary drought, or after much moist weather and store of rain, opens
very great chinkes and wide chawnes, at which the air above with violence and
in exceeding much quantity enters, and so by them shaken with a strong
spirit, is stirred and moved out of her proper place. For which cause, such
like terrible accidents chance either in excessive hot seasons, or after
immoderate fall of rain from heaven. And hence it is, that both ancient Poets
and Theologers also have termed Neptune, who has dominion over the moist
elements, i. a shaker of the earth.
Ennosigaeon and Sciles, and thereupon it seems to be named Delos.
Sisichthona. Now, these earthquakes are observed to be four manner of ways:
for they are either a Brasmatiae, which heaving and raising the earth within,
force upward most huge mounts: in which sort, in Asia, Maretamo
Delos appeared above the water, and Namphio.
Hiera, likewise Rhodes.
Anaphe and Rhodus, called in the foregoing ages Ophiusa and Pelagia, drenched
in times past with a golden shower: also Eleusin in Boeotia, and the Island of
Vulcano.
Vulcane among the Tyrrheni, with many more beside: or secondly, b Climatiae,
which rushing askew, or sidelong and crooked, lay cities, houses, and
mountains flat: or else c Chasmatiae, which by a greater kind of motion
suddenly opening wide gulfes, swallow up parts of the earth: as in the
Atlanticke sea, an Island more than all Europe; and in the gulf Golfo de
Patras.
Criseus, Helice and Bura: as also in Ciminia, a part of Italy, the town
Succiniense, swallowed up all in a deep gaping chinke, lie hidden for ever in
perpetual darkness. Among these three sorts of Earthquakes, those that be
heard with a menacing noise, are termed d Mycematiae, namely, when as the
elements by loosening of their joints encounter and run one upon another of
their own accord, or fall back, as the ground does settle: For then of
necessity the crashing noise and rumbling of the earth within must bellow and
rore like a Bull. But proceed we from hence to the history that we have begun.

CHAP. VIII. Iulianus whiles he makes his abode in Paris, warreth upon the
Alemans. After that the Franci, Salij, and Chamani were defeated and subdued,
there fell out a famine, which in the army caused a tumult and hot mutiny;
which being quenched, our soldiers pass over Rhene, and lay wast the Alemans
territories.
But Caesar whiles he wintered in Paris, hastened with all diligence possible
to prevent the Alemans, who as yet were not assembled together; but now after
the battle of Argentoratum become all audacious and cruel beyond all
measure, and waiting still for the month July, whence they of Gaul use to
begin their warre-service and to come into the field, he was much troubled a
long time in his mind: For go forth he could not before that corn was brought
out of Acquitaine, upon the breaking of the cold weather and frosts, by reason
of the mild Summer season. But, as diligent and considerate regard is the
conqueresse in manner of all difficulties, casting many and sundry things in
his head, this was the only way he found, namely, without expecting the full
season of the year, to encounter the Barbarians before he was looked for. And
in this settled resolution he took corn for twenty days (out of that store
which was provided to be spent in the standing place of abode) baked thoroughly,
for to last, into biscuit bread, such as commonly they call Buccellatum, and
laid it upon his willing soldiers shoulders: and so, confident of this help,
in a good hour, as before, he took his journey, thinking that within five or
six months two urgent and necessary expeditions might be performed. Which
things being put in a readiness, first of all others he marches against the
Frankes; those I mean who commonly are termed Salij, and who in old time
durst in the Roman ground, at a place called Weser.
Toxiandria, very boldly place and plant themselves. Now when he was come to
Tongeren.
Tungri, an embassage of the foresaid people meets him, supposing the
Emperor was to be found still in his Wintering harbor, pretending peace upon
this condition, That no man might either provoke or molest them, whiles they
remained quiet as in their own territories. These ambassadors, after he had
fully digested and disposed his affair, and opposed certain ambiguous and
doubtful conditions, as if he meant to stay in those tracts until their
return, he sent away rewarded. No sooner were they in their way homeward, but
he followed hard upon them, sending out the General Severus, and suddenly
having set upon them all along the rivage, he smote them, as it had been a
whitling thunderbolt, or flash of lightening: And now when they fell to
entreatie, rather than to make resistance, turning the effect of victory to a
commodious course of clemency, upon the yielding of themselves, their riches,
and children, he took them to mercy. The Chamavi likewise, who had given
semblable attempts, he set upon, and with the same celeritie partly he put to
the sword, and partly, when they stoutly resisted and were taken alive, he hung
yrons upon; others, that took them to their heels, and fearfully in all have
fled, he permitted for the while, to get away without hurt: unto whose
ambassadors, sent afterward to make supplication and to provide for their
estates, lying humbly prostrate upon the ground before his face and under his
very eye, he granted peace with this capitulation, to return in safety to
their own home. Thus when all things succeeded according to his hearts desire,
hastening with most vigilant care to found by all means possible the good of
the provinces, he thought (as the time would permit) to repair three skonces
or forts, situate directly in a rue upon the bank of the river Mosa, which
lately had been overthrown by the obstinate selfe-willed Barbarians: and
forthwith, omitting the wars for a small time, reedified they were. And to
the end, that the policy wisely begun he might by quick dispatch make safe,
out of the seventeene days provision of corn which the soldiers as they
marched forward in their expedition carried on their necks, he defalked a
portion, and laid up in the same holds; hoping, that so much as was taken from
it might be supplied out of the Chamavians corn fields. But it fell out far
otherwise: for, by reason that the standing corn was not yet ripe, the
soldiers having spent what they carried, and finding food in no place, fell to
threatening terms in the highest degree, provoked Julian with foul names and
opprobrious language, calling him a vain Grecian of Asia, and a deceitful,
yea, and one that, under the show of wisdom and learning, was a very lob and
fool: and, as usually there be some found even among armed soldiers, that
have ready and rolling tongues of their own above their fellows, they stuck
not to mumble many of these and such like speeches: Whither are we drawn
without all hope of better? in times past verily we endured hard travail and
most irksome to be abidden even through snowes and the pinching cold of bitter
frosts: but now, o shameful indignity, when we are upon the point finally to
vanquish and defeat our enemies, ready we be to pine away and consume for very
famine, the most inglorious and base kind of death that is. And that no man may
think us to be mutineus and given to raise commotions, we protest, that it is
for our life only that we speak, craving neither gold nor silver, which long
ago we might not have, nor so much as once see; so denied it was us, as if we
had been convicted to have undertaken so many toilefull pains and perils even
against the State and Commonweal. And to say a truth, good reason they had
thus to complain: For among so many courses of probable or allowable matters,
and doubtful points of necessity, the soldiers out-toyled and spent with the
painful services of Gaul, had gotten neither e donative nor wages, since
time that Julian was thither sent: for that neither himself could come by
aught to give, nor Constantius after the wonted manner permitted any such
allowance to be bestowed. And hence it appeared plainly, that this was done
upon fraudulent malice rather than nigardize; because, when the said Caesar had
given a small matter of no value to a certain common souldior, asking somewhat
according to his need to go unto the barber for to be trimmed, he was for it
with contumelious terms traduced and backbitten by Gaudentius then Notarie,
who had abode long in Gaul to spy into his proceedings; whom afterward
himself commanded to be put to death, as shall be showed in place convenient.
At length, after the mutiny was appeased, not without sundry sorts of fair
words and pleasing speeches; and when by means of a bridge made of ships
joined together, he had passed over the Rhene, and set foot in the Alemans
countries, Severus General of the horsemen, who aforetime had been a warlike
and industrious captain, all on a sudden became lither and heartlesse. And
he that oftentimes encouraged both all and some to fight courageously, now
seemed a contemptible and timorous dissuader of battle, happily for fear of
death so near at hand: like as we read in the books of Tages the Tuscane,
that they who are within a while to be smitten with the lightening of Veiovis
f, are so dulled in their senses, that they can hear neither thunder nor any
great noise whatsoever. And contrary to his wonted manner, he marched in his
journey lazily, insomuch as he terrified, by threatening death, the guides
that led the way apace and lustily before, unless they all with one accord
would agree and avouch, that they were altogether ignorant of the ways: who
fearing the authority of this prohibition, went no where, after that, one foot
forward.

CHAP. IX. The Aleman kings Suomarius and Hortarius, not able to endure the
heavy weight of this war, in humble manner sue for peace, and obtain it.
HOwbeit, during these lingering delays, Suomarius a king of the Alemans, of
his own accord, together with his friends and followers, unthought of before,
met Caesar upon the way: (a prince he was before time proud and cruelly bent to
endammage and hurt the Romans; but then he thought it would be an unexpected
gain well gotten, in case he might be suffered to hold his own:) And for that
his countenance and gate showed him to be an humble suppliant, he was
entertained and willed to be of good cheer and quiet in mind; who then
abandoning wholly his own will and pleasure, meekely upon his knees besought
peace. And verily, he obtained the same with pardon granted for all that was
past, under this condition, That he should redeliver our men that were
captives, and find the soldiers food, so often as was needful, after the manner
of base vassales received to mercy and protection, taking only security of
life for whatsoever he brought in: which if he showed not as time and occasion
required, he might well know he was to be wearied again therewith. This being
thus well ordered and disposed of, was fulfilled accordingly without fail. Now
were they to march also into the territory of the other king named Hortarius:
and because nothing seemed wanting but guides, Caesar gave commandment unto
Nestica, Tribune of the Scutarij, and to Chariton, a man of admirable strength
and valor, with all diligence to seek, find, take, and present unto him one
captive or other: So with all expedition an Aleman youth was caught up and
brought unto him, who promised upon a capitulation covenanted to have his life
saved, for to discover and show the ways. Thus went he before, and the army
following after was impeached for going on still by a barricado of high trees
cut down and lying in their way. But by wheeling about, and fetching long and
winding circuits, they came at length to the places aforesaid, and the armed
soldiers every one in an angry mood fell to fiering of the fields, to
harrying away both cattle and folk, yea and without mercy hewing in pieces
as many as made resistance. The king sore troubled and disquieted with these
adverse accidents, when he saw many of his territories spoiled, and beheld
withal the remains of towns and villages consumed with fire, considering
now, that the final ruin of his whole estate was at hand, himself also
besought pardon, and after an execrable oath taken to do whatsoever should be
imposed upon him, promised also to make restitution generally of all captives:
for that was a capitulation in the conditions that was much stood upon and
earnestly urged: but he delivered a few, and detained the most part. Which
being known, Julian was provoked to just indignation: insomuch, as when he the
said king came, as the manner is, to have a gift bestowed upon him, four of
his followers that accompanied him, in whose assistance and fidelity he had
most affiance, he would not dismiss, before that all the captives were
returned. Howbeit, being by Caesar sent for to a conference and parle, whom he
adored with trembling eyes, and even overcome again with the sight of the
conqueror, he was driven to an hard exigent and condition; namely this, That
for as much as it was meet and requisite after so many prosperous achievements,
that those cities also which the Barbarians had forcibly rased and destroyed,
should be reedified, he at the charges of himself and his people must find
carriage, timber etc. for the building. Which after he had promised to do, and
withal wished, if he dealt any way disloyally, to make satisfaction with the
loss of his heart blood, he was permitted to return home. As for the
transporting thither of corn and victuals, he might not be compelled thereto,
as Suomarius was, because his country being so utterly wasted, he could meet
with nothing therein to give. Thus these kings, that in times past swelled so
outragiously in pride, and were accustomed to enrich themselves with the spoil
of our men, became now tame, and yielded their necks under the yoke of the
Romans power: and as if they had been borne and bred among Tributaries,
willingly obeyed their commandment. These affairs in this wise achieved, the
soldiers were bestowed in sundry stations, and Caesar retired himself to his
wonted wintering place.

CHAP. X. The flatterers in Court go about to deprave and fore-doe the noble
deeds and virtues of Iulianus with flouts and skoffes before Constantius; which
is no new and strange practice, Marcellinus shows by allegation of notable
examples.
WHen knowledge of these occurrents was from time to time taken in Constantius
his court (for Caesar like unto an apparitour or double diligent servitor, was
of necessity to give notice unto the Emperor of all proceedings) as many as
bare greater sway than others in the court, and were now learned professors in
that [eighth] liberal science of Flattery, turned whatsoever was by him
either wisely advised or happily performed, unto a mere mockery; giving out
beyond all measure these and such like words full foolishly: This Julian, a
goat, and no man (carping thus at him for being full of hair) together with
all his victories, stinketh again, and is become odious: tearming him also, a
talkative mold-warpe, an ape in a purple coat, and a bookish smattering
Grecian. Thus resounding many lewd speeches and skurrilities of this kind in
the princes ears, who took pleasure to hear these and such like notes, they
went about with impudent words to smother his virtues, railing at him as a
slow-backe and coward, and delicate carpet-knight, and one that knew how with
trim words to set out deeds that were amiss: a thing that newly happened not
then, and never before. For as the greatest glory is always subject to envy,
we read, that malicious and spightfull persons have used to devise even upon
the renowned warriors and captains in old time (as taking offense at their
most redoubted acts) vices and crimes, although there could none such be found.
As for example, Cimon the son of Miltiades was charged with incest and
incontinencie, even he, who near unto Eurymedon, a river in Pamphylia,
vanquished an infinite number of the Persians, and forced the whole nation,
prowdly puffed up by reason of the insolency of their king, in humble manner
to sue for peace. Semblably, Aemilianus Scipio, through the evil will of his
concurrents, was taxed for a drowsy sluggard, by whose invincible vigilance,
two most puissant cities, obstinately bent to work Rome mischief, were
utterly rased to the ground. Likewise, certain slanderous backbiters, seeking
many ways for a hole in Pompeius coat, when they could find nothing in him
blame-worthie, observed (forsooth) these two things (very toys to speak of,
and of no validity;) namely, that by a peculiar and natural use that he
took, he scratched his head with one finger, and for a pretty while (to hide
a certain foul and ill favored ulcer that he had) bound up his leg with a
little white band: The one of these he did (said they) as being a loose and
dissolute person; the other, as one that looked for a change, and affected to
be king; coming out (forsooth) with this bald and frivolous reason, that it
mattered not on what part of the body he wore a diadem, the mark of regal
majesty: and this did they by that man, than whom there was not one that bare
himself more valiant and politic in the behalf of his country, as the
notable proofs that he gave do testify. While these things thus went abroad,
Artemius abode also at Rome vice-Praefect or deputy governor for Bassus, who
having been but newly promoted Prefect of the city, was by natural death
taken away; whose government met with turbulent seditions and commotions,
neither had it any memorable matter worth the relation.

CHAP. XI. The war that Constantius made against the Sarmatians and the Quadi.
WHiles the Emperor in this mean time took his Winter ease and repose in
Sirmium, there came unto him heavy news, and those thick one in the neck of
another, showing how the Sarmati and the Quadi (nations suitable in near
neighborhood, like conditions, and consonant armor) jointly together, in
sundry squadrons dispersed, made rodes into Pannonia, and the second Maesia:
who being better fitted for brigandize than open fight in the field, are
weaponed with long pikes, and armed with habergeons made of shaved and smoothed
horns, which feather-wise are wrought close into linen jackes. Most of their
horses for to serve their turns be guelded, least either upon the sight of
Mares they should be disquieted and fling out of order, or bestowed behind in
place of supply, growing there with frampold, bewray by their thick neighing
those that ride upon them. And these warriors are able to gallop and ride a
great ground, whiles they either follow others in chase, or else turn back
themselves, sitting as they do upon swift coursers and pliable, leading also
after them in hand one lere horse, and otherwhiles twain, that by change they
might cherish the strength of their beasts, and by alternative turns of rest
renew their vigor afresh. After therefore, that the When days and nights are
of a length.
Aequinox of the Spring time was past the Emperor having assembled a puissant
army, put himself on his journey with the guidance of a more gracious and
mild fortune: who being come to a most convenient place, and having passed over
the river called also Danubius. Donaw.
Ister, flowing above his banks (by reason that the heaps of snow and ice
were now thawed and resolved into water) and that upon a planked floor of
ships joined together in manner of a bridge, he invaded the lands of the
Barbarians, which he meant to wast and spoil: who being prevented by his
speedy journey, and seeing whole troops of a warlike army affronting them,
and ready to cut their throats; an army (I say) which they supposed could not
possibly be gathered together, considering the season of the year, durst
neither breath themselves, nor stand their ground, but to avoid this unlooked
for destruction, betook themselves all at once to flight. Most of them, such
as for very fear could hold no speedy pace, were beaten down and slain:
those who by their quick footmanship escaped death, lying close among the
secret vales and hidden bottomes of the mountains, beheld their native
country destroyed before their face with the edge of the sword, which verily
they might have saved, had they made head and resisted with the same vigor
that served them to escape away. These things were done in that part of
Sarmatia which faceth Within the kingdom of Hungary.
Pannonia secunda. With like fortitude also, over against Another part of
Pannonia. Krabaten, Rhenano.
Valeria, our soldiers in manner of a tempestuous whirlewind carrying and
harrying the riches of the Barbarians, wasted what soever stood in their way.
Who being thoroughly moved at the sight of this so great a loss and extreme
misery, laying aside all purpose to hide themselves any longer, armed as they
were in three battailons, thought (under semblance of suing for peace) to set
upon our men, whiles they carried themselves more securely: so that they might
not be able either to make ready their weapons, or avoid violent wounding, or
(that which is the last means in extremity) to turn themselves to flight.
Now presently there were with the Sarmatiae, to partake with them in peril,
the Quadi, who oftentimes had been yoke-fellowes with them in doing hurt. But
their forward boldness, as ready as it was, could not help them, running
headlong as they did upon evident and open dangers: For after a number were
killed, as many of them as could survive, made shift to escape by the ways
wherein they were perfect. Our army then upon this fortunate event, which gave
an edge to their strength and courage, joining their squadrons closer together,
hastened into the dominions of the Quadi: Who fearing much by this accident
past, what might hang over their heads; minding as suppliants to crave peace,
confidently presented themselves before the Emperor.

CHAP. XII. Zabais, Acabacius, Vsafer, and other petie kings or princes of the
Quadi, with humble prayer and as submissive gestures seek unto Constantius for
peace, and receive the same.
WHen they therefore were about to qualify and mitigate these and such like
troubles, and a day was appointed for the setting down of the conditions,
Zizais also, a prince of the blood royal, and a young gallant, tall and
mighty of personage, even then marshalled the Sarmatians, as it were in order
of battle, for to fall likewise to entreatie and sue for peace. And no sooner
had he a sight of the Emperor, but presently he flung away his weapons, and
fell grovelong flat upon his breast, in manner breathless, and not able to
take his wind: and having for very fear lost the use of his tongue, even when
he should have made his petition, thereby he moved the greater pity. Now,
after he had assayed sundry times to speak, permitted he was with sobbing
(which somewhat hindered his speech) to utter as well as he could what he
requested. At length, after he was refreshed, and bidden to arise upon his
knees, having now recovered his voice, he humbly besought forgiveness and
pardon for his trespasses. Thither also was the multitude admitted to make
their supplications; who for very fear could not open their mouths, for that
as yet the better person among them stood in doubtful terms of danger: but
when he was commanded once to raise himself from the ground, and had given
unto them a sign which they long waited for, to make their petition, they all
cast from them their targuets and weapons, and wholly gave themselves to humble
prayers, devising many means and gestures how to exceed the said prince in
lowly supplication. This Zizais, being the greater potentate, had (with the
rest of the armed men) brought also with him other petty princes, namely
Rumon, Zinafer, and Fragiledus, and many lords beside of the nobility, to
tender the like petitions upon hope to speed: who albeit they rejoiced highly
for their lives granted, and promised to undergo the heavy load of hard
conditions, in recompense and to make amends for hostile hurts and outrages
committed, yea, and willingly to present themselves, their goods, children, and
wives, together with the whole circuit of their territories and possessions
under the power of the Romans; yet courtesy and bounty joined with equity
prevailed and took place: so that being willed, without fear to hold still
their own habitations, they rendered up all the captives they had of our men.
They brought in also their hostages according as they were enjoined, and
promised most readily from thenceforth to obey whatsoever they were commanded.
This example of clemency gave encouragement likewise to others; insomuch, as
there came in speedily together with all their people, Arabarius and Vsafer,
princes of the blood royal, among the lords and potentates of eminent place,
leaders of the Gentile regiments: the one of them ruled part of the Quadi,
inhabiting beyond the mountains; the other, certain of the Sarmatians; both,
in regard of their countries so near confining, and their suitable savagenesse,
sorting most jointly together. The multitude of their people the Emperor
suffered not to aproch, least under a pretense of making some league, they
might suddenly take them to arms. Thus when the company was parted and
divided, those that came to entreat in the behalf of the Sarmatians, were
willed for a small time to withdraw themselves out of the way, whiles the
business of Arabarius and his Quadi, might be skanned and considered of. Who
having presented themselves in place, after the fashion of their country,
standing with their bodies stouping, when they were not able to excuse and
purge themselves of their outrages committed, fearing the calamities of
extreme misery, gave hostages as they were commanded, never compelled before
time to exhibit any pledges of league or alliance. These matters thus
according to equity and reason concluded, Vsafer was admitted to deliver his
request, whiles Arabarius stiffely stood upon these terms, and affirmed, That
the peace which himself had obtained, ought to stand him also in stead, as
being partner with him, although in an inferior degree, and wonted to obey
his commandments. But after this question was debated, order was given, That
the Sarmatians, as having been always vassals unto the Romans, should be
freed from other foreign power, and so they gladly accepted to put in
hostages, for better assurance of keeping the peace. After this, there offered
themselves of their own accord a mighty number of nations and kings
conflowing together in troops and companies, now that they understood how
Arabarius went his way without punishment and hurt, who besought that the sword
might hang from their throats. And in like sort, they also, having obtained
peace, which they desired, brought in sooner than a man would have thought,
their sons by way of hostages, whom they sent for out of the inmost parts of
the kingdom. Semblably also, they delivered up our men their prisoners
(according as it was capitulated) whom they parted fro with no less grief and
sorrow than they did from their own children.

CHAP. XIII. The Sarmatians that were slaves, after they had put to flight and
banished their lords and masters, contemned the clemency of Constantius, and
trusting upon the strength of their places, furnish themselves with guile,
weapons, and prayers together, for their defense.
THese affairs thus set in order, his care was now for the Sarmatians, who
deserved rather a pitiful eye of compassion, than privy hatred and
displeasure; unto whom, how fortunate and happy this occasion fell out to be,
a man would not believe: so as that might well be deemed true which one says,
A princes power either mastereth or makes Fortune. There inhabited this
kingdom in old time certain ignoble potentates, but in a secret conspiracy
their servants taking arms, enterprised a notorious act; and, as the
Barbarians use evermore to reckon might to be their right, they vanquished
their masters, as being in stoutnesse their matches, and in number superior:
who then by reason of fear that troubled their wits, being to seek what
counsel to take, fled unto the or Victovali, or Victophali. Eutrop.
Victobali inhabiting far off, thinking it better to yield obeisance to their
defendors (a thing that men in distress will wish to do) than to serve their
own slaves: which hard fortune of theirs they grievously complaining of, now
that they had gotten their pardon, and were taken into [the Emperours]
protection, craved means and help to recover their liberty: and so far
forth was he moved with this wrongful indignity, that in the sight of the
whole army he called them all together, and gave them very good and gracious
words, willing and commanding them to obey none but himself and the Roman
captains. And to the end that this restitution of freedom might have the
addition and increase withal of dignity, he set over the same Sarmatians, as
their king, Zizais, a noble person and of high reputation, meet verily even
then for regal ensigns (as his deed showed) and faithful besides. Neither
was any man licenced after these glorious achievements to depart, before that
our captives (as it had been agreed on) returned. After these acts thus
performed in the Barbarians ground, the camp removed forward to Brigitio.
Callisto.
Bregetio, to the end, that there also the relics of the Quades war, who
kept a stir about those tracts might be quenched either with tears or blood:
among whom, Vitrodorus, a prince of the blood, as being the son of king
Viduarius, and Agilimundus a pettieking, with other Potentates and Judges, who
had the governance of sundry nations, when they saw our army in the very
bosom of the realm, and of their native soil, laid themselves along at the
feet of the soldiers as they should march, and after pardon granted, did what
they were commanded; yea, and delivered their children as hostages in pawn,
that they would yield performance of conditions imposed upon the^; drawing
forth also their swords, which they worship as gods, swear by them to continue
loyal and faithful. These affairs thus brought (as has bin related) to so
happy an end, the regard of a common good required, that the forces should
with all speed be turned upon the Limigantes, those Sarmatian slaves and
usurpers aforesaid: for it was an abominable shame, that they had without
punishment perpetrated so many wicked prankes: Who likewise, as if they had
forgotten their former outrages, now that the free Sarmatians brake out and
cast off their allegiance, having gotten so fit a time and opportunity, entered
forcibly into the Roman marches, to perform this only mischief and villainy,
joining in one mind with their masters and enemies. Howbeit, upon good
deliberation determined it was, That this offense also should be punished more
mildly than the heinousness of their crimes required: by proceeding thus far
forth in revenge, as that they should be translated into places far remote,
thereby to loose the means of molesting our territories: yet the conscience
they carried about them, what lewd and wicked parts they had this long time
played, made them to fear the dangers wherein they stood. And therefore
imagining no less, than that the whole war should be bent upon them, they
furnished themselves with falsehood in their hearts, weapon in their hands, and
prayers in their lips. But at the first sight of our army, being stricken and
astonished as with a flash and stroke of lightning, and thinking of nothing but
extremity, after they had craved life, they promised a yearly tribute, the
mustering of their able and lusty youth, yea and their service; ready, as
they made show by gesture and countenance, to yield and give consent, if they
were so commanded, to flit into some other country; yet presuming confidently
on the strength of those places, wherein after they had driven their masters
thence, they had seated themselves in security. [For the river Pathissus.
Plinio. Teissa in Hungary
Parthiscus running down violently into these lands, with a crooked course and
stream mingleth his water with Donow.
Ister. But whiles he passes on alone with more liberty, gliding soft by
little and little through long and spacious countries, and near unto his issue
reducing the same into a narrow streit, with his own channel he defends the
inhabitants upon it from the invasion of the Romans by the channel of
Danubius, and by his own fence performs them safe from the out-rodes of the
Barbarians. In which place, the most part of the country, by reason of the
natural moisture of the ground, and the rising of the rivers, be overflowne,
full of standing waters, and over-growne with willowes, and therefore
unpassable, unless it be to such as are very skillful in those quarters: and
beside all this, there is a winding circuit of an Island, meeting in a manner
by the coming to it of Parthiscus, which a greater river environing, severeth
from all fellowship with the firm land.]

CHAP. XIIII. The Sarmatian slaves daring to join battle with the Roman
army, after ashort fight are discomfited, and by a very bloody execution,
within the space of half an hour utterly destroyed. After which overthrow,
the rest who remained at home were cruelly dealt with.
THey came therefore, at the princes motion, with their inbred pride and
arrogance, to the hithermore bank of the river, not minding, as the end
showed, to do that they were commanded, but because they would not seem to
dread the presence and sight of our soldiers: where they stood in a stout and
stubborn self-will, making plain show, that therefore they drew so near,
because they would reject whatsoever commandment should be laid upon them.
Which the Emperor seeing evidently that it might happen, having secretly
divided his army into many battailons, with quick speed and expedition
enclosed them, as they went, within the said battailons of his own soldiers:
and standing himself with some few upon an higher bank, and defended with a
strength of his guard about him, he mildly willed them not to be unruly. But
they, wavering and doubtful in mind, were distracted contrary ways, whiles
by wily craft and furious heat together they assayed to give battle, but
withal entermingled their prayers: and so providing to issue forth in a place
near unto them, and to charge upon our men, they cast for the nonce their
shields a great way before them, that stepping forward by little and little to
recover them, they might without any show of fraud gain ground by stealth. Now
by this time the day was well spent, and grew toward evening: seeing then the
declining of daylight put them in mind to make have, our soldiers marched
with their banners upright, and in a fiery heat advaunced against them. Who
keeping close together, and drawing themselves into thicker ranks, bent all
their force against the prince himself, standing (as has been said) on high:
and that they did with menacing eyes and terrible words. This furious madness
of theirs our army for very anger could not endure, but (as they preassed hard
and hot upon the Emperor, as has been said) with a battailon narrow and
sharpepointed before; which form the simple and plain soldiers use to term
Caput porci, i. an Hogs head, gave them such a hot and violent charge, that
they dis-ranked their battle. Thus on the right hand our footmen cut in
pieces the companies of their footmen, and on the left our men of arms entered
the nimble troops of their horsemen. The Praetorian band that carefully
guarded the Emperors person, affronted them in the very breast, and slew them
down right: soon after also as they fled, came upon their backs and killed
them. And these Barbarians, as they were overthrown and felled to the ground,
such was their invincible contumacie and wilfulness, showed by the horrible
gnashing noise which they made, that they grieved not so much at their own
death, as at our men's joy and gladness. And beside those that were stark
dead, a number of them having their ham strings cut, and thereby destitute of
all means to fly, some with their right hands cut off, others again
unwounded verily, but crushed and squeezed under the weight of those that went
over them, endured dolorous torments, without one word or groan given: neither
was there one of them, who among those sundry sorts of execution either craved
mercy, or flung his weapon from him, or desired quick dispatch by present
death; but holding their weapons continually, thus piteously afflicted though
they were, esteemed it a less fault to be overcome by the gorce of others,
than convicted by the doom of their own knowledge and conscience: yea, and
they were heard otherwhiles grumbling and mumbling these words; That it was
long of Fortune and not of thdir desert, that this befell unto them* Thus in
the space of one half hour was the trhall of this battle dispatched, and so
many Barbarians lay dead at once upon the ground, as that it was the victory
alone and nothing else which showed there had bedne a field fought. Scarcely
were yet these hostile nations defeated, when the near kinsfolk and dear
friends of them that were slain, of both sexes and all ages one with another,
were brought forth in routs and companies, plucked out of their poor and low
cottages: who abandoning the pride of their former life, fell to the most
humble and servile obsequiousness that might be. And thus again within the
compass of a very small time, a man might see whole heaps of bodies slain,
and flocks of poor captives. Whiles this heat therefore of fighting, and the
gain withal of conquering pricked our men still forward, they rose up all at
once, intending the destruction of those that either forsook the field, or lay
close hidden within their cottages. When our soldiers therefore, thirsting
still after the blood of Barbarians, were come to the places where they kept,
down they went with the light thatch, and hewed the men in pieces: neither was
there any one of them, whom his cabin, were it never so surely framed of
strong timber-peeces, saved from danger of death. Finally, when as all was on a
light fire, that none could lurk or lie hid any longer, now that all means of
saving life were cut off, every one either perished obstinately consumed with
fire, or avoiding the fire, if he went forth of doors, whiles he sought to
decline that one kind of death, fell upon the enemies sword, and so was slain.
Yet some there were of them, who escaping both weapon and fire, as general as
it was, committed themselves to the stream of the river running hard by, in
hope by skill in swimming to gain the bank on the farther side: of whom, the
most part sunk under the waves, and perished; some were shot in with arrows,
and so lost their lives; insomuch, as with abundance of blood there shed, the
stream of the river fomed and swelled again. Thus by both elements, the armed
anger and valor of the winners, made clean work and riddance of all. Decreed
then it was, after this order taken aforesaid, That generally throughout, they
should all loose both hope and comfort of life: and so, after their houses
burnt, and whole families carried away, commandment was given, That vessels
should be gotten together, to search out those whom the farther bank of the
river had severed from our army: and forthwith, least the courage of the
warriors should abate or wax cool, certain nimble and lightly appointed
skirmishers were put in boats, who being guided along the secret coasts of the
country, met with all the lurking holes of the Sarmatians: who at the sudden
sight of them were deceived, namely, seeing them to be their own country
wherries and rowers whom they knew. But when by the glittering of the weapons
afar off, they perceived that was coming toward them which they feared, they
betook themselves for refuge and safety to their moorish and fennie grounds,
whom the soldiers followed the more maliciously: and having killed the most of
them, found a victory there, where a man would have verily thought, they
neither could keep sure footing, nor would adventure upon any service.

CHAP. XV. The Picenses and Limigantes, terrified with these fresh examples of
their confederats thus subdued and laid along, yield their necks unto the
Roman yoke: and having been compelled to seek other places for their
habitation, at length are reducea by Constantius into their ancient seat.
AFter that the Sarmatians, so called of the region adjoining.
Amicenses were in manner all destroyed, as large a country as they
overspread, our men marched without delay against the Likewise, the Picenses,
Ersech. Castal.
Picenses (thus called of the regions bordering upon them) who were the safer
by reason of their fellows miseries, whereof they had certain intelligence by
the continual rumors that ran of them. To the surprising and subduing of them
(for an hard piece of work it was to pursue them scattered as they were in
diverse places, and namely where unskillfulness in the ways gives a check) our
men.
they took unto them the help of the or Thaiphali.
Taifali, and likewise of the free Sarmatians. And considering that the
regiments of these their aid-souldiors were by distance of places far
severed, our men chose those tracts to invade that join to Moesia; the Taifali
took in hand those parts that lay next; and the free Sarmatians seized upon
the lands that lay opposite unto them. The Limigantes afflighted with the fresh
examples of them that were subdued and overthrown, wavered a long time in
doubtful minds, Whether they should die, or fall to entreatie, seeing they had
notable examples and experiments given of both ways. In the end, the counsel
of their elders prevailed so much, and the consideration withal of so many and
sundry victories, that they took the course to yield themselves. They also
came in and joined with them in humble supplication, who by force of arms had
usurped liberty: and the residue likewise of them (despising now such masters
as had bin overcome, and were unmeet for war, seeing the mightier in place)
with humble prayers submitted their necks to the yoke. The more part of them
therefore, after they had received a safeconduct, and forsaken the strong
defense and bulwark of the mountains, sped them apace to the Romans camp
over the spacious and wide champian fields, together with their parents, wives,
and children, as also with that pelf which their quick departure permitted
them to steal away. And they that were thought would rather loose their lives,
than be compelled to void their country, whiles they took licentious madness
to be liberty, willingly agreed now to be under authority, and to enter upon
other quiet and trusty places of habitation, so as they might not be troubled
with wars, nor changed by seditions. And these men being received into
protection, according to their own desire (as it was verily thought) remained
quiet for a small time; but afterward through their inbred wildness grew
again to commit most mischievous outrage, as shall be showed in convenient
process of our history. In this prosperous course and success of affairs, a
competent defense of Illyricum was upon a twofold reason established: the
duple greatness of which business the emperor having taken in hand, effected
both. The banished persons suspected though they were for their mutabilitie, yet
like to behave themselves somewhat more civilely, he reduced home at length and
placed in their ancient habitations: and to do the same people a greater
pleasure, he set over them not an ignoble and base minded king, but one of
royal blood descended, and endued with excellent parts both of body and mind,
even him whom before time they themselves had made their governor.

CHAP. XVI. Constantius taking joy in the surname and style of Secundus
Sarmaticus, in a solemn Oration rejoices both in the behalf of himself and
of his army, for the victory gained of his enemies.
Upon so happy a train of brave exploits, Constantius now bearing himself
higher than one that feared any thing, and with general consent of the
soldiers styled Secundus Sarmaticus, after the name of those whom he had
subdued, and being now at hand to depart, called all the Cohorts, Centuries,
and Maniples together, standing up in his Tribunal, environed about with the
Ensigns, Eagles, and a number of sundry captains and officers of high place
in the camp, made a speech after his manner unto the army, gracious as he was
in the eyes of all men, to this effect. The remembrance of our glorious
achievements, which to valiant men is more acceptable than all the pleasures
in the world, moves me in right modest terms to rehearse unto you the most
faithful defendors of the Roman State, what enormities (by our victorious
fortune sent unto us from God above, both before battle, and in the very heat
also of fight) we have reformed and set in frame: For what is there so
glorious, or so worthy in all right to be commended unto the memorial and
records of posterity, than that a souldior, having been in the action of
worthy exploits, may rejoice in the same so wisely and politickely devised? Our
enemies in their furious rage, and upon a vanity of swelling pride, despising
us in our absence, whiles we were employed in the defense of Italy and Gaul,
overran Illyricum at their pleasure: and in sundry rodes that they made to and
fro, wasted the frontiers of our limits: one while in hollowed troughes of
oak, otherwhiles on foot passing over rivers: not by way of conflict in open
field, nor using the means of armor and fine force; but like, as their use
has always bin, after the manner of secret brigands and robbers, for their
crafty guile and variety of deceitful mockeries ever from the first
beginning of their nation dread even unto our old ancestors. What displeasures
were by them done tolerable, we suffered, as being in person far removed,
supposing that lighter losses by the effectual service of our captains might
be forfended. But when through their licentiousness they proceeded further,
and grew to work many mischiefs and the utter undoing of whole provinces;
after we had fortified and made sure the avenues into Rhaetia, and by a most
vigilant guard firmly founded the security of Gaul, leaving no cause of
terror and fear behind us at our backs, we came into Pannonia, to the
pleasure of eternal God, purposing to strengthen whatsoever was like to run to
ruin and decay. And when all things were prepared accordingly, as ye know, in
the middle of Spring we went in hand with most weighty and important affairs.
First, that when we were about to frame a bridge close ioynted, no voleyes of
shot might impeach us: which work being with small ado finished, after we had
seen and overrun our enemies lands; the Sarmatians, who stubbornely in a
wilful mind went about to withstand us unto death, we overthrew and subdued
without any loss of our own men. The Quadi also in semblable malapartnes,
whiles they came to aid the Sarmatians, and fell upon the squadrons of our
noble legions, we hewedin pieces: who after miserable damages sustained, having
found by experience in all their braving rodes and minatorie attempts of
resistance, of what force our valor was, did cast away all fence of armor;
and those hands which they had prepared and fitted for fight, they carried
pinnioned behind at their backs: and seeing no other means to save their
lives but in prayer and petition, they fell prostrate at the foot of a
merciful Emperor, whose battails they had often found to have come unto
afortunat end. After these were sequestered and set aside, with like valor we
vanquished the Limigantes also: and when a number of them were slain, the
others to avoid the danger were driven to fly for refuge unto their starting
holes among the blind marshes. And when these exploits were likewise brought
to an happy conclusion, the time was come when we were to use seasonable
mildness and clemency. The Limigantes we forced to flit into places far
removed, for fear they might any more bestirre themselves to do our men
mischief, and most of them we spared. Over those that were free, we set as
ruler Zizais, who was to be devoted and faithful afterward unto us, reputing
it a greater matter to create, than to present unto the Barbarians a king: and
this honor added much unto the solemnity of his creation, that he was
appointed unto the same people a ruler, who had before time elected and
accepted him. A fourfold reward therefore, which one expedition has
performed, we have acquired and the Commonwealth together: first, by working
due revenge upon hurtful and mischievous robbers; and after by taking of our
enemies so many prisoners as may satisfy you abundantly. For with those things
ought virtue and prowess to stand contented, which it has won by painful
sweat and strong hand: as for our selves, our own travailes and fortitude will
be sure to save for us much wealth and ample riches, which are great treasures,
even the patrimonies of all men whole and sound. For this is it that beseems
the mind of a good prince; this suiteth well with prosperous successes.
Finally, I my self also carry before me the spoil of our enemies name, even
the addition in my style of Secundus Sarmaticus: which ye all with one accord,
without arrogancy be it spoken, have worthily and for desert conferred upon
me. After this speech ended, the whole assembly with more than wonted
alacrity, as having their hope of greater matters and gain bettered, by way
of joyful applause and festival acclamations rose up, to resound the praises
of their Emperor: and at last, after open declaration made according to the
manner, That Constantius was invincible, repaired with joy unto their pavilions.
And the Emperor being brought back unto his palace, and refreshed with two
days repose, returned with triumphant pomp to Sirmium: the military bands
and companies also, retired to their appointed places of abode. In these very
days, Prosper, Spectatus, and Eustachius, sent as ambassadors unto the
Persians, as I have showed before, went unto the king, being returned to
Ctesiphon, producing the Emperors letters and presents, and they demanded (as
things then stood whole and sound) a peace: and mindful of their commission
and what directions they had in charge, they never left the due regard of the
good and majesty of the Roman Empire, avouching boldly, that the covenant of
amity was to be established no otherwise, but with this condition, That there
should be no motion at all made of troubling the state of Armenia and
Mesopotamia. When therefore they had stayed there a long time, seeing the king
most obstinately set and hardened against the admitting of any peace, unless
the Seignorie of these countries were awarded unto him; they returned without
effecting their business. After this, were sent to obtain the self-same thing
with like strength and validity of conditions, Lucillianus a or Comes.
lieutenant, and Procopius at that time a Notarie, who afterward entangled and
tied fast with a certain knot of violent necessity, rose up in open
rebellion, and aspired to the imperial diadem.

THE XVIII. BOOK.
CHAP. I. Iulianus Caesar having set aside all cares of war, has a watchful
eye to the safety of Gaul, and seems a maintainer and lover of justice:
after this, renewing war against the Alemans, he builds and storeth his
garners: seven cities he takes in, and repaireth.
THese acts in one and the same year were in sundry parts of the world
achieved. But in Gaul, now that the State stood in better terms than
before, and Eusebius, together with Hypatius, brethren, were styled with the
high titles of Consuls; Julian renowned in the place of his Winter abode, for
contriving of his affairs to so good success, having sequestered and laid
aside for the mean time all cares of war, with no less regard disposed and
ordered many things to the behoof and welfare of the provinces, observing
diligently, That no man should be surcharged with the burden of tribute, That
no one man's greatness or power should over-weigh and oppress another, nor
they be in place of authority, whose private estate grew by the fall and decay
of the Common weal, ne yet that any Judge should without punishment swerve
from equity. And this redressed he with small travail and little ado: for
that himself deciding quarrels and controversies (especially when the
greatness either of causes or persons s required) was a constant and
irremoveable discerner of right and wrong. And albeit there be many commendable
examples of his, in such like controversies, yet it shall suffice to put down
but one, to the pattern or likeness whereof his other deeds or sayings are to
be considered. Numerius, ruler but a while before of Narbonensis [Gallia]
being accused for theft, he heard after an unusual censorious rigor openly at
the bar before his Tribunal, and admitted to the audience of his trial
whosoever were willing to be there: who when he pleaded unguiltie, and put by
all matters objected against him, by a bare denial, and could not in any one
point be convinced; Delphidius a most sharp Orator, who laid sore against
him, for want of proofs and evidences, in a great chafe cried out: Who can
ever be found guilty, o most noble and renowned Caesar, in case it shall be
sufficient to deny? Whereat Julian being moved, wisely replied thus ex
tempore: And who (quoth he) can be unguiltie, if it will suffice to have
accused? These verily were his speeches, and many such in civil matters. But
now being minded to go forth unto an urgent warre-service, when he considered
that certain territories of the Alemans harbored in their hearts hostility,
and would both dare and do many outrages, unless they also, after the
examples of others, were overthrown, he stuck perplexed and doubtful, with
what forces, or with what expedition (so soon as in reason he might have fit
opportunity) by preventing all rumor of his coming, he should be able on a
sudden to invade their lands. Now as he cast about and thought upon many and
sundry ways, he resolved at length to assay that which prooved in the issue
and effect thereof expedient. He dispatched in show of embassy Hariobaudes, a
Vacantem Tribunum.
Tribune not in ordinary, a man of approoved fidelity and fortitude, without
any one privy thereto, unto Hortarius a king now at peace, that from thence
going easily forward into their confines, against whom he was immediately to
make war, he might enquire (as he was very skillful in the Barbarians
language) What they went about: who being boldly gone about this business,
himself taking the fit season of the year, having assembled his soldiers
from all parts, went forth to this expedition: and among the most special
services to be done, he thought good with all speed to perform this one,
namely, before the heat of any conflicts and battles to enter into those
cities which long before had been rased, and when they were thus recovered,
them to fortify: also to build new barnes and garners in lieu of those that
were burnt, wherein might be laid up for store the provision of corn which
was wont to be transported out of Britannie. And both these works were
finished sooner than any man would have thought: for not only the garners were
quickly reared, but also the cities taken in and seized on, in number seven, to
wit, Erkelens.
Castra Herculis, Quaetraedt, between Guilich and Colein.
Quadriburgum, Some take it for Vltrajectum, i. Vtrecht. Ortel.
Tricesimae, Nuiss. upon Rhene. Ortel.
Nivesio, Bon.
Bonna, Andernach.
Antennacum, and Bing.
Bingio: where, as good hap was, Florentius the Prefect suddenly showed
himself, having in his conduct part of the forces, and bringing with him
sufficient provision of victual to serve for a long time. After these things
thus accomplished, it remained (such was the urgent occasion and present
necessity) that the walls of these cities thus gained, should be repaired,
whiles no man as yet was there to interrupt or impeach this work: and this is
apparent by clear evidences and arguments, that the Barbarians at that time,
for fear and not for love of their ruler, served the common good. The kings
according to the capitulation of covenant the former year, sent upon their
own carts and wagons much matter meet for building: and the aid-souldiors,
who always disdained such kind of ministeries, by the fair words that Julian
gave them wrought to the performance of diligent service, willingly carried
upon their necks timber-pieces fifty foot long and above, and among those
workmen and laborers that served the carpenters, stood them in right good
stead.

CHAP. II. The Alemans having intelligence how the Roman army was broken in,
and had set sure footing beyond Rhene, or ave peace, which upon certain
conditions was granted.
WHiles these works were set forward with diligence, and brought with all
speed to effect, Hariobaudes, when he had searched and spied into every thing,
returned, and related what he had learned. After whose coming, the forces were
soon afoot, and so they came along to Mentz.
Mogontiacum; where when Florentius and Lupicinus, the successor to Severus,
urged very hard, That they must pass over at a bridge set up and erected
there; Caesar most stiffely stood against them, saying, That they ought not to
tread on the lands of those that were within the peace, for fear, least (as
oftentimes it falls out) through the uncivile behavior of the soldiers
(spoiling wilfully what ever comes in their way) the covenants of the league
should be rudely broken. Howbeit, the Alemans in general, against whom our
army marched, thinking what danger came toward them, warned in minatorie
terms king Suomarius, who by an agreement and composition past was become
friend unto us, to debar the Romans from passage over (for his towns and
territories lay close to the farther banks of Rhene:) who protesting, That of
himself alone he was not able; the Barbarian multitude assembling themselves
all together, approached Mogontiacum, ready with all their power to impeach the
army, that it should not cross the river. In two respects therefore, that was
thought convenient which Caesar had before advised, namely, for fear that the
lands of our peaceable confederats should be spoiled, and least whiles a most
warlike nation was ready to make resistance, a bridge should be (with the
danger of many men's lives) set up there in a place which was indeed most meet
for the framing of a bridge. Which our enemies having most wisely considered,
marching softly along the contrary bank, look where they saw afar off our
men to pitch their tents, there also they in the same paralele over against
them attended all night, and slept not, observing with right vigilant care,
that no passage should be attempted. But when our men were come to the place
before provided, they sat them down and rested within the precinct of trench
and rampire. Then Caesar taking Lupicinus to counsel, commanded certain or
Sergeant Majors.
Tribunes to make ready three hundred soldiers lightly appointed, with
stakes, and those altogether ignorant what to do, or whether to go. These
being gotten together, when it was far in the night, and all of them going
aboard (whom forty small pinnaces or barges, even as many as were then at
hand, received) were willed to row along the river, with silence, so as their
very oars should hold off, or give a light stroke, for fear that the noise of
the waves might raise the Barbarians; and so with ready minds and active
bodies they break through the frontier banks over against them, whiles the
enemies were amused on the fires that our men made. Mean while that these
things were setting forward with all speed, Hortarius, a king made before hand
our confederate, not minding to alter aught otherwise than the tenor of the
covenants went; but withal, a friend unto his neighbour-borderers, having
invited and assembled together all the kings, princes of the blood, lords and
potentates to a feast, kept them with him at good cheer, which (according to
the manner of the country) held unto the third midnight.
watch of the night: whom, as they departed from him, our men aforesaid by
chance set upon at unawares, but by no means could either kill or catch them,
by reason of the darkness, and their swift horses withal, which carried them
quite away, whither in that doubtful braid they were driven. As for all their
lacquies and servants that followed them on foot, they slew, unless they were
such as the obscurity of the time saved from danger. At the length, when it
was known that the Romans had passed over (the kings, who both then, as also
in the time of expeditions past, supposed there to take some easement of their
labors, when it happened that they found enemies) were stricken and astenied;
their people also, who watched the bridge with great care and diligence, that
it should not be made, quaking for very fear, betook them to their heels:
and thus the unbridled fury of theirs assuaged, they made what have they could
to remoove their nearest and dearest friends farther off. Then presently, when
all this difficulty was past, the bridge being set together, and the projects
of these so careful nations prevented, our soldiers seen now in the
Barbarians land, passed through the dominions of Hortarius, without doing any
hurt. But when they were come once into the territories of those kings, who
were yet enemies, without any fear they made foul work throughout the
midst of the rebels country, burning and spoiling all before them. Now,
after they had set on a light fire the mounds and fences of their brittle
houses, hewed in pieces a number of folk, and seen many of them falling
down, and others making supplication; when they came so far as to a country
named Capellatij, or Palas, where certain mere stones parted the confines
between the Alemans and Burgundians, there they encamped, for this reason,
that Macrianus and Hariobaudus, brethren, Germans and Kings, might be
received without dread: who perceiving that their destruction drew near, came
with careful and heavy hearts to entreat for peace. After whom immediately
repaired king Vadomarius also, whose habitation was just against the Rauraci,
and through the commendatorie letters of prince Whether now Emperor, or his
grandfather, it is uncertain.
Constantius secretly brought out, and earnestly alleged, he was gently
entertained; as who long since had been taken into the protection of the Roman
Empire. And Macrianus verily, with his brother, admitted among the Eagles and
Ensigns, wondered at the variety and braverie of the armor and forces, which
then and never before he saw, and entreated in the behalf of his people. But
Vadomarius acquainted with our men, as neighboring upon the limit, marvailed,
I assure you, at the munition and furniture of so stately and sumptuous an
expedition; but remembered very well, that in the prime of his youth he had many
times seen the like. In conclusion, after long consultation had, and all
things well weighed and considered, unto Macrianus verily and Hariobaudus peace
was granted: but as for Vadomarius, who intending to establish his own
security firm and sure, was come also by way of embassage, and as an Orator,
in the behalf of Vrius, Vrsicinus and Versalpus kings, heartily desiring
peace, he could not in this mean time suddenly have his answer, for fear
least (as these Barbarians are fickle and hardly to be trusted) they
bethinking and remembering themselves, after the departure of our men would not
stand to those points which by others had been obtained. But when they also
themselves, upon the fiering of their standing corn and houses, upon the
taking also of many of them prisoners, and killing a number, made such humble
suit, as if they likewise had trespassed in the same kind against our people,
they got peace with the semblable conditions: among which, this was above all
most instantly urged, That they should redeliver all those captives, whom in
many out-rodes they had taken and carried away.

CHAP. III. Barbatio colonel of the Infanterie, and Assyria his wife attaint
of high treason, are beheaded.
WHiles the heavenly providence reformeth these abuses in Gaul, there rises
up in the Emperors court a turbulent tempest of new matters, which from small
beginnings proceeded to sorrowful mourning and lamentation. In the house of
Barbatio, then colonel of the Infanterie, it happened that a swarm of Bees
were evidently seen to settle: And when he carefully sought unto wisards,
skillful in prodigies about so strange a sight, this answer they made, That it
portended unto him some great danger; grounding (forsooth) upon this
conjecture, That these flying creatures, after they have made their
habitations, and gathered goods, are driven out from thence with smoke and the
troublesome ringing of cymbals. This Barbatio had a wife named Assyria, a dame
of no few words, nor yet wise: who, when her husband was gone forth to the
wars, and fearfully perplexed many ways, in regard of that which he well
remembered had been foretold him by the said Soothsaiers, moved like a woman
with a foolish toy that took her in the head, called for her maid servant, who
could skill of cyphring, and one whom she had gotten from out of the patrimony
and goods of Silvanus; by whose hand she wrote a letter full untowardly and out
of season unto her husband, weeping, as it were, and beseeching him for Gods
sake, That after the death of Constantius now at hand, himself (as she hoped)
being admitted to the imperial place, would not cast her off, and prefer the
marriage of Eusebia the Queen, a lady for person and beauty surpassing. This
letter was sent as secretly as might be: and the maid servant, who had penned
the same as her mistress endited it, after that every man was returned home
from the warre-service, stole out in the beginning of night, and ran away to
Arbetio, taking with her a copy of the said letter; and being heartily welcome
unto him, disclosed that piece of written paper. He then, as he was the fittest
man in the world to frame an accusation against one, trusting upon this
presumption and evidence, informed the prince of this matter: and, as the
usual manner was, without any delay or pause allowed to the handling of this
business, Barbatio after he had confessed the receipt of such a letter, and the
woman his wife by good proof was convicted to have or caused the some to be
written
written the same, lost their heads for it. When these were executed, much
inquisition was made abroad, and many men were troubled, as well the innocent as
offenders: among whom, Valentine also, late principal or captain of the
Protectores, and now Tribune, with many others, after he had been tortured
diverse times, as one privy to the foresaid treason, survived notwithstanding,
and in very truth knew nothing at all of the matter. In recompense therefore of
this wrong done, and danger whereto he was brought, he became a great captain
and leader in Illyricum. Now, this Barbatio abovesaid was a man somewhat rude
and arrogant withal in his carriage: in this regard also many hated him; for
that both whiles he had the rule of the Protectores in ordinary under Gallus
Caesar, he played the perfidious traitor: and also after his decease, bearing
himself proud of his advauncement to an higher place of warre-service, he
devised and plotted the like against Iulianus Caesar and oftentimes (a thing
that good men detested) he whispered in the open ears of the Emperor many
shrewd and grievous matters: ignorant as he was of that wise saying and so well
known of Aristotle; who sending Calisthenes, a or disciple.
sectarie and kinsman of his, unto K. Alexander, gave him many times in charge:
That very seldom he should have any talk (and be sure then it were pleasant)
with a man who carried in the tip of his tongue power of life and death. And
that we should make no marvel at this, That men whose minds and souls we
suppose to be of a celestial substance, otherwhiles are able to discern of
things profitable and meet; considering that unreasonable creatures are wont
sometimes to defend their lives by deep silence: as appears by this notable
example. Cranes, when for heat they leave the East parts, and fly Westward, no
sooner begin to enter upon the mountain Taurus, wherein there be so many
Eagles, but fearing those so strong and hardy fowls, close up their bills
with little stones, that very extreme necessity it self might not fetch any
noise or voice from them: and after they have with swift flight passed over the
same hills, they cast away the said stones, and so hold on their flight forward
with more security.

CHAP. IIII. Whiles Sapor king of the Persians prepares to make war against
the Romans, Constantius besotted by his sycophants of the Court, is advised to
call back home Vrsicinus, a most renowned warrior and Prefect of the East.
WHiles these matters were with much diligence straightly sought into at Sirmium,
the fortune of the East sounded terrible trumpets, and gave intelligence of
much danger abroad. For, the king of Persia bearing himself bold of help from
those savage nations whom he had quieted, and burning unmeasurably in an
ambitious desire of rule and dominion; made preparation of armor, forces, and
victuals, consulting with the fiends and infernal spirits of hell, and seeking
to all conjurers and juglers for to know the future events. And thus being
sufficiently furnished every way, intended in the first temperat season of the
spring to overrun all before him. Now, when as the news hereof were brought,
first by running rumors, and afterward by certain messengers, and all men
stood perplexed and wist not what to do, for so great fear they had of
calamities coming toward them, the Forge in court beating still both day and
night, as one would say, upon the same anvile, and all for the pleasure of
guelded Eunuchs; presented unto the Emperor (a suspicious and fearful
prince) Vrsicinus as a bug-beare or grim-visaged or Medusa^s head.
Gorgon, oftentimes iterating these and such like suggestions, That he, being
after the death of Silvanus sent eftsoons to the defense of the East parts, as
it were, for default of better men, aspired to higher matters. By this base
manner of foul flattery, many endeavored to purchase the favor of Eusebius,
then chief Chamberlain, with whom, if we must speak a truth, Constantius As
if Eusebius carried a strong hand over him, and ruled all.
could do much, who was eagerly bent to overthrow the state of the foresaid
General of the Horse, for two causes: for that he of all men alone had no need
of his help, as others; and besides, at Antioch gave not up his house unto
him, which most importunately he required. This Eusebius, like a serpent full
of rank poison stirring up a number of her young ones, that yet can hardly
creep, to do mischief, sent out his grooms of the chamber, now well grown,
and of good bigness, with direction, That in their near attendance which they
gave about privy and inward ministeries, they might with their small voice,
always continuing childish and soft, wound with grievous envy the credit and
reputation of that valiant man in the princes ears, too open unto such
suggestions, who quickly put in practice his instructions. In irkesomenesse of
these and such like, I take delight to fall in praise of old Domitian: who
albeit far unlike unto father and brother, he stained the memorial of his
name with inexpiable detestation; yet famous he was for making this law so
generally received and approoved, by which in threatening wise he gave streit
charge, That no man within the bounds of the Roman jurisdiction should gueld
any boy: which if it had not happened, who could have endured whole swarms and
multitudes of them, whose fewness is hardly tolerable? Yet a good and wary
course was taken, least the same Vrsicinus being sent for again, as he made
semblance, should for fear set all on a hurly-burly, but when any good
opportunity was offered, be haled presently away to suffer death.

CHAP. V. Antoninus a politic and well experienced person, leaving
Constantius, sideth with Sapor.
WHiles they waited for the event of these plots, and were troubled with
doubtful thoughts, in the time that we made some short abode at Samosata, the
most noble city in old time of the kingdom in Syr^^.
Comagena, suddenly by rumors coming thick and threefold, we heard of new
troubles, which the process of our history shall declare. There was one
Antoninus, who of a rich merchant became a minister in the Auditors office, and
then one of the protectors or guard under the Lord Warden of Mesopotamia, a man
well experienced, wise, and in all those parts passing well known, being
through the greedy avarice of some lapt in bonds, and brought within the
danger of exceeding great loss; when he saw, that by contesting with bigger
and mightier than himself, he gained nothing, but was through unjust dealing
more and more weakened, by reason that they who had the hearing and handling of
his cause, leaned to the mightier, as ready to currie favor with them, he,
because he would not kick against the prick, framed himself to give fairer
words and gentler language, yea, and confessed the debt which by covin and
cautelous packing was turned over, as due to the princes Treasury. And now
projecting great and high designs, very closely pried into all parts of the
Commonwealth: and as he was well seen in both tongues, Greek and Latin, he
busied himself about the reckonings and accounts, setting down what soldiers
and of what forces were abiding in any place, and in whole defense they served
in time of war: semblably, enquiring by way of diligent search, Whether there
were abundant store of armor, victuals, and other necessary provision for the
wars: Thus when he had learned the inward secrets of all the East, and
distributed the greatest part as well of men as money throughout Illyricum,
where the Emperor was held employed in serious affairs; now that the
appointed day drew near of paying that money, which by force and for fear he
was compelled to confess by a bill of his own handwriting, that he owed,
foreseeing that on every side he was like to be overwhelmed with all manner
of perilous troubles, whiles the Lord Treasurer, for to pleasure another, was
very instant, and sore urged him, he endeavored all he could to address his
flight unto the Persians, with his wife, children, and all the dearest
kinsfolk that he had. And to the end he might avoid the stationarie soldiers
and warders in the marches, he purchases for a small sum of money a piece of
land in Hiaspis, a place watered with the river Tigris. By which device, when
as no man durst demand the cause of his coming (with a number about him) into
the utmost parts of the Roman limit, as being now a landed man, and a holder
of possessions there; by the means of trusty friends, and those cunning
swimmers, after he had many times conferred and parled secretly with Sapor;
who then being in place of a Warden of the marches, defended all those
frontier quarters lying against him; as one also that before time had been
known unto him, was by the help of certain nimble and light appointed men
sent from the Persian camp and forts adjoining, set aboard in fisher-boats:
and so in the dead time of the night, with his sweet wife and children, and his
whole household, crosses the water, like for all the world, although in a
contrary case, unto that Babylonian traitor Zopyrus.

CHAP. VI. Sabinianus a cowardly old man, and unfit for war, is substituted
for Vrsicinus the successor elect of Barbatio. Antoninus honorably received of
the Persians, stood them afterward in very good stead.
THings being brought to this pass in Mesopotamia, the Cohort Palatine of the
Court sounding the retreat and turning again to do us mischief, found
occasion at length how to hurt a most valiant man, and that through the motion
and instigation of a sort of guelded Eunuchs, cruel at all times and greedy;
who wanting otherwise children, the dear pledges of love, embrace riches alone
as their most sweet daughters. Determined it was, That Sabinianus, a feeble old
man verily, and well monied, but altogether unmeet for war, and cowardly,
yea, and by reason of his base obscurity, far unlike as yet to obtain the
dignity of commanding an army, should be sent as Prefect to govern the
East parts; but Vrsicinus return unto the Emperors court, to take the charge
of the Infanterie, and to succeed Barbatio: to this end, that he, a hot
stirrer up of sedition and rebellion, as they gave it out, might now, being
present in place, be set upon and assailed by his great enemies and such as he
was to dread. Whiles these parts are acting in the camp of Constantius, as it
were, in course every a five years, and upon the stage, and the b Dirribitores
or pay-masters spread abroad and divulge in great men's houses the price of an
high office thus suddenly bought and sold: Antoninus being brought to the
king where he wintered, was gladly received, and graced with the promotion to
wear a Tuffe or Turbant (which honor they enjoy that be allowed to sit at the
kings board, and who for good desert among the Persians may open their mouths
in solemn assemblies, to persuade and deliver their minds) set his course
against our State and Commonwealth, not (as they say) with spret nor oar,
with shooving, or haling, that is, by way of doubtful or dark
circumlocutions, but even with spread and full sail, and inciting the said
king, as intimes past Maharball when he rebuked Anniball for his lingering
slownesse, ceased not to tell him, That he had the way to win; but wist not
how to use his victory. For, being brought in place to speak, as a man well
skilled and experienced in all matters, when he had gotten diligent and
attentive hearers, such as delighted in pleasing speeches, and were ready not
to praise openly, but like to Homers c Phaeaces, for to admire them with deep
silence, he used to rehearse the acts that had passed for forty years gone:
and namely, how after continual chances of wars, but especially at Hileia
and Singara, where there was a most cruel conflict and battle fought by
night; after our forces were mightily overthrown and defeated, as if some
herault came between to take up the quarrel, the Persians had not yet for all
their brave victories gained and gone as far as to or Edessa.
Aedessa, nor the bridges of Rhoa, or Rhoas.
Euphrates; whom it had become in the confidence of their puissance in arms
and noble achievements, so far forth to have extended and enlarged the
bounds of their Empire; what time especially, as by reason of long troubles and
civil wars, the Roman blood was spilt, and their power abated on both
sides. By these and such like motives from time to time at the table, and among
the cups (where, after the manner of the ancient Greeks, they use to consult
about preparation of wars and other serious affairs) this revolted traitor
full soberly incensed the king, fire-hote of himself, presuming also upon his
great fortune, that immediately after Winter was ended, he should sound the
al'arme, promising also assuredly for his own part to stead him well in many
of his necessary and important occasions.

CHAP. VII. The coming of Sabinianus and departure of Vrsicinus brings
sorrow unto the provinces in the East, subject to the Roman Empire, and with
perplexity of cares troubles the captains of the forces.
ABout the very same time, Sabinianus puffed up with his sudden advauncement
to so high a place of command, when he was entered into the marches of Cilicia,
delivered unto his predecessor the letters of the Emperor, exhorting him with
all speed to repair unto the Court, there to be honored with some higher
dignity: and that upon such an urgent point of necessary affairs, that had
Vrsicinus made his abode even as far as Island, or Tilemarke, a tract in
Norway. Ortel.
Thule, good reason there was, that in regard of so weighty business he
should be sent for, as being best acquainted with the old discipline, and
through long experience in warfare most skillful in the Persians policy. With
which rumor, when the provinces were much disquieted, the States of cities,
armed both with the decrees of the people, and with acclamations coming thick
one upon another, laid hold of him, and detained still with them their
public patron and defendor, bearing well in mind, that being left among them
for their defense with a company of idle soldiers that loved not to stir
out of doors, yet in ten years space he had lost nothing: and withal,
distrusting now their own safety, for that with the removal of him, in a
doubtful and dangerous time they had intelligence, that a most cowardly person
was come in his place. Deeply persuaded we are (for there is no doubt
thereof) that Fame flies swiftly in ways through the air; by whose relation
giving intelligence of these occurrents, put to question it was, and proposed
among the Persians in counsel, What course to take: And after much debating to
and fro, concluded it was according to advice given by Antoninus, That for as
much as Vrsicinus was posted away far off, and the new come ruler and
captain naught regarded, setting aside therefore all besieging of cities
(which commonly is dangerous) they should break through Euphrates, and march
on directly forward, to the end, that by speedy expedition preventing all
rumor of their coming, they might seize into their hands whole provinces, even
those that in all the former wars (unless it were in Gallienus his time)
were untouched, and by reason of long peace very wealthy: of which enterprise
and exploit he promised, with the leave and grace of God, to be a most meet and
sufficient leader. This counsel of his being commended, and with one accord of
them all confirmed, they generally bent and set their minds to such things as
were with speed to be gathered together and put in readiness: and so all
Winter long preparation was made of victuals, soldiers, armor, with other
munition and means requisite for a warlike expedition shortly to be taken in
hand. We in the mean while having stayed a while on this side the mountain
Taurus, in our coming by commandment toward the parts of Italy, made have
until we drew near to the river Maritza, or Meritza.
Hebrus, that runs down from the Odrysian hills: and there we received the
princes letters, commanding us without all excuse making to return into
Mesopotamia, and that without any officers attendance; where we were to take
charge of no dangerous expedition, now that all the power of command was
transferred unto another: a thing plotted and contrived by these busy
politicians and pragmaticall Statists about the Emperor, of purpose, that in
case the Persians, frustrate of their expectation, retired into their own
country, this should be reputed a doubtie piece of service, exploited by the
new captain: but if fortune otherwise should come adverse and cross, an
imputation of treason to the State might be laid upon Vrsicinus. Being thus
without all reason tossed to and fro, after we had stood doubtful a good while
what to do, we returned, and found Sabinianus full of disdain, a man of mean
stature, base minded, and of small courage, hardly able without shameful fear
to abide the light noise of a company met at a feast, much less the rustling
and clattering of an army in battle: howbeit, because the discoverers sent
out in espiall, affirmed most constantly, and the fugitives avouched no less,
That the enemies made hot preparation every way, whiles this silly fellow,
idle and slothful as he was, slept his business, we approached Nisibis,
ready to provide good and necessary means; for fear least the Persians
making no semblance at all of siege, should surprise the city at unawares.

CHAP. VIII. The Persians with a great power make an excursion upon the
Romans, with variety of fortune, as commonly it is seen.
NOw whiles within the walls every thing with all speed was putting in
readiness, we might discover smoke and light fires all the way along, from
Tigris by otherwise called Maurocastrum, in Armenia.
Castra Maurorum, by A place near to Nisibis.
Sisara and the rest of the marches even to the very city, shining more thick
than usually they had done, and that continually; an evident proof, that the
enemies having passed over the river, were broken forth, and fell to wast and
spoil the country. Whereupon, least the passages should be intercepted, with
a running march we made speed forward; and when we were come within two miles,
we espied a well-favoured boy with a chain about his neck, and, as we
guessed, eight years of age, pitifully crying in the midst of an high way;
the son, as he said himself, of a freeborn gentleman, whom, his mother
(when in a terrible affright for the enemies so near at hand, she fled) being
encumbered with other carriage, for have left all alone behind her. This child,
whiles I at my captains commandment (who took pity of him, and was much
moved at the sight) carry before me upon my horse, and bring back unto the
city, the Brigands having cast a trench and tampier round about the circuit of
the walls, ranged at randon all abroad. And for that I was terrified with the
troubles and calamities that commonly follow siege, after I had set down the
boy within a posterne gate half shut, with all the speed I could make I
returned all windlesse for have toward the regiment of our men as they marched,
and there I escaped hardly of being taken. For when a wing of our enemies
horsemen followed after, one Abdigidus a Tribune, as he fled with his
camp-slave, and having overtaken the said servant (now that his master was by
flight slipped away) had asked him (as I passed in great have by) Who was
appointed to be the Judge or Governor? and heard how Vrsicinus, who a little
before had entered the city, was going toward the mountain Izalla, and
therewith slain the party, who answered them to a thing that they never
demanded, a number there were which pursued us in hot chase, and never
rested: whom after I had out-stript (such was the fleet pace of my horse under
me) and found our men laid securely along at their ease hard by Amudum, a
weak hold, whiles their horses were scattered here and there about at their
forage, I stretched forth mine arm at length, and swinging the skirt of my
cassocke on high, round about my head, by this usual sign showed, That the
enemies were at hand: and so joining with them, rode amain, with my horse
ready by this time to tire. Now, the thing that terrified us, was the full
Moon shining all night long, and the flat level and plain fields not able to
afford us, if we had been distressed and put to our shifts, any borough to
shelter us; as where there was not a tree nor shrub to be seen, nor aught at
all, besides short grass and low weeds. This stratageme therefore was devised,
namely to set upon an horse back a burning lamp, and to tie the same fast
about him, for falling, and so to let him (as he carried the same) go loose by
himself without a rider, and take the left hand way, whiles we in the mean
time marched toward the mountain tops situate on the right: to this end, that
the Persians weening it to be a tallow link giving light before the captain
softly marching, might take their course that way especially: which if we had
not foreseen, we should have been taken prisoners, and brought in
subjection to our enemies. Being escaped out of this danger, when we were come
to a certain woodie place set with vines and apple trees, named Meiacarire (so
called of cold fountains) now that all the inhabitants were slipped away and
gone, we found in a nouke remote far out of the way one souldior lying hid
alone by himself: who being presented unto our captain, after he had faltred
in his speech for fear, so that his words hung not together, and was therefore
suspected, being further affrighted with menaces, reveals the whole truth,
and shows, That he was borne at Paris in Gaul, that whiles he served in a
troop of horsemen, and was afraid to be punished for a foul fact in times
past committed, he fled his country and turned Persian: and since that time
being for his honest behavior and carriage well approved, wedded a wife, begat
children, and sent as a spy into our parts, related many a time true tidings:
but now addressed from Sapor and Nohodareus, two great potentates, who led
certain companies of brigands, he was in his return minding to report unto
them what he had learned. After this, when he had delivered withal what he
knew in the contrary side, he was slain: and therefore, seeing our cares more
and more increased upon us, from thence we came with great speed, according as
the time would give us leave, to C^r-amida, or C^r-amit.
Amida; a city which afterward for calamities and miseries ensuing became
memorable.

CHAP. IX. The Romans that abode in Amida having in some sort intelligence of
the Persians designs, by certain characters written in a parchment, send out
Ammianus Marcellinus, who wisely having taken view of the enemies army,
returns unto his company more speedily than could be hoped or looked for.
WHen our discoverers were returned hither, we found a parchment written in
ciphers and strange characters within a scabbard, which by commandment was
brought unto us from Procopius, whom together with Comes.
Lieutenant Lucilianus I said to have been sent before in embassage to the
Persians: and the same being set down in dark terms of purpose, least if
the bearers had been caught, and the sense of the writings understood, some
matter of much mischief should have risen thereupon, carried this tenor: Now
that the ambassador of the Greeks are sent away far off, and perhaps to be
killed, the long-lived king not contented with Statto di Gallipoli, or Bras da
S. George, i. Saint Georges arm.
Hellespontus, by making bridges over the rivers Granius and Rhyndacus, will
come with a puissant army of many nations, minding to overrun Asia: who being
a prince of his own nature easily provoked to anger, and most fierce withal,
has to incite and incense him, the successor of Hadrian, sometime Emperor of
Rome. All is lost and past help for ever, unless Greece take better heed.
Which writing implied thus much, That the king of Persia having passed over the
rivers Anzada and Tigris, by the advice and instigation of Antoninus aspired to
the dominion of all the East throughout. Now, when these contents were very
hardly and with much ado read, by reason they were written so exceeding
intricately, this politic course was taken. There was at the same time a
great potentate named Iovinianus, ruler of Corduena, a province under the
Persian dominion, who had grown up in the Roman ground, and secretly stood
well affected unto us, for that he was detained as an hostage in Syria, and
being allured with the sweetness of liberal arts, had an hot desire and
affection to return unto our parts again. Unto him I (being sent with a
certain centurion, right trusty and of approoved fidelity, to know more
certainly what matters were in hand) came by desert mountains and steep
straits. Being seen, known, and courteously received, after I had confessed
unto him alone the cause of my presence, I was sent accompanied with one of
secrecy, and skillful in the ways, unto passing high rocks a great way off,
from whence might be seen for fifty miles forward the least thing that was,
if a man's eyesight failed not. After we had abode there two whole days, by
the sunne-rising on the third day we discovered all the circles of the earth
under us (which we use to call Horizons) full of infinite troops of armed men,
and the king himself leading the way, all glittering in his gorgeous and
glorious array. Close unto him on his left hand went Grumbates king of the
Chionites, a man (I must needs say) of middle age, and with riveled lims, but
carrying with him a brave mind, and ennobled for the ensigns of many goodly
victories: on his right side the king of the Albanes, an high and mighty
prince of equal place and honor: after them diverse captains and leaders, men
of eminent quality and command, marched: whom there followed a multitude of
all sorts and degrees, picked and chosen out of the manhood of the nations
adjoining, trained and enured a long time by many adventures to endure the
difficulty of all accidents whatsoever. Now tell me, Greece, that art so
fabulous, How long will thou talk unto us of Doriscus, a town in Thracia, and
of the forces mustered and numbered by bands within enclosures? Whereas we,
wary and circumspect, or (to speak more truly) timorous, amplify nothing,
but what testimonies of credit neither doubtful nor uncertain have
delivered. Well, after that the said kings had passed through Moss, or Mosal.
Nineve in Botun. Castaldo.
Adiabene, a mighty city, in the midst of Anzaba bridge having killed
beasts for sacrifices, and seen the inwards thereof praesaging good success,
they went over most joyfully, and were guessing, that all the multitude behind
could hardly go through in three days after, made have to return from thence
unto the potentate and ruler aforesaid, with whom we rested, and were refreshed
with courteous offices of hospitality. From whence, after we had returned by
places likewise desert and solitary, sooner than could be hoped or expected,
whiles we had the mighty means of necessity to be our guide, we
strengthened the hearts of those that stood in a doubtful quandarie, as who
had intelligence given unto them, That the kings without fetching any compass
about, had passed over one of the bridges made with ships.

CHAP. X. After that Mesopotamia was by the Romans wasted, the fields fiered,
and the places fortified to endure the first brunts of war, Sabinianus
ridiculously takes his pleasure, and makes much of himself.
INcontinently therefore were swift horsemen sent out to Cassianus, Ducem.
Marquess of Mesopotamia, and to Euphronius, ruler for the time of the
province, with commission to compel the country peasants with all their
families and cattle to remoove into places of more safety; and that the town
Heren. Nig.
Canhae, compassed about with weak walls, should quickly be abandoned,
presently hereupon all the fields to be set on fire, that there might be no
store of forage. And thus, when the said commission was without delay performed
accordingly, no sooner was the fire made and kindled, but the mighty violence
of that raging element consumed all the corn, when as it was swollen full, and
the straw thereof now turned yellow, yea, and the ripe grass, in such sort, as
that from the very brims of Tigris bank, as far as to Euphrates, there was
no green thing left. At the same time were many wild beasts burnt up, and
Lions especially so fell and furious in those parts, which were wont
wonderfully to perish, or be blinded by little and little after this sort.
Between the Reed-plots of the rivers of Mesopotamia, and the bushie or
shrubbie grounds, there raunge abroad an infinite number of Lions, which so
long as the mild Winters last (and those are always there most gentle) take no
hurt: but when the season of the year by reason of the Sunne-beames is become
exceeding hot in those countries, so scorched with frying and parching heat,
what with the sultrie breath of the said planet, and what with the great gnats
that swarm exceedingly in every corner of those lands, they are sore troubled
and set a madding. And for that the said flies make at their eyes, as being
moist and shining members, whiles they settle upon their eyelids, and fall to
biting; the same Lions, after they have abidden painful torments a long time,
either are drowned and swallowed up of the rivers, whereto they fly for
remedy, or else for the loss of their eyes (which with their claws they
often scratch, tear, and pluck out of their own heads) they become much more
wood: and were it not for that, all the East parts throughout should be
exceeding full of such beasts. Whiles the fields were a burning, as has been
said, the Tribunes that were sent out with the Protectores, fortified the
hither banks of Euphrates with skonces and stakes sharp pointed before, and
with all kind of defensive munition, planting in convenient places their
artillery and shot, where the river was not full of gulfes and swallowing
deep pits. Whiles these matters are speedily put in execution, Sabinianus a
most (...).
excellent captain and manager of a mortal war, when all occasions and
advantages were to be caught, as well to set as to avoid dangers, among the
sepulchers of Edessa, as if he had made a grounded peace with the dead, casting
no perils, and fearing naught, but carrying himself very loosely, as one that
lived a careless life, what with military dancing in armor, and what with
sound of musical instruments, in lieu of histrionicall actours and players,
took his delight and pleasure in the greatest repose and silence that might
be: a thing, I assure you, both for the enterprise and the place, very ominous:
whereas we may learn by the course of the world and process of times, That
every person of excellency ought to avoid these and such like, which both in
word and deed carrying a fearful and heavy praesage, pronounce and portend
future troubles.

CHAP. XI. During this time, the Persae using the counsel and help of
Antoninus, provide well for their own army, and on every side encircle two
troops of Roman horsemen, sent for the succor of Mesopotamia: before whom
went Antoninus the fugitive, who boldly dallieth with Vrsicinus.
Mean while, the kings having passed by Nisibis, as a station of no account,
as the fires still increased with variety of dry fuel feeding them, shunning
what they could the want of forage, marched at the foot of the mountains along
the green valleys and bottomes full of grass: and when they were come to
Bebases a village, from whence even unto the town otherwise called Amida.
Constantia (which stands an hundred mile off) all things are withered and
dried up with continual drought (save that in some pits there is found a
little water;) after they had stayed a long time in doubtful suspense what to
do, and were now resolved (upon the confidence they had in the hardness of
their people) to pass over, they take knowledge by intelligence given of a
faithful discoverer, That Euphrates was risen by reason of snow newly thawed
and resolved, and had with his swelling stream surrounded his banks, and
over-spred a great way besides, whereby it affoorded no foord to wade over.
Being disappointed therefore, and put beside their expectation of the hope they
had conceived, they betake themselves to whatsoever casual occasion would
minister to be embraced. And after it was put to question and consultation,
according to the sudden and urgent condition of the present State, What was
in this case to be done? Antonine commanded to speak his mind, began to this
effect, persuading to turn the journey toward the right hand, that by fetching
a longer circuit about through countries fruitful of all things for necessary
use, and (in this regard, that the enemy went straight forward) as yet
unspoiled and untouched, they might by his guidance go to Barzala and Laudias,
two garrison castles; where the river, being small and narrow, for that he is
so near his head, and as yet not grown big by other rivers running into him,
might be easily passed over, as having in it many shallow foords. These reasons
being heard, and the counselor commended and willed therewith to lead the way
he knew, all the companies and whole army altering their intended journey,
followed him through the wilds and desert by-waies. Which being by sure espials
known, we appointed to make have unto Samosata, that from thence having passed
over the river, and cut off the bridges at A city of Dacia, called of some
Clausenburg, or Mulenbach.
Zeugma and Capersana, we might with the help of fortune beat back the
enemies forces. But there chanced an horrible and shameful fact, such as
deserved to be buried in silence for ever. For the horsemen of two troops, in
number about seven hundred, newly sent out of Illyricum to the succor of
Mesopotamia, being feeble and fearful, keeping garrison in those parts, and
fearing some ambushment in the night, departed in the evening (when it had
beseemed that all passages should have been the better warded) far from the
common port-wayes. This was by the Persians well observed, who to the number
well near of twenty thousand, under the leading of Sapor and Nohodares,
having passed beyond them, over-loaden with drinking wine, and fast asleep,
whiles no man looked forth in espiall, lay hidden all armed behind certain
high mounts near unto Amida. And within a while after, when we were (as has
been said) upon our journey to Samosata, and went forward while it was yet
twy-light, from a certain high Barbican or Toot-hill, we (suddenly
affrighted at the bright shining of glittering armor, and crying out alowd,
That the enemies were hard at hand) after the accustomed signal of battle
given, made a stand, and castour selves into a round ring, as thinking it our
safest way, neither to fly (our enemies being now within sight to follow in
chase) nor to join battle with them (more mightier than we both in horsemen
and number otherwise) for fear of certain death. In the end, being driven
now upon extremity to fight, even whiles we were devising what was behoofefull
for us to do, some of our men running out rashly to skirmish, were slain: and
as both parts preassed one upon another, and Antoninus advaunced gloriously
before the army, Vrsicinus took knowledge of him, and being in a chiding
accent by him rated and termed wicked traitor, he putting off his Tuffe or
Turbant, which he wore aloft on the crown of his head, as an ornament of
honor, alighted from his horse: and after he had bowed his body so low, that
he touched wellneere the ground, saluted him, calling him Patron and Lord: and
fastening his hands together behind his back (which among the Assyrians is the
gesture of a suppliant:) Forgive me (quoth he) right honorable Comes.
Lieutenant, who upon necessity and not with mine own will am fallen to these
courses, which I know to be lewd and ungracious. Certain officers with their
importunate calling upon me (as you well know) whose covetousness that high
place of your excellency in protecting my poor estate was not able to resist,
have plunged me headlong into these designs. And withal, as he was speaking
these words, he departed out of sight, not turning his back, but as he slipped
away, modestly stepped backward, and showed still his breast afront.

CHAP. XII. The troops of the Roman horsemen discomfited and put to flight,
after the loss of the most part and a number slain, hardly recover Amida.
WHiles these occurrents happen in the compass of one half hour, the
soldiers of our rereward, who kept the upper part of the hill, cry out, That
there was another multitude of men of arms in complete harneis seen behind,
which with all the speed they could make, came forward and approached. And then,
as it commonly falls out in dangerous extremities, we being to seek against
what mischief we either ought or were able to make head, as the preasse of so
huge a multitude came still upon us, and put us to it, our ranks were broken
throughout, and we on all sides made shift every man for himself the next way
he could to fly. And whiles each one endevoreth for his own part to get out
of this great danger, dispersed here and there out of ray, we become
entermingled among our enemies, traversing the ground for to meet us at every
turn: and so fighting manfully now, without any desire at all to live, driven
we are unto the banks of Tigris, that stood on high, as it were, cut out of a
rock. From whence some being thrust headlong, stuck fast there, with their
armor and weapons encumbring them, where the river is shallow, and yields
foords: others were swallowed up and drowned in holes and whirlepits: some
joining in skirmish with the enemies, fought with variable event: others again
affrighted with their thick bands and squadrons, made have to the next wolds
of the mountain Taurus. Among whom, our leader himself being known, and
environed round with a number of fighting men, together with Aiadaltha a
Tribune and one lacquey, by swift horsemanship escaped. As for my self, whiles
I wander out of that way which the rest of my company took, and look about
me what I were best to do, I meet with Verennianus, one of the guard or
Protectores with me in ordinary, shot through the thigh with an arrow: which
whiles I assayed at my For Ammianus himself was of the band of Protectores.
fellows earnest request to pluck forth, seeing my self hemmed in on every
side, and the Persians going before me, I came apace climbing up as fast as my
wind would permit me, toward the city, situate on high on that side where we
were assailed, and whereto there was no passage but by one very narrow assent,
and the same exceeding straight, by reason that among the cloven hills there
were certain huge mounts erected of purpose in the way, to make the foot-paths
more narrow. Here entermingled pell-mell, with the Persians running forth in
the same brunt with us to the higher ground, stood we, and stirred not until
the Sun rising the next day, and so thick thrust together, that the dead
bodies of the slain, borne up with the multitude, could no where find rowme to
fall down: insomuch as a certain souldior just before my face having his head
divided and cloven with the maine stroke of a sword so, as it lay in even
halves on both shoulders, stuck pent in straight on every side in manner of a
stake: and albeit many sorts of casting-weapons and darts were from the
bulwarks discharged and shot by all kinds of engines and artillery, yet by
reason we were so near under the walls, we avoided this danger: and so at
length I entered into the city at a posterne gate, which I found full, by
occasion that a sort of both sexes, men and women, conflowed thither out of the
parts bordering upon it: for it happened also at the very same time, that a
number of people, which used every year in places by the cities side to
traffic for foreign commodities, were then met together, and so increased
the multitude of the rural folk. Mean while were heard every where sundry
and confused noyses, whiles some bewailed those that were dead and lost, others
carried about them mortal wounds, and many called upon diverse of their dearest
friends, whom for these streights they could not see.

CHAP. XIII. The description of Amida a right strong town: the munition and
garrison therein: Sapor having taken into his hands certain fortified Piles,
with great clemency entreats the captives of both sexes, and namely the
virgins consecrated and devoted to the Christian Religion, commanding them to
be kept safe.
THis city being in times past very small, Constantius then Caesar, to the end
that the inhabitants there-by, and borderers, might have a most safe place of
refuge, what time as he built Antoninupolis another town, encircled with large
walls and fair towers; and by setting there an armourie to hold engines for
battery and other artillery to be planted upon the walls, made it dreadful to
the enemies, and would needs have it called after his own name. And verily on
the South side watered it is beneath with the curving stream of Tigris that
arises near unto it: what way it stands against the East wind, it has for
prospect underneath, the plains of Mesopotamia: where it is exposed to the
North, and has the river or Nymphius.
Nympheus neighboring thereto, shaddowed it is with the tops of the mountain
Taurus, which divide the nations beyond Tygris and Armenia asunder: as it is
opposite to the West wind, it joyneth upon Gumathen, a fruitful country in
cattle, and for tillage as plentiful; wherein stands a village named
Abarne, well known for the natural hot bathes of medicinable and wholesome
waters. Now, in the very middle and heart of Amida, under the citadell, there
issues out a rich and plenteous fountain, and the same potable verily, but
otherwhiles by reason of hot vapors reaking out of it, of a strong and
stinking savor. For a garrison in defense of this town, there served always
by appointment, the fifth Legion, together with no small troop of the natural
inhabitants: but then there were six Legions, which partly with speedy
journeyes by running before, had out-gone the Persians, who in multitudes
invaded those parts and approached the place, stood to the defense of the most
strong walls it had: namely, the Magnentiaci and Those who had served under
Magnentius and Decentrus, usurpers
Decentiaci (whom after the civil warfare ended, as being deceitful and of a
turbulent spirit, the Emperor forced to come into the East, where was no fear
but of foreign wars) also the d Tricesimani and Decimi e Fortenses, likewise
the f Superventores and g Praeventores, together with Aelianus now Lieutenant,
who being as then but new untrained soldiers, at the motion and persuasion of
the said Aelianus, as then one of the Protectores, sallied out of Singara, as I
have recorded already, and slew a great number of the Persians, as they lay
along fast asleep. There was also at this piece of service the greater part of
the h Comites Sagittarij, to wit, certain troops of horsemen so termed,
wherein serve all the barbarous soldiers free borne, for good armor of proof
and clean strength of body surpassing all others. Well, whiles in the first
impression and brunt, by unexpected attempts and enterprises, these designs
are put in execution, the king in person with his own people and those nations
which were under his conduct, turning his journey toward the right hand from a
place called Bebases (according as Antoninus had given counsel) by the way of
Horte, Meiacarire, and Charcha, as if he would pass by Amida, when he was
come near unto certain fortresses of the Romans, whereof the one had to name
Reman, the other Busan, learned by the relation and intelligence given of
certain fugitives, that many men's wealth and riches was thither brought, and
kept safe thereas in holds seated very high and sure withal. They said also,
That together with household goods of great price there was found there a
beautiful dame, and her daughter a little one: the wife that lady was of one
Craugasius a Nisibene, a man of bourgesse degree, for birth, reputation, and
power of good regard and esteem. The king therefore in a greedy desire to
catch hold of other men's goods, makes have, and confidently assayleth the said
holds: whereupon the defendants in a sudden amazedness of mind, as being
affrighted with the sight of such variety of armor and weapons, betrayed all
those that fled thither for succor and defense: and when those had
commandment to depart, they presently rendered up the keys of the gates.
Thus when the entries were laid open, whatsoever had been bestowed there, was
taken forth: and the silly women astonished at the noise then made, were brought
out, yea, and the babes in their mothers arms clasping close unto them, put to
the experience (poor wretches) in the very beginning of their tender years,
of grievous miseries and calamities. Now, when as the king by enquiring and
demanding whose wife the dame aforesaid was, had found that Craugasius was her
husband, he permitted her, fearing that some violence should be offered unto
her person, confidently to come near unto him: and when he had seen her all
covered over with a black veil, saving only her very lips, he right
courteously confirmed and settled her now in a more assured hope of recovering
her husband, and the safe keeping withal of her honesty undefiled. For,
hearing that her husband was wonderfully enamoured of her, he supposed verily,
that by this price and beneficial reward he might be able to purchase the
betraying of Nisibis. And yet there were found other virgins also there, which
according to the Christian Religion were consecrated unto the service of God,
whom he commanded to be kept untouched, and to perform their religious service
after their wonted manner, without impeachment of any person whatsoever. Thus
made he semblance for the present of mildness, to the end that all those, whom
before time he terrified with cruelty, might without fear of themselves come
in, as being by such fresh and late examples persuaded, that he had now
tempered the greatness of his fortune with a civil and courteous deportment.

THE XIX. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Sapor lifted up with this small victory, besieges Amida not without
danger. The son of king Grumbates, a young gentleman, is pierced through the
body with the shot of a Balist, and with royal funerals lamented.
THe king right joyous for this miserable captivity that happened on our part,
and waiting still for the like successes, departed thence, and marching softly,
came by the third day before Amida. Now, when the daylight first appeared, all
the country over, as far as could be seen, shone again with glittering
armor and weapons, and the men of arms with their bard horses all in complete
harneis, covered both hill and dale. Himself mounted upon a courser, and
higher than the rest, advaunced before the whole army, wearing in lieu of a
diadem the resemblance of a rams head of gold, set with precious stones, all
goodly to be seen aloft, accompanied with a train of many high personages in
honorable place, and of diverse and sundry nations. And for certain it was
known, that he meant by way of parley only and no farther to sound the
defendants of the walls, as hastening by the advice of Antoninus another way.
But the heavenly power, to conclude the miseries of the whole empire of Rome
within the compass of one region, restrained and curbed him, as he infinitely
bare himself aloft, and weened verily, that upon the very sight of him all the
besieged would streightwaies for fear become heartlesse, and fall in humble
manner to entreatie. Before the gates he rode braving up and down, accompanied
with the guard of his royal band: and whiles he over-boldly engages himself
so near, as that his very visage might openly be known, a fair mark he was,
by reason of his goodly ornaments, to be shot at with arrows and other
casting-weapons; whereby he had surely been overthrown and laid along, but
that through the dust that arose from the archers and darters, they lost the
sight of him: and so with the rent of a part of his garment by the shot of a
barbed-headed javelin he gat away and escaped to do afterward an infinite deal
of mischief. Hereupon raging against them no less, than if they had been
sacrilegious spoylers of some holy temple, and giving it out, That the lord of
so many kings and nations was violated; he made great preparation, and
mightily endeavored utterly to raze and destroy the city: And when his chief
and principal captains besought him, that by falling thus into an excessive
fit of choler, he would not give over and leave his glorious-begun enterprises,
being with their most mild petition pacified, he decreed, That the morrow also
the defendants might be summoned to surrender. And therefore, at the first
breaking of the day, Grumbates king of the Chionites, to perform his diligent
service in this behalf, boldly approached the walls, having a strong guard
about him of right expert and nimble servitours: who was no sooner espied
(coming now within the reach of a dart shot) by a most skillful archer that
had a very good eye, but bending his crosse-bow, he levelled at his son in
the very prime of his youthful years as he stood close to his fathers side,
pierced his curace, and shot him through breast and all: a gallant gentleman,
for tallness of personage and goodly presence surmounting all his equals in
age. At whose fall, his countrymen slipped away every one, and fled: but
returning anon again upon good reason and due consideration, least he should
be harried away, they struck up the al'arme, and raised together a number of
nations with their dissonant outcries: by whose concourse and encounter,
whiles the darts flew to and fro as thick as hayle, there was a cruel fight:
and after deadly skirmishes, which lasted to the end of the day, when as now it
grew to be night, the corpse with much ado protected, hardly by the mist and
darkness of the night was gotten out among heaps of slain bodies and
streams running down of blood: much like, as when at Troy in times past there
was a right hot and bloody conflict about the breathless body of
[Patroclus] companion to the Thessalian leader [Achilles.] By occasion of this
death, the kings house was heavy and sad, and for that all the lords and
nobles, together with the father, were stricken with this sudden loss, after
proclamation of a vacation made, the young prince (commendable for his
nobility of birth, and well beloved) was solemnly bewailed and mourned for,
after the guise of his own nation. Being therefore carried out all armed, as
he used to be, placed he was upon a certain large and high raised terrace or
scaffold, and about him ten little beds were spread, carrying the images of
dead men, so curiously dressed and embaulmed, as that the very portraits were
like unto bodies new enterred. And thus for the space of seven days together,
all the men verily by bands and companies kept good cheer, and with dancing
and singing certain mournful kinds of dumpes and sorrowful dities, bewailed
the death of the young prince: but the women with woeful knocking of their
breasts and shedding tears after their wonted manner, piteously cried and
lamented for the hope of their nation, thus untimely cut off in the very prime
and flower of his age: like for all the world to those women priests and
worshippers of Venus, that are oftentimes seen to weep in the ordinary
feasts and solemnities of a Adonis, which mystical Religion teaches us to be
some representation of corn full grown.

CHAP. II. The description of the siege before Amida. A most terrible and hot
assault made by the Persians, which the besieged manfully sustain until night.
AFter the corpse was burnt, and the bones bestowed close within a silver pot,
which his father determined should be carried unto his own nation for to be
enterred; upon debating in counsel as touching the main chance, agreed it
was, to expiate the Manes of this young gentleman slain, with the general
fire of this city, when it was once overthrown: for Grumbates would not
endure to go any further, without revenging the ghost of his only dear son.
And after two days rest given, and a great number sent out to wast the rich
and well husbanded fields lying open after the manner of peace, the city was
environed about with a five-fold rank and course of shields: and upon the
third day betimes in the morning, the glittering troops standing round in
plumps, took up all the ground, so far as a man was able to look and see
from him: and the ranks marching with a soft and gentle pace, held their
places divided by lot unto them. All the Persians invested the circuit of the
walls: that part which looked Eastward, fell to the Chionites, which was the
quarter where the young gentleman, to the mortal mischief of us, was slain:
the Vertae were appointed to the South side, the Albanes kept the North tract,
and against the West gate were opposed the Segestans, the fiercest warriors of
all others: with whom the Elephants making a lofty show, and terrible to
behold, for their bodies full of wrinckles, paced their ground softly, as being
laden with armed men: and as we have often said, for dreadful sight
exceeding all other foul spectacles whatsoever. Beholding then so infinite a
number sought out a long time to set on fire the Roman world, and wholly bent
to work our destruction, in full despair of any safety, we took care from
thence-forth to end our lives with glory, the only thing now that we all
wished for. Well, from the Sunne-rising to the end of the day stood their
battaillons in array, as fixed fast in the ground, and never stirred, not so
much as once shifting foot, without any noise at all, or neighing of horses
heard; and in the same manner retired they as they came: but after they had
refreshed themselves with meat and sleep, before the night was fully past,
with the sound of trumpets leading the way, they beset the city round about,
and gave so terrible an assault unto it, as if within a while it would have
fallen. Scarcely had Grumbates there, like an herault at arms, launced (after
his own country fashion and our manner also) his spear died all red in
blood, but the whole army with a clattering noise of weapons mounteth up to
the walls, and straight way begins a hot and lamentable fight, whiles on the
one side these by whole troops run on violently, and with all resolution and
alacrity bend themselves to the assault: and cont^^iwise on the other, our men
were as eager and forward to encounter and receive them. Therefore it came to
pass, that huge stones thrown out of Engines so called.
Scorpions, brake many of our enemies heads in pieces, and brained them: some
were shot through with arrows, part of them having barbed darts and javelines
sticking in them, lay wounded and bespred the ground: others ran away and fled
as fast as they could toward their fellows again. Neither was there within
the city less weeping and wayling, or fewer sorts of death: whiles many a
cloud of arrows flying thick together, with a multitude of them shaddowed and
darkened the air; whiles also the engines of ordinance and artillery, which
the Persians were possessed of since the sacking of Singara, did much hurt, and
inflicted many wounds. For the defendants gathering their strength together,
and falling afresh to fight again by turns, after they had given over for a
time, in their exceeding heat of defending the town being mortally hurt, fell
down dead, or after they were torn and mangled, with their tumbling
over-turned those that stood next them: or at leastwise, whiles they were yet
alive, sought about for them that had the skill to draw forth the arrow and
dart heads that stuck fast in their bodies. Thus these slaughters happening
one in the neck of another, and continuing unto the very latter end of the
day, the very darkness of the evening had not slacked, by reason that on both
parts they were so stiffely set to fight to the outrance. After that the watch
therefore was kept by those that were heavily armed and weaponed, the hills of
the one side resounded again with the cries that were set up, whiles our men
extolled the virtues of Constantius Caesar, as the sovereign Emperor and Lord
of the world: and the Persians for their part styled Sapor both Achaemenes and
Artaxerxes, which by way of interpretation import as much, as commander of
kings, and conqueror of wars. And before the day began to peep, upon the
signal given by trumpets, inestimable numbers of forces were raised from all
sides, and flocked in manner of so many fowls to the like hot skirmishes as
before, and every way both far and wide, as a man's eye could reach before
him, the fields and dales made no show of any thing but the glittering harneis
and brandishing weapons of savage nations: and within a while, upon setting up
a mighty shout and out-crie, as they ran all rashly forth, a huge deal of
casting-weapons flew from the walls: and, as we might well think, none were
discharged in vain, falling as they did amongst a number of men that stood so
thick together. For, considering we were beset round with so many dangers, we
bore our selves in fight right fiercely, not because we would save our lives,
as I said, but for that we desired to die manfully: and from the beginning of
day until twy-light in the evening, the victory swayed to no side; but still
there was fighting on all hands more fiercely than advisedly: For there arose
hideous outcries of one terrifying and frighting another; so that for heat of
courage hardly could any man stand his ground, without receiving some hurt or
other. And at length, as the night made an end of slaughtering, so the satietie
of painful travails yielded to both parts a longer respite and cessation of
fight. For, when as we had time given to rest, that little strength which
remained in us, continual labor and want of sleep consumed quite: and
withal, the bloodshed upon the ground, and the wan faces of them that lay a
dying, made us exceedingly afraid: and verily the narrow and straight rowme
within the circuit of the city, which was none, ywis, of the greatest, would
not permit so much as the last comforts yet, of burying the dead, considering
that there were enclosed within the same, legions, and a confused sort of
strangers and citizens one with another of both sexes; besides some other few
soldiers raised, to the number in all of twenty thousand. Well, every man
cured his own wounds, according as they were curable, or could meet with
leeches ynow to look unto them; considering, that some were so grievously
wounded, that with the spending of their blood to the last drop, they gave up
their vital spirits, struggling still for life: others being stabbed into the
body with sharp pointed weapons, lay along on the earth, and when they had
given their last gasps, were thrown forth dead. There were again, who had so
many deep gashes and holes on every side in their lims, that their skillful
and learned chiru^gians forbade them once to go about the cure, for fear
least the grievous handling of them taking no effect, their poor afflicted
souls should be more tormented: lastly, diverse there were, who with the
plucking out of arrows, where the cure was doubtful, abid torture more
dolorous than death.

CHAP. III. The care that Vrsicinus had for helping the besieged, whiles
Sabinianus slept till he snored again, remaining still as dead among the
Sepulchers. The Plague infesteth the Amidens, and after some few days by fall
of smallshowers cease.
WHiles the fight continued thus at Amida with full resolution and purpose of
both sides, vrsicinus taking it heavily, that he depended upon the will and
pleasure of another man's authority, oftentimes advertised Sabinianus, being
then in greater place of government and command over the soldiers (but keeping
still among the Sepulchers) That putting in readiness and order all the
skirmishing soldiers, they should closely make speed by the bottom and foot
of the hills: that having by the means and help of light armor (if fortune
were any thing favorable unto them) intercepted the stations, they might set
upon the enemies night-watches, which taking a mighty compass about, had
invested the walls, or by often provocation and urging, find them occupied that
so stoutly plied the siege. Which projects of his, Sabinianus stood against, as
hurtful and dangerous; pretending verily in show, the Emperors letters openly
giving commandment, That what service soever might be done, should be
performed every where, without hurt or touch of souldior: but secretly in the
bottom of his heart root retaining that which he was charged many a time in
the court to do, namely to disappoint his Vrsicinus.
predecessor, so much inflamed with the love and desire of glory, of all
means and occasions to win honor, though the same might tend to the benefit
of the State; such have was made even with the utter destruction of the
provinces, that this warlike Vrsicinus.
knight might not be reported the author or copartener of any memorable
exploit. And therefore, much abashed and dismayed with these hard fortunes, as
booting naught by sending spies often unto us, although the ways were laid so
by straight watch and ward, that hard it was for any man to enter into the
town: and gaining as little by devising many good and profitable courses, he
resembled for all the world a Lion, for big body and grim look terrible, but
not daring to go and deliver out of danger his whelps enclosed within net and
toil, as having his claws taken from him, and lost his teeth. But within the
city, where the number of dead bodies lying thick scattered along the
streets, was greater than of such as were to perform that last duty of
burial, to mitigate so many miseries beside, came the pestilence, occasioned
by a contagious infection of puttified carcasses breeding by this time vermin
in them, and maintained with hot vapors and sundry diseases of the common
multitude. These kinds of maladies whence they use to arise, I will briefly
declare. The Philosophers and renowned Physicians have written, That excess of
cold, of heat, of moisture, or dryness, breeds plagues. Whence it is, that
those who dwell hard by fennie, moorie, and wet grounds, are subject to
coughes, to the Ioc^lares casus quare, whether he meant not de fura cuno ris^:
a kind of madness with extreme fits of laughter: understanding by Casus.
(...), or (...), according to the Greek phrase.
falling sickness, and such like: contrariwise, they that confine upon hot
countries, are dried up with the heat of fevers: But look how much more
powerful than other things is the substance of fire, so much is drought i more
quick to kill. Hereupon it came to pass, that when Greece was employed
painefully in a war continuing ten years, that a k stranger might not go
away unpunished for breaking the bond of a kings marriage, by such a malady
that reigned and came by the arrows of Apollo, who is deemed to be the Sun,
a number perished: and as Thucidides shows, That woeful calamity which in
the beginning of the l Peloponnesiacke war vexed the Athenians with a
grievous kind of sickness, crept by little and little from the hot climate of
Aethyopia, and so set foot in Attica. Others are of opinion, That the air
(like as waters use to be) infected and corrupted with the stink of dead
carcasses, or such like, is the greatest cause of most diseases: or at
leastwise, that the sudden alteration and change of air breeds lighter m
sicknesses. Some also affirm, That the air (thickened by some gross
exhalation of the earth, and thereby resisting the letting forth of the subtle
matter that uses to breath out of the pores of the body) kills some: for
which cause, all other living creatures, besides men, which continually look
down to the ground, Homer once said, and we our selves know by many
experiments afterward, die thereof at first. The first kind of this contagious
malady is called n Pandemus, which causes those that dwell in dry places to
be troubled many times with extraordinary heats: the second, o Epidemus, at
which time as it does invade, it dimmeth the quick light of the eyes, and
stirs up perilous humors: the third is p Loemodes, which likewise is
temporary, but speedily dispatcheth and kills. With this deadly and mortal
plague were they here shaken: and after some few consumed with intemperate
heat, whom the pestering multitude stifled, at length, in that night which
followed the tenth day, when by some small showers the gross and thick air
was dissolved and scattered, the bodies recovered and retained again their
firm and perfect health.

CHAP. IIII. When the city was encircled round about with hurdle-Fabrickes, by
the means of a certain towns man the Persians become masters of an high
tower, from whence cunningly they scatter fire-darts among the besieged, and by
all means molest them, and upon the winning of a pile called Ziatum, cruelly
fall upon many thousands of prisoners.
But in this time the restless Persian king compassed the city round about
with hurdle-workes, and began to raise platformes against it: then were there
also framed high towers with fronts bound with iron, and upon the top of every
of them Balists planted, that they might drive the defendants from their
bulwarks: howbeit, the slingers and archers ceased not so much as one minute
of an hour to make light skirmishes. Now there were with us the two legions,
Magnentiae, newly brought out of Gaul, as I have said before, the same
consisting of valiant men, active and nimble, meet for fight on even and plain
ground; but for that manner of service and war whereto we were tied, not
only unfit, but contrariwise also exceeding unruly and troublesome: Who, when
they would not lend their helping hand to any man in engine-worke, nor making
of bulwarks and fortifications, used foole-hardily to fallie forth and fight
most courageously, but came home fewer than they went, doing no more good than
one handful of water, as men say, in a common (...)-fire. At the last, when
the gates were locked Fast up, and they for all the entreatie that their
Tribunes made, might not issue forth, they fretted and gnashed their teeth like
wild beasts. But certain days after, their valor and effectual service was
seen above all others, as I will declare. In a by-place or corner of the South
part of the wall which looks down to the river Tigris, there stood a tower
rising to a great height, under which certain craggie and broken rocks lay
gaping open, so that a man could not look down into them without horrible
dizzines and turning of the brain: from whence by vaults hollowed under the
ground along the foot of the mountain, certain stairs workmanly and finely
polished, led unto the very plain plot of the city, whereby to the end that
water might privily and by stealth be drawn out of the rivers channel, a
devise that we have seen in all the forts and strong holds throughout those
countries which lie hard to rivers. Through this dark angle not regarded by
reason of the broken rock, with the guidance of a certain townes-man
fugitive, who had revolted to the contrary side, seventie Persians, archers,
chosen out of the kings regiment, very cunning and bold withal, guarded with
the silence of that remote and by-place aforesaid, suddenly at midnight
climbed one by one up to the third story or loft of the above said tower: and
when they had lien there close hidden, in the morning they put out a soldiers
coat of a red color, which was a signal or token to begin battle: which
done, when they perceived once that the city was environed round on every
side, with forces that flowed like waves upon it, after they had emptied their
quivers, and cast them at their feet, with clamorous yellings and shouts they
set all on fire, bestowing their arrows abroad right cunningly. And then anon
all the army in thick set squadrons assailed the city much more eagerly than
before. Whiles we within were uncertain and doubtful which way to turn us,
and to make head; against these that stood above and molested us, or against
the multitude, that by skaling were already at hand to take hold upon the very
bulwarks? thus was the service divided among us. Five of the lighter kind of
balists were removed out of their own places, and planted against the tower:
the which discharging very quickly wodden darts, otherwhiles pierced through
two of them at once. Some of them hereupon greevouslie wounded fell down:
others for fear of the engines making such a noise, were cast headlong, and so
with their bodies sore mangled, died: which being dispatched with great
celeritie and expedition, and the said engines brought back again to their
wonted places, with somewhat better security we ran on all hands to the
defense of the walls. And for that the wicked act of this fugitive increased
our soldiers trouble and care, as if they were encountering in the very plain,
they bestirred their strong arms so lustily in discharging diverse sort of
casting-weapons, that the Vertae, who were quartered against the South Side,
now repulsed and set back with many a smart wound, and weeping for the death
of many their fellows, retired in fear unto their tents. Thus fortune
breathed upon us some hope of safety, considering we had passed one day not
taking hurt our selves, and doing hurt unto our enemies: the rest of which day
being granted for rest, to refresh our wearied bodies; behold, the next
morning betimes we discover from the citadel an infinite number of people,
which upon the winning of the fort Ziata were led into the enemies land: for,
unto that place being strong, and of very great receipt, (as taking up in
compass ten stadia) the multitude one with another of all sorts had fled for
safety. For there were other holds also about that time won and burnt, whence
many thousands of folks were taken forth, and followed after into captivity.
Among whom, many men for old age, feeble, and women also now far stricken in
years, when as they fainted upon sundry causes, as being offended with
travailing so far, casting off all desire to live any longer, had the calves
of their legs or hough-strings cut, and so were left behind.

CHAP. V. The soldiers of Gaul requiring leave to encounter the enemy, and
impatient of delay, charge upon the king of Persia, guarded with a power of one
hundred thousand fighting men, and kill a number that lay fast asleep: but
being almost beset round about with other companies that came running in, with
the loss of four hundred retire unto the city. After this, their leaders had
by commandment from Constantius armed Statues erected for them.
THese pitiful and miserable troops of captives the Gaulois soldiers
beholding, upon a reasonable motive verily, although it were unseasonable,
demanded leave to encounter the enemy in plain fight, threatening to kill the
Tribunes, if they forbad them, and the principal corporals of every company,
if afterward they should prohibit them. And like as savage beasts with keen
and fell teeth kept up in grated cages, and made more fierce and cruel with
their foul and filthy keeping, upon hope to get out, rush and bounce against
the bars that turn and wind within their sockets: even so fell they to
hewing and hacking with their swords the gates, which (as I said before) were
kept locked, as wonderfully troubled in mind, least either when the city was
rased and destroyed, they also should perish, without the achievement of some
brave and glorious exploit: or if it happened to be delivered from dangers,
they might be reported to have done no worthy and memorable act beseeming the
magnanimity of the Gauls: albeit before time, when they had often issued
forth, and attempted to impeach the pioners, as well casters up of banks, as
makers of plat-formes, yea, and killed some, themselves received the like at
their hands. We then destitute altogether of good counsel, and doubting what
we should set against them in their way, raging in this wise as they did, at
length made choice of this course above the rest, although themselves would
hardly yield their assent unto it, namely, that seeing they could no longer be
endured, after some short pause and stay made, they might be permitted to set
upon the watch and ward of the enemies, that were placed not far out of the
darts shot, to the end, that when they had broken through them, they might
proceed on still further. For apparent it was, That if they chieved well in
this enterprise, they would make foul work, and commit some notable carnage
among them. Whiles preparation is made for this design, by sundry sorts of
fight and skirmish, the walls were valiantly still defended, what with pains
taking and continual watching, and what with planting of engines and ordnance,
to discharge from all parts both stones and casting-weapons; yet were there two
high banks erected by the hands of Persian footmen, and the winning of the
city was intended by long work (...) taking leisure thereto: against which,
with the more earnest care and endeavor of our men also, were raised exceeding
mighty mounts, topping equally the height of the terraces or banks affronting
them, and such as would bear the greatest weight that might be of defendors.
Mean while, the Gauls impatient of all delays, armed with axes and swords,
went out at a posterne gate set open for them, taking the vantage of a dark
night, when the Moon was in the change, praying unto the heavenly power to be
good and favorable unto them, and withal holding their very wind as they
went: now when they drew near, all in a thick plumpe they ran violently, and
after they had slain some of the standing warders, killing also the utmost
watch of the camp (as who fearing no such matter, lay sound asleep) they
thought and fully purposed secretly with them, if they had good luck, and sped
any thing well, suddenly to come upon the king himself, and to surprise him.
But their sleep being broken with hearing the noise of them that fell down,
and the groaning of such as were slain, a number of the enemies were raised,
and when every man for his part cried, Arm, Arm, these venturous soldiers
stood still and stirred not a foot, as not daring to pass on further: for it
was no point of wary policy, since those were awakened whom they laid in wait
for, to run rashly upon an open hazard. Now when as whole companies of Persians
fuming and fretting on every side, came hotely set to fight, the Gauls on the
other side with strong bodies and undaunted boldness, so long as they could
hold out, slashed and hewed all them with their swords that stood in their way,
and some of their own side were either beaten down or shot into the body,
with a number of arrows flying about their ears on every hand. When they
perceived therefore all the danger bent amain to one place, and whole
squadrons of their enemies running toward them, they made have to get away, and
yet not one of them turned his back: and so being driven without the rampire,
retyring by little and little, as it were, by sound of the measures, when they
could no longer endure the bands so thick assayling them, with the noise of
the trumpets from the camp they were sore troubled, and so departed: also
while many trumpets and cornets resounded out of the city, the gates were set
open to receive our men, if happily they could possibly return so far; yea,
and the engines of artillery kept a great rattling, without shot of any dart:
to the end that both the captains of the stations and wards, after their
fellows were slain, might be driven to go behind, as not knowing that they
stood against the naked walls of the city, and that those hardy and valiant
men might be received without taking harm. And so by this stratageme and
cunning device, the Gauls having their number lessened, entered the gate when
it was twylight wounded, some deadly, others lightly, and having lost in that
nights work four hundred of their fellows: who, if some more violent chance
had not withstood them, would have killed in the very tents, not q Rhesus, nor
the Thracians, lying encamped before the walls of Troy, but the king of the
Persians, guarded with an hundred thousand armed men. For the leaders and
trainers of these Gauls, as being the chiefetaines of valiant deeds, after
the city was destroyed and raced, the Emperor commanded, there should be
their statues all armed set up at Edessa, in a country of great resort: which
statues are kept there sound and entire unto this present.

CHAP. VI. Great sorrow and lamentation in the Persians army for the slaughter
of their nobles and potentates, and three days cessation of arms: which being
past, the Amidens are fiercely assaulted, but the Persians valiantly repulsed:
howbeit the next morning by day light they renew the combat.
THe day following, when the dead bodies were discovered, and noble potentates
and great lords found among the carcasses of the slain, the dissonant cries
and tears together showed sundry mishaps in sundry places, every where
nothing was heard but sorrowful mourning and indignation of the kings,
supposing that the Romans had broken in among them through the corpse deguard
placed against the walls: and for that a truce was granted by common consent
for three days, we also took a time to breath our selves. After this, these
nations (sore troubled and made more wood with so new and strange an accident)
setting aside all further trifling and delay, thought good now to try the
quarrel by raising maine fabrickes and other fortifications, since that fine
force sped no better: and thus in the heat of their blood, meaning to put the
matter to the extremity of wars, they all hastened now either to die with
honor, or else to make satisfaction unto the ghosts of them that were slain,
with the downfall and utter ruin of the city. And now by this time, when
they had on all hands with alacrity and cheerfulness finished their
furniture and preparation accordingly, no sooner was the day star up, but
sundry sorts of fabrickes and turrets, bound with iron bars, were set close
to the walls: in the high tops whereof were balists fitly placed, which removed
the defendants that kept lower. And by that time it grew to be fair daylight,
the sky all over was under-spread with a seeling, as it were, of iron harneis;
and the battaillons thick set together, marched, not out of rank disorderly,
as before, but directed by the mild sound of the trumpet, without any of them
running rashly forth of their array, covered all the while with roofes or pent
houses over their heads, and having before them wicker hurdles made of rods for
a fence. And when they drew so near, as that they were within dart-shot, the
Persian footmen, for all they held their shields before them, unneth avoiding
the arrows shot from the walls out of brakes, crosse-bowes, and other engines,
displayed and opened their ranks wider: and for as much as there was no kind
in manner of casting-weapons that did light in vain, even those that came
heavily armed at all pieces, were daunted, and by their reculing made our men
the bolder and more courageous. Howbeit, because our enemies Balists, planted
upon their yron-bound turrets, being of force from above to annoy and
displease whatsoever was somewhat under them, as the place was unequal; so the
effect and event was unlike, whereby they made foul bloodshed among us. Now
when the evening came on apace, so that both sides rested, the greater part of
the night was spent in devising what means might meet with so horrible a
mischief. And in the end, after we had cast and projected many ways, we
resolved upon this device, which by putting quickly into execution, proved the
safer, namely, that against those balists aforesaid four scorpions should be
planted full affront. Which while they were removed and placed over against
them warily (a matter of great difficulty and skill) the day comes, to us
most woeful, showing the dreadful bands of the Persians, with whole herds and
troops of Elephants joining close unto them, which made such a braying noise,
and their bodies withal carried so huge a boulke, as a man's mind cannot
conceive a more terrible and fearful sight. And when we were on al sides put
to it, what with violent weapons, huge fabrics, and hideous beasts, by the
means of our Scorpions or Sockets.
iron slings, round stones driven otherwhiles from out of the bulwarks, brake
the joints of their turrets, and overthrew both the Balists and their benders
so headlong, that some without woundhurts; others, crushed with huge and heavy
weights, perished; and the Elephants with great violence were set further off:
which beasts being on all sides encumbred with flames of fire thrown among
them, that had now taken hold of their bodies, and going thereupon backward,
their masters could not hold: and afterward, when the munitions and fabrickes
were burnt, they skirmished yet still, and gave not over. For, the king
himself of the Persians, who is never forced to be personally in any
battle, sore moved with these tempestuous infortunities, after a new manner,
never exampled or known before, like unto a souldior that is used to fight a
field, leapt forth into the thickest of them: and because he was more goodly
and brave to be seen of them that looked a far off, than the other multitude
of such as guarded and protected him, many a casting-dart was thrown at him:
and when a number of the guard and squires of his body were laid along, he
went clear away, changing alternatively by turns the battaillons easy to be
ruled: and to the very end of the day, not affrighted with the fearful sight
either of those that were a dying, or of wounds given and taken, at length he
permitted some small time to be granted for rest. But when the night came and
ended the conflict, and that in so small a time he had taken a short sleep, no
sooner grew it to be daylight, but he boiling with anger and dolor, and
minding to set no regard of right before his eyes, excited his people against
us, for to win what he hoped for. And when after their fabrickes and
plat-formes were burnt, as I have showed, they attempted to fight along the
high terraces next unto the walls: out of the mounts raised up within forth,
our men, so far as they were able to do or strain, with equal force
resisted on the high ground. And a long time continued there a bloody
battle, neither for fear of death stirred one man of any side, nor gave over
his endeavor, to make good their places. The conflict being drawn out and
continued thus far, when the fortune of the sides was ruled by an inevitable
event, that mount or terrace of ours that had cost so long labor about it, as
if it had been shaken with some earthquake, fell down forward: and the space
that lay hollow and gaped between the wall and the heap of earth cast up
withoutforth, laid now even and plain, as it were, by a causey or bridge set
over it, made an open passage and entrance for the enemies, and the same by no
bars in the way impeached: and so the most part of our soldiers that were
thus cast down, ceased their fight, either overwhelmed with earth, or weakened
with travail. Howbeit, there was running on all sides to put back so sudden
a danger, and whiles with have making they entangled one another, the enemies
grew the bolder and more venturous for their good success.

CHAP. VII. At length, when all the forces were from all parts sent for and
assembled together, Amida by the power thereof is won. Some of the garrison
soldiers escape: and among them Ammianus Marcellinus, who by swift flight save
themselves. Sapor after he had crucified Aelianus, a lieutenant, and certain
Roman Tribunes, sought carefully for all the Transtigritores, and put them to
the sword.
BY reason therefore that the king commanded all the brigands and robbers to
be sent for, and naked swords were bent against one another breast, when by
occasion of infinite slaughter there was nothing but bloodshed on both sides,
the ditches were filled up with bodies, and thereby a broader way laid open:
and the city thus pestered with concourse of forces still sharp set and hot
upon execution, when all hope was cut off either of longer defense or escape by
flight, hewn in pieces they were pell-mell one with another, armed soldiers
and unarmed weaklings, and no regard of sex was made. Wherefore, when it began
to be dark in the evening, and as yet a number of our men (though adverse
fortune stood and strived against them) by joining in fight were held occupied,
and had their hands full, I (with two others) lying hidden through the benefit
of the dark night, in a certain secret place of the town, got forth at a
posterne gate, where there was no watch kept: and having some help by the
skill I had of desert places and the swift speed that my companions made, came
at length as far as to a station or baiting place at ten miles end: wherein
after we had been moderately refreshed, and were about to go forward still on
ourway, and my self was now overcome with too much travail, as a gentleman
not used to such toil, I found a terrible object to see to, but yet that which
to me (so wearied and tired out as I was) yielded passing great comfort. One of
these campelacqueyes or soldiers pages riding upon a swift horse without
saddle and bitt or bridle, to the end that he might not drop off his back,
tied very straight and short unto his left hand the halter or cord, wherewith,
as the manner is, he was used to be led and guided: and within a while after
chauncing to be cast, and not able to break in sunder the knot of the bond
that held him fast, had all his lims piteously rent and mangled, as he was
dragged through desert wilds and forests, and so with the weight of his
carcass restrained back the beast, which by this time also was spent and
tired out with running. The service of which jade thus caught, I making use of
for the time, came with much ado together with the said companions of mine, to
certain fountains of waters naturally hot, standing upon a vein of
brimstone. And for that by reason of the hot weather we being over-taken with
drought and thirst, went softly seeking a great while for water, and so spied
at length a very deep pit, not able either to go down into it for the depth
it carried, nor having any cords or ropes about us, we being taught by
extreme necessity what to do in this case, did cut the linen shirts that we
were lapped in, into small pieces: whereof having drawn out a rope of a
mighty length, we took a quilt which one of our company wore under his
morrion, and put the same to the nether end of it: which being by the said rope
let down into the pit, and drinking in water like a sponge or dishclout,
quickly quenched the thirst wherewith we were in manner consumed. From thence
we went apace unto the river Euphrates, minding to cross the water unto the
further bank, by a vessel which a long time was wont to give attendance
therein that tract, for to ferrie over both horse and man. But behold, we
might discover a far off a regiment of Romans, with their horsemens guidons
disranked and broken, which a multitude of Persians pursued; and we wist not
whence it was, that in so sudden violence they charged thus the backs of the
other, marching on their way. By which example, thus presented to our eyes, we
believe verily, That those earth-begotten giants arose not out of the bowels
and bosoms of the earth, but were borne indeed so exceeding swift: whom, for
that they were seen suddenly in diverse places (Sparti commonly they termed
them) men supposed to have started out of the ground, so fabulously does
antiquity extol this thing, as above all others beside. This unhappie
occurrent made us bestirre our stumpes, and for that all the help we had to
save our selves, lay in swift footmanship, we made speed through greves and
groves toward the high mountains, and so from thence we came to Melitina, a
town in the less Armenia: and there having met with our captain, we
accompanied him, now ready to take his journey, and visited Antiochia again.
Mean while, Sapor and the Persians, because they might not now march into the
inland parts of the country, considering it grew toward the end of Autumn,
and the star named the Kids, were risen, driving their captives and other
booties before them, intended to return home into their own country. Among
these executions nevertheless and riflings of the city thus rased, when
Aelianus the Comes.
lieutenant, and those Tribunes (through whose valiant service the walls stood
so long defended, and so many Persians slain) were villanously hanged upon
gibbets, Iacobus and Cesius, the Numerataij.
Registers or Notaries belonging to the office of the General of the Horsemen
and other of the Protectores were led away prisoners, with their hands
pinnioned behind their backs. But the inhabitants beyond Tigris, straightly
laid for, were all massacred every mothers child, without respect of degree,
from the highest to the lowest.

CHAP. VIII. The wife of Craugasius a nobleman, taken captive, sends for her
husband, who abode at Nisibis with Romanus a Prefect, and the garrison
soldiers there: who craftily makes an escape, and comes to the Persians
host: and thus having recovered his wife, is advaunced to new dignities and
honors by Sapor, who, by report, in that siege of Amida lost thirty thousand
fighting men.
But the wife of Craugasius (who keeping still her chastity unstained, was
honored as a noble dame) mourned as though she were to see another world
without her husband, albeit she hoped by fresh and present examples, of better
and more happy fortune. Casting therefore and providing for her own good, and
far forecasting accidents to come, troubled she was with a twofold thought,
as one detesting both widowhood and wedlock. Whereupon she secretly dispatched
a very trusty familiar friend of hers, and one that knew well all the coasts
and quarters of Mesopotamia, with direction to enter into Nisibis by the
mountain Zagrus, between two garrison fortresses, Miride and Lorne;
requesting her husband by a special message and some secret tokens of matters
privily passed between them twain, That after he was informed what occurrents
had happened, he would come over, to live with her a blessed life. With these
instructions this passenger being to his content furnished, and withal
lightly appointed, through blind ways in forests and shrubbie places he hieth
apace, and enters into Nisibis: where he pretended this to be his errand,
namely, That for as much as his mistress was no where to be seen, and
peradventure murdered, he having espied means to make an escape, departed
out of the enemies camp. And so being not regarded, as one that was but a base
fellow, he informed Craugasius of all that had been done: and soon after,
having taken his faithful promise, That if he might with safety, he would
follow his wife; the messenger gat away from thence, glad man that he was,
bringing unto the woman news that she so long wished for. Who knowing thus
much, by the mediation of Marquess Sapor made a supplication to the king, That
before he departed out of the Roman marches, he would (if it might
conveniently be done) of his gracious favor grant and command, That her
husband might come under his power and protection. Now when the said stranger,
so suddenly come, was as soon gone before any man looked for it (for indeed
he presently returned in secret manner, and without the privitie of any,
slipped away) Marquess Cassianus struck with a deep suspicion of the thing,
and other great captains there in place of government and command, came
roughly upon Craugasius, and threatened to put him to death, crying with open
mouth, That the man neither came nor went without his will. But he fearing to
be charged as a traitor, and troubled exceeding much in mind, for fear least
by the revolt of some fugitives thither, intelligence might be given, That his
wife remained living, and was most kindly entreated; by way of semblance
affected marriage with another brave and noble virgin: and so pretending that
he would provide things necessary for his nuptial feast, went forth to a
village standing eight miles from the town, and so with all the speed and have
he could make, fled to a company of Persian forrayers that were abroad to wast
the country, of whom he had intelligence that they approached: and being gladly
of them received, and known by the words he spoke who he was, after five days
delivered he was to Sapor, and by him to the king. So after he had recovered
his goods, which had been taken from him, and all his dearest friends,
together with his wife, whom for some few months he had lost, he was in a
second place next unto Antoninus; howbeit, as the excellent Poet says, Longo
proximus intervallo, i. next indeed, but yet a great way off. For he having a
notable wit, and grounded besides by long experience of the world, was a very
sufficient man, and able by some policy to compass whatsoever he took in
hand: whereas Craugasius was by nature very simple, yet in name as well
renowned and much spoken of. And these things verily happened not long after.
But the king, albeit in his countenance he made show of security, and seemed
in outward appearance to rejoice for the destruction of this city, yet greatly
disquieted and grieved deeply at the heart he was, when he cast up his
accounts, and found, how he had many times sustained lamentable losses in
these dangerous and mischievous sieges, yea, and that himself had lost far
more of his own people than he had taken of our men alive, or slain at
leastwise in so many skirmishes. Like as it fell out diverse times at Nisibis
and Singara: and semblably having for seventie three days beleaguered Amida
with a multitude of armed soldiers, he lost thirty thousand fighting men and
good warriors: which within a while after were by Discenes a Tribune and
Notarie reckoned the easier, by this difference observed: for that the
carcasses of our men slain soon become fantome, do burst, run out, and turn
all to putrefaction; insomuch, as after four days be past, no dead man can be
known by his face: but the bodies of the Persians slain, wax dry and stark
as stakes, so that neither their lims become soft, nor moistened with any
matter, or corrupt blood, wherein they are embrued: the cause hereof is their
frugall manner of living, and the land wherein they be borne and bred, so
parched with heat.

CHAP. IX. Rome is distressed with dearth and scarcity of victuals. Tertullus
Prefect of the city, by a wise Oration reclaimeth the people in an uprore,
and brings them to good order. Upon the change of wind ships freight with
corn drive away the said want. Constantius prepares an expedition against the
rebellious Sarmatians.
WHiles these affairs are carried on end by sundry whirle-puffes in the
utmost marches of the East, the immortal city Rome feared a dearth coming
for default and scarcity of corn: and Tertullus Prefect at the same time,
through the violence of the commons very full of their menaces, as fearing
famine, the worst calamity of all others, was otherwhiles sore troubled, but
without all reason, I assure you: for it was not long of him that victual was
not brought in convenient time by shipping, which being arrived as fair as to
the next bays, partly the roughness of the sea, which was more angry than
ordinary, and partly tempests of contrary winds affrighted with doubt of
great perils from putting into the haven of Augustus. For which cause, the said
Prefect being often disquieted with seditious commotions, and by reason that
the common people took on and raged more fully now, as being vexed for the
imminent mischief that they feared, out of all hope to save his life, as he
thought; unto the people thus keeping a sore stir in tumultuous wise (and yet
using aforetime wisely to consider of such accidents) presented his little
sons and shedding tears: Behold (quoth he) your fellow citizens and
countrymen, who shall endure (but the gods in heaven forfend the Osse) the
same hard distress together with you, unless some better fortune shine upon
us. If therefore, by the loss and destruction of these, ye think that no
heavy calamity can light upon you, here am I ready at your command. By
which pitiful object, the common sort (inclined of their own nature to
clemency) became appeased and held their peace, patiently waiting for that lot
which should befall unto them. And anon (such was the will and pleasure of the
divine power which has advaunced Rome from the first infancy thereof, and
given answer, That it should continue for ever) whiles Tertullus was offering
sacrifice at Ostia in the temple of Castor and Pollux, a calm came that
allayed the sea, and the wind turning about, and changing to be mild South,
the ships with full sail entered the haven, and filled the garners with corn.
Whiles Constantius among these occurrents was thus doubtful what to do, as
who still in his Winter repose at Sirmium sat carking and musing upon the
matter, thoroughly moved and troubled he was with fearful and heavy news,
showing that which he then was much afraid of, namely, how the Limigantes of
Sarmatia, who (as I have showed before) had expelled their own lords and
masters out of their ancient seats and possessions, having by little and little
neglected those places, which the year past in a good and profitable policy
were set out and appointed for them, least (as they are a fickle and unconstant
nation) they should rise and plot some mischief to the State, had now seized
into their hands the countries confining upon their limits, and after their
inbred manner raunged abroad licentiously, ready to set all in an hurrie and
combustion, if they were not removed and put back. Which outrages of theirs,
the Emperor supposing that they would shortly grow to prowder terms, if the
business were deferred, having gathered together from all parts a number of
most expert and active soldiers, took the field in the beginning of the
Spring, before it was yet come to the height; the more forward to this
expedition in two respects, for that the army full of rich booties, since the
end of the late Summer was confidently upon the like hope emboldened to the
achievement of prosperous exploits: and again, because Anotolius at that time
fitting as sc. Pratorio.
Prfect for Illyricum, there was abundance of all necessary provision gotten
together already, even before the ordinary time, without the loss and
hinderance to any man. For, never by the dispose and order set down of any
other Praefectship unto this present (as all men confess and avouch)
flourished the Northren provinces in all blessings, as which by a friendly
correction and wise reformation of some that did amiss and erred, were cased
of the great losses they had by waggonage and other carriage, that undid an
infinite number, and made them shut up their doors, and delivered from the
professing and acknowledgement of every man's worth in the Subsidy book,
under a goodly show of trust. And thenceforth the inhabitants of those parts
might have lived exempt from hurt, and been saved harmless, considering all
matters of quarrels and complaints were hushed: but that afterward the odious
and detestable titles of matters exquisitely sought out and devised, and the
same amplified and aggravated in criminous wise by those that both exhibit and
admit such bills, whiles these of the one side strain and strive to have their
power and authority settled and continued to them still, and those of the
other hoped, if all men were shrigged of their goods, and left bare, they
should live in safety, grew at length to open proscriptions and hanging of
silly innocent persons. Well, the Emperor, as I have said, for the redress of
that urgent outrage and enormitie, having in stately and glorious manner (with
all his furniture and provision) put himself on his journey, came to Valeria a
province, sometime part of Pannonia, but in the honor of Valeria, daughter of
Dioclesian, first instituted and so named: and encamping with his army (lying
spread under their tents) along the banks of the river Ister, observed the
Barbarians; who before his coming (under a color and pretense of friendship)
minded by stealth to invade and wast Pannonia in the very hardest time of
Winter, considering that the Snow was not yet melted by the warmth of the
Spring, whereby the said river remained passable every where, and our soldiers
hardly could endure to stay longabroad and lie without door in frostie weather.

CHAP. X. He goes about to appease the Limigantes of Sarmatia, who pretending
that they craved peace, all on a sudden in raging wise, with weapon in hand,
set upon him, and force him to shift for himself by running away: But within a
while after, as men destined to destruction, they were all put to the sword.
FOrthwith therefore having sent unto the Limigantes two Tribunes with one
interpreter apeece, in very modest terms, by way of asking the question, he
required to know, What the reason was, that leaving their houses assigned unto
them at their request, after peace and covenants of league concluded, they
wandered abroad so disorderly in sundry places, and did violence upon our
limits, all prohibitions in that behalf notwithstanding? Who alleging for
their excuse certain frivolous and vain reasons, whiles fear forced them to
lie, besought the prince to pardon them, and entreated him, That all grudges
and displeasures forgotten, he would permit them to pass over the river, and
come before him, where they would relate what harms and damages they
sustained: and were pressed and ready, if it might stand with his pleasure, to
take lands far remote, so they lay within the compass of the Roman world,
as men nuzzeled in long rest and peace, worshipping Quietness as a goddess of
health, and would both undergo the burdens and bear the name of Tributaries.
The Emperor taking knowledge hereof, after the return of the Tribunes
aforesaid, leaping for joy, as if the affair which he deemed most difficult
and in explicable, would fully be dispatched without any pains taking,
admitted them all to his presence, as one inflamed with an hot desire still of
having and getting more: which humor of his, all the crew of flatterers about
him followed and fed, who without all measure filled his ears with these and
such like speeches, That now having stilled all foreign troubles, and made
peace in every place, he should gain a number of r proletarie subjects to
multiply and beget issue, and be able to levy and muster a most puissant
fry of young soldiers: for provincial people will be most willing to give
gold for the saving of their bodily labor; I take this to be spoken in the
person of the author.
which hope has diverse times hindered and endangered the state of Rome. And
therefore after he had placed a rampire near to Kamets. Simlero.
Acunincum, and erected an high terrace or bank like unto a Tribunal, diverse
ships manned with certain legionarie soldiers lightly appointed, were by
commandment set to keep the channel of the river next unto the banks,
together with Innocentius, sometime a land measurer, who gave this counsel; to
the end, that if they perceived once the barbarous people to stir, whiles
they were bent another way, the said soldiers might charge upon their backs.
And the Limigantes, of whom no man was aware, albeit they perceived some have
and hurrie made yet devising nothing on the head and rashly, stood bowing
forward, thinking deeply in their hearts of other matters, far different
from what they pretended in gesture and speech. Now, when they saw the Emperor
addressing himself from an high pulpit to make a most mild Oration, and ready
to speak unto them, as people that would soon be tractable and obedient; one
of them in a terrible fit of fury having flung with a violence his shoo at the
Tribunal cried out Marha, Marha, which among them is the watch word and
signal to begin a fray and skirmish: And the rude multitude seconding him
presently, put up a Barbarian banner, and with a loud outcrie, after a wild and
savage manner, advaunced forward against the prince himself. Who looking down
from aloft, when he saw the multitude running to and fro in every place with
their casting darts, and that by reason of their drawn swords and rapiers he
was like to come presently to some mischief; entermingling himself with his
own people and strangers, and not known whither he was a captain or a
souldior, because there was no time now either to linger or to sit still,
being mounted upon a swift stead, he gallopped away with bridle in neck, and
escaped. Yet some few yeomen of the guard, whiles they labored to keep the
villains back, flashing as it were upon them like flames of fire, lost their
lives, as being crushed with the weight only of those that fell upon them;
and the kings throne, together with the cushion all cloth of gold, was stolen
and carried away, whiles there was no man to gainesay it. And within a little
after, when news came that the Emperor had been plunged well near into
extreme jeopardie, and stood not yet upon sure ground, the army supposing the
chiefest and first thing that they had to do, was to rescue him (for they
thought him not quite rid yet out of danger) presuming confidently to have a
good hand of it, and to save his life; armed though they were but by the halves
because they ran out to fight so suddenly, gnashing their teeth also, so that
they rung again, as fell soldiers use to do, engaged themselves among the
bands and companies of the barbarous rebels, fully bent there to leave their
lives. And because the fiery courage of our men resolved fully by manhood to
wipe away all shameful dishonor, as whetting their anger against such
disloyal and perfidious enemies, without spare, down they went with all that
stood in their way, hewing them in pieces, trampling underfoot as well those
that were alive, as them that lay half dead, and killed outright indeed: and
before they could make up their hands full with killing these Barbarians, there
lay whole heaps of them dead, thrust up and steaked fast together. For these
rebels were driven to extremities, whiles some were killed downright in the
place, others for deadly fear scattered asunder: of whom, a great sort
conceiving some hope of life by prayers which came to nothing, after many a
blow and wound received one in the neck of another, were massacred in the end.
After they were all defeated and made away, when the trumpets sounded the
retreat, our men also, though but here and there, were seen lying breathless
and dead, namely, such as some violent rout had borne down, or whom the fatal
course of destiny made an end of, whiles they withstood the enemies rage, and
laid their naked and unarmed sides open to them. But the death of Cella, a
Tribune of the Scutarij, was notable among others, who at the very beginning of
the conflict thrust himself first of all others into the midst of the
Sarmatians troops. After which so cruel a carnage and massacre committed,
Constantius having taken order for security, according as the urgent occasions
of the limits required, returns to Sirmium, with full revenge taken of his
false enemies: where when he had likewise dispatched those affairs, which the
instant necessities of the time called for, he departed from thence and went to
Constantinople, that being now so near unto the East, he might salve the sores
and hurts received at Amida, and by renewing the army with fresh supplies,
with like puissance and forces restrain the king of Persia his violent
attempts: who, as it was well known (unless the heavenly power and some
greater care of many besides did repel) intended to leave Mesopotamia behind
him, and advaunce his ensigns displayed along the spacious and wide countries
of the maine.

CHAP. XI. A new Tragoedie, growing from a slender matter: the chief part
wherein to be acted, is committed unto one Paulus a Notarie, and skillful in
cruel feats.
HOwbeit, among these cares and thoughts the trumpets sounded with full blast,
according to a certain received custom of old, in lieu of civil wars,
certain matters of imputation, colored deeply with the crime of majesty or
high Treason. For the pursuit and managing whereof, Paulus that or Chauncellor.
Notarie, whom I must so often name, was sent: who being a skillful
practitioner in these capital and bloody arts, like as a fencer or
sword-player out of s Funerals or t Plays, so himself also from the rack or
hangmans office used to reap some gain and commodity: for as he had an
obstinate and settled purpose to do hurt, so he forbear not also to theeve and
steal, devising against innocent persons sundry causes and imputations,
tending to their mischief and overthrow, so long as he had his hand in such
damnable salaries. Now a small and base occasion there was, that ministered
matter of examinations infinitely extended. There is a town named or Abydus.
Elsium, Ortelio, Acutich. Caestaldo.
Abydum, seated in the furthest part of the province Thebais: here the Oracle
of a god, called in that place Beses, in old time revealed things to come, and
was wont to have honor and worship done unto it, according to the ancient
ceremonies of the countries lying round about it. And for as much as some
personally present, and some again by others sending a script, that showed what
they were desirous to know, with an express form of supplications conceived,
asked counsel of the divine powers, those pieces of paper or parchment which
contained in them their requests and petitions, remained otherwhiles, even
after answers given, in the chapel. Of these, some upon a malicious intent
were sent unto the Emperor, who, as he was a man of a base mind, carrying a
deaf ear in other matters even of great weight and importance, became in this
particular cause and information presented unto him, passing tractable and
suspicious; and besides, being prepared before hand naturally with bitter gall,
soon was heat, and caught fire. Immediately therefore he warned Paulus with
all speed to go into the East, armed with this warrant and commission, That as
a captain renowned for his experience in the world, he should cause these
matters to be heard at his will and pleasure. Likewise there was employed in
this business Modestus, then lieutenant overall the East, a man fitted for
these and such like affairs: for Hermogenes Ponticus, at the same time
Praefectus Praetorio, was rejected as one of too mild a temper. Well, Paulus
according as he was commanded, set forward on his journey, full of deadly
fury, and carrying a pernicious breath with him. Having granted liberty
therefore to prefer slanders and false endictments, a number were brought
into question from all parts (in manner) of the earth, as well of noble birth
as of obscure parentage: whereof, some were put to pain by hard and straight
bonds, others died, pent up in close prisons and dungeons. And chosen there was
to behold these deadly and woeful punishments, Bethsan.
Scythopolis a city in Palstina, which upon a twofold consideration was
thought the meetest of all others, for that it stood more secret and apart, and
besides was just in the midst between Antiochia and Alexandria, whence many
most commonly were drawn to their accusations.

CHAP. XII. The executions of right honorable and most noble personages,
whiles Paulus the Notarie sat as Judge. The exquisit censure of Ammianus
Marcellinus as touching this affair. An horrible monster borne and seen at
Antioch. The Isauri with theeving and robbery infest the neighbor nations:
but by the threats rather than the rigor of Lauritius, they are reformed.
BRought there was therefore judicially, with the first, Simplicius the son
of Philip, who had been Prefect and Consul both, endited upon this point,
for that he was reported to have enquired about the obtaining of the Empire:
and being commanded to be put to torture by virtue of the princes writ (who in
these cases at any time neither sinned nor trespassed in matter of piety and
mercy) by some special providence of God protecting him, without any foil or
abuse done to his body, was condemned to banishment: then Pernasius, late
Prefect of Egypt, a plain conditioned man, brought to that point of danger,
that he had sentence pronounced (worthy of death) was likewise driven into
exile: he had been heard oftentimes long before to say, That when he left
Patra.
Patrae, a town in Achaia, where he was borne and had his dwelling place, for
to obtain or get a certain office, he had seen as he lay asleep many images
in habit of tragical actors accompanying and bringing him on the way.
Andronicus afterward well known for his liberal studies and excellency in
Poetry, was brought into the judgment place: who carrying a clear and secure
conscience, when he could not be touched with any suspicions and presumptions
laid against him, standing still to his purgation, and that very stoutly, was
acquit. Semblably, Demetrius a Philosopher, surnamed Cythras, a man verily
far stepped in years, but having still a good strong body, and as stout a
mind, being hardly laid unto and charged, That diverse times he had offered
sacrifice, could not deny the fact, but the fault, impleading, That from the
very prime of his youth he had used so to do, for to please and pacify God,
and never sounded nor searched into high matters; for he did not so much as
know any man that affected or desired it. Continuing therefore a long time set
fast on the rack, when surely grounded upon a firm confidence, he persisted
fearelesse, and without varying in his answers alleged and pleaded still the
same, suffered he was without any further harm received to depart unto
Alexandria, where he was borne. And these verily, with some few others, the
righteous hand of God, which helps and assisteth Truth, delivered out of
extreme and present dangers. But whiles these criminations and endictments
spread still further and further by intricate and intangling snares without end,
some, after their bodies were piteously mangled, died thereof; others despoyled
of their goods, were condemned to suffer further punishment: and Paulus all the
whiles was the prompter and succentor of these cruel enterludes, which out of
a spence or budget of crafty devices he brought forth in open show to do hurt,
and whereof he acted many: upon whose will and pleasure I may in manner boldly
say, depended the life of as many as went on the ground. For if a man wore
about his neck any remedies against the Quartane ague, or some other pain, or
could be charged by the information of evill-willers, to have passed by a
monument in the evening, as one that were a witch or sorcerer, and collected
the horrors of sepulchers, and vain illusions of spirits and ghosts walking
and wandering thereabout, pronounced he was to deserve death, and he died for
it. And verily, the matter was thus for all the world carried and handled, as
if many a man had solicited u Clarus, the x Dodonaean trees, and the Oracles
of y Delphi, which were so famous in times past, and all to procure the death
and destruction of the Emperor. Whereupon the Palatine cohort of courtiers
about him curiously and finely faining naughty devises of flattery, affirmed
flatly, That he should from henceforth be exempt from all evils that commonly
befell other men, giving it out alowd with open mouth, That his fortune had
appeared at all times powerful and surely effectual in confounding and
destroying of his adversaries. And verily, that there was such straight
inquisition into these matters, no man of wisdom and discretion finds
fault. For we do not deny, that the life and safety of a lawful prince, who
is a protector and defendor of good men, and from whom we seek for means of
others safety, ought with joint diligence and endeavor of all men to be fenced
and maintained: For whose redeeming with might and maine, when upon violence
and abuse offered to his majesty he stands upon his guard and defense, the
laws z Corneli have exempted no person of what estate and degree soever from
examination by way of torture, though the same were with loss of blood. But on
the other side, it becomes not princes unmeasurably to rejoice and take
pleasure in the woeful cases of subjects, least they should seem governed by
licentiousness and not by authority. And the example of Tully ought in this
point to be followed, who when it was in his power to harm and to spare (as
himself affirms) sought for causes of forgiveness, and not occasions of
punishment: which is the proper duty of a discreet and considerate Judge. At
the same time, in Daphne, that pleasant and sumptuous place, near unto the
city Antioch, was borne a monster, horrible to be seen and reported, an
infant with two mouths, two teeth, a beard, four eyes, and two exceeding
little ears: which birth so misshapen and deformed, foretold; that the
Commonwealth was turning into a foul and ill favored state. Now such strange
and uncouth monsters as these are many times brought forth into the world,
signifying and praesaging the events of sundry things; which because they are
not openly, as in old time, expiated, they pass away as unheard of and
unknown. And even in these days, the Isauri, who had been long time quiet,
after they had done some acts, according to the contents of the former story,
and attempted the siege of the city Seleucia, reviving by little and little
(as serpents are wont in the Spring season to leap out of their holes) came
down the craggie straits and desert wields, and then putting themselves close
into thick companies and squadrons, as robbers and brigands, sore troubled and
disquieted the borderers, and withal, as mountainers, passed beside the
fore-fences and stations of our soldiers unseene, and by means of their daily
practice ran easily to and fro over rocks and through grounds full of bushes.
For the appeasing of whom, either by maine force or reasonable persuasions,
Lauritius was sent as ruler, with the dignity also of a Comes added to his
style, a man politic, and of a civil carriage, who reformed most enormities
by threatening rather than by rigorous dealing: insomuch, as for a great time,
while he governed the province, there happened nothing that was reputed worthy
of punishment.

THE XX. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Lupicinus is sent from Iulianus into Britannie, for to repress the
troubles and commotions there. Vrsicinus, by the slanderous calumniations of
those in the Court depressed and thrown underfoot, laid away his girdle of
knighthood, and is commanded to betake himself to a private life.
THis was the order and process of affairs throughout Illyricum and the East.
But in the tenth year of Constantius his Consulship, and third of Iulianus,
when by the out-rodes of Scots and Picts, savage nations, the peace was broken
in Brittannie, and the places near unto the limits appointed for marches
wasted, so that the provinces (wearied with a multitude of calamities past,
heaped upon them) were affrighted, Caesar keeping his Winter in Paris, and
distracted into sundry careful thoughts, was afraid to go and succor those
beyond the seas, as Constantius had done before time (according as I have
declared) least he should leave Gaul without a ruler; especially at such a
time, when the Alemans were stirred up to make cruel wars. He thought it
good therefore to send into these parts, for to set all things in order,
Lupicinus at the same time Colonel of the Infanterie, a warlike man, I assure
you, and skillful in feats of arms; but proud withal, carrying a stately
look, setting up his brows aloft like horns, and speaking thereto as big,
yea, and keeping a stir, as one would say, he acted in a Tragedy upon the
stage; of whom, men doubted a long time, whether he were more covetous than
cruel. This great captain therefore abovenamed setting forward on his journey
with the auxiliarie light appointed soldiers, to wit, the a Heruli, Batavi,
and many companies of the Moesici, in the midst of Winter came to Bullen, or
Bologne.
Bononia: and having gotten shipping, and embarked all his soldiers, with a
good gale of wind, which he waited for, arrived at Richburrow, or Ripchester,
near Sandwich.
Rutupi, just overagainst it, and so marches toward London.
Lundinium, that from thence, after advice taken, according to the quality of
the business he might make more speed to come into the field and give
battle. Whiles these affairs thus proceed, after the assault and forcing of
Amida, when Vrsicinus was returned to the princes or Cour.
camp and captaineship of the footmen (for we said before that he succeeded
Barbatio in that place) he had his welcome given him by backbiters, who first
dispersed abroad in whispering manner biting slanders, and then followed on
with framing openly counterfeit criminations. Whereunto the Emperor giving
ear readily, as measuring most things by an opinion only, and lying open to
wait-layers and accusers, appoints Arbetio and Florentius, master of the
Offices, to be Commissioners and Judges, to make inquisition, what the reason
was, that the foresaid Am^la.
town was rased: who, when they rejected the evident and probable causes
thereof, and feared least Eusebius, then high Chamberlain, should be
offended, in case they had admitted the proofs and arguments which plainly
showed, That what misfortunes befell there, happened all through the obstinate
negligence and cowardice of Sabinianus; being turned quite from listening unto
the truth, enquired after vain and frivolous matters, and far from the
purpose. With which unjust proceeding, Visicinus.
he being thoroughly moved, who heard the manner of it: And if (quoth he) the
Emperor despises me, yet this present business is of that weighty
importance, that it can neither be known nor punished otherwise than by the
personal judgment of the prince, yet know he thus much by way, as it were, of
praesage and prophecy, that whiles he mourns for these accidents, which he
has learned by an honest and true relation to have chanced at Amida, and
whiles he is led after the will and pleasures of his guelded Eunuchs, himself
present in person with the whole puissance of his army will not be able the
next Spring to help Mesopotamia, when it shall have need of defense. At these
words and many more put to them, related with a malicious gloss and exposition
set thereto, Constantius exceeding wroth, without farther sifting the matter,
or suffering those particulars to be laid open whereof he was ignorant,
commanded him thus traduced with false imputations, to give over his place of
command in the army, and to betake himself to a private life, promoting Agilo
into his rowme (which was an unreasonable leap) considering he before was no
better than a or captain.
Tribune of the Gentiles Scutarij.

CHAP. II. A memorable eclipse of the Sun in the East parts. A discourse
according to Naturalists, as touching the motions of Sun and Moon, and their
eclipses.
AT the same time, in the east parts, the air was to men's sight over cast with
a dark mist, and from the dawning of the day until noone tide, stars were
seen continually to shine. And to increase this fearful accident, it fell
out so, that when the heavenly daylight was operiretur.
hidden by reason that there was a total darkness over the face of the earth
like unto the night, men were afraid, and supposed verily, that the Sun was
extraordinarily Like as the moon in her conjunction with the Sun, which we
call the Change, has an universal defect.
eclipsed, seeing him first diminished to the shape of the Moon, horned, or in
the new; then, increased to the form of an half Moon, and afterward restored
full and whole again. A thing that happens not at other times so evidently,
unless it be when the Moon, after unequal and oblique courses, and certain
spaces between, in her change returns to the same points or beginning; that
is, when in the house of the same sign the whole body of the Moon is found by
most direct lines quite opposite under the Sun, and stays a while in these
minutes, which in the art of Geometry are termed Parts. But, albeit the
conversions and motions of both planets, as the searchers Astronomers.
of intelligible causes have observed, after the course of the moon fulfilled,
by a perpetual distinction meet in one and the same end: yet is not the Sun
in those days always hidden and covered, but when the Moon by a just
plumbe-line, as it were, is opposite in the midst, and interposed between
the fiery globe of the Sun and our sight. In brief, then is the Sun
hidden, and his shining light suppressed, when himself and the roundle of the
Moon (the lowest of all the stars) accompanying together, keeping their own
proper Sphres, and placed jointly (saving the regard of height) as Ptolomaee
both skilfully and elegantly shows, are come to those dimensions which they
usually term in the Greek tongue (...), that is to say, eclipticke or
defective conjunctions ascending and descending. And if they touch the places
joining close unto the said Caput and cauda Draconis.
joints, the eclipse will be the smaller: but if they abide in the very points
and joints, which bind more straight together the said ascents and descents,
then is the sky overcast with grosser darkness, as if the air were
thickened; so that we are not able to see so much as the things that stand just
before our eyes. Moreover, we think that we behold two Suns in this wise:
in case a cloud mounted higher than ordinary, and shining again by reason of
the neerenesse of those eternal from the Sun.
lights, represent the brightness of another circle by the reflection, as it
were, from a pure glass. Now, come we to the Moon. Thus only and not
otherwise suffers the Moon a plain and evident eclipse, when being in her
full light round, and opposite unto the Sun, she is from his Orb distant one
hundred and eighty parts, that is to say, in the seventh sign. And albeit
this distance and opposition happens always in every full Moon, yet for all
that she is not always then eclipsed. But because she being placed about the
mobilitie of the earth and the utmost of that universal beauty, and most
remote from heaven, puts her self under the Sun, that otherwhiles
strikes upon her, by interposition of the limit of the night that ends in a
pointed cone, she lies hidden for a while, and is enwrapped or covered within
the black globes of shadow, in case the Sun, compassed about with the bent
of the inward Sphre, by reason of the mass of earth lying in the way, is not
able to enlighten her with his beams, for that she has no proper light of her
own, according as diverse opinions have collected. Again, when by equal parts
she meets with the Sun at one and the same sign, darkened she is (as has
been said) totally, and her white and bright hue is wholly obscured, what time
she is called in Greek (...), i. in her conjunction or change. Now, she is
thought to arise new again, when by a small declining, as it were, from a
plumbe-line, she carries the Sun erected just over her. And this arising of
hers as yet but small, is first seen of men, when leaving the company of the
Sun, she proceeds to the second sign. After she is gone therefore further
still, and is now good and lightsome, and shaped, as one would say, with
horns, she comes to be termed (...), i. carrying the form of a Moon: but
what time she begins to be removed a great way and distance from the Sun,
so that she is proceeded as far as to the fifth sign, for that his beams
are turned upon her, she conceives greater light, and is named in the Greek
tongue (...), which form represents a half a circle.
semicircle. Then passing on still, and having now caught the most remote
sign, she shows the figure (...), bearing and bunching out on both sides:
but when she is sited just against and directly by line opposite, she will
shine out at the full, as keeping the house of the seventh sign, yea, and
whiles she converseth or abides yet in the same, and being a little gone
further, diminishes; which habit or state of hers we term (...), i. full,
or whole Moon; and the same forms as before, she takes again in her wane as
she waxes old. And out of the learning of many writers that agree in one mind,
we are taught, that the Moon was never seen universally eclipsed or darkened
altogether, but in the time of her change. Moreover, whereas we have said
before, that the Sun has his course one while above in the sky, and another
while in the world below, ye are to know, That the bodies of planets and
stars, in regard of the universal frame of the world, neither set norrise;
but seem so to our sight (who are here beneath upon the earth) as elevated and
held aloft by the motion of some inward spirit, and in comparison of the great
fabric of the world, are set under it no bigger than a small prick: and one
while we behold above us the stars fixed in the sky, whose order is
perpetual; and sometimes again, because man's sight does fail, we suppose
they are departed and gone out of their places. But now let us return to our
purposed history.

CHAP. III. The virtues of Iulianus gaul Constantius to the heart. Now when he
was minded to take from him the auxiliarie forces, the soldiers favoring
Julian, stand against, partly with open mouth, and partly by casting abroad a
libell.
WHiles Constantius made have to succor the East, which was like shortly to be
infested with the Persians outrodes, according as both fugitives and
intelligencers in one accord declared, vexed he was for very envy with the
virtues of Iulianus, which by a general bruit were blazed abroad, and talked
of daily among sundry nations: the lofty praises of whose great travailes and
exploits, fame carried and divulged in the world; as namely, how after certain
kingdoms of Alemain conquered, he had recovered towns in Gaul, sacked
aforetime and rased by the barbarous enemies, whom he made tributaries, and
subject to pay imposts. Being moved in regard of these and such like matters,
and fearing least the same would grow greater, considering that (as the report
went) Florentius the of the Praetorium.
Prefect pricked him on, he sent Decentius, a Tribune and or Chauncellor.
Notarie both, to fetch away from him forthwith the Heruli and Batavi, the
Celts also, together with the Petulantes, and three hundred besides, chosen
forth of other bands, who under this color were commanded to make speed,
that they might be in readiness for to war in the beginning of the Spring
upon the Parthians. And as touching aid-souldiors verily, and other three
hundred to be levied and gathered, Lupicinus, who was for certain known not
to have passed over as yet into Britannie, was dealt withal apart by himself:
but out of the Scutarij and Gentiles, Sintula, Tribune at the same time of
Caesar's table, had commandment to draw forth all those that were of greatest
activitie, and to bring them along himself. Julian held his tongue all this
while, and condiscended hereunto, submitting all to the will and pleasure of
the mightier person. Howbeit, this one thing he could neither dissimule nor
pass over with silence, but urge instantly, That those might suffer no
troubles, who leaving their habitations beyond Rhene, were come under this
capitulation and condition, That they should not be at any time led unto the
parts beyond the Alps: avouching, that it was to be feared, least the
voluntary soldiers of the Barbarians, who oftentimes upon such terms and
conditions were wont to come over and side with us, taking knowledge hereof,
might hereafter be kept back from performing the like service. But all his
speech came to nothing. For the said Sintulae.
Tribune making no account of Caesar's complaints, obeyed the Emperors
commandment: but after he had made choice of a company very lightly
appointed, such as for lively vigor and delivernesse of body surpassed all
others, with them he went forth, hoping confidently for greater matters. And
because Caesar, pensive what should be done with the rest that were commanded
to be sent, and casting in his mind diverse and sundry thoughts, deemed, that
the business ought to be managed with good heed and circumspection, seeing
also the cruel Barbarians on the one side, and the powerful command on the
other to enforce him; and especially for that the absence of the General of
the horsemen made him most to doubt, he willed the Prefect to return unto
him, who beforetime was departed to Vienna under color to provide victuals,
that he might exempt himself from military troubles. For the Prefect.
he well considered, that according to his own relation, which he was thought
in times past to have sent, those warlike bands, dreadful already to the
Barbarians, were to be withdrawn from the defense of Gaul: who when he had
received Caesar's letters, advising and requesting him to come with all speed as
to assist the Commonwealth with his counsel, most obstinately drew back and
refused; his mind with fear being troubled in regard of the letters which
plainly imported thus much, That the Prefect ought no where to be parted from
the chief Imperatore, or General.
Commander in any heat and broile of fearful stirs: and thus much moreover
was written, That in case he held off to perform this service accordingly,
himself of his own accord would cast from him the ensigns of his princely
authority, as taking it to be honorable and glorious for him to die by
commandment, than that the destruction of the provinces should be imputed
unto him. But the stiff and constant resolution of the Prefect prevailed,
with all his might striving again and refusing to yield obedience to those
things which with reason were required. Howbeit, in the time of these delays
of Lupicinus absent, and the soldiers mutinies, Julian destitute of the
helpefull counsel of the proud Prefect, and waving in doubtful terms what
to do, supposing this to be his best course, determined to hasten them forward
on their journey by the ordinary way, being all departed out of the stations
wherein they wintered. This being known, one among the companies of the
Petulantes closely let fall upon the ground a libell, which with many other
contents carried this tenor also: Thus we verily are driven and confined as
guilty and condemned persons unto the furthest parts of the earth: and those
who are most leife and dear unto us shall be slaves, enthralled again unto
the Alemans; those, I say, whom after mortal foughten fields we have freed
from their first captivity. Which script being brought unto the or Counsel.
Court and read, Julian considering their reasonable complaints, commanded
them with their whole families to go into the East, granting them a warrant
to take up posthorses and wagons. And when doubt was made a long time which
way they should journey, thought good it was (and that through the motion of
Decentius the Secretary, or Chancellor aforesaid.
Notarie) that the folk should pass along by Paris, where Caesar yet abode,
as not removed yet any whether. And so they did indeed.

CHAP. IIII. Julian endeavors to satisfy the desire of Constantius. But the
captains and soldiers breaking out into a mutiny, take arms, and with loud
voice salute Iulianus by the style of Augustus, yea, and force him to assent
thereto, and accept of a diadem set upon his head.
NOw as the same approached, and were coming, the Julian.
prince met them in the places and villages near the cities side, and (as his
manner was) by commending those whom he knew, and putting every one in mind to
do valiantly, with mild words he animated them to go cheerfully unto the
Emperor, whose power was very ample and large; where also they should get most
condign rewards for their travailes and pains. And the more honorably to
entreat them that were thus to depart so great a way from him, he invited the
chief and principal of them to a feast, and willed them confidently to
prefer what lawful petition they could readily think of, wherein he might
pleasure them. Who being thus liberally entertained, took their leave of him,
malecontent and very sorrowful, in regard of a twofold grief; for that a
certain unkind fortune thus severed them both from so temperate a governor,
and also from their native soil. And thus possessed with this anxietie, they
retired unto their usual camp. No sooner began it to be night, but they
brake out into an open brawle: and now when they were once set on, and their
bloods up, according as every man found himself aggreeved with the unexpected
occurrent, they take weapon in hand: and so with a mighty noise, to the palace
they all went, and having compassed it round about, so as no man could escape
them and get away, with hideous and terrible clamours they cried unto Iulianus,
by the name of Augustus, urging him with all speed to come forth unto them: but
being compelled to stay until it was daylight, they forced him at length to
go forth. Whom when they saw, iterating the same great noise and shout, with a
most firm and settled consent they styled him Augustus: and he for his part
upon a resolute and grounded mind withstood them all and some; one while
showing himself to be wroth and highly displeased; otherwhiles stretching
forth his hands, requesting and beseeching them, That after so many most happy
and fortunate victories, no undecent and unseemely part should be committed,
nor any unseasonable rashness and breaking out raise matter and cause of
discord. And when in the end by mild speeches he had appeased their tumult,
thus much moreover he added and said: Let your angry mood, I pray you, cease
for a while: without dissension or seditious seeking of alteration, that which
ye demand shall easily be obtained. For as much as ye are possessed thus
with the sweetness of your native country, and fear to go into strange lands
which ye are not acquainted with, return ye now even out of hand unto your
own home: see you shall nothing beyond the Alps, because it is displeasant
unto you: and hereof I will assoyle you by a competent satisfaction before the
Emperor, a prince capable of reason and most prudent withal. After these
words they set up a loud cry on all sides, God save Augustus: nathelesse, when
with one uniforme zeal and heat of affection they all preassed on him still,
and that with an exceeding earnest noise, mixed with reproachful and reviling
terms, Caesar was enforced to condescend unto them. And so being set upon a
footmans shield, and borne up aloft in sight, and with great silence of the
people declared Augustus, he was willed to bring forth a white band or
diadem: and when he said that he never had any, they called for one of his
wives, that she used about her neck or head: but because he affirmed, That it
was not meet he should be fitted at his first entrance into the Empire with any
woman's ornament or attire, they sought for an horse trapping, to the end, that
being handsomely adorned therewith, he might make some show yet, obscure though
it were, of higher authority. But when he still avouched, that it also was but
base and unseemely, one named Maurus (who afterward being a Comes or captain
of the discoverers in espiall, received a foil in fight at the straits of
Succi, at this time serving in quality of a pikeman) took the collar from
about his own neck, which he wore as an b Ensign bearer, and boldly did it
upon Iulians head: who being thus driven to an extremity, and perceiving now
that he could not avoid present danger, if he persevered still to make
resistance, promised unto them all throughout five c aurei apeece, and every
one a pound of silver besides. These matters thus passed, he no less troubled
with care than before, and foreseeing with quick conceit what might afterward
come hereof, neither wore the d^ademe, nor durst go abroad any where, ne yet
negotiate any serious businesses, were they never so urgent. But whiles
Iulianus (affrighted with sundry accidents) betook him thus to a private
retyrednesse, a certain Decurie of the He means Iulians Court.
Palace (which is a degree and place of dignity) stepping a great pace to the
Petulantes and Celtae, where they quartered, cries out in turbulent manner: Oh
shameful indignity, that he who but the day before was by their judgment
declared Augustus and Emperor should now be secretly murdered. No sooner was
knowledge taken hereof, but the soldiers, who were moved alike, as well with
what they knew not, as what they knew, some brandishing and shaking their
casting-weapons, others ready to fight with naked swords in hand, running forth
here and there diverse ways (as the manner is in a sudden uprore) in all have
gat unto the princes train: at which excessive noise the Warders and Tribunes
being astonished, and by name Excubitor, captain of the guard in ordinary,
fearing also some treachery of mutable and unconstant soldiers, dispersed
themselves for fear of sudden death, and slipped out of sight. Howbeit, the
soldiers when they saw all was well and hushed, stood for a while armed as they
were, quiet: and being demanded, What was the cause of this unadvised and
sudden hurlyburly, after long silence, and making some doubt of their [new]
Emperors life, they departed not before they were sent for into the
Consistory, and had seen him at the full gloriously dight in his imperial
robes. Notwithstanding, when these news were heard abroad, they also, who I
said were gone before unfore under the leading of Sintula, being now secure and
past fear, returned togegether with him unto Paris: and upon an edict or
proclamation made, that the morning next following they should all meet in the
open plain field, the Julian.
prince being come forth with greater port and pomp than usually, mounted up
to the Tribunal, environed about with Ensigns, as well the maine Eagle
standards, as banners and guidons, as also guarded with whole squadrons of
armed Cohorts. And after he had paused a time, whiles from aloft he beheld
the countenances of them there present, when he perceived them all cheerful
and joyous, with plain and simple words (to the end he might be understood)
as it were with so many trumpets, he incensed them in this wise.

CHAP. V. The Oration of Iulianus as touching the appointment of military
rewards. Also with what words, the night before that day wherein he was
declared Emperor, he was by the public Genius of the State saluted.
THe difficulty of this present business does require and instantly crave,
(right valiant and trusty protectors both of my person and of the
Commonwealth, who together with me have many a time put your lives in danger
for the state of the Provinces) for as much as ye have in a settled judgment
advaunced your Caesar to the highest pitch of all honors and dignities, in few
words summarily to deliver, how there may be devised just and wise remedies to
cure and salve this change of the world with us. While I was a very youth,
scarce come to my growth, being as ye well know, clad in purple, and made
Caesar only for a show, yet by the providence of the heavenly power commended
to your protection and tuition, I never was put from my settled purpose of
leading an upright and honest life, in all painful labors seen together
with you: what time as having put to rout the confidence of bold nations, after
cities destroyed, and infinite thousands of men slain, those few remain which
were left behind half broken and unsound, infinite calamities still overran.
And needless I think it to rehearse, how often in the hard Winter, and bitter
cold weather, at which time both lands and seas are exexempt from warfare, we
repelled the Alemans, a nation untamed before time, with no small detriment and
loss of their forces. And verily for this one thing, it is not meet that I
should either over-passe or conceal it, namely, that when near unto
Argentoratum that most blessed day shone, which in some sort brought with it
perpetual liberty unto the Gauls, whiles I rode to and fro through the pikes
and among the arrows and darts where they flew thickest, ye thoroughly
grounded, what with vigorous courage, and what by long experience, vanquished
your enemies, that suddenly brake in and overflowed all in manner of swelling
and swift land floods, and them either laid on the bare ground by dint of
sword, or else drowned in the deep channel of the river; and that with few of
our men left dead behind us, whose funerals we honorably kept, rather with
solemn praises of them, than any mournful sorrow of ours. After which
exploits so great and so renowned, posterity, I suppose, will not keep
silence (as touching your good deserts of the Commonwealth) in all nations, if
whom ye have fully adorned with so high a title of majesty, ye vouchsafe to
defend by your virtue and gravitie, in case any adverse fortune should assail
me. Now to the end there might be a sound course holden in our affairs, and
that the rewards of valorous men may attend upon them without all corruption,
and no secret ambition or indirect seeking after promotions catch them up
beforehand, this under the reverend presence of your counsel and assembly I
determine and set down; That neither any civil Judge nor martial commander
shall be preferred to higher degree, through the help of aught else but his
own worth and good desert, neither shall he who otherwise will presume to be a
suitor for any, go his ways without disgrace and shame. The inferior
soldiers beneath, encouraged with this confidence of greater hopes, as who had
been a long time kept fasting for having any dignities or rewards, smiting
their bucklers with their javelines, rose up with a mighty noise, and with one
voice (in manner) and accord gave a favorable assent to his speeches and good
beginnings: and immediately for fear there might be never so little time given
to trouble this so considerat and well advised dispose, in the behalf of the
pro Atthuarijs, a nation of the Frankes. O^tel. Some read here, pro Actuarijs,
^. for their Clerks or Scribes: others per Atthuarios, or Actuarios, i. by
their means and mediation.
Atthuarij, the Petulantes and Celtae besought, they might be sent to govern
what provinces it pleased him: which when they could not obtain, they departed
neither offended nor ill appaied. Howbeit, that very night which went next
before the day wherein he was declared Augustus, as himself now Emperor
reported to those were next about him and more inward with him, in his sleep
there appeared one unto him in that shape and form, as the public d Genius
or Angel uses to be portrayed, who said by way of chiding, these words unto
him: Julian, long since have I in secret manner duly observed and kept the
entry of thy house, desirous to increase thy dignity, and diverse times gone
my ways as rejected. But if I be not at this time received and admitted,
namely, when the judgments of so many agree in one, go I will as forlorn and
sorrowful: howbeit, take this with thee, and set it deeply to thy heart, That
I will no longer dwell with thee.

CHAP. VI. The king of the Persians, whiles Constantius abode far off,
invadeth Mesopotamia, forces the city Singara, hewed in pieces two Roman
legions, and carried the rest as well citizens as soldiers away unto the
furthest parts of Persis.
WHiles these things were earnestly a doing in Gaul, that cruel king of the
Persians, burning in hot desire (kindled first by Antonine, and now redoubled
by the coming of Craugasius) to be Lord of all Mesopotamia, whiles
Constantius abode far off with his army; after he had augmented his armed
forces, and passed (after his usual manner) over Tygris, sets in hand to
assault Singra. D. Athanasio.
Singara, a city very well fortified both with soldiers and all things else
necessary and requisite, as they deemed, who had the government of those
countries. The defenders of which place, after they had espied the enemy a
great way off, quickly shut their gates, and with stout and courageous hearts
ran to and fro along the turrets and battlements, gathering together great
stones and warlike engines to discharge upon them: and thus having made all
ready beforehand, they stood all in armor, pressed to repel the multitude of
their enemies, if they attempted to climb the walls. The king therefore being
come, when by the mediation of his nobles and captains admitted to approach
near, he might not by a gentle and mild parle persuade the defendants to
yield unto his pleasure, both gave them a whole days respite, and in the next
morning betimes by break of day setting up a signal of a fire-red banner,
assailed was the city on every side, whiles some brought skaling ladders,
others planted their engines, and the most part defended with a fence of timber
and hurdles before them, as also with penthouses over their heads, sought ways
to undermine the foundations of the wall. Against these devises the townsmen
standing above upon their high bulwarks and munitions, with stones and all
sorts of casting-darts afar off, repelled those who venturously and proudly
presumed to put themselves forward within the reach of shot. Thus continued
they fighting for certain days together with doubtful event, and many a man
on both sides lost his life, and as many were wounded. At the last, when the
skirmish was very hot, and evening now came on, one exceeding strong Ram among
other engines was brought forward, which with pushes thick and threefold butted
upon that round tower, at which in the former siege, I said, the city by a
breach was laid open. Unto which tower all the multitude came to rescue, where
they fought most closely. There might a man have seen firebrands, burning
torches and fiery darts flying every way for to burn this mischievous engine,
as it approached near, neither gave over the thick shot of arrows and bullets
of either side. But the sharp pointed head of the said Ram went beyond all the
devices against it, entering and piercing into the joints of the stones new
laid, and as yet by reason of moisture weak and feeble. But while the fight
continued still with fire and sword, the tower aforesaid fell down, whereby way
was made into the city, and the place disfurnished of defendants, whom the
great danger so imminent had scattered: whereupon whole troops and bands of
Persians setting up a yelling outcrie, filled all parts of the town, whiles
there was none to restrain them; and after some few slain, and those pell
mell one with another, all the rest by commandment of king Sapor were taken
alive and carried away into the furthest countries of Persia. Now, there were
two legions in garrison for defense of this city, to wit, e Prima Flavia, and
f Prima Parthica, besides many homelings and natural inhabitants, together
with auxillarie horsemen, whose hap was by reason of this sudden danger to be
shut within, who all, as I said, were led with their hands bound, whiles none
of our men helped them. For the greater part of our army lay in the field
encamped for the defense of Nisibis, a city very far distant from it: and
otherwise, never could any man so much as in old time succor Singara when it
was in distress, by reason that all the places there round about for want of
water be dried up. And albeit antiquity built this fort in a very fit and
convenient place for the discovery of adverse and sudden troubles, yet it
turned always to the detriment of the Romans, as being sundry times surprised
and taken with the loss of the defendants thereof.

CHAP. VII. Sapor king of Persia sets upon Bezabde, otherwise called
Phoenicha, and with great violence assaulteth it.
AFter the racing therefore of this town, the king in wisdom and policy
avoiding Nisibis, as one ywis well remembering what hurts he had there many
times sustained, took the right hand way, marching by crooked and winding
journeyes, minding either by force, or with winning unto him the garrison
defendants by sweet promises to recover Bezabde, which the ancient founders
termed also Phoenicha, a very strong fort, situate upon a pretty high hill,
and bending toward the banks of Tygris, and where the places be either
suspected or low, fenced with a double wall. For the defense of this piece were
three legions deputed, Secunda g Flavia, Secunda h Armeniaca, and likewise
Parthica i Secunda, together with many Zabdicene archers, in whose ground being
at the same time under our subjection, stood this town. At the first brunt
therefore, the king in person accompanied with a troop of horsemen glittering
in their complete harneis, being himself mounted higher than all the rest,
riding about the circuit of the bulwarks and fortifications, approached
venturously to the very brim and edge of the trenches: and albeit he was
assailed with shot of balists that missed not their mark, and with arrows
flying thick, yet by reason he was under a good armor of proof, and the
same wrought in manner of a roufe or Tortoise-shell, he went away without
taking harm. Howbeit, for all this, sequestring and setting apart his anger
for that time, he sent, as his manner was, his heralds, by whom he gently
exhorted the besieged, That they would look unto their lives and other hopes,
and by yielding in time, raise the siege; and setting open the gates, go forth
in humble manner, and present themselves unto the conqueror of all nations.
These heralds adventured to approach very near, but in this regard the
defendants of the walls forbear them, because they brought with them close by
their sides certain gentlemen freeborne of their acquaintance, taken prisoners
in Singara: for in a pitiful respect of them, no man flung a dart, nor made
any answer as touching peace. Then after a cessation of arms granted for one
whole day and night, before it was daylight the next morrow, the Persians all
at once setting fiercely upon the rampire, gave out cruel threats, and with a
terrible noise coming boldly to the very walls, preassed hard upon the
townsmen, who with great force resisted them: whereby most of the Parthians
were sore hurt, for that some of them carrying ladders, and others holding out
before them hurdles of oysiers, went as it were blindly forward within shot,
neither escaped our men without hurt: for the arrows flying thick like hayle,
went through them as they stood close together. Now, after the Sun was set,
they departed on both parts with equal losle: and toward the next morning,
fought much more eagrely than before, whiles the trumpets sounded from the one
side and the other, neither was there less flaughter seen on either hand,
fighting as they did most obstinately on both sides.

CHAP. VIII. Sapor rejecting the admonitions of a Christian bishop, by force
wins the besieged city, fares cruelly against the townsmen: and having
given the attempt upon Virta, a most strong fenced city, and relinquished this
vain enterprise, at length departs.
But the day following, when a truce by common assent after manyfold travail
and pains taken was granted, what time as a great terror was presented round
about the walls, and the Persians feared no less, a Christian bishop showed by
certain signs of gesture and by beckening, that he was willing to go forth,
and upon faithful promise of return in safe conduct, he came as far as to
the kings pavilions: where after leave given to speak his mind, in a mild
manner of speech he persuaded with the Persians to depart home, now that both
parts had received in common lamentable losses, saying withal, that greater
sorrows yet were to be feared which happily would come unto them. But he
stood discoursing of these and such like points in vain: such was the fell and
outrageous fury of the king, who withstood the motion, and stoutly swore, That
he would not depart before the town and fortifications about it were
destroyed: yet was the bishop somewhat suspected (untruly, as I think, though
commonly it was by many men vouched) That in secret conference and talk he
informed Sapor what parts of the wall he should assault, as weak within-forth
and easy to be battered. And this seemed to carry some likelihood with it,
for that afterward the enemies engines were evidently seen with a great shout
and joyous leaping of the assaylants to play lustily upon the undefensible
places, and such as for very age and rottenness began to lean and were ready
to fall, as if some that knew the inward secrets of the city, had given
direction. And albeit the narrow ways yielded difficult access unto the
walls, and the Rams fitted for battery were hardly set forward, for fear of
stones thrown by hand, and arrow-shot that kept them off, yet ceased not
either the brakes or scorpions, whereof these discharged stones thick, the
other sent out darts as fast, and together with them baskets and panniers
burning, besmeared over with pitch and k Bitumen: by the continual fall
whereof, coming still down the hill, the said engines of artillery stuck
fast, as fixed and rooted deep within ground; and being thus set, fiery
darts and burning linkes together thrown lustily with a good arm and star
hand, set them on a light fire. But although the case stood thus, and many on
both sides were slain, yet the assaylants were more hotely set to raze and
destroy the town, (both by natural situation strong, and also by great
workmanship of man's hand fortified) ere the midst of Winter; as being
persuaded, that the kings rage would not be allayed before. And therefore,
neither the effusion of much blood, nor the number of them that were shot into
the body and deadly wounded, could reclayme the rest from like boldness. But
when they had a long time maintained fight with much hurt and mischief gotten
thereby, at length they exposed themselves to extreme and present dangers: and
as they drove their Rams, what with the weighty stones coming thick from
the walls, and what with sundry fireworkes, debarred they were from going
forward. Howbeit, one Ram higher than his fellows, covered over with wet bulls
hides, and therefore in less danger of mishap by flames or darts, going before
all, with much straining and endeavor crept to the wall, and so with his
mighty sharp pointed head entering between the joints of the stones, and
having losened the same, overthrew a tower: which being fallen with a
wonderful crashing noise, they also who stood upon it, with so sudden a ruin
thereof were thrown down, and so either breaking their bones, or overwhelmed
with rubbish, died sundry deaths, and those unlooked for: thus the armed
multitude having found a more safe ascent, rushed in. Then, as the hideous
noise which the Persians made, yelling and crying out on every side, thundered
and resounded in the fearful ears of the townsmen thus over-matched, the
fight grew hot and more close within the walls, whiles our enemies in squadrons
fought at hand, considering that standing with their bodies one against another
thick, and having their swords drawn on both sides, there was not one spared
that stood in the way. In conclusion, the besieged resisting a long time with
much ado, and to the mischief of both sides, were at length with the pressing
hard of the huge multitude disranked and scattered by heaps: after which, the
angry enemies put to sword whomsoever they could find, the small babes were
plucked from their mothers bosoms, the mothers also themselves killed, and no
man regarded what he did. And yet in the mean time this bloody nation more
greedy of pillage than of carnage, laden with all kind of rich spoils, and
leading away an exceeding great number of prisoners, went back with much
rejoicing to their tents. The king for all he was puffed up with extraordinary
joy, as one who a long time burned in desire to win Phaenicha, a strong fenced
piece, and of great importance, departed not thence, before that he had right
strongly repaired that part of the wall which was shattered, laid up there in
store plenty of victuals, and bestowed in it a garrison of armed men, such as
for their birth were of good note, and for skill in martial feats renowned.
For he feared (as it fell out indeed) least the Romans taking to the heart the
loss of such mighty strong holds, would address themselves by maine force to
besiege the same. Vaunting therefore, and bearing himself more big, and fed
with hope to win whatsoever he could go in hand with, after he had surprised
and taken in other meaner piles, he determined to set upon or Iu^ta.
Virta, a sort of great antiquity: insomuch, as it is thought to have been
built by Alexander king of Macedonia, seated verily in the utmost part of
Mesopotamia, but encircled with walls as it were winding in and out, and pointed
with horns, and by reason of sundry devices and means made unaccessable.
Which when he assayed by all the skill and art he had, one while alluring the
defendants with goodly promises, otherwhiles threatening to hang and crucify
them: sundry times going in hand to raise up banks and mounts, and bringing
engines against it, pertaining to a siege, after more wounds and losses
received than given, he gave over his vain enterprise, and in the end
departed. These were the acts achieved that year between Tygris and
Euphrates. Which when Constantius had learned by the relation of many
messengers, fearing the Parthian expeditions whiles he wintered in
Constantinople, with greater care he furnished the frontiers with all warlicke
provision; setting also armor together and new trained soldiers,
strengthening likewise the legions with supplies of strong young men; for that
the set battles of legionarie soldiers oftentimes sped well in all the
wars and services of the East parts: besides all this, he sought for the
Scythians aid either for money or love, that in the mid Spring setting forth on
his journey out of Thracia, he might forthwith seize into his hands the places
that were suspected.

CHAP. IX. Iulianus in good regard of himself, by a long Epistle endeavors
to pacify the mind of Constantius.
Mean while Julian having placed his wintering harbor at Paris, much fearing
what would be the end of these begun enterprises, was sore perplexed, as who by
casting and tossing many matters in his mind, considered, That Constantius
would in no wise like of his doings, in whose conceit and eye he was reputed as
a vile, base, and contemptible person. Advising well therefore the fearful
beginnings of all innovations and changes in the state of an Empire, he
resolved to send unto him ambassadors, who should declare what occurrents had
happened: and withal he dispatched letters agreeable unto them, wherein more
plainly he advertised and showed, what was done, and what ought afterward to
be done: although he supposed that he had heard all, a good while before, by
the report of Decentius long since returned, as also by gentlemen of the
Chamber newly come again back out of Gaul, who had carried unto Caesar
certain solemn presents. And albeit he was not unwilling hereunto, yet wrote
he nothing in arrogant terms, least he might be thought suddenly to have
revolted. Now the tenor of his letters went in this wise. My faithful
allegiance, according to my purpose, no less in my accustomed behavior than
in covenants of agreements, I verily for my part, carrying always one and the
same mind, have for the time hitherto kept and performed, as by many effectual
proofs has evidently appeared. And ever since that you created me Caesar, and
exposed me to the terrible noise of battles contenting my self with the
place of command wherein I was set, like a trusty servitour and officer,
filled your ears evermore with news of prosperous achievements performed to
my wish and hearts desire, attributing nothing at all to mine own perils and
adventures; whereas by daily examples and continual proofs it is well known,
that where the Germans were spread abroad and intermingled every where, I was
in painful travailes, of all others seen first, and in my repose and
refection last. But if I may with your good leave say so much, in case there be
any change and alteration now (as you think there is) hence it comes: The
soldiers spending their years in many wars, and those right dangerous,
without reaping any fruit of their service, effected that in tumultuous manner
at length, which long since they determined, as impatient to serve under a
Commander in a second place; seeing that by a Caesar they could have no
recompense made for their long labor, and many victories. To whose anger, for
that they neither found augmentation of dignities, nor touched their yearly
wages, this also is fallen out unlooked for to aggravate the matter, That
being men acquainted with cold and frozen countries, they were commanded to
come to the utmost parts of the East world, and drawn away needy and bare,
apart from their wives and children. Whereupon they being enraged above their
wonted manner, in the night assembled themselves together, and beset the palace
with loud voices, and those often reiterated, styling Julian by the name of
Augustus. This set me in a trembling, I confess, and I withdrew my self: and
thus so long as I could keep me out of the way, I sought to save my self with
holding my peace and hiding my head. But when they would give me no time nor
respite to consider upon the matter, fenced (as I may so say) with the wall of
a free and pure heart, I went forth and stood in the sight of them all,
supposing this their tumultuous rising might either by authority of
countenance or gentle words be allayed. Howbeit, they grew into a wonderful
heat, and went so far, as that because I assayed to overcome their stubborn
obstinacy by entreatie, they instantly menaced death, as it seemed by their
violent assaults following one in the neck of another. In the end being
overcome, and reasoning thus with mine own self, that if I were once stabbed,
some other perhaps willingly enough would be declared prince, I gave my assent,
yet hoping still to assuage this their frantic and armed violence. This is
the very order and manner of my proceedings, which I beseech you to entertain
with a peaceable and gentle construction. Neither think that any thing has
been done otherwise, nor admit malicious persons and evil willers ready to
whisper in your ears pernicious matters: such I mean, as are wont for their
own gain and advantage to make debate and variance between princes: but
putting aside flattery, the very nourice of vices, set your mind upon justice,
the most excellent virtue of all others, and receive unfainedly and bona fide
these equal conditions which I propose unto you: reasoning and reckoning thus
in your mind, That these things are behoofefull to the Roman state and to us,
who in neerenesse of blood and in the height of supreme fortune are conioined.
And (pardon me I pray you) I desire not so much that such things should be done
which with reason are required, as that profitable and honest courses should of
you be approved: whose commandments even henceforth still I purpose right
willingly to embrace, such I mean as need requires to be performed. To be
short, I will allow unto in regard of sovereign pre-eminence.
you Spanish horses for your chariot, and chosen piked young men to be
entermingled among your Gentiles and Scutarij, some of them being a race from
the barbarous nations descended on this side Rhene, or at leastwise out of
those that yield themselves and revolt to our side: and this promise I to do,
not only in a thankful mind, but also with willing heart, so long as I live.
For ^. L L. chief Justices.
Praefects of the Praetorium, you shall of your clemency give unto us those
who for their equity and deserts are known worthy of the place. The residue,
as well ordinary civil Judges, as messengers of war affairs, likewise
Pentioners to guard my person, who are to be promoted, meet it is they be left
unto my will and pleasure. For a folly it were (where as it may be prevented
before hand) to admit those to the guard of an Emperors person, whose
behavior, whose mind and affection is not known. This one thing verily I may
be bold without all doubt to avouch, The Gauls having been with long troubles
and most grievous misfortunes vexed, neither will of their own accord, nor can
by compulsion send young soldiers into strange and remote countries, least if
their youth being utterly spent, they be afflicted anew; and calling to
remembrance, as they do, what is past, in a desperate fear of dangers hanging
over their heads, be ready to perish. Neither will it be convenient, that from
hence aid soldiers should be sent for to oppose against Parthian nations,
considering that as yet the violent rodes and invasions of their barbarous
enemies be not stopped: and (if you will abide the truth to be spoken) these
provinces here being afflicted with continual troubles and calamities, have
need themselves of foreign helps, and those right strong and valorous. These
things by way of exhortation (to the good, as I deem it, of the state) have I
written, requiring and requesting the same to be put in execution. For well I
wot (that I may speak nothing prowdly, according to an imperial place) well
I wot I say, what adverse and woeful cases of the Commonwealth, when it was in
manner remediless and given as lost for ever, the concord of princes yielding
by turns one unto another, has reduced into better terms; considering it is
evident by the example of our ancestors, That rulers when they think of these
and such like courses, find in some sort the way to lead a fortunat and blessed
life, and so commend a most pleasant remembrance of themselves unto posterity
and future times for ever.

CHAP. X. Constantius taking it to the heart that the name of Augustus was
conferred upon Iulianus, plotteth many things that take no effect. But Julian
walking warily, after he had subdued the Frankes called Atthuarij, returns to
Vienna, there to Winter.
WIth these missives he jointly sent others of more secret credence to be
presented closely unto Constantius, and those were penned in an objurgatorie
and biting style: the tenor whereof, neither might I search out, nor if I
might, became it me to publish abroad. Now, for the performance of that office
of embassage, were chosen grave persons, to wit, Pentadius master of the
offices, and Eutherius, then his high Chamberlain; who after they had delivered
the letters, were to report, without concealing of aught what they saw, and
confidently to deal, about the order of the future affairs. Among other
things, the envy of these new begun enterprises of Julian, was aggravated and
made much more by the departure of Florentius the Prefect, who praesaging the
troubles that would arise by the abovesaid sending for soldiers (as it was
commonly spoken) of purpose was departed to Vienna, pretending for his excuse,
In regard there was such want of victuals, that he and Caesar were parted, whom
in truth he dreaded, for that he had oftentimes very hardly entreated him. And
afterward, when he understood that he was mounted to the imperial throne,
having little hope or none at all of life, became very fearful, and now that
he was far removed, delivered himself from the dangers that he doubted: and
leaving all his nearest friends and kinsfolk behind him, went aside, and by
soft journeyes came unto Constantius: and to show himself liable to no fault,
many imputations he charged upon Julian as a traitor to the State. After whose
departure, Julian considering well and wisely of the matter, willing also it
should be known, that he had spared him when he was present; gave
commandment, That his wife, his children, and those whom he held dearest,
together with all his goods not once touched or diminished, should return in
safety to the East parts, allowing them to take the benefit of the public
posthorses and wagons. And the said ambassadors with no less diligence
following after, carrying with them those letters and instructions, as I have
before said, and still minding their wayfare, when they came to Judges and
rulers of higher place, were indirectly stayed and detained: who after they had
endured long and chargeable abode through Italy and Illyricum, at length
crossed over the Frith or stre^ghts of Constantinople.
Bosphorus, and travailing forward with easy journies, they found Constantius
making his abode as then at Tisaria.
Caesarea in Cappadocia, a place before time named Mazaca, a city of good
importance, and well frequented, situate at the foot of the mountain Argeus:
who being admitted into the presence, by permission granted unto them
delivered their missives. No sooner were they read, but the Emperor grew into
choler and indignation beyond his usual manner, and looking so awrie upon
them, that they feared death, he commanded them to go forth, and could not
abide afterward either to move question unto them, or once to hear them
speak. Howbeit, in as great a heat as he was stricken into, yet he stood in
a doubtful mammering, Whether he should command those forces wherein he
trusted, to march against the Persians, or against Julian? And sticking thus a
long time, after he had weighed sundry counsels, he gave ear to the advice
of some that persuaded him to that which was good, and so proclaimed his
journey Eastward. Yet for all his angry mood, soon after he both dismissed
the ambassadors aforesaid, and also appointed Leonas his Treasurer.
Quaestor to ride with all speed into Gaul, with letters also written unto
Julian, affirming, that he nothing liked of this new change and alteration, but
charging him (if he regarded the safety of his own person and of his nearest
friends) to lay down his swelling pride and vanity, and to contain himself
within the power and government of a Caesar. And that the fear of what he
menaced might the sooner induce him thereto, as if he presumed and bare
himself highly of his great forces, he promoted Nebridius, then Treasurer.
Quaestor of the said Caesar in the rowme of Florentius, to be Praefectus
Praetorio, and Foelix the Chancellor or Secretary.
Notarie, he made master of the offices, and preferred some other officers. For
advanced he had Gumoharius the successor of Lupicinus to be l master of the
Armor, before any such matter was known. Leonas therefore being entered into
Paris, was received as an honorable and prudent personage; and the morrow
after, when the Julian.
prince was gone out into the field with a multitude as well of armed soldiers
as common citizens, whom of purpose he had called together, commanded he was
to present his letters unto him, standing aloft in his Tribunal, that he might
be seen from above. And after the scrow of the edict sent was unfolded, and
begun to be read from the beginning, when the reader came to the place
containing thus much, That Constantius disallowing all that had been done,
judged the power and authority of a Caesar to be sufficient for Julian, there
was on all sides set up a sound of terrible voices crying out in this note, God
save Julian Augustus, and according as the provincials, the soldiers, and
authority of the Commonwealth has decreed, which indeed is refreshed, but
yet fears new excursions and invasions still of barbarous enemies, [So be
it.] Which words being heard, Leonas with the letters of Julian importing the
same, returned safe, and Nebridius alone was admitted to the Praefectship: for
so much Caesar also openly had said in his letter should stand with his good
will and pleasure. As for the master of the Offices, he had a little before
ordained Anatolius to be the man, who before time was in place to give answer
unto requests, like as he had made other officers, according as he thought them
meet for his own behoof and safety. And for as much as among these
proceedings he feared Lupicinus, though absent, and then making his abode in
Britannie, a proud minded man, and of a swelling nature: and for that he had
him in suspicion and jealousy, that if he knew thus much beyond the seas, he
would stir up some matter of alteration and rebellion: a or Chauncellor.
Notarie of his was sent to Bologne.
Bononia, for to observe and watch carefully, that no man might be suffered to
pass over the narrow seas: By means of which prohibition, Lupicinus returned,
before that he took any knowledge of these news, and so was not able to raise
any troubles. Howbeit Julian a right joyous man now, in regard of his higher
fortune and the confidence he had in his soldiers, because he would not wax
luke warm, nor be reproved as one remiss, idle and doing nothing, after he
had dispatched ambassadors unto Constantius, went forth into the marches of
Low Dutchland, or Netherlands.
Germania secunda: and having strengthened himself with all furniture and
provision, which the business in hand required, drew near to the town
Obtricensis, near Mosa. And afterward having crossed over the Rhene, he
suddenly overran the country of the Franks, whom they call Atthuarij, men of
an unquiet spirit, and at the same time in very licentious manner raunging over
the coasts of Gaul: whom when he had suddenly surprised (fearing no
hostility, but exceeding secure, for that they could not remember that any
prince had entered into their towns and territories, by reason of the
difficulty of the stony ways that kept them off) he overcame with little
ado: and after he had taken prisoners and slain most of them, to the rest that
remained, upon their earnest suit he granted peace, in what conditions he
would himself, supposing this to be expedient for the neighbor borderers
that were possessors and holders of land. From whence he returned with like
celeritie by the said river: and diligently surveying the garrisons along the
marches, and reforming what in them was amiss, he came as far as to the
People about Basil.
Rauraci: where having recovered those places, which the barbarous enemies had
in times past taken in and holden as their own, and fortified the same more
carefully, he departed by the way of Besanson.
Besantio to Vienna, there to Winter.

CHAP. XI. Constantius having concluded a firm peace with the king of Armenia,
assembled an army, and besieges Bezabde: the walls whereof he labors in
vain to undermine and overthrow.
IN this sort went the affairs in Gaul: which while they had so prosperous
and safe success, Constantius sent for Arsaces king of Armenia: whom after he
had entertained most liberally, he forewarned and exhorted to persevere a
faithful friend to us: for he understood, That the king of the Persians had
oftentimes deceitfully, what with threats and what with crafty devices, been
in hand with him to cast off the society of the Romans, and to combine with
him. Who taking many an oath, That he could forgo his own life before that he
would change his mind, was highly rewarded: and so with the train that he
brought to accompany him, returned into his realm, and never durst afterward
break his promise, as being obliged unto Constantius by a bond of many favors
and pleasures done unto him; among which, this was the chief, that he had
joined unto him in marriage Olympias the daughter of Ablabius, sometime
Praefectus Praetorio, and the espoused wife of his brother Constans. After he
was dismissed, himself by the way of Bosoch. Castaldo.
Melitina, a town in Armenia the less, and by Lacotena and Samosata, passed
over Euphrates, and came to Edessa. Where, when he had stayed a long time,
expecting the companies of soldiers as they assembled together from all parts,
and waiting for plentiful provision of victuals, after the Autumnall Aequinox
he went forth and came to Amida: the wall whereof when he approached, and
beheld round about, how it was full of ashes and dead embers, he shed tears
and groned again, to consider what calamities that woeful and miserable city
had endured. There Vrsulus, Treasurer to the State, who chanced then to be in
place, with grief of heart cried out and said: Behold with what courage and
valiant hearts are our cities defended by the soldiers, for the payment of
whose wages, the wealth of the very Empire begins now to fail. This so
bitter a speech of his, the military multitude remembered afterward at
Chalcidona. Soph Calcitin. Turcis.
Chalcedon, and there rose up in a mutiny, to his destruction. From thence
marching with thickeset squadrons, when he approached Bezabde, he pitched down
his tents: which See the 22. book, how he came to his death.
being fenced all about with an high rampire and deep ditches, riding a great
way off about the circuit of the fortifications of the town, he was informed
by the report of many, that the places were more strongly rebuilt, which before
time the injury of time had decayed. And because he would omit nothing that of
necessity was to be provided, before the heat of fight, he sent certain sage
and wise men unto the to wit, the mercinarie garrison soldiers.
defendants of the town, to urge them by proposing a twofold condition, either
to return home into their own countries, with the grant of other men's goods
without bloodshed; or else to become wholly subject unto the Roman Empire,
where they should be advaunced with dignities and rich rewards. But when they
upon a natural obstinacy and inbred resolution rejected this offer, as men
being nobly descended and of high parentage, they addressed themselves with
undergoing of extreme perils and pains against all the preparations that
belong unto a siege: He therefore began to give an assault unto all parts of
the town, with his men marshalled in thick ranks, and with sound of trumpets
to incite their courage to the service: the valiant Roman souldior, for that
the legions were gathered under sundry defensive roufes of shields, going
softly and safely forward, began to undermine the walls: and because all manner
of casting-weapons were discharged upon them that came under the said walls, and
thereby the said joint frame of their shields loosened, they departed upon the
sound of the retreat. Now, after their hearts were for one whole day refreshed,
the third morning being more curiously covered and defended, with loud outcries
every where on all sides they assaied to skale and get up the walls. And albeit
the defendants lay close within behind hair clothes, because they would not be
seen of the enemy, yet so often as need required, they would stoutly thrust
forth their arms, and with stones and darts assail them that were beneath.
And when the hurdle fences of oysiers went confidently forward, and were at
hand to touch the walls, then there fell from above great pipes and barrels,
milstones, and pieces of broken pillars, with the exceeding weight whereof the
fighting men below were overwhelmed: and thus their devices to cover them being
violently driven asunder and laid gaping open, they made shift to get away with
the utmost danger of their lives.

CHAP. XII. With new engines of battery Constantius shakes the walls of Amida,
and with many assaults redoubled, in sundry sorts wearieth as well his own
people, as the Persians besieged.
THe tenth day therefore, after the assault began, when our men's hope grew
worse than it was, so that they were set all in heaviness, thought good it was
to bring over that huge frame of a Ram, which the Persians in times past, after
they had by the battery thereof rased Antiochia brought from thence, and left
at Carras: which being on a sudden seen, and most artificially set together
and fitted accordingly, daunted the hearts of the besieged so, as that they had
fallen in manner to the last remedy of yielding, but that they took heart
again, and prepared to oppose some means against this terrible and menacing
engine. Neither after this gave our men over one jot to adventure rashly, or to
advise politikely: For whiles this old Ram, being unjoynted and taken in
pieces, for easier carriage, was a setting in order and readiness, with all
cunning and strength of man, notwithstanding the exceeding force and firm
resolution of the defendants, the pieces of ordnance were still defended:
nevertheless with a number of stones and bullets sent out of slings on both
sides, many were killed, and still the mounts and bulwarks waxed greater, and
quickly rose to a mighty height: so that the siege grew more fierce and hoter
every day than other; and many of our men lost their lives in the place: for
that, fighting in the sight of the Emperor in hope of rewards, and taking off
their helmets from their heads, because they might the sooner be known, they
were with the cunning shot of the enemies archers overthrown: and therefore
tending watch and ward both night and day they stood more wary on both parts,
and did their devoir. And now by this time the Persians, seeing the banks and
terraces brought up to a mighty height, and withal the huge ram aforesaid,
after which there followed also other smaller engines of that kind, were
stricken with a wonderful horror, and did what they possibly could with might
and maine to burn them all: and albeit they ceased not to fling heaps and bals
of wildfire, and shoot fiery darts, yet they labored in vain; for that most
of the timber pieces were covered all over with skins and hair clothes
thoroughly wet; others again well smeared with alum, that the fire might glide
off without doing harm. But the Romans bringing them forward with great force
and valor, though with much difficutlie, yet defended and saved them: and in an
earnest desire they had to win the town, they set naught by imminent and
present dangers: and on the other side the defendants of the walls, when the
greatest Ram above said came toward them, ready to shake down the tower that
stood against it, by a subtle devise ensnared the iron front that it bears
out before (and in truth it resembles a Rams head) with long ropes on either
side, and so held it fast, that by returning back again it should not gather
new strength, nor be able with thick jurres and pushes, forcibly to strike the
walls to any purpose: and withal they powered down scalding hot pitch. The
engines also being advanced forward, stood along time carrying upon them huge
stones, to batter the walls, and other casting weapons. Now, when the mounts
without were raised still higher, the defendants fearing their destruction was
at hand, unless they took the better heed, ran headlong into a most bold and
adventurous action: and in a sudden sally, issuing by numbers out at the
gates, and setting upon the foremost of our men, threw with all their might upon
the Ram, firebrarnds and iron buckets laden with fire. But after a skirmish
valiantly performed with doubtful fortune, most of them prevailing naught,
were driven back within the walls: and anon from the mounts which the Romans
had erected, the same Persians as they stood upon their bulwarks were assailed
with arrows, slings-shot, and fiery darts; which flying among the roofes and
curtains of the towers, for the most part went by, or glaunced in vain, and
did no hurt, for that there were some of purpose ready to quench them. And
when on both sides the fighting men grew to be fewer, and the Persians were
driven to utmost despair, but that they found better means, they eftsoons
gave the attempt with greater care and diligence to sally out of their
fortifications: and so the multitude breaking suddenly forth, among our armed
soldiers, some appointed there were of purpose, who carried greater store of
fire than those before, and threw iron skuttles full of flaming fire upon the
timber frames, sticks also and twigges, with other dry fuel, very apt to
take fire. And for that the exceeding black clouds of smoke took away all
sight, when the trumpet sounded the battle, the legions in good array marched
on a quick pace; and as the heat of skirmish grew still by little and little,
by that time they came to buckle at hand-strokes, all the foresaid engines at
once were on a light fire, and in manner burnt, save only that greater one than
the rest, which, being half burnt, after the ropes were plucked away, that
were cast upon it from the walls and held it fast, with much ado, and by the
forcible straining of strong men, was drawn forth of the fire. But when the
darkness of the night made an end of the skirmish, our soldiers rested not
long, but being refreshed with small food and short sleep, they rose at the
call of their captains, and removed their munitions far from the wall,
providing to fight more close and short along the high bastiles or
countermures, which now that they were finished overtopped the walls: and that
the defendants might easily be driven from off the walls, upon the very top of
the said bastiles were planted two Balists, for fear of which it was verily
thought, that not one of the enemies could so much as put up his head and look
out before him. These means being sufficiently provided, a little before the
twy-light of the morning appeared, three battailons of our men in good array
advancing, with the crests of their helmets bending forward in threatening wise,
together with a number that carried ladders, attempted to give an assault upon
the walls: And now as the armor clattered, and the trumpets resounded, fighting
on both sides jointly with semblable heat and eagrenesse, they made a venturous
conflict of it: which as it did spread still more and more, the Romans,
perceiving that the Persians hid their heads for fear of the engines of
artillery placed upon the mounts, did beat upon the walls with the ram, and
then with mattocks, pickaxes, iron crows, and ladders, they approached: mean
while on both sides flew the casting darts thick. But that which troubled and
annoyed the Persians much more than all the rest, was the sundry shot
discharged from the Balists, running as it were through loope holes and grates
from the bastiles newly raised: Whereupon, supposing now that they were come to
the last cast, they ran resolutely upon the danger of death: and thus having
parted between them the several charges to fight upon the point of any
extremity that should happen, and leaving those behind that should keep the
walls, a strong company of them secretly setting open a posterne gate, issued
forth, with others following behind, that closely carried fire with them. And
whiles the Romans one while press hard upon them that reculed, another while
receive those that of themselves charge them, they that carried the fire pans
creeping softly and stooping low by the ground, conveied light burning coals
within the joints of one of the fabrics raised upon boughs of diverse trees,
reeds, and bundels of canes, which so soon as the dry fuel had caught fire,
were burnt: but our soldiers, together with their pieces of ordnance
untouched, were departed first in danger enough.

CHAP. XIII. Whiles Constantius determines to abide there by it, there fall
continual shewers of rain (foretold by a rainbow; concerning which there is
annexed a speculative discourse) and then follows Winter: Fearing therefore a
tumult of the angered soldiers, without effecting his purpose, he gets back
into Syria.
But so soon as the evening ended their fight, so that they departed on both
sides to take some short repose, the Emperor distracting and turning himself
unto sundry counsels, considering that important reasons urged him longer still
to attempt the destruction of Phaenicha, which fort, like an insoluble bar lay
opposed against the enemies outrodes, and the late season of the year checked
him, determined to stay yet there, and continue slight skirmishes, thinking
that the Persians, like happily to be distressed for want of victuals, would quit
the place and be gone; which fell out otherwise than he supposed: For, when
there was but small fighting, the air being moist, waterie clouds with
fearful darkness arose; and the ground with continual rain became so
drenched, that the clammie soft clay all that country over, standing upon a
most fat turffe and soil, made a great trouble every where: and beside all
this, cracks of thunder, and flashes of lightning coming thick one after
another, mightily affrighted the timorous minds of men. Moreover, to increase
their fear, there were apparitions seen continually of the rainbow: which how
it comes usually to be shaped so, the laying open of the natural causes
thereof will declare. The hot exhalations of the earth, and moist vapors
gathered round together into clouds, and from thence scattered into small
sprinkling dewes, and by spreading of the sunne-beames made bright and
glittering lie rolling full against the very round body of the sun, and so
do shape out the form of a rainbow, and the same winding with a spacious and
large bent, because it opens and stretches out here in our world, which the
reasons in Natural Phylosophie place over the or half part of the whole
Sphae^e.
Hemisphaere. The first color or show whereof, as far as man's eye does
behold and discern, seems Lutca.
pale or yellowish, the second more yellowish or tawnie, the third red, the
fourth purple, and the last compounded of blew and green. And this temperature
of mingled beauty, it carries, as our understandings here upon the earth do
conceive, therefore, because the first part thereof is seen more thin and
waterish, as suitable in color to the air round about it: the next following
is tawnie, that is, of a deeper and brighter hue somewhat than the former
yellow: the third red, for that being subject to the brightness of the sun, by
the receipt of the spirit or air, it discoloureth and diminishes his most pure
resplendence glittering over against: the fourth therefore a purple color,
because as the thick sprinkling dews through which it rises glitter between,
it casts forth shining rays and shows to our sight a color coming near
unto that of a flame: which color, as it spreads more abroad, turns into
blew and green. Others are of opinion, That the form of a rainbow then
appears to things here beneath in the world, when the beams of the sun
infused deeply into a thick cloud carried up on high, have cast a clear
light into it: the which not finding issue, winding round into it self, with
much fretting and striking thereupon, shines, and those colors verily which
come nearest unto white, it takes from the Sun that is aloft; but such as
are greenish, from the resemblance of the cloud next over it; as usually it
falls out in the sea, where the waves be white that beat upon the shore and
sea banks, but those farther within the sea, be without any mixture blew or
azure. And because it is a sign of change of weather (as we have said) namely
after a clear air gathering heaps of clouds, or contrariwise, after thick
air making a change to fair and pleasant weather, therefore we read often in
Poets, that Iris, i. the Rainbow, is sent from heaven, when there is an
alteration toward of the present state. There be many others, and those sundry
opinions, which now it were a superfluous thing to reckon up, considering that
my narration hasteneth to return whence it has digressed. With these and such
like objects the Emperor was tossed between hope and fear, whiles the Winter
came on a pace, and grew to be hard, whiles he suspected also to be forelaid in
those deserts and wild tracts; and withal, he feared likewise some mutiny of
the soldiers that were discontented and angry. Over and besides all this, it
vexed his perplexed mind, that having now the door set open (as it were) into
a rich man's house, he was to return, without effecting his purpose, with
empty hand. For which causes, giving over his vain enterprise, he returns
into Syria, minding to Winter in Antioch, after he had endured a labourious and
most dangerous Summer, and the same a long time to be lamented. For, thus it
fell out, as if some fatal constellation so ruled diverse events, that evermore
when Constantius himself in person warred with the Persians, some adverse and
cross fortune attended upon him: whereupon he wished, if it might not otherwise
be, to win by the conduct of his captains; a thing that we remember sometimes
happened in deed.

THE XXI. BOOK.
CHAP. I. Julian purposes first to begin with Constantius, and to set upon
him, conjecting his death by sundry presaging tokens, dreams, amd such like
devices: as touching which Ammianus Marcellinus sets down his own
judgment.
WHiles Constantius was held occupied with this hard fortune of wars beyond the
river Euphrates, Julian making his abode at Vienna, bestowed both days and
nights in laying plots against future accidents and afterclaps, bearing
himself aloft (so far forth as his weak and poor estate would permit) but
always standing in doubt, Whether he should by all means draw Constantius to
reconciliation and concord, or, to strike a terror begin first to provoke him
by war: which as he carefully revolved in his mind, he feared him both ways,
as well a bloody minded friend, as an adversary in civil troubles oftentimes
superior: but most of all the fresh example of his brother Gallus, held his
restless mind in suspense, whom his own negligence, and the deceitful
sleights of some, mixed with perjuries had betrayed. Howbeit, he took courage
otherwhiles, and addressed his mind to many and those urgent affairs,
supposing it most safe for his estate, to show himself a professed enemy unto
him, whose passions he guessed by the times past, as he was a wise prince, but
that through fained friendships he was deceived by secret traynes. When he
heard therefore, and understood what Constantius had written by Leonas, he
took small regard thereof, but admitting none of those that by his pleasure
and appointment were promoted to offices (save only Nebridius) himself being
now Augustus and Emperor, did set forth the a Quinquennall games and
solemnities, and wo^e a rich and sumptuous diadem set with shining precious
stones, whereas in the beginning of his reign he took a garland of small
value to go about his head, like unto a Master of the b wrestling gallerie,
apparelled in purple. In which time he sent unto Rome the funeral relics of
Helena his wife deceased, to be enterred in a manor or possession of his, upon
the highway Nomentana, near unto the city, where the wife also of Gallus,
Constantina, her sister, was sometimes buried. Now, it took him in the head,
and incensed was his desires (seeing Gaul now quieted) to set first upon
Constantius, guessing by many presages of Prophesies (wherein he was right
skillful) as also by dreams that he would shortly depart this life. And for as
much as malicious folk lay an imputation unto this learned prince, and
studious of all kind of knowledge, That he attained to the foresight of future
things by naughty and unlawful arts; briefly it is to be considered whence
it comes, that this kind also of no mean learning may befall unto a wise man.
The spirits of all the elements, for so much as they be eternal bodies, at all
times, and in every place having the powerful motion of foreknowledge, out of
those things which by sundry disciplines and sciences we desire to learn,
participateth with us the gifts of foresight and divination: and the
substantial powers, by diverse rites and ceremonies pacified, minister unto
mortal men, as it were out of lively and ever-running veins of fountains,
prophetical words: over which the president is (as they say) that divine
power, or Goddess Themis, whom so named, for that it is lawful and possible
to foreknow against the future time, those fixed decrees set down by fatal
law, which in the Greek tongue are called Tethemena, the ancient Theologers
have shrined in the very bed and throne of Jupiter, that life giving vigor.
Auguries c also, and Auspicies are gotten, not according to the will and
pleasure of fools, that know not things to come; (for there is no man so
foolish as would say so) but God it is who directs the flight of birds, so,
that the sound of their bill, or flight of wing, by the trouble some or gentle
passage thereof, may show before hand future events. For, the goodness of the
heavenly power (either because men deserve so much, or for that the same is
moved with some affection unto them) uses even by these arts also to discover
unto us those occurrents that hang over our heads. Semblably, they that observe
the soothsaying entrails and bowels of beasts, using to be turned into infinite
forms, know such accidents as are to fall. The inventor of which learning one
named Tages was seen (as men fable and talk) suddenly to have risen out of
the earth, in the parts of Hetruria. The hearts of men do then also reveal
events to come, when they boil in heat of spirit, but they utter and speak
withal divine matters. For, the Sun (as Natural Philosophers say) the soul
of the world, sending abroad out of himself, our minds as sparkles, when he
has set them aburning very hot, causes them to be privy to that which is to
come: Whence it is, that the Sibyls d so often say, They burn, while a mighty
deal of flames scorcheth them. Besides all these, the creaking noyce of
voices, and occurrent signs meeting us, thunder moreover, flashes and
lightnings, likewise the shooting of stars, signify many things. As for
dreams, seldom are they to be believed; but infallible they would be, in case
they who reason and debate of them missed not in their conjecture: And
otherwhiles (as Aristotle affirms) settled they are and stable, when the sight
of the eye as a living creature, soundly sleeping, and bending neither way
aside, sees most directly before it. And for that foolish people prate
otherwhile, and in their ignorance come out with these words, If there were
some knowledge of foreseeing, why knows not one, that he should be slain in
battle, or another, that he should suffer this or that? Sufficient it is to
answer thus, That a Grammarian has sometime spoken barbarously, a Musician
sung absurdly, and a Physician been ignorant of a remedy; and yet therefore
it follows not, that either Grammar, Music, or Physic have not their
being. Whereupon Tully, among other excellent sentences, has delivered this
also: The gods (says he) show tokens of things to come: In these, if one
chance to err, it is not the nature of the gods, but the conjecture of men,
that has faulted.

CHAP. 11. With these arts and an hypocritical profession of Christianity,
Julian confirms and strengthens himself. Mean while the Alemans kill a
certain warlike captain and the garrison soldiers of Julian, and put others
to flight.
LEast therefore this discourse of ours running, as they say, without the
bounds of the race, should breed a fullness and lothing in the reader, let us
return to the particular unfolding of such things as were foreseen. When
Julian, as yet being Caesar, shaking his shield with sundry motions, exercised
himself in the field at Paris, after that the small pins whereby the roundle
thereof was close jointed were shaken out and fell down, the handle only
remained, which he held still and clasped with a strong hand: And when all
there present, were affrighted herewith, as an ominous sign portending some
evil fortune, Let no man (quoth he) be afraid: I have that sure which I held.
Item, when afterward at Vienna he went sober to bed and took his rest, about
midnight a certain image very bright and glorious appeared unto him, and
uttered plainly unto him, lying as good almost as waking, these heroicke
verses, and repeated the same many times: upon the confidence whereof he
supposed there was no calamity or adverse fortune behind to trouble him. And
these were the verses: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When Jupiter shall reach the bound of noble Aquarie,
And Saturn touch of Virgo bright the twenty fifth degree,
Then shall the or Emperor.
king of Asia, Constantius, of this life,
So sweet and pleasant, make an end, with heaviness and grief.


He lived therefore in the mean time without any change or alteration as
touching his present State, but with a peaceable and quiet mind disposing of
all occurrents; and by little and little making himself strong, that unto the
augmentation of his dignity the increase of his strength also might be
answerable. And to the end he might without any impeachment allure all men to
favor him, he made semblance that he adhered to the Christian Religion, from
which a pretty while before closely he was and thereupon named Apostata,
revolted: and making some few privy to his secrets, he set his mind upon
divination by inspection of beasts bowels, birds flight, and other such arts,
as worshippers of the idols have always done. But to cloak these matters in
the mean time, upon that solemn holyday which the Christians celebrate in the
month of January, and commonly call the Twelfe day.
Epiphanie d, he went into their church or congregation, and after he had
solemnly done his worship and devotions to their The true God.
God, departed. Whiles these things thus pass, and that the Spring now
approached, stricken with sudden and unexpected news, he fell into a fit of
sadness and sorrow: for he understood, that the Alemans beginning at the
territory of Vadomarius (from whence after the league made there was no harm
feared) wasted the tracts confining with Rhetia; and that whole companies of
brigands raunging up and down all abroad at liberty, suffered nothing to
pass by their hand unattempted. Which outrage least being winked at and
neglected, it might stir up occasions anew of war, that before lay dead, he
sent one Libino a Com^tem, or Count.
lieutenant, together with the Celts and Petulantes that wintered with him, to
take order for the redress of this affair, as should be thought requisite:
who being come with speed near unto the town Seekingen. Rhenano.
Sanctio, was discovered afar off by the Barbarians, who already purposing
to fight, had hidden themselves along the valleys: and so having exhorted his
soldiers, though in number inferior, yet exceeding desirous to give battle,
unadvisedly he charge upon the Germans, and in the very beginning of the
conflict was himself the first man that lost his life. Upon whose death, as
the Barbarians became more bold and confident, and the Romans enkindled to
revenge their captain, there was a tough battle resolutely fought, and our
men, after some few slain and wounded, with the huge multitude of enemies
preassing hard upon them, were broken and put to rout. With this Vadomarius and
his brother Gundomadus likewise king, Constantius, as has already been
related, had established a peace. After which, when Gundomadus was dead,
thinking that Vadomarius would be faithful unto him, and a silent executor of
his secret designs, he gave him in charge as his herald (if we may believe
the report of Fame only) and wrote unto him, That (as if the covenant of
concord were broken between them) he should otherwhile trouble the marches
near unto him, to the end that Iulianus standing in dread thereof, might never
depart from the defense and protection of Gaul. Which instructions Vadomarius
following (as we may well think) committed those and such like outrages
aforesaid; being a man from the very prime of his youth wondrous skillful in
beguiling and deceiving the world, as afterward also he showed, whiles he was
Marquess or Warden of the marches in Phaenice: but being taken with the manoir
and convict, he forbear and abstained. For when his or Secretary.
Notarie, whom he had sent unto Constantius, was caught up by the stationarie
soldiers in centinell, and searched, if happily he carried any thing about
him, there was found a letter of his, wherein, beside many others matters, he
had written also this: Your Caesar has no [martiall] discipline or knowledge
at all. Howbeit, in his missives continually he styled Julian Lord, Emperor.
Augustus, and God.

CHAP. III. Iulianus having taken Vadomarius prisoner, who was the principal
author of this overthrow, and one much addicted to Constantius, confined him
and sent him away into Spain: and when he had passed over Rhene, he terrified
the Alemans, and at their humble suit for pardon granted them peace.
IVlian considering that these things (as they were dangerous indeed and
doubtful) would break forth in the end to some mischievous extremity,
bending his whole cogitation and mind upon this one point, made have to
surprise (...).
him at unawares, that he might establish in safety the security both of
himself and of the provinces; and such a plot as this he devised. Philagrius a
or Secretary.
Notarie, afterward Lieutenant general of the East, he sent into those
parts, a man in whose wisdom (whereof in times past he had good proof) he
reposed great affiance: and unto him, among other instructions, according to
which he was to deal, as the occasion of present occurrents should require,
he delivered also a little paper written and sealed, charging him not to open
or read it, unless he saw Vadomarius on this side Rhene. Philagrius, as he was
commanded, went forth on his journey: and whiles he was present there, and
busied about diverse affairs, Vadomarius, who had passed over the river,
fearing naught (as in time of sound and settled peace) and seeming to know
nothing that had been done amiss, when he saw the Provost or captain of the
soldiers that lay there, after he had spoken some few words of complement
unto him (as the manner is) invited himself (because he would leave no
suspicion behind him at his departure) and promised to come unto a feast of
his, unto which Philagrius also was bidden. Who being entered into the place, no
sooner espied the king, but remembered the Iulianus.
Emperors words: and pretending by way of excuse some earnest and urgent
business that he had, went back unto his inn: where, after he had read the
writing, and thereby taken knowledge what was to be done, immediately
returned, and sat him down among the rest of the guests. After the feast was
ended, he laid strong hand upon Vadomarius, and thus attached, committed him
to the said captain of the soldiers, for to be straightly kept about the e
standards and ensigns, after he had first read unto him his commission and
warrant, yea, and compelled those of his train and company (as touching whom
he had no commandment) to return home. Howbeit, the king himself being
brought to the princes camp, and now shut out of all hope to obtain pardon,
as knowing that his Secretary.
Notarie was intercepted, and what he wrote unto Constantius, already
published and known abroad, yet having not so much as any reviling speech or
foul word given him, was sent into Spain. For this order was very carefully
taken, That when Julian should depart out of Gaul, this Vadomarius, a most
fell and cruel man, might not licentiously trouble the State of the provinces
there, which hardly and with much ado was brought into frame. Julian lifted up
with this good hap, that the king was apprehended sooner than he looked for,
whom he stood in dread of when he should take his journey into far countries,
no whit slacked the care of his affairs, but determined to set upon the
Barbarians, who, as I have showed, slew Libino the or captain.
lieutenant in a skirmish, together with some few of his soldiers. And because
the rumor of his coming should not cause them to remoove into the parts more
remote, after he had passed over Rhene in the dead time of the night with the
most expedite and lightest appointed companies of his auxiliarie forces, he
compassed them about, mistrusting no such matter. And when with the rustling
and clattering noise of armor and weapons they awoke and started up, whiles
they look about for their swords and darts, he hastily flew upon them, and
some he slew; others craving mercy, and offering booties, he took prisoners
upon their submission: to the rest that remained, upon their entreatie, and
promising withal to continue in steadfast and assured quietness, he granted
peace.

CHAP. IIII. The hortatorie Oration of Iulianus unto his soldiers, when he
meant to give battle unto Constantius in open field. A solemn oath taken of
them all, except Nebridius, whom Julian delivers from the fury of the
soldiers, and saves his life.
WHich exploits being performed with stout and resolute courage, he guessing
what a world of civil and domestical troubles he had raised, and foreseeing
by quickness of wit and understanding, that nothing was so well befitting
sudden enterprises as expedition, he thought himself should be in safer
estate, if he professed openly his revolt and breach of allegiance: but
standing doubtful of his soldiers loyalty, he first pacified by a secret
kind of religious ceremony the goddess of War.
Bellona f: and then, after he had summoned his army together unto an
assembly, standing upon a bank raised of stone, and now as it seemed very
confident, he discoursed thus with a louder voice than he was wont to do. Long
since in secret deliberation with my self, I suppose, that you my noble and
worthy fellow soldiers, stirred up with so brave and valiant exploits, expect
this counsel at my hands, namely, how those events which are feared might be
thoroughly thought upon and well taken heed of before hand: for it becomes
soldiers grown up in glorious acts, to use their ears more than their
tongues, and deem no other commander to be of approoved equity than him, who
may be both praised and liked worthily. To dispatch therefore what I have
purposed, letting all circumstance go by, mark I pray you favorably what I
shall in few words deliver. Being by the will of God in heaven entermingled in
company with you in the very beginning of my youth, the continual inrodes and
invasions as well of Alemans as of Frankes, I repressed, and jointly with
vigorous courage, I made Rhene passable to the Roman forces as often as they
would; standing unmovable against the noise of rumors and the violent
excursions of puissant nations, trusting I assure you and grounding my self
upon your virtue and valor. And these painful labors which we have taken
and sustained, Gaul an eyewitness thereof (which after the loss of many a
man's life after long and grievous calamities has been relieved) shall commend
unto posterity from age to age for ever. But now, seeing that by the
compulsion of your grave and honorable judgment, as also of urgent
necessity, I am through the grace of God and your favor lifted up to the
imperial dignity, if Fortune further my enterprises, I will aspire higher and
reach at greater matters, protesting and declaring thus much openly, That unto
the army, the equity and noble prowess whereof has been so renowned, I
have been seen both at home temperate and mild, and in many wars also
against the banded and combined forces of the [barbarous] nations, considerate
and wary. That we may therefore jointly with one accord and mind prevent
adverse events, follow this way and policy that is right good (as I take it)
seeing the welfare of the State is correspondent to our intention and desire:
and whiles the countries of Illyricum are without greater garrisons, let us
march on apace without stay, and take the time to seize into our hands the
utmost bounds of Dacia, and from thence by the means of good success be
furnished with instructions what ought further to be done: and as the manner is
of hardy and redoubted leaders and captains, promise, I beseech you, by the
bond of an oath, continuance of concord, and fidelity unto me your Commander,
who will endeavor diligently, and after my accustomed manner, that for my part
nothing be done inconsiderately or faintly, yea, and produce the testimony (if
any man shall require it) of a sincere and incorrupt conscience, that I will
enterprise or attempt nothing willingly, but what is expedient and profitable
to us all in common. This verily I earnestly desire and request, Take heed that
in the fit of heat and boiling anger none of you break forth to the hurt and
hinderance of any private person: but let him consider thus much, that as the
infinite overthrowes and losses of our enemies, so the indemnitie and safety
of the Provinces, testified notably by examples given of virtues, have made us
so famous. This Oration of the Emperors being no less approoved, than if it
had been an Oracle, the whole assembly was seen to stir and moove
exceeding much: and desirous of noveltie and change, with one consent made a
terrible noise, with loud voices and wonderful clattering of their shields,
calling him, Great and high Commander, and (as they had seen by experience)
the Fortunate Conqueror of barbarous Nations and Kings both. And being all
commanded throughout to swear allegiance unto him, with setting swords close
to their own necks, they took a solemn oath in set form of words, and that
under pain of horrible curses, That they would in his quarrel, even to the
spending of their lives (if need so required) undergo all chances and perils
whatsoever: which done, all the great officers and rulers following, yea, and
those that were next in place unto the prince, obliged their fealty with the
like oath. Nebridius the Prefect was the only man of all that company, who
although in his inward purpose he was sure enough and steadfast, yet boldly
refused to swear, saying, That he might not be bound by oath against
Constantius, unto whom for his many benefits at sundry times he had already
been obliged. Which when the soldiers that stood near unto him heard, they
were in a great chafe and furious heat of anger, and made at him to have killed
him outright, but that the Emperor with his rich coat of arms protected him,
as he fell down at his knees. And being returned into his royal palace, when
he espied him gone before, and lying prostrate in suppliant wise, beseeching
him, That for to ease him of fear he would vouchsafe to reach forth his right
hand unto him: And what (says he) shall I keep especially for my friends, in
case thou touch my hand? But go thy ways from hence whither thou will, in
safety and security: Which when he heard, he retired himself apart, without
any harm done unto him, to his own house in Tuskane.
Thuscia. Julian having provided thus aforehand, as the weighty importance of
the business required, knowing also by experience, how powerful and
effectual in troublous affairs is prevention and getting ground before, after
he had by a signal and watchword given warning of his journey into Hungario.
Pannonia, he advaunced forward his tents, and marched on with his ensigns
displayed, and rashly committed himself to doubtful fortune.

CHAP. V. What acts Constantius performed, both domestical and military,
whiles he wintered in Antioch.
NOw, meet it is that I unfold the times past, and recount summarily what acts
Constantius wintering in Antiochia achieved both at home and in the wars
abroad, whiles these affairs aforesaid passed in Gaul. Among many other right
honorable personages that came out of strange countries to do their reverence
unto the Emperor, there were also Captains.
Tribunes of the better sort, men of mark appointed thereunto. When as
therefore Constantius being returned out of Mesopotamia was received with this
kind of duty, one Amphtlochius a Paphlagonian, who had been Tribune, and not
long before, whiles he served under Constans, was deeply suspected upon
presumptions that carried a likelihood of truth, to have sowed matter of
quarrel and discord among his elder Constantinus and Constantius.
brethren, presuming very sawsily to stand in place, to the end that himself
also might be admitted to the like obsequious service, was known and debarred:
And when there were many that muttered hereat, yea and cried out, That he was
not worthy to live any longer, as being an obstinat and stiff-necked traitor,
Constantius, who in these matters was more mild than otherwise he used to be,
Surcease (quoth he) to trouble the man, who, as I think is guilty, but not
yet openly convicted; and remember ye, that if he have committed any such
matter from under mine eye, he shall receive punishment by the doom of his
own conscience, from which he cannot be hidden: and so he departed. The day
following the same Amphilochius, at the solemn games Circenses stood beholding
the sight, as he was wont, just over against the Emperor, and upon the setting
up of a sudden shout, at the sending forth of an expected game or masterie that
was to be performed, when the or railer.
crosse-barres on which he with many others leaned, brake in pieces, so that
they all and he together fell down to the ground, some few of them were
slightly hurt, but he alone was found with rupture within of his or ri^ of the
b^lly (...).
midriffe to have yielded the ghost: whereupon Constantius, skillful also in
the foreknowledge Happily he divined hereby. That ^uli^n his concurrent should
likewise perish who did set himself against him, as the said Tribu^e had done
be^^re time, in siding with (...), and who now stood opposite unto him.
of things to come, rejoiced much. At the same time he espoused and took to
wife Faustina, having a good while before buried Eusebia (who had to her
brethren Eusebius and Hypatius, men of Consuls degree) a lady for bodily
beauty and commendable behavior excelling a number, and yet in so high an
estate right courteous; through whose most just favor, as I have showed before,
Julian was delivered out of dangers, and declared Caesar. At the same time also
there was good regard had of Florentius, who for fear of an alteration in the
State departed out of Gaul: and by occasion that Anatolius Praefectus
Praetorio in Illyricum was late deceased, he was sent to take his place, and
together with Taurus, likewise Praefectus Praetorio in Italy, he received the
ensigns g of the highest and most honorable The Confulship.
office. Nevertheless, preparation was made of means for war, as well
foraine as civil: the number also of horsemens troops was augmented, and with
like carfulness there were enrolled supplements for the ^. Footmen.
legions, by appointing a levy of new and young soldiers throughout the
Provinces. Moreover, all degrees and professions were sore burdened with
finding apparel, armor, weapons, and Engines to discharge shot, as also gold
and silver, yea and plenty of victual of sundry sorts, and diverse kinds of
beasts for carriage. And because the king of Persia for all the hard Winter was
with much ado driven back, and therefore more puissant forces of his were
feared, so soon as the mild weather and temperat season of the year came
about, ambassadors were sent with rich presents unto the kings and potentats
beyond Tigris, with instructions to admonish and exhort them all, to be of our
mind, and to hold with us, as also to attempt no fraudulent nor deceitful
practice: But above all, Arsares and Meribanes, the kings of Turcomania, and
Anaduole, accorto Girau^, or P^gian, after Castaldus.
Armenia and Georgiana.
Hiberia, were bought and wrought to our side, with costly and gorgious suits
of robes, with many gifts also of sundry sorts; who were like to endamage the
Roman affairs, if in the dangerous and doubtful times they had revolted unto
the Persians. Amid so many troubles and urgent negotiations, died Hermogenes,
and promoted to the Praefect-ship was Helpidius, borne a Paphlagonia, a man
that carried no presence with him, and for infirmity in his speech, of no
reckoning; but very simple and plain, of nature gentle, and nothing bloudily
minded: insomuch as when Constantius commanded him to put a certain innocent
person to torture in his presence, he was very well content to be deprived of
his place, and besought, That these matters might be committed to others better
than himself, for to be accomplished according to the princes mind.

CHAP. VI. In what sort Constantius provided for his instant affairs. The
politic speed that Julian made in setting his designs forward.
COnstantius therefore in this difficulty of urgent businesses standing
doubtful, was to seek what course to take, as one along time much troubled in
his mind, whether he should go against Julian into countries far of, or
repel the Parthians upon the point now, as they threatened, to pass over
Euphrates: and sticking thus in equal balance, in the end, after he had
consulted oftentimes with his captains, he inclined wholly this way, namely
(when he had finished, or at least wise appeased the nearer war, and left
behind him at his back no enemies, whom he might fear, now that Sc^avonia.
Illyria and Italy, as he thought, were daunted and quelled) to take Julian as
a hunters prey in the very beginning of his enterprises: for, to allay the
fear of his own soldiers, these were the very words that otherwhiles he
gave forth. But because he would not be thought to wax cool, or to have
omitted the other side where war was on foot, as minding to disperse and
spread a terror of his coming in all places, and fearing withal, least
Afric, a country fit and commodious for the Emperor in all occasions that
might befall, should in his absence be invaded, as if he had been departed
out of the marches of the East, he sent thither by sea Gaudentius a Chancellor
^^ Secretary.
Notarie, him I mean, who as I briefly touched before, lay as a spy a good
while, to observe the proceedings of Julian in Gaul. For he hoped that he
with his obsequious and quick service, would be able to effect all, and that
in two regards: First, because he feared the adverse of Julian.
part, which he had offended: and then, because he made have by the means of
this so good an opportunity, to commend his doings unto Constantius, who, he
made no doubt would get the victory: For no man then there was of the
contrary opinion, but fully of the same mind. This Gaude^tius being thither
come, and carrying in mind the charge which the Prince had given him, after he
had by letters instructed Cretio a or Captaine^
lieutenant, what was to be done, as also the rest of the commanders, and
made choice of the stoutest soldiers from all places, yea and brought over out
of both the Barbari^,
Mauritaniae nimble and light appointed skirmishers, kept most straightly the sea
coasts that lay opposite unto Guitune, Martiano. Gascoigne. Remigio Florentino.
Acquitanie and Gaul. Neither failed Constantius of his purpose by this
policy: For, so long as he lived none of the adverse part set foot in those
lands, although there was a number of armed men that observed the coast of
Sicilie, reaching from Capo Bo^i. Capo Coco.
Lilybaeum to Cabo Passato.
Pachynus, ready soon to sail over, if the passage had been clear and
open. Constantius having disposed of these and other small and lighter matters,
as he thought (considering how things stood) expedient for him, was advertised
by messengers and letters from his captains, that the forces of the Persians
being all assembled together under the conduct of their proud Sapor.
king leading the way before, were now Tendere, Encamping themselves.
marching near unto the edge of Tigris, and doubtful it was whither they went
to break out and make invasion: At which news being much moved, to the end
that making his abode nearer, he might prevent their attempts, he departed with
all speed out of his wintering harbor, and sending from all parts for his
horsemen and strength of infanterie wherein he trusted, he passed over
Euphrates by Capessana, upon a bridge of ships, and went to Rhoa. Nigro.
Edessa, a city stored with victuals, and strongly fenced, waiting there a
while, until either his own discoverers, or else some fugitives brought him
word that the enemies encamped forward. Mean while Julian departing from the
Rauraci, after he had dispatched his business, which ere while we showed,
sent back into Gaul Sallustius promoted to be Prefect, and commanded
Germanianus to hold the room of Nebridius. Semblably the All one with the
charge of the horsemen, as appears a little beneath.
Mastership of the armor he committed unto Nevita, fearing Gumoarius an old
traitor, of whom he had heard say, that whiles he had the leading of the
Scutarij, he secretly betrayed Veteranio his Prince and Sovereign. Also to
Iovius he gave the Treasurership of the household.
Questorship, of whom I have made mention in the acts of Magnentius, and unto
Mamertinus the charge of the of the State, or Empire.
Treasure and revenewes. Dagalaiphus he ordained Steward or Seneschal of the
household.
Captain of his h domestical train, and others, according to his own will
and pleasure (whose good deserts and faithful service he well knew) over the
soldiers. Being therefore to make his journey through the Martian woods, and
the ways joining upon the banks of the river Ister, being, as among sudden
occurrents, exceeding uncertain what to do, he feared especially this one
thing, least having so few in his train to accompany him, he should grow
despised, and offend Offenderes.
the multitude ready to repugne and repine against him. To prevent this
inconvenience, he with good forecast took this wise course: For, dividing his
army into diverse regiments, he sent some under the leading of Iovinus and
Iovius, to march with speed along the known ways of Italy; and others he
committed to the conduct of Nevita Whom he termed before. Magistrum armorum.
General of the horse: to the end, that being thus spread sundry ways, they
might be thought an infinite number, and so fill all places with the fear and
terror of them. For even thus did Alexander the great, and after him many
other skillful leaders, when the case so required. Howbeit, he gave charge
unto them that thus were gone forth in their march, to stand well upon their
guard, as if the enemy forthwith were ready to encounter them, and to keep
watch and ward by night in their stations and sentinels, least they might by
some outrode at unawares be set upon. Which businesses being thus, as it was
thought, well digested, following that manner whereby he had oftentimes broken
through the Barbarians tracts, and presuming confidently upon a continued
train of successes, he went on still farther and farther. And when he was
come to the place whence he understood the river was navigable, he embarked in
fisher boats, whereof, as hap was, he found good store, and along the channel
of the river he passed as closely as possibly he could: keeping himself
therefore secret, for that finding no miss of fine viands, but contenting
himself with slender and course diet, he passed beside the good towns
without forth, securely: laying for his rule to follow, that notable saying of
old Cyrus, who turning in by the way to an hostelrie, and being asked of his
host, What good cheer he should provide for him, answered, Bread only, for I
hope, quoth he, to sup near unto some river.

CHAP. VII. The fame of Iulians coming chaseth away certain captains of the
adverse part. Lucillianus thinking to make head against him, is suddenly taken
prisoner, and in few words rebuked and chastised. The straits and passes of
Illyricum and Thracia, with great celeritie intercepted by Iulianus, are
fortified.
But fame, which with a thousand tongues, as folk say, multiplies the report
of things exceedingly, was with much talk spread through all the Sclavonians.
Illyrians, That Julian having overthrown a number of kings in Gaul,
vanquished an army of many nations, and bearing himself proud of his sundry
successes, was coming near at hand: at which rumor Taurus, Prefect of the
Praetorium, being stricken with fear, departed quickly, avoiding him no less
than a foreine enemy, and ryding away speedily with change of posthorses
allowed by the State, after he had passed over the Julian Alps, in the same
trice had Florentius the Prefect likewise away with him. Howbeit Lucillianus a
Comes, who at that time in those countries had the charge and command of the
forces moved with some slight intelligences, as touching the stir and
trouble that Julian made, having his abode at Sirmium, and gathering soldiers
together, as many as the speedy execution of the business in hand would
permit to be sent for out of their proper stations, intended to make head
against him when he should come: but he, like a firebrand or casting dart set
on fire, hastening swiftly, as if he flew to the final end of his appointed
journey, was no sooner come to Bonmonster, Simlero.
Bononia, which stands 19. miles from Sirmium, but in the old of the Moon,
and therefore shining not the greater part of the night, he leapt all on a
sudden out of his ship, took land, and presently sent Dagalaiphus with a
company of light appointed men to call Lucillianus unto him, or to take him
away perforce if he made resistance: who being even then at his rest, and
raised up with a troublesome noise, when he saw himself environed round about
with a company of men whom he knew not, conceived presently what the matter
was, and at the hearing of the Emperors name, amazed with fear, obeyed his
commandment, though full against his will: And thus he who a little while
before was commander of the horsemen, and bare himself proud and stout
enough, yielded to the will and pleasure of another, and being set upon an
horse, such as came next to hand, was presented unto the Prince as a base
captive, unneth able to call his wits again together, so much oppressed they
were with the terror hereof. But when at the very first sight of him he
perceived, that he had leave and favor granted him to adore the purple robe,
he taking heart again at the last, and now secure of himself, My Lord
Emperor (quoth he) you have done unwisely and rashly, thus to venture your
person with so few, upon these foreine parts. To whom again Julian with a grim
and bitter kind of smile, Reserve (quoth he) these wise words of thine for
Constantius; For, this ensign of Imperial majesty reached out to thee, not
as to a counselor, but because thou should cease to fear. After this, when
Lucillianus was voided away, Iulianus supposing now he was to make no delays,
nor to slack his business in hand (as he had been always a Prince in
doubtful and dangerous affairs, bold and confident) marching toward the city
which he presumed was no less than surrendered, went a quick pace: and as he
drew near unto the suburbs, which were very large, and reaching out a great
way in length, the whole company of soldiers, and the multitude of people of
all sorts, coming forth with many burning lights, gay flowers, and luckie
vows, calling him Augustus, and Lord, brought him into the royal palace,
where, taking much contentment at this good speed, and grounding the hope of
future events with a lucky presage, That according to the example of this
mother city so populous and so well frequented, he should in other cities also
be received as a gracious and healthful star; after he had proclaimed the
morrow after a solemn game of running with chariots for the prize, to the
great joy of the people, when the third morning waxed once light, as impatient
of delays, he rode with speed along by the common highways, and meeting
with no man that durst make resistance, he took in Turk^^est.
Succi, and kept them with garrisons and for the defense thereof he ordained
as ruler Nevita, a man of approved trust and fidelity: the site of which place
it will be meet now to show. The tops standing thick together of the high
mountains (...), or Monte Argenta^o, Itali^.
Haemus and Valiza, Rithay^ero.
Rhodope, whereof the one arises from the very banks of the river Ister, and
the other from the hither part of the river Bardare, Tzet^ae.
Axius, ending at length in streits with risings of small hills, cut through
the mids of the Illyrians and Thracians; of one side bordering hard upon the
midland ^benburgen, Germanis.
Dacae and Serdica, on the other looking down to Thraci and ^hilippopoli. Vel
^t errano. Philibe, Turcis.
Philippopolis, great and noble cities: and, as if nature foreknew, that the
nations seated round about, should be reduced under the Romans dominion, so
framed and fashioned of purpose; in times past gaping more obscurely between
the hills thrust close and near together, but afterward when the Roman State
rose up to greatness and glory, laid wide open for passage also of carts: And
sundry times when the avennes thereof were shut up and stopped, they have
checked the attempts of great captains and puissant nations. As for that part
which faceth Illyricum, being of a meaner height, is now and then taken as it
were at unwares and passed over: but that part over against it, opposite unto
Thraciae, broken and bearing forward down right, both of the one side and the
other, encombred with rough and craggie ways, is hardly climbed, although no
man be there to impeach. Under these high banks and cliffes, there lies on
both sides a spacious ground of plain fields; the upper plot reaches unto the
Alps Iuliae, the nethermore is so flat and open, as that it is inhabited
without any let, all the way as far as the I take it to be the F^th Bosporus
Thracius, or Helle^pontus.
narrow sea and Mardi Marmota.
Propontis.

CHAP. VIII. An embassage of Iulianus sent unto the Senate of Rome, with an
invective against Constantius; two of whose legions under the conduct of
Nigrinus having taken in Aquileia, drive Iulianus into new thoughts and
counsels.
THese things thus set in order, as in such and so urgent a business might be,
this or Emperor Iolianus.
Sovereign commander, leaving the General of the horsemen there, returns
to Naessum, a wealthy town, to the end that he might from thence dispose
readily and with speed of all particulars that should make for his commodity
and profit: Where he commanded Victor the Hystoriographer, whom he saw at
Sirmium, to come from thence unto him, ordained him Lord Deputy to govern
Pannonia secunda, honored him with a brazen statue, a man for his sober
carryage right commendable, and long after made him Prfect of [Rome]-citie. And
now by this time, bearing himself more aloft, and thinking verily that
Constantius could never possibly be wrought unto an agreement, he sent unto the
Senate a sharp and invective oration laying open certain reproachful villainies
and vices against him: Which when they were read in the Senate house by
Tertullius, who as yet governed the city of Rome as Prefect, right notable
was the courtesy and thankful goodness of the nobility unto him, joined with
an honorable testimony of their affiance in him: for with one accord of
sentence and judgment, they cried out all alowd, Autorituo reverentiam
rogamus, i. We wish and award reverence and honor to thy Author. Then also it
was, that he harrowed the memorial of the Great.
Constantine, as one that had been a deviser of innovation and troublous
confusion in the auntientlawes and customs received of old: laying openly to
his charge, That he was the first of all others who advanced Barbarians unto
the honor and dignity of Consuls, unsavorly I assure you, and with small
discretion: who when he ought to avoid that which he right bitterly blamed in
another, shortly after preferred to a Consulship Mamertinus, a man neither for
honest life, for brave part, for sightly presence, nor glorious reputation in
the world, comparable to any of these, upon whom Constantine had conferred that
most honorable magistracy; but contrariwise, one full of imperfections, rude,
and uncivile withal, and (that which was intolerable) in high place of
authority cruel. As he was thinking of these and such like matters, and
careful about most weighty and serious businesses, fearful and unexpected
news were brought unto him, showing the wicked attempts of some, like to
hinder the forward courses of his designs, unless with watchful providence
he repressed them also, before they grew farther. The two legions i
Constantiacae with the addition of one cohort of archers, which he found at
Sirmium, he sent (as whose allegiance he yet distrusted) into Gaul, under a
color of some urgent and necessary occasions. These making but slow have
forward, and fearing as well the long and tedious journey, as the Germans,
cruel and continual enemics, plotted to make some rebellion, through the
counsel and inciting of Nigrinus, borne in Mesopotamia, and Captain.
Tribune of a troop of horsemen. Having contrived this matter by secret
conferences, and strengthened it the more by deeper silence, when they were
come into Aquileia, a town strongly seated, and compassed about with mighty
munitions, bulwarks, and walls, in hostile manner all on a sudden they took
it in; and the natural inborne townsmen and common people, who favored and
friended still the name of Constantius, put to their helping hands to set
forward this horrible and fearful tumult. And having shut up all ways of
entrance, and manned the towers and bulwarks thereof with armed soldiers, they
made preparation against the time to come for fight, living in the mean time
at ease and liberty: and by this so audacious an act, they stirred up the
Italian inhabitants, to side with Constantius, as if he had been yet living.
When Julian was advertised hereof, abiding then at Naessum without fear of any
troubles behind his back, and knew besides by reading and heresay, That this
city, how ever it had bin diverse times besieged, yet never was either rased or
rendered up; the more earnest he was, and made have to gain it to his own
side, what by cunning practices, and what with sundry sorts of flatteries,
before some greater mischief might arise. And therefore he commanded Iovinus,
a captain of the horsemen, who coming by the Alps was entered into Beyern, or
Bavaria.
Noricum, to return with speed for the quenching of that fire one way or
other, which was now on a flame. And that nothing might be wanting, he gave
commandment, All soldiers who followed either Comitatum aut Signa.
court or captain, to be staid as they passed by the same town, for to be
ready to their power to give aid.

CHAP. IX. The siege and assault of Aquileia, whiles Julian wintered in
Constantinople, upon hearing of Constantius his death, are described.
THese things thus set in order, himself not long after taking knowledge of
Constantius his death, passed with speed through Thracia, and entered
Constantinople: and being oftentimes advertised, that the said siege would
rather hold long, than be dreadful and dangerous, having appointed for this
service Immo with his company and other captains, he removed Iovinus from
thence, to be employed in other affairs of more importance and necessity.
When as therefore Aquileia was compassed about with a double pavoisado of
shields, thought convenient it was by consent of all the captains to draw the
defendants, what with threatening words and what with fair speeches, to yield:
and after much debating to and fro, seeing their obstinacy grew still more and
more, they depart from the parle without effecting their purpose. And because
there was now nothing looked for but fight, after they had on both sides
refreshed their bodies with food and sleep, early in the morning with sound
of trumpets incensed they were to do mischief one unto another; and so with
more have than good advisement, they set up cries amain, and prepared to
encounter. The assaylants therefore carrying before them roofefences and
hurdles very thick wrought, marched softly and with good heed; and so with a
number of iron tools assayed to dig under the walls, and many of them brought
skaling ladders, framed to the just measure and heights of the said walls. And
when they were now almost at the very wall, some with stones that came tumbling
down upon them, were bruised and sore squized together, others shot with darts
that flew singing about their ears gave back, and drew away with them all the
rest; who for fear of the like welcome, were wholly averted from their purpose
of fighting. The besieged now emboldened with this first encounter, assumed
confident hope of better and better still, and made small account of any thing
behind, but with settled and resolute hearts, along the river where it yielded
convenient place, with uncessant labor they performed watch and ward, and all
other means for their better security. On the other side, the assaylants
without, although they were sore troubled with the fear of dangers, yet for
very shame, least they might be thought dull of spirit and slothful, seeing
that the assaulting by open force sped no better, betook themselves to
artificial fabrickes and engines meet for a siege. And because the place was
no where found meet either to set Rams to it, or plant engines against it, or
to undermine it, by reason that the river Natisone. Lea^d.
Natiso runs along the city side near unto it, there was a device found
out comparable to those in old time. They built with quick speed certain
towers of timber higher than the enemies bulwarks, and placed the same upon
Trige^tinis.
three ships strongly fastened one to another, on which stood armed men, that
putting their whole strength together, jointly labored all at once with equal
courage near at hand to drive away the defendants from their standings: and
under them were light appointed skirmishers, that came forth of certain holes
in the said towers, put forth and laid over little k bridges, which of
purpose they had framed and joined before, and made have in a trice to pass
over upon them: to this end, that whiles they which were placed aloft on both
sides, assail one another with casting-weapons and stones, these that went
over on the said bridges, without any one to disturb them, having pulled up
part of the stone-worke in the wall, might make a breach and entrance into the
town within. But this second enterprise as wisely as it was begun, sped amiss
in the end. For when these towers drew near, assailed they were with shot of
fiery darts all besmeared over with pitch, with reed also, with sticks,
twigs, and sundry sorts of fuel, ready to catch a light fire. Which towers
being quickly set a burning, when they bending forward, and reeling with the
weight of those that stood waving upon them, fell down into the river, some of
the armed men, sticked with engine-shot a far off, were killed from their
very tops. During which conflict, the footmen beneath, after their ship-mates
that served on the water aloft were fallen, with huge stones were crushed, all
but some few, who by swift footmanship, through combersome places of refuge,
escaped. At length, after the conflict had continued until it was toward
evening, at the sound of the retreat, as the manner is, they departed on both
sides asunder, and passed that little remnant of the day diversely affected. For
as the assailants upon sorrow and lamentation for the death of their fellows;
so the defendants in hope of winning the upper hand, were mightily incensed,
and yet these also themselves took the loss of some few of their own side
right heavily. Nevertheless, no time was lost, and after allowance of so much,
for one whole night, as was sufficient to recover their strength with rest and
food, betimes the next morning the fight began afresh at the sound of trumpet.
And some of them bearing up their shields over head, to fight more nimbly;
others carrying ladders, as before, upon their shoulders, and running forward
with fervent violence, exposed their breasts to the stroke of many a dart.
There were also, who setting in hand to break the iron port-cluses, were soon
fired away, or killed with mighty stones from the walls. And some that went
about very boldly to pass over the ditches, by the sudden assaults of them
that issued forth secretly at the posterne gates, as they rushed on
unadvisedly, were sore hurt and set back. For the safe recourse they had to
the wall and vaumure strengthened with turfe, defended these wait-layers from
all danger. And albeit the defendants, in skill of martial feats surpassed,
who now had no other help left but their walls: yet our soldiers picked forth
of the best companies, not able to endure long delays, went round about all
the places near unto the city, seeking by what forcible means or engines
they might make way and break into it. But when they could not effect so much,
so great difficulties were in their way, they began more slackly to lay siege
unto the city; and the stationarie or garrison soldiers leaving their guards
and sentinels, by wasting the fields near adjoining, got plenty of all things
meet and necessary, and imparted a great deal of the booties which they had
gotten, unto their fellow soldiers: whereby swilling in a deal of drink, and
cramming themselves with full fare and high diet, they became heavy spirited
and unlustie.

CHAP. X. After news brought of Constantlus his death, the men of Aquileia
besieged, set open the gates unto Agilo, sent from Iulianus. Nigrinus is burnt
quick: other two are executed with the sword. Iulianus takes charge of the
affairs in Illyricum and Italy.
IVlian having intelligence hereof, by the common report and relation of his
consorts, whiles he wintered yet in Constantinople, politiquely took order to
set in frame these troubles. Soon after therefore he sends Agilo, colonel
of the Footmen at that time, a man of good note, and well known, to this end,
that upon the sight of that right honorable personage, and knowledge taken by
him of Constantius his death, the siege should break up. Mean while, that the
siege of Aquileia might not be given over, thought good it was, since all
their pains and labors undertaken otherwise came to nothing, that these who
so fiercely stood out, should be forced for very thirst to yield: and whereas,
notwithstanding the conduit pipes were cut between them and the springs heads,
they valiantly made resistance nevertheless, nay with more courage and
confidence than before; with much labor the course of the river was turned
away: which device likewise took no effect. For when the means of drinking
liberally and with greediness were cut off, those that by their own wilful
rashness were enclosed within, lived sparily, and contented themselves with
water out of pits and wels. While these things thus pass, and fell out as has
been said, Agilo, according as he had commandment, came upon them: who being
covered over head with a thick fence of shields, approached confidently: and
when he had delivered many speeches, and those truly, whereby he acquainted
them with Constantius his death, and how the Empire was settled upon Julian,
reputed he was as a liar, and escaped not without reviling terms: Neither
gave any man ear unto his relation of what was done, before that upon grant
of safe conduct he was admitted alone unto a certain bastile or fortification,
where, upon a more religious protestation of his true report, he recounted the
same again that before he had delivered. Which when they heard, after long
sorrow the gates were set open, and they all came forth by heaps, and with joy
received this peaceable captain: who in excusing and clearing themselves,
presented Nigrinus as the author of all this outrage, with some few others,
requiring that with the execution of them, the crime of majesty, and the
calamities of the city might be expiated. To conclude, within a few days
after, when this business was more nearly sifted and examined, before
Mamertinus the Praefectus Praetorio, then sitting in place of justice,
Nigrinus, as the hotest persuader of this war, was burnt quick. But after
him, Romulus and Sabostius, principal (...)
bourgeffes of the town, convicted to have sown discord and stirred up
sedition, without regard of what peril might ensue, had for their deserts
punishment by loss of their heads. All the rest, whom necessity and not their
own will forced to these furious broils, went away without harm. For so this
mild and merciful Emperor, weighing well the case with equity and reason,
took order. And these verily were the proceedings that passed afterward. But
Julian resiant still at Naessum, was encumbred with deeper cares, fearing many
things on both sides. For he stood in dread, least, if the soldiers shut
within Aquileia, by some sudden impression should stop the streits of the
Julian Alps, he might loose the provinces and the succors which he daily
expected from thence. Semblably, he feared much the affair of the East,
hearing that the soldiers dispersed over Thracia, against sudden violence
quickly assembled, drew toward the confines of Succi, under the leading of
captain.
Comes Martianus: But yet for all that, himself also in regard of these
instant businesses, working effectually with such careful provision as was
meet, gathered together the Illyrian forces, bred up and inured in martial
exploits, and ready in all conflicts to join with any warlike commander: not
despising in this so troublous and busy a time, the good and profit of private
persons, but giving audience to causes and matters in controversy, and
especially to the or Potestates.
States of free towns, to the favoring of whom being overmuch inclined, he
unjustly invested many of them in great offices of State. There finding
Symmachus and Maximus, two Senators of good mark for their noble birth, sent
as ambassadors unto Constantius; when they were returned from him, he visited
them in honorable manner, and rejecting a more worthy personage, in the rowme
of Tertullus he made Maximus Prefect of Rome, and all to gratify Rufinus
Vulcatius, whose sisters son he knew him to be: in whose government the
markets were plentifully served with victuals, and the complaints of the
commons, which oftentimes were wont to arise, ceased. Then also, to settle the
fearful State in security, and to embolden those that were obedient, he
declared Mamertinus, the Prefect Praetorio in Illyricum, Confull together with
Nevita: he (I say) did this, who but of late had beyond all measure taxed
Constantine as the first man that began to countenance and honor base
Barbarians.

CHAP. XI. When there was a very dangerous war toward, from the Persians,
Constantius in much sorrow and perplexity, in fearful have frames his
soldiers to their allegiance. Mean while the Persians, repelled by the
direction of the destinies, return home.
WHiles by these and such like means he plotted new designs, and that upon
ticklish terms between hope and fear, Constantius at Edessa perplexed in
his mind by occasion of sundry reports delivered by his intelligencers, was
drawn into a survey of diverse courses, as doubtful which of them to take: one
while preparing his soldiers to skirmishes and battles; another while ready
to go in hand, if opportunity might serve, to lay a siege a gemina.
second time to Bezabde: wisely considering, that being shortly to take a
journey into the North parts, he did not leave the tract of Mesopotamia without
defense. But being thus unresolved in his counsels, withheld he was by many
delays, for that the of Persia.
king stayed yet beyond Tygris, until by sacrifices and religious ceremonies
he had warrant to enter upon his expedition. For if he had passed over that
river, and found none to make head against him, without any difficulty at all,
he might have gone over Euphrates also: and otherwise again, keeping his
soldiers for civil war, he feared to expose them unto dangers about city
walls; having had experience particularly, of what strength the walls of that
Fort, and how resolute also and valourous the defendors were. Nevertheless,
because he would not sit still, nor be despised for his stouth, he enforced
Arbetio and Agilo, with other captains and officers of the Cavallerie, to make
have with puissant regiments under their conduct; not meaning that they should
provoke the Persians to fight, but keep the hither banks of Tigris with good
guards and fore-fences, and to lie in espiall, whither their king in his
violence would break forth. This direction moreover he gave, by admonition and
writing often, That so soon as the multitude of enemies began to pass over,
they should draw back with speed. And whiles these captains keep the limits
accordingly as they had in charge, and observe the secret design of that most
deceitful nation, himself remaining with the 1 stronger The old Legionarie
soldiers and Infanterie.
part of the army, had a careful eye to all urgent occasions, as if he meant
to defend the towns that he had in his protection, by sallies and outrodes.
But the spies and fugitives from the adverse part, as they otherwhiles came,
delivered intelligences repugnant one to the other: as being uncertain of
future issues, by reason that among the Persians there be none privy to their
counsels but the nobles and great lords, who are silent and trusty: among whom
likewise there is a god also worshipped, under the name of Silence. Now, the
foresaid captains sent daily for the Emperor himself to come unto them: for
they protested, that they were not able to withstand the violence of that most
fierce king, without all their forces put together. Mean while that these
matters are thus carefully handled, there arrived sure messengers one after
another, by whose faithful relation it was known for a truth, That Julian
having with great celeritie passed beyond Italy and Illyricum, seized as he
went the straits or pass of Succi, and waited for aids to come with speed from
all parts; that being thus environed with a multitude of armed men, he might
overrun Thraciae. Which being known, Constantius driven into a great agony,
with this one comfort yet sustained himself, That in Civil wars.
hometroubles he had always the upper hand: but considering how difficult a
matter it was to take counsel what to do in this case, he made choice of this
course especially, namely, to bestow his soldiers in That lay as post for the
affairs of State.
public wagons, and sent them before by little and little, with the more
expedition to meet with and resist the imminent danger. And this opinion of his
being by a general consent of all the army approved, they went, as they had
commandment, lightly appointed. And as he was taking this order, the next
morning word was brought, that the king with his power which he had led forth,
was returned home, by occasion that the praesaging signs by birds brake off
his enterprise. After this fear was thus allayed, and all the forces called
back, save those which ordinarily were appointed for the defense of
Mesopotamia, he returned to Haleppo. Belion.
Hierapolis.

CHAP. XII. Constantius delivered of this care, by a stinging and biting
Oration incenseth his soldiers against Iulianus, whom he terms Rebel, and
sends Arbetio and Gomoarius before with certain Cornets of the more light
appointed horsemen.
But doubting whereto these enterprises would in fine tend, when his armies
were come together, he summoned to an assembly all the Centuries, Maniples,
and Cohorts, with sound of trumpets filling the whole field with the multitude:
and then, that the more readily he might bind them to establish what he was to
give in charge, standing upon an high Tribunal, and the same with a thicker
guard about it than usual, composing his countenance to a cheerful aspect,
thus he discoursed unto them for their better encouragement: Being at all times
careful, that I commit not ought either in word or deed (were it never so
little) that suited not well with perfect honesty: and like a wary Pilot or
skillful Sayler, setting up and bending down the helm according as the
billows stir, I am constrained now to confess unto you (most loving
friends) mine errors, nay rather, if I may speak a truth, my humanity and
courtesy, which I thought verily would have profited the common affairs. To
the end therefore it may more easily be known, what is the cause of
assembling this company, listen I pray you with patience and favor. Mine
uncles son Gallus, what time as Magnentius (whom your valor and prowess
overthrew) obstinately persisted in working the trouble and confusion of the
State, I lifted up to the high place of Caesar, and then sent him to aid the
East parts: who, when he had by many lewd practices, horrible to be seen or
rehearsed, forsaken the way of justice, was by the doom of law justly
punished. And would God, that Envy, most forcible in stirring up of tumults,
had rested so and stood contented herewith, and that theremembrance alone of
grief past (but the same commonly is devoid of care) had disquieted and
troubled us. But now another accident is happened, more sorrowful I dare well
say than all that went before, which by our native and inbred fortitude with
the help of God in heaven we shall repress. Julian, whom we ordained for the
defense of Gaul, whiles ye were employed in assayling foreign nations that
made a foul stir round about Illyricum, presuming upon victory in some
light skirmishes which he had with the Germans, half naked men, has borne
his head aloft like a mad man, and assuming into his proud society some few
aid soldiers, ready in their fell stomach and desperate boldness to enter
into any mischievous action, conspired the hurt of the Commonweal, having
abandoned and trodden underfoot Justice, the mother and nourse of the Roman
world, who as a goddess to be revenged of such as joy in wicked deeds, will in
the end bring such proud, swelling, and fiery spirits to dead sparks and
embers, as my self have found by experience, and as I easily am induced to
believe, by the knowledge I have out of ancient histories. What remains
then, but that we withstand these tempestuous whirlewinds that are raised, and
by speedy remedies repress and quell the rage of this war new sprung up,
before it be grown to greater strength. For there is no doubt to be made,
with the favor of that most high God assisting us, by whose eternal sentence
unthankefull persons are already condemned, but that the edge of the sword so
impiously prepared, will be turned upon them to their utter destruction, who
not provoked with injuries, but made greater by many benefits, have thus risen
up to endanger the innocent. For, as my mind presageth, and justice ready to
further good counsels, does promise, I dare undertake, that if they come once
to buckle in close fight, they will for stark fear grow so benumbed, that
they shall not be able to endure the ardent light, brandishing and sparkling
out of your eyes, or the first noise of the outcrie at the joining of battle.
After these speeches uttered, he drew them all to his mind, and when they had
answered the same with kind words and loving acclamations, they shook their
spears in angry wise, and called to be led forth out of hand into the field
against the rebel. Whereupon the Emperor turning his fear into the joy,
soon after dissolved the assembly, commanded Arbetio, whom he knew already
by former proofs to be above all others a fortunate man in appeasing of
civil wars, to go before him in his journey, with the m Lancearij and n
Mattiarij, and the companies of the light armed soldiers: likewise Gomoarius
with the Laeti, who was to be opposed against them that should come into the
straits of Succi; one, whom in this respect he preferred before others, because
he was mischievously bent against Julian, as who had been despised and
disgraced by him in Gaul.

CHAP. XIII. Constantius after this, being disquieted with dreams, and as he
thought for saken of his tutelar Genius, and frighted withal by a certain
unluckie and ominous token, whiles he came unto a village near Antioch, fell
mortally sick, and dyed.
HIs fortune thus sticking and standing still in this tumultuous state of
adversities, showed by signs as openly almost as if they had spoken plain,
That the painful end of his life was at hand. For, both terrified he was in
the night time, and before also that he fell fast asleep, he saw the ghost of
his father, as offering unto him a fair babe: Again, when he had taken the
said babe unto him, and bestowed it in his bosom, it struck from him, and
flung a great way off, the or globe.
ball which himself carried in his right hand. Now, this betokened nothing
else but a change in the State, although the interpreters answered pleasing
things to him. After this, he confessed unto his familiars that kept nearest
unto him, and daily bare him company at the table, That now, as one forlorn,
he saw no more any secret apparition in cheerful and pleasant form, but he
thought it stood hard by him in poor and mournful manner: and supposed it
was, That a certain tutelar Genius Demon, or Angel.
allotted unto him for the protection of his life, had forsaken him, ready to
depart very shortly out of the world. For, the Divines out of their learning,
say, That all persons newborn, saving always the stable firmness of the
destinies, have to accompany them some such powerful spirits, to guide, as it
were, and govern their actions, and yet the same appearing to veriefew, even
those whom many kinds of virtues have made great and famous: And this doctrine
both the Oracles, and also excellent authors have taught us, among whom is
Menander likewise the Comical Poet, in whom are read these two o
Senarie-Iambick verses. (...),
(...).
One Angel has each man, his birth once past,
Which him directs, whiles lively breath does last.
Semblably, out of those everlasting verses of Homer, we are given to
understand, That they were not gods of heaven that communed with valiant men,
neither stood by, or helped them as they fought, but familiar Genij, or angels
that conversed with them: by means of whose especial help, it is said, that
Pythagoras, Socrates, Numa Pompilius, the (...).
former Scipio, and as some think, Marius and Octavianus, the first that had
the name of Augustus given unto him, excelled, likewise that great p Hermes
Tris-Megistus, Apollonius also Tyaneus, and Plotinus; who adventured by
discoursing upon this Theme by way of argument, both mystically and profoundly,
to show the first beginnings when these Genij become linked to men's souls,
which, being once received into their bosoms, they protect, as long as they
may, and instruct them in many high points, in case they perceive them to be
pure, and by the immaculat society of the body severed from the filth of
sin. Well, Constantius with all speed being entered Antioch, and minding
earnestly to address himself, as his manner was, against the troubles of
civil wars, after he had put all things in readiness, hastened to go forth
into the field, although a number secretly in mumbling manner were exceeding
much against it: For no man durst either openly dissuade him or say nay. Toward
the later end of Autumn he put himself in his journey, and when he was come
to a certain country or village.
Manor, not far from the said city, to wit three miles off, named
Hippocephalus, in the morning when it was day light, he espied the dead body
of a man slain lying on his right hand (with the head severed from the
shoulders) stretched out along just against the West side: And being afrighted
with this ominous sign, himself, as the destinies hastened his end, went on
apace the more resolutely, and came to Tarsus, where he got a light ague: but
supposing that all danger of this crasinesse of his, might be shaken off by
stirring in his travail, he came by difficult and cumbrous ways to Mamist^.
Glyca.
Mopsuestia, the utmost or town.
station of Cilicia as men go this way, scitua^ under the foot of the mountain
Taurus. And when the next morrow he would have gone forth, the grievousnesse of
his disease growing upon him, had so impaired his strength, that he was stayed
there; and so by little and little the unkind and excessive heat of the fever
so inflamed the blood within his vein^s, that his body burning in manner of a
furnace or oven, would not suffer a man so much as to touch it. When as
therefore all means of medicines failed, drawing toward the hour of death,
he bewailed his end. While his memory and senses were yet sound and perfect,
he ordained by will (as the report went) Julian to succeed him in his imperial
place. After this, when his wind grew short, which is the forerunner of death,
he became speechless; and after he had strugled a long time with his soul,
ready now to go forth of his body, he departed this life the third 5. day of
October.
day before the Nones of October, when he had ruled q and lived 40. years and
a few months.

CHAP. XIIII. His Testament and his heir. The ingenuous and plain dealing of
Ammianus Marcellinus, in describing the virtues of Constantius.
AFter this, when his relics were with grievous groans, loud lamentations,
and monefull mourning interred, those that were of highest place in the court
consulted what to do, or what they should go about; and when they had sounded
some few in secret wise, about electing an Emperor, by the instigation, as it
was said, of Eusebius (who was pricked in conscience for his offenses
committed, what time as Julian aspiring now to the government of the State,
crossed him) there were sent Theola^phus and A^igildus, then Counselors of
State.
Comites, unto him, showing the death of his kinsman, and requesting him,
setting all delays aside, to go directly into the East, and to possess
himself thereof, being ready to yield him obedience. But the voice went, and
rumors ran abroad, That Constantius in his time had made his last will and
Testament, wherein he did set down, as I said before, Julian to be his heir,
and gave to those whom he loved, feoffements upon trust, and legacies. Now, his
wife he left behind him with child [of a daughter] whereupon, being borne after
his death, and called after his Constantia.
name, when she came to ripe years, she was coupled in marriage to Gratianus.
Observing truly then the difference of his virtues and vices, meet it will be
that the principal be first declared. He kept in all places the State and
Majesty belonging to an Emperor, and with a lofty and brave mind despised
popularitie; exceeding sparing he was in the beftowing of high dignities,
suffering seldom times any innovations about the administration of public
offices, and never erecting any military titles: neither was any captain or
commander under him advanced with the dignity of r Clarissimatus: for they
were, as we remember, styled s Perfectissimi. Neither came the governor of a
Province to be general of the horse, nor suffered he General of the horse.
him to meddle with any civil affair: but as well all officers of the camp,
as civil magistrates, after the manner of the reverence and respect done in old
time, had always in honor the Praefects of Praetorium, as the very height of
all authority. Passing careful and wary in preserving of soldiers; a
precise examiner otherwhiles of their deserts. As for the Palatine dignities,
he gave them, as it were, by a certain plumbe-line and level, and in his
days no new upstart, or unknown person came in place to bear any great sway
in the court, but he only that after ten years space was thoroughly known,
like to s s manage the mastership of the offices, or the Treasure and
Revenewes, or any such like function. And very seldom it fell out, that any
martial man passed to the administration of civil matters: and on the other
side, none took the charge of soldiers, but such as had been hardened in
war service. An earnest mind and affection he had to learning: but when as by
reason of his dull and heavy spirit he could not attain unto Rhetoric, he
left it and went to Poetry, wherein he did nothing to any purpose. In a
frugall and sober kind of life, by moderat eating and drinking, he had his
health so well, that seldom he contracted any diseases, but when he did, sick
he was almost to death. For, by long experience and proof in t Physic, we
have observed, That such dangerous maladies are incident to bodies not loosely
nor riotously given. A little sleep contented him, when time and occasion so
required. And in so many years of his reign passing chaste he lived, so as he
could not be touched so much as with suspicion of Happily here is meant that
soul and u^^^^u^al sin of ^^decastie.
inconstancy, by any page or groom attending about him: in which behalf,
malicious people, if they can find no fault indeed, yet stick not to raise
slanders of such as be in highest place, and may live as they list. A right
good horseman he was, and launced a dart very well: but above all, as a most
cunning archer, he shot sure, and besides was exceeding skillful in the feats
of service on foot. To say nothing, that he was never seen abroad and out of
his house to have snit his nose, or spit, or cast his head at any time at one
side, nor so long as he lived to have tasted of any apples, or such like fruit,
because this has been often related already.

CHAP. XV. He cloketh not nor concealeth his vices, but with the pencill of
hystoricall truth, painteth them to the life, having described the shape and
liniaments of his body, together with his burial.
HAving recounted summarily his good parts, as many as we could come to the
knowledge of, let us now proceed to his bad. Whereas in other affairs he was
comparable with princes that were of the middle rank, if he had caught hold
once of any presumption of affecting or aspiring to the Empire, how untrue or
slight soever, in sifting and examining thereof he would never make an end, but
without all regard of right or wrong proceeding herein, he went far beyond
the monstrous courses of Caligula, Domitian, and Commodus, whose cruelty he
taking for a pattern to imitat, in the beginning of his reign, slew and
rooted out al of his own blood and kindred. To add more unto the sorrows of
these poor wretches that were informed against, as culpable in any point of
pety or high treason, his rigor and wrathful suspicions were streined and
stretched to the uttermost in all such cases. And if an inckling were given of
any such thing, he addressing himself to streit inquisition after it, more
eagrely than might stand with civil justice, did set such as were fell and
dreadful, to be the examiners and judges of these causes: and in punishing
some, he went about to lengthen out the time of their death, if nature would
permit, as one in such points of judicial trials, more cruel even than
Gallienus. For he, being many times forelaid by the trains of traitors indeed,
namely, Aureolus, Posthumus, Ingenuus, Valens, surnamed Thessalonicus, and many
others, punished otherwhiles very mildly their heinous faults, that would have
cost them their lives: but this man enforced their facts, even those whereof
some doubt was made, to seem by violence of torment most evident and certain.
And in these and such like cases, he then hated to the death, when most of all
he labored and endeavored this, to be reputed just and merciful. And like
as out of a dry wood the sparks that fly by a gentle blast of wind, with an
unrestrainable course, reach to the danger of country towns; even so he
also out of the least matters raised whole heaps of mischiefs and miseries:
far unlike unto that modest and noble prince Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus
Marcus, who, what time as A^idius.
Cassius had by way of usurpation.
mounted up to the imperial dignity in Syria, and a packet of letters sent
from him to his accomplices and adherents, was presented unto him, and the bearer
intercepted, caused the same sealed as it was, straight ways to be burnt: this
did he whiles he abode in Illyricum, for fear, least if the traitors were
detected and known, he might offend and displease some of them whom he would
not. And as diverse of sound judgment are of opinion, it was a sign rather of
great virtue in the same prince, Imperio coundem comitantium sine ^ruore
c^ssisse That it might be said after his death That his Empire was (...), the
thing that Alexander Sver^^ and other good Emperors aimed at.
to have left the Empire without any bloodshed of those of his train and
privy Counsel, than if he had been revenged so unmercifully: According to
the doctrine also of Tully, in a certain Epistle to Nepos, taxing Caesar for
cruelty: For, Felicity, quoth he, is nothing else but prosperity of honest
things: Or, that I may define it otherwise, Felicity is that fortune which
helps good counsels, which whosoever uses not, can by no means be happy:
And therefore in wicked and impious counsels which Caesar took to, there could
be no felicity: And more happy in my judgment was Camillus, whiles he lived
in exile, than in the same days Manlius, although he might, as he desired,
have reigned king. Her aclitus also the Ephesian, affirms the same, and
advertiseth us, That brave and worthy men have diverse times been overcome
(such are the variable events that fortune works) even of idle and slothful
cowards. And that this moreover among other principal praises is most eminent,
when as authority placed in high degree, having the desire to hurt, to be
cruel and wroth, subdued, and, as it were, put under the yoke, has erected a
glorious trophie of clemency, in the castle of a victorious mind. Now as this
Prince in foreine wars went away with hurt and foil, so by reason of civil
conflicts, wherein he sped well, he bare himself proud, and by occasion of the
inward ulcers of Common weal, he was all embrued with horrible and filthy
blood: Whereupon, in a perverse purpose rather than just and usual, he reared
with great cost and charges in Gaul and Pannonia triumphall arches even out of
the loss and calamity of the Provinces, together with the titles of his acts
affixed thereto, for men to read, so long as those monuments would be able to
stand. Exceeding much addicted he was to his wives, to the small puling voices
of Eunuchs, and to some Courtyers, who applauded every word he spoke, and
observed to honor him, and sooth him up in whatsoever he affirmed or denied.
The distasteful bitterness of these times, was made the worse by the
unsatiable extortion and snatching of these receivers, and importunat
collectors of tributes and taxes, who drew more hatred upon his head, than
money into his coffers. And this seemed unto many the more intolerable, for
that he never heard any cause, nor tendered the indemnitie of the provinces,
when they were over-layed with taxes, tributes, and imposts, one in the neck
of another. Over and above all this, apt he was to take away again what he
had once given; and that perfect and sincere religion of the Christians he
blended with foolish and doting superstitions: and being given to search
thereinto more intricately, than to settle it with gravitie, he stirred many
schisms and discords, which as they spread more and more, he maintained with
contentious words and disputations: insomuch as, whiles their bishops coursed
up and down by troops on posthorses, allowed by the State, from Synod (as
they term it) to Synod, laboring to bring all rites and ceremonies to their
own dispose and will, he thereby cut the sinews quite of those that kept
wagons for hire. As touching his form and feature of body, this it was. His
complexion somewhat black or brown; the cast of his eye lofty, his sight
quick; the hair of his head soft, his cheeks always shaven, and shining
beautifully, from the grafting of his neck to his groine very long; bow-legged
and short withal, whereby he both leapt and ran passing well. Well, being thus
dead, his corpse being embalmed and chested, Iovianus; who then was Protector u
Domesticus, had commandment to attend upon it with royal pomp as far as
to Constantinople, to be enterred close unto the nearest of his blood: and unto
him, sitting upon the Carroch that carried the Relics (as the manner is unto
Emperors) were presented the essays and proofs of the soldiers corn and
victuals, as themselves term them, x Indicia proba: also Publica e^i^^alia: I
suppose he means posthorses, camels, ^^ules, horses etc. for draught and
carriage, in service of the state.
public beasts were showed, and according to the usual custom they came
upon him, and grew more and more: which together with officious meetings upon
the way, and other such signs, portended verily unto the said Iovianus the
Empire; but the same to no effect, and without any port or continuance, as unto
one that was the minister of such funeral pompes.

THE XXII. BOOK.
CHAP. I. The death of Constantius once known, Iulianus as yet a young man of
good growth, with exceeding applause of all men is received by the
Constantinopolitanes.
WHiles the mutable and rolling chances of Fortune work these occurrents in
diverse in the East and West Empires.
parts of the world, Julian among many affairs which he projected in
Illyricum, pried continually into the bowels of beasts, and gazing withal at
the flight of birds, longed to know before hand, what end all accidents would
have: but when he had received doubtful and dark answers, he rested still
uncertain of the future. And at the length Aprunculus Gallus the Orator, a
skillful Soothsayer, and promoted afterward to be governor of the province
Narbonensis, told him the events, instructed before hand (as himself said) by
the inspection of a liver, which he had seen hidden within a duple skin. And
when as Julian feared for all that, least this might be devised to humor his
desire, and was therefore sad and heavy, himself espied a much more certain
praesaging token, which evidently showed the death of Constantius. For at the
very same instant, when the said Constantius died in Cilicia, it happened, that
the yeoman of the stirrup.
souldior, who with his right hand lifted him up to his horse back, caught a
fall and lay along on the ground, whereupon he cried out by and by in the
hearing of many, That He was fallen who had raised him up to his high place of
dignity. And albeit he knew these were gladsome signs, yet standing fast
still, as it were, upon his guard, he kept himself within the bounds of Dacia,
fearing even for all this, many accidents: for he thought it no point of
wisdom to trust in conjectures, which peradventure would fall out contrary.
Whiles he stood thus doubtful and in suspense, behold all on a sudden there
came as ambassadors sent unto him, Theolaiphus and Aligildus, with tidings,
That Constantius was deceased: and saying moreover, That by the last words he
spoke he nuncupated him successor in his imperial throne. Which being known,
after he was exempt from dangerous broils and troublous stirs of war, he
bare himself wondrous high: and now believing prophesies, and making use of
his own experience, namely, how expedition in his affairs had diverse times
stood him in much steed, he gave knowledge by proclamation of his journey into
Thracia: and so advauncing forward his ensigns in an happy hour, after he
had passed through the bending and hanging straits of the Succi, he marched on
to Philippopolis, in old time called Eumolpias, and all those with a cheerful
pace followed him, whom he had in his conduct. For they well considered, that
the Empire, which they went by force to win, and that with the fear of
extreme perils, was now beyond their hope granted unto him by the ordinary
course of right. And as the usual manner of Fame is, to amplify all
novelties, he hastened from thence, mounted higher and higher, as it were in
some chariot of Triptolemus, who for his swift passage round about in the air,
fabulous antiquity says, rode upon winged dragons: and thus dread by land and
sea, having no walls to withstand him, he entered into Heraclia, Ortel.
Heraclea, otherwise called Perinthus. This being soon after known at
Constantinople, there came forth by numbers a multitude of all ages, and of
both sexes, to see one sent down as it were from heaven. Received therefore he
was the third the 11. day of December.
day before the Ides of December, with the honorable and reverend attendance
of the Senate, with the consonant applause also of the people: and thus
environed with troops of armed soldiers and gowned citizens, conveyed he was
along as in battle ray, having the eyes of all men fastened wistly upon him,
not only with an earnest look, but also with much admiration. For it seemed
to praesage some great thing, that he, as yet a young man newly come to his
growth, small of body, for his brave acts right excellent, after the bloody
ends of kings and nations, passing from city to city with unexpected
swiftness, which way soever he went, with increase still of riches and forces
like a burning flame, so easily seized and took up all places; and to
conclude, who by the ordinance of the heavenly power entered upon the imperial
government, without any detriment or loss of the Weal public.

CHAP. II. He grants out a commission to right honorable personages for the
examination and trial of all matters: whence ensued the repairing of the
tottering state of Commonweal, and the punishment of some lewd and wicked
persons.
SHortly after this he committed unto Secundus Sallustius, promoted to be
Praefectus Praetorio, the charge to sit upon inquisitions, as unto a faithful
minister; and joined with him in commission Mamertinus, Arbetio, Agilo and
Nevita, Iovinus likewise newly advaunced to be General of the Cavallerie in
Illyricum: who being all gone over to Chalcedon, in the presence of the a
Principia and captains.
Tribunes of the b Ioviani and c Herculiani, examined causes more rigorously
than reason and equity required; except some few, in which the truth presented
unto them most dangerous malefactors and offenders. And first of all they
confined into Britannie Palladius, late master of the offices, called into
question upon suspicion only, That he had framed and suggested some matter to
Constantius against Gallus, whiles he was Master of the offices under the said
Gallus, being Caesar. Then banished they unto or Vercellae, now Vercelli.
Vercellum, Taurus, who had been Praefectus Praetorio: whose fact before
indifferent judges, that can discern between just things and unjust, might
seem very pardonable. For, what fault committed he, if fearing a blustering
wind and tempest that was up, he fled to the protection of his prince? And the
acts that passed upon him, were read not without great horror, when the
public Act or Record thereof contained this beginning.
Exordium: During the Consulship of Taurus and Florentius, when Taurus was
brought in under the Criers etc. Semblably, to the like point of destruction
was drawn Pentadius: unto whose charge it was laid, That being sent from
Constantius, he wrote by way of cyphring, What answers upon many
interrogatories Gallus made, when his death was at hand: But when he defended
himself rightfully, he ^bi^t ^^n^xius: I would read it ^o, rather than (...)
he died etc.
departed without harm of his person. By the like unjust proceeding was
Florentius the son of Nigrinianus, Master of the offices for the time being,
thrust up into Boas, an Isle of Dalmatia. For the other Florentius, who had
been Praefectus Praetorio, and was then Consul also, being skared with the
sudden change of the State, having together with his wife escaped the
dangers, lay close a long time, and could not return before the death of
Julian; howbeit, in his absence condemned he was to die. In like sort,
E^agrius, Comes d rei privatae, and Saturninus, late great Master, or
Seneschall of the palace, as also Cyrinus, who had been a Notarie, were
transported over into exile. But for the death of Vrsulus, who was high
Treasurer.
Comes Largitionum, Justice her self seems unto me to have wept, blaming the
Emperor for an unthankful person. For, when as being Caesar, he was sent into
the West parts, there to be kept short, and put to all sparing of expenses, and
had no power granted, to give aught by way of donative unto the soldiers, to
the end, that being thus strait laced, he mightlye open to the mutinies of the
army, this selfsame Vrsulus sending his letters unto him, an under Treasurer.
who had the keeping of the treasure in Gaul commanded, That whatsoever
Caesar called for, it should be given unto him without fail. When Vrsulus was
put to death, Julian perceiving himself exposed to the railing words and
curses of many, and supposing this foul fact which could not be purged, might
yet be excused, avouched, That the man was killed without his privitie,
pretending, That in an angry mood of the soldiers he was made away; as who
remembered well those words, as I have already related, which he had let fall,
when he saw Amida rased. And therefore he seemed timorous, or not well advised,
when he made Arbetio, a man always suspected, and exceeding proud, a special
Commissioner and Judge to hear and determine these causes, having others
together with the chief captains and officers of the camp.
Principia of the Legions for show only present with him: one (I say) whom
above all he knew to be opposite and set against his life and safety, as became
him who should be partner in civil victories. And albeit those particulars
which I have reported, were displeasant to his well-willers and favorers, yet
these examples that follow were executed with due vigor of justice and
severitie. For Apodemius, lately a Pursivant or Intelligencer, who (as I have
showed) was very hot and sharpe-set to work the death of Gallus and Sylvanus
and Paulus that Notarie, surnamed a Ch^^^.
Catena, a man not to be mentioned but with the grief and groaning of many,
were burnt quick, and perished by that end which was to be hoped for. Beside
these, Eusebius, who had been chief Chamberlain to Constantius, a man of
high spirit, and cruel withal, was adjudged to suffer death: Eusebius (I say)
who being lifted up from a most low degree to so high a place well near, as to
command the Emperor, and therefore intolerable, e Adrastia, that beholds
men's doings, plucking him first by the ear (as they say) and admonishing him
to live more reformed, when he strived again and made resistance, threw
headlong down as it were from a certain high and steep rock.

CHAP. III. The most ugly and loathsome face described, of the court and army
of Iulianus: the same Princes impiety, his hatred and deceitful dealing
against Christ and Christians.
AFter this the Prince turned his whole favor and affection toward his
Courtiers, even all that were or could be, not ywis as a Philosopher that
professes the search into the truth. For he might have been commended, if he
had retained, though few, yet some at least wise that were of moderat
behavior, and known for their honest conversation. But confessed it must be,
that he highly maintained the most part of them as the very seed-plot of all
vices, in so much as they infected the Commonwealth with their lewd lusts and
wicked desires, and did hurt to many, more by example, than by liberty of
sinning: For some of them fed with the spoils of churches, and out of every
occasion smelling after lucre, being raised from base beggerie to so high a
leap of great wealth and riches, held no measure either in profuse largess,
or in poling, or in wasting, as those that always had been accustomed by
extortion and pillage to get other men's goods into their hands. Hence budded
forth the beginnings of loose and licentious life; hence sprung perjuries: no
regard was there of reputation, but such was their witl^sse pride, that they
stained their credit with dishonest and shameful gains. Among which
enormities grew also the foul sinks and deep gulfes of wastfull banquets, and
in stead of triumphs for victories, feasting with triumphs. Then came up the
wearing of silks and velvets without all spare: then increased the artificial
skill of weaving and embroderie, together with the curious cunning of cookerie:
then were large plots for sumptuous and richly decked houses laid for, the
spacious model of which, if the Consul Quintius should have possessed in
lands he had lost even after his Dictatorship the glory of his poverty. To
these blemishes and stains in Court, were adjoined the enormious
transgressions of discipline in camp, when the soldier instead of a joyful
shout, studied to sing wanton sonnets: neither had the armed man, as before
time, a stone to couch himself upon, but feathers and delicat winding beds:
now were their drinking pots more weighty than their swords, for they shamed
now to drink out of earthen vessel. Moreover, there was now seeking for
houses built of marble, whereas we find it written in ancient records, That a
soldier of Sparta was sharply chastised, for that during the time of war
abroad, he durst be seen within house. Moreover, the soldiers in those days
were to their allies and contrymen so stout, and withal so given to
extortion but contrariwise to their enemies so false hearted, and cowardous,
that having by ambitious suits and idleness gotten wealth, they could most
skilfully distinguish the variety that was in gold and precious stones: far
otherwise than we find in records of later date. For well known it is, that in
the time of Maximian Caesar, when a fort or camp of the king of Persia was
rifled, a certain common soldier after he had met with a Parthicke sacbell,
wherein were perles, upon simplicity, for want of skill and knowledge, threw
out the gemmes, and went away sufficiently contented with the beauty only of
the lether bag. It fortuned about the same time, that a certain Barber being
commanded to come and pole the Emperors head, entered in arrayed in rich and
costly apparel, whom when Julian saw, he was much astonished, I (quoth he)
commanded not a or Auditor.
f Receiver, but a Barber to be sent for: Howbeit the said party being
demanded, What he might dispend by his art? answered, He got every day as much
as came to the g allowance for twenty men in victual, and as much for
horse-provender (which they commonly term h capita) also he had a good stipend
or salarie by the year in money, over and beside many commodious suits and
requests granted unto him. Whereat being moved and displeased, he discharged
away all such, together with Cooks and others of the like sort (who were wont
to recive in manner the same fees) as those whom he had little need of, and
gave them license to pass whither they would. And albeit from the very first
instructions of his childhood, he was given much to the worship of idols and i
heathen gods, and as he grew by little and little elder, became zealously
affected to the same, as standing infeare of many things, yet some points
thereto appertaining he practiced as secretly as possibly he could. But when
those matters being past and gone which he feared, and he perceived once the
time of liberty was come wherein he might do what he list, then discovered he
the secrets of his heart, and by very plain and absolute decrees ordained,
That the temples should be set open, that beasts for sacrifice should be
presented before the altars, and that the worship of the i. Idols, or heathen
gods.
gods should be put in ure again. And to effectuat and strengthen these
designs of his so digested, the Christian bishops which were at dissension,
together with the people divided into schisms, he admitted into his palace,
and gave them this admonition, That having appeased and ended all civil
discords among themselves, every man confidently should profess and follow
his own religion, without any impeachment whatsoever: which he did with a
stiff and constant purpose, to this end, that as this liberty increased
discentions, he might not afterward fear the multitude of them according in
one mind, as having found by experience, That no savage beasts are so noisome
and hurtful to men, as Christians are to themselves, and for the most part of
them mortal and deadly. And oftentimes he would come out with these words,
Hear me, whom the Alemans and Frankners have heard, thinking to imitat the
speech of that ancient Prince Marcus. But little marked he, that the case was
much altered: For, the said Marcus, when he travailed over Palestina, in his
way to Egypt, being oftentimes disquieted with the odious and stinking
sturres of the tumultuous and unruly Jews in grief of heart is said to have
taken up this exclamation, o Marcomans, o Quadi, o Sarmatians, I have at length
found others more unquiet than you.

CHAP. IIII. The Egyptians unseasonably importuning and troubling him, he
wisely expels. By a kind of civil submission he labors to currie favor
with all men. The Ethnicke Philosopher Maximus he familiarly entertaineth. The
fame of his virtues and puissance, drives other Princes to a certain secret
dutifulness, and embassages from all parts repair unto him.
AT this very same time, upon sundry rumors, there were stirred up and came
abroad a number of Egyptians, a litigious kind of people, taking much pleasure
and joy at all times, in an ordinary custom they have, to sue one another and
maintain ambiguous controversies, but above all, most greedy to require
again, and that by way of multiplication and increase, if they have given
ought to an A Proctor, or Advocate, Compulsori, the same I take it, that
Suffragator, a little after.
Attorney or creditor, for to be eased thereby of a debt, or at least wise to
be allowed more commodiously by way of forbearing and giving day, to bring in
those sums which are as debts demanded: or, for fear of some odious
crimination, to call into question and molest rich men in the case of
extortion. All these being thronged thick together, flocked about the prince
himself, and the Praefects of the Prtorium; where chattering like a sort of
Iayes, they disturbed and troubled them out of all order most rudely, ready to
extort and wrest what they avouched they had given unto very many, whether
rightful or otherwise, it skilled not, even threescore and ten years before.
And when they would suffer no business else to be dispatched, Julian
published a proclamation, commanding them all to pass over the water unto
Chalcedon, with a promise, that himself also in person would follow quickly
after, to decide and determine these their causes. When they were gone over,
there went out a precept to the masters of the ships, who use to sail to and
fro between, That no man should be so hardy as Transfr^tare Aegyptu^.
transport over sea an Egyptian any more. Which precept was kept so straightly,
and with so forward carfulness, that their obstinat purpose thus to quarrel,
and forge accusations, came to nothing in the end: and so disappointed of their
presumed and conceived hope, they returned all home. Whereupon a law passed, as
if equity her self had indicted it, whereby provided it was, That no Advocat
or Attorney should be troubled about those as fe^s.
moneys which it might appear for certain, that he rightfully and by law had
received. Well, when as the first day of January was come, what time as the
names of Mamertinus and Nevita were entered into the rolor calendar of Consuls,
the Prince was seen in a very humble manner of duty, to go on foot with
other honorable personages: a thing that others commended, but some again
found fault with, as a base part of his, and full of affectation. Afterward,
when Mamertinus exhibited the games k Circenses, what time, as the manner was,
these were brought in and presented, who came to be manumised and made free,
himself, as his custom was, commanded by the under l usher [Lege m agi;] and
being V^^le^as, or according to the usual customs, and then it is to be
referred unto [Lege agi]. that men might commence their Actions, and proceed in
their suits.
straightwayes advertised, That the jurisdiction for that day pertained to
another, himself also changed the December morning, as liable to an error. In
this while much resort there was to the court of justice, from diverse ways and
coasts, and a number of folk there were, who upon sundry occasions did put in
their bills. And when as on a certain day word came unto him, That Maximus the
Philosopher was come out of Asia to see him, he leapt up full undecently, and
forgetting who to wit, an Emperor.
himself was, ran apace forth a great way from the palace gate, to meet him,
kissed him, received him, and with much reverence and honor brought him in,
showing himself by this unseasonable ostentation of courtesy, to be an
excessive hunter after vain glory, and forgetful of that notable saying of
Tullie, whereby such persons are noted and taxed in these words: Even those
Philosophers themselves (says he) in these very books which they pen and
entitle, as touching the contempt of glory, write their own names, so as even
in this very point, that they seem to despise the fame and glory of the
world, willing they are to be named, and that men should talk of them. Not
long after, two of those busy and pragmaticall or Informers.
Pursuivants, who were cassed and put out of their places, came boldly unto
him, promising, if they might be restored unto their degree which they had in
warfare, to show where Florentius lurked and hid himself. Whom he rated, and
termed Promoters, saying moreover, It was not the manner and part of an
Emperor, to be induced by indirect suggestions and informations, to fetch a
man back again into danger, that for fear of death lay hidden, and who
peradventure should not be suffered long to hide his. head, without hope of
pardon. In all these proceedings there was assistant to him a noble
Praetextatus. Some read Praetextatus, as if it had been his proper^a^e.
Senator n, a man of an excellent disposition to virtue, and carrying with him
the ancient gravitie of old time, who by chance was found about business of
his own at Constantinople, and him of his own mere motion and pleasure he
made a Proconsular deputy in Achaia. Neither for all his being so precise and
earnest in reforming of civil abuses, neglected he those of the camp, but he
ordained captains and commanders over soldiers, such as had been a long
time approoved and tried; repairing moreover all the cities throughout Thracia,
together with the utmost frontier forts, and taking diligent care, that neither
armor, apparel, money, or victual should be wanting unto them, who lying
dispersed along the banks of Ister, and opposite to the rodes and invasions of
the barbarous enemies, he heard say, performed their service with great
vigilancie and valor. Whiles he disposed thus of these affairs, suffering
nothing to be done slackly, when his favorites next about his person,
persuaded him to set upon the Goths joining so near, who had been so often
false and perfidious, he said, That he sought for better enemies: for, the
Galatian merchants (quoth he) are sufficient for them, by whom they are every
where sold, without regard of state and condition. As he was employed in these
and such like businesses, fame commended him to foreign nations, as a brave
and eminent person, for prowess, sobriety, skill in feats of arms, and good
progress in all virtues: and growing thus forward by little and little he
filled the whole world with his name. The fear therefore of his coming being
spread all abroad, as well among neighbor nations, as those that were far
remote, there came with great care from all parts embassages thick: Of the one
side, those beyond Tigris and the Armenians, craved peace: on the other side
the men of Inde strived a vie, and sent great men with gifts beforehand, even
from as far as the Indians and happily the same that the S^res.
Serindians: From the South climat the Moo^es.
Mauri offered their service to the Roman State: from the North and Easterly
regions, in which the very Fasso.
Phasis falls into the sea, the Bosphorians, and other people before time
unknown, brought with them their embassages in suppliant manner, requesting,
That upon performance of their yearly tributes and duties, they might be
permitted to live quietly within the bounds of their native countries.

CHAP. V. An exact description of provinces and nations which at this time are
inhabited far and wide in Thracia, and along the circuit of Pontus Euxinus.
A Fit time now it is (as I suppose) that since we are by occasion of this
great Prince devolved upon these parts, we should truly and plainly deliver
somewhat that we have seen or read, as touching the utmost coasts of Thracia,
together with the situation of the gulf Mar-Majore.
or sea of Pontus. Mor^e Santo, or Agion-o^os.
Athos, that exceeding high mountain in Macedonie, through which sometimes the
Medes ships passed, and or Caphereus rather, Chimi, Sophtan^.
Caphereus the rock or Promontorie in Eubaea, where Nauplius, father to
Palamedes, caused the fleet of the Argives to be split and cast away, although
they stand a great way afunder, divide the Archipelago.
Aegean and Thessalian Seas one from the other. As for this Aegean sea,
spreading it self by little and little as it grows broader, on the right
hand where it stretches wide by the Sporades, is full of Islands, as also by
the Isoli di Archipelago.
Cyclades, so called, for that they do all of them encircle Sdiles. Sophian.
Delos, the noble place of the ^^ gods nativitie: on the left hand, where it
washes Lembro. S^ph.
Imbros, Tenedo.
Tenedos, Stalimine.
Lemnus, and Taso.
Thasus round about, when the winds are big and blow full upon it, with great
violence it beats upon Metelyn.
Lesbos: From whence with a return of the current and reflowing waves, it
dasheth upon the temple of Apollo So called of Smin^ha, a city in Troas, where
he was worshipped.
Sminthius, and upon Troas, as also upon Troia.
Ilium, so famous for the chances that befell to noble and worthy warriors.
And here it makes the gulf or Bay Melas, lying full against the Western
wind, at the very entrance and beginning whereof is seen Asperosa. Mario Nigro
Abdera, the habitation of Protagoras and Democritus, and the P bloody seat of
the Thracian king Diomedes: as also those bottomes and vales by which the river
Maritz a. (...).
Hebrus runs into it: likewise, Marogna. Nigro.
Maronea and Oeno. Nigr.
Aenus, which when Aeneas in a cursed and unluckie hour had begun and soon
abandoned, by the guidance of the gods he sped himself to ancient a part of
Italy.
Ausonia. From hence growing small by little and little, and as it were by
certain natural commerce rushing into Pontus, and joining to it self a part
thereof, shaped it is in form of the Greek letter ph, and cutting Str^tto di
Gallipoli, or Bras de S. George.
Hellespontus from Valiza. (...).
Rhodope, passes along by A certain Promontonie.
Cynossema, where it is thought Hecuba was buried; also by A town.
Coela, Sestos, and Bo^^zo^lar.
Callipolis: and overagainst them, by the Sepulchers of Gallipoli.
Achilles and Ajax, it flows close to Dardanus and Achilleum and Aeantium.
Abydus, whence Xerxes by making a bridge of ships joined close together, went
over the sea on foot: then passes it by Aidos Le^nclav.
Lampsacus, which the king of Persia by way of gift bestowed upon Themistocles;
and by Lampsico. S^ph. Lep^eke. (...).
Parion, which Parius the son of Jason built. Whence swelling on both sides
in manner of an half globe, and opening a wide partition of lands, with the
arms of Propontis that stretch round about, it bedasheth on that side P^^io
Soph^^an. Paradiso Mar. (...).
Cyzicum and Dindyma, the religious and sacred temples of the great dame q and
Mother [Cybele:] Apamea likewise and Cius, Chizito. Sophian.
Astacus also called in the age (...).
ensuing after the kings name, Nicomedia. But what way it holds on Westward,
it beats upon Cherronesus and Aegos, Potamus, in which place Anaxagoras
foretold, That stones should fall from heaven: also Hexamili S^ph.
Lysimachia and that city, which when Hercules had founded, he named Herac^ia,
or Arachlea. Ortel.
Perinthus, and dedicated it to the memorial of his companion. And to keep
the fashion of the perfect and complete letter ph, in the very midst of the
roundle lies Marmora. Bello^^o and Curop^latae.
Proconnesus, an Island fashioned somewhat long, and Calomio. Mercat^^^
Besbicus: beyond the top whereof it grows narrow again, and running
between Europe and Bursia. Girav^.
Bithynia, passes along Chalcedon, Scutari.
Chrysopolis and certain obscure stations or harbor towns. For upon the left
skirts and sides thereof the haven Aqua dolce
Athyras looks down, as also or Selybria.
Selymbria and Constantinople (Byzantium in old time) a Colonie of the
Athenians, and the Promontorie Pera. Soph.
Ceras, carrying a turret built aloft upon it, giving light to ships; for which
it is called Pharos: and from thence an ancient fountain exceeding cold, with
many or channels
watercourse issuing from it. In this manner being broken, and by the
participation of both seas determined, and now growing more mild, it enlarges
it self, and even like unto a maine sea indeed spreading wide and long, as
far as a man may possibly ken. Now, the whole circuit thereof, as if it lay
like an Island, as a man sayleth along the coast and skirts of it, contains
the measure of three thousand stadia, as Eratosthenes, Hecataeus, and Ptolomey
affirm, as also other most skillful searchers into these and such like kinds
of knowledge, and by the assent of all Geographers is shaped to the form of a
Scythian bow, fitted with a string and bent to the full. And look where the
Sun rises out of the East Ocean, limited it is with the fennes and meres of
Mar delle Sabacche, or Della Tana.
Maeotis: what way the Sun bends Westward, confine it does upon the Roman
provinces: where he looks up to the Northren stars about the North pole.
Bears, it has people bordering upon it, different in language and manners:
to conclude, the South side thereof has a gentle plain and falling of the
ground from it.

CHAP. VI. Part of the contents in the former Chapter.
ALong these most spacious and large tracts, there be towns of the Greeks
dispersed; all which, except some few in diverse and sundry ages, the
Milesians, coloners of the Athenians, built: who among other Ionians were long
before placed in Asia by Nileus, the son of that famous Codrus, who is
reported to have exposed himself to death in the Doricke war, for his
country. Now, the small ends or tips of the said bow on either side, which the
two Bospori do expressly resemble, stand just opposite one against another;
the one named Stretto di Constantinopoli.
Thracius; the other, Stretto di Caffa.
Cimmericus. And for this cause called they are Bospori, for that through them
in times past the Io^.
daughter of Inachus transformed, as the Poets say, into an heifer, passed over
to the Some take this for the gulf of Venice, others for the Mediterranean sea.
Ionian sea. The right side therefore, at the bending in of Bosporus Thracius,
Bithynia boundeth upon, which they in old time called Mygdonia; wherein lie the
countries Sagora.
Thynia and Mariandena; wherein also are seated the Bebricians delivered from
the cruelty of r Amycus through the valiant prowess of Pollux: also that
remote station, in which the Prophet Phineus stood in horrible dread of the
ravenous Harpyiae, flying up and down in such threatening manner as they did:
by which shores curving and crooking into long coves or creekes, the rivers
Sangari. Bellon.
Sangarius and or Psil^is. Fenosia. Pineto.
Psylis, Bizes also and Ribas Gyllio.
Rhebas, pour themselves into the seas. Against which without forth are the
Pavonate.
Symplegades, two rocks reaching up on every side into high and steep heads,
and were wont in old time to encounter and meet, yea, and with a terrible noise
to run and beat one upon another with all their hugeness, and giving way
backward, fetch their feese or beire again, and with a fierce charge and
assault to return full butt upon the same that they had knocked and beaten
before. Between these rocks that thus open asunder, and jurre one against
another so often, if a foul should happen to fly, by no swiftness of wing
could she possibly escape and get away, but be crushed to death. These cliffes,
when as Argo (the first ship that ever was making speedy way to Canameina.
Castaldo.
Colchi, for to steal the golden Fleece) had passed by them without harm,
stood unmooveable conjoined in one body, with the head or point cracked round
about: so that no man who sees them now, would ever believe they were at any
time parted asunder, but that all the songs and poemes of men in old time
agreed jointly thereupon. Beyond part of Bithynia, the provinces Pontus and
Ro^i. Castaldo.
Paphlagonia stretch out in length, wherein stand Aupep. Bonac^oto or
Pendaruchia. Nigr.
Heraclea, Pordapas. Ch^lconditae.
Sinope, Vatiza Nigro.
Polemonion, and vel Amisus.
Amysos, great cities: also Tios and Samastro. Nigro.
Amastris, all founded auspicately by the direction of bird-flight, such was
the precise care of the Greeks: likewise Cheras^da. Mercatori.
Cerasus, from whence Lucullus brought such fruit as are named Cerasa, i.
Cherries. Semblably certain Isles bearing up aloft, containing in them
Treb^^ond^.
Trapezus and Pityus, towns of no mean account. Beyond these places, there is
the hole or cave Acherusius, which the people dwelling thereby call (...): also
the haven Acone, with diverse rivers, rivers, to wit, Acheron (named likewise
Archadius) Lirio. Nig.
Iris, Tembrius, and, hard by. Dolap. Ortel.
Parthenius, running all down into the sea with a swift course and violent
stream. Next unto these is the river Pormon Nigr.
Thermodoon, falling from the mountain or rather Armenius, out of Herodotu^.
Armonius, and gliding between the woods and groves of Themyscyra; into which
the Amazones in times past were forced to flit upon this occasion. The ancient
Amazones, after that the bordering nations were sore weakened with continual
losses, as who by them were wasted with bloody rodes and invasions, aimed now
at higher exploits: and considering their own puissance, and the places
bordering near unto them, oftentimes gave the attempt upon more mighty
nations, as being ravished with the heat of greedy desire. And when they had
broken forcibly through many countries, they made war upon the Athenians, and
being in a sharp conflict discomfited and scattered asunder, and having the
flanks of their Cavallerie laid naked, were slain every one. When the
defeature and death of these were known, the feeble remains of them that were
left at home, declining the deadly violence of their neighbors, who had before
time suffered extremities, and were like to pay them home with semblable
measure, flitted to the more peaceable seat of Thermodoon. The progeny of
these being in long time after multiplied by many issues and generations,
returned with a mighty power to their first native places, and in process of
time became dread to people of diverse discents and originals. Not far from
thence mounteth up Cabo Pisello.
Carambis, an hill of gentle ascent, rising full upon the Northren f Elice,
overagainst which is Cabo Leone. P^^eto. S. Iani. Do^^nico Nigr.
Criu-metopon, a promontorie of Taurica, distant from the other two thousand
and five hundred stadia. And from this place all the maritime coast, which
begins at the river Lali. N^g^o.
Halys, lying straight in length like a line, shapeth out the string fastened
to the two ends of the bow aforesaid.

CHAP. VII. More of the same argument as before.
Upon these countries confine the Dahae, of all others the most fierce
warriors; and the Chalybes, who were the first that dug up and wrought iron
into steel. Beyond whom, the open lands are possessed by the Byzares, Tapites,
Tibareni, Mossynaeci, Macrones and Philyres, people by no acquaintance known
to us: and from them not far stand the monuments or tombs of noblemen,
wherein were enterred Stheneleus, Idmon, and Typhis. Of whom, the first was a
companion of Hercules, wounded to death in the war against the Amazones; the
second, an Augure or Soothsayer to the Argonauts; and the third, a most
skillful and expert pylot of the ship abovenamed, Argo. After you have passed
beyond these parts before specified, you meet with the den or cave Alion, and
the stream of Callichorus, surnamed so upon this occasion: For that Liber or
Bacchus having after three years vanquished the Indian nations, and being
returned to those tracts, about the green and shadie banks of this river
brought again into ure the old songs and daunces t Orgia. Some are of opinion,
That such sacred ceremonies and solemnities as these were called u Trieterica.
Beyond these confines, are the populous and well frequented territories of the
Camaritae, and the river Phasis with roaring stream comes to the Colchi, the
ancient offspring of the Egyptians: where, among other cities, stands
Polistonia. Vill^ novano.
Phasis, bearing the name of the river abovesaid; also Sava^opoli. Cs^aldo.
Dioscurias, known even to this day. The founders whereof, as we find in
record, were Amphitus and Telchius, two Spartanes, the chariot-drivers to
Castor and Pollux; of whom began the nation of the Hemiochi. Not far removed
from these, dwell the Achaei, who having finished a certain former war at
Troy (I mean not that war which was fought for the quarrel of Helena, as
some authors have written) by reason of contrary winds wandering, and driven
into Pontus, finding nothing but hostility, and no where any assured place to
set foot in, possessed themselves of the hill tops, always full of snow: and
thus being pent in, and hardened with the chilling cold of the weather,
accustomed they were to get their living dangerously by robbing, and by that
means grew afterward beyond all measure fell and cruel. As touching the
Cerceti, who join close unto them, there is no memorable matter written. At
the back of them dwell the inhabitants of the Cimmerian Bosporus, where are
the Milesian cities, and the mother of them all, Vospero. Nig. alluding to
Bosphorium, which was the old name in Plini^.
Panticapaeum: before which, runs the river Bog. Mercator.
Hypanis, swelling as well with his own water, as foreign streams running
into him. Then a great way off, the Amazones stretching out in length even as
far as to the Caspian called al^o Hyrcanum, and has at this day many names,
according to sundry languages and countries that bound upon it.
sea, inhabit about Tana.
Tanais, which rising among the rocks of Albsor Nigr.
Caucasus, glideth by many winding turns and reaches, and parting Asia from
Europe, is hidden at last within the meeres of Maeotis. Near unto this is the
river Volgha by some.
Rha, on the sides whereof grows a comfortable and holesom Rha-Ponticke: and
not Rhabarba^um or Rhewbarbe: For this is purgative, the other rather binding.
root, so named, good for many uses in Physic. Beyond Tanais, there spread
out in breadth the Sauromatae, through whom all the way run the rivers
Maraccus, Copa.
Rhombites, Theophanes, and Totordanes: although there be another nation also
of the or Sarmatians, i. Tartarians, and Russians
Sauromatae, far distant from these, joining hard upon the shore, which
letting in the river Corax, sends it to the utmost maine sea. Near unto this
is the mere Maeotis, of an exceeding large circuit, out of the most plentiful
veins whereof, by the straits Patares, a maine deal of water breaks forth,
and runs into Pontus; in the right side of which are the Islands Matriga
Theueto.
Phanagorus and Moncastro. Nigr.
Hermonassa, reared by the industrious labor of the Greeks. About these
marshes which lie furthest and utmost, there dwell many nations, in variety
of speech and customs unlike one another, namely, the Iaxamat, Maeotae,
Iazyges, Rhoxolani, Alani, Melanchlaenae, and together with the Geloni, the
Agathyrsi, among whom there is plenty of the Diamond.
Adamant stone: others also lie hidden beyond, because they are of all the rest
furthest within. But near to the left side of Maeotis lies sc. Taurica,
Perocopsca, and Ges^ra. Pinet.
Cherronesus, full of Colonies, inhabited by Greeks; whereby the men are quiet
and still, setting their minds upon tillage, and living upon the increase of
fruit, that the earth yields. From these, no great way off, are the Tauri
disjoined, and those divided into sundry kingdoms: Among whom, for their
exceeding cruelty, the Arinchi, Sinchi and Napaei most terrible (and by reason
of their long licentious liberty the more cruel they be) have given name unto
the unhospitall sea; which of the contrary, by way of merriment and jest, is
called Pontus for Axinut.
Euxinus, like as we term a fool x Euethes in Greek, the night, Euphrone,
and the furies, Eumenides. For, appeasing and pleasing their gods with offering
men for sacrifice, and sacrificing strangers to Diana, who among them is named
y Orsiloche, they used to fasten upon her temple walls the heads of men slain,
as the perpetual monuments and testimonies of valiant exploits. In this
[byland] Taurica, the Island Leuca, without any inhabitants in it, is dedicated
to Achilles. At which, if any happen by chance to arrive, after they have
seen certain tokens and remains of antiquity, the temtained ple also, and
oblations consecrated to the said worthy prince, in the evening they go to
shipboord again: For they say, no man is able to stay there all night, without
danger of his life. There also are rivers, and there breed white birds, like
unto the z Halcyones: concerning the first original of which fouls, and the
battles in Hellespontus, we will discourse in due time. Now, there be
certain cities within this Taurica, among which the principal are Eupatoria,
Dandace, and Caffa.
Theodosia, besides other of smaller account, not stained or polluted with any
sacrifices of men's bodies. Thus far forth is thought the top of the bow to
reach.

CHAP. VIII. More still of the same argument.
THe remnant now thereof, with a gentle bent, and lying under the Northern
Beare-starre, as far as to the coast of Bosporus Thracius, we will, as order
does require, prosecute and declare, telling you thus much by the way, that
whereas the bows of all other nations are bent with the staves thereof
crooked, only those of the Scythians and Parthians, having the bowing and open
horns thereof drawn about on both sides, inward, represent the shape of the
Moon in her wane, and a straight and round rule divides them just in the
mids. In the very beginning therefore of the joint or knitting together, where
the Riphaean mountains do end, dwell the Arimaspi, righteous men, and for there
meekness and humanity well known; by whom the rivers or Chronus, Memel, Germ.
Chronius and or Vistula: de Wizel, Germanis.
Bisula do run along, and hard by them, the Massagets, Alani, Sarmatae, and a
number of other obscure nations, of whom we know neither the names nor their
manners. Then after a mean space between, opens the gulf Golfo de
Nigropoli.
Carcinites, a river also of the same name, and the sacred grove of Diana.
Trivia a, held religious with much devotion in those countries. Then Nieper,
Market.
Borysthenes, springing from the mountains of the Neuri, carrying much water
by occasion of his own fountains, and growing big with the confluence of many
rivers, with a stream of huge rolling waves enters into the sea: upon the
rivage whereof, full of woods, stands the city also Borysthenes, and
Cephalonesus, likewise the altars consecrated to Alexander the Great, and to
Caesar Augustus. From hence, a great way between, is that Biland, or demi
Isle, which the Sindi inhabit, an ignoble and base kind of people, who upon the
overthrow of their lords and masters in Asia, enjoyed afterward their wives
and goods. Under theselyeth a little strond or shore, the homeling inhabitants
call it Achilles race.
Achileos-dromon, a place memorable in times past for the exercise there of
that Thessalian Commander. And next unto it stands the city Suri.
Tyros, a colonie of the Phaenicians, by which passes the river Nester.
Tyras. Now in the middle space of the bow (which as I said before carries a
large round bent, and which is fifteen days journey of a nymble and light
appointed footman) are seated the Alani of Europe, and the Costobocae, and
infinite nations of the Scythians, which in length reach out as far as the
lands that stretch forth without an end: of which some few feed upon corn and
fruits of the earth, all the rest wandering in scattering wise over the vast
wilderness (which never felt the plough, nor know what seednesse is, but lie
desert, and subject to many frosts) feed after the filthy manner of wild beasts:
Their wives and children, their houses (such as they be) and their
household stuff, are set upon waines covered over with barks: and whenever
it pleases them, they flit without any let, tumbling and rolling with them the
same wagons whither they list. Moreover, when you are come to another bent or
compass, full of creekes and havens, which determines the utmost figure of
this bow, there bears forth the island Pizina, Nigr^.
Peuce, round about which dwell the Trogloditae and Peucimi, and other smaller
nations. There also stands up Istros, sometime a most mighty city, likewise
Kiovia, (...)
Tomi, Apolloni Anchiolo.
Anchialos, and Varna.
Odyssis, beside many other contained within the coasts of Thracia. But the
river Donaw.
Danubius, which has his head near unto the mountains ^t^igerwald^ D^ten.
walde ^c.
Rauraci, that confine upon the borders of Rhetia, stretched forth through a
wider part of the world, and receiving into him threescore rivers (in manner
all navigable) through this Scythian shore, breaks forth into the Sea at
seven mouths, and their names carry their interpretation according to the
Greek Stoma in Greek signifies a mouth
tongue: of which the first is Peuce, the island above said, the second
Naracustoma, the third Calonstoma, the fourth Pseudostoma, as for the fifth
Boreonstoma, and the sixth Sthenostoma, they be far less than the rest: the
seventh is a mighty great one, and in manner of a mere, black. Now this
whole sea Pontus, in all the circuit thereof flowing round about, is both
cloudie and Fresher.
sweeter also than other seas, yea and full of shallowes, for that the air
thickened oftentimes with the breathing up and elevation of moist vapors,
congealeth; and is tempered with a multitude of waters rushing into it, and
rises into certain flats full of shelves and sand-banks, by occasion that a
number of streams coming into it every way about, cast up mud and heaps of
sand. And known for certain it is, that from the utmost bounds of our sea,
fishes flock by whole skuls, or sholes, to this nooke of the Ocean, to breed
and shut their spawne; to the end, that with the sweetness of the water, they
may more holesomely bring up their young fry, secured from the devouring Whales
and monsters of the sea within hollow places of receipt, which are there very
thick. For, in this Pontus there has been at no time seen such, but only
harmless Dolphins, and those but small. Now, what coast soever of this same
maine gulf of Pontus, is beaten with the North-east wind and frostie air, it
is so thoroughly frozen and congealed, as that neither the courses of rivers are
supposed to roll underneath the ice, neither is it possible for man or beast to
set firm footing upon the ground, so unsure it is and slipperie: a fault that
never takes hold of the sea as it is pure of it self, but mingled with river
waters. Having been thus carried somewhat farther than we thought, proceed we
to the rest of our history behind.

CHAP. IX. Iulianus borne up on high with the favor of all men, hasteneth to
go unto Antioch: what acts he did in this journey.
THerefell out another occurrent to increase the heap and measure of these
present joys, which verily was a long time hoped for, but protracted by many
circumstances of delays. For, tidings came by Agilo and Iovius, afterward
Treasure^.
Questor, That the defendants of Aquileia, wearied out with so long a siege,
after they were advertised of Constantius his death, did set open their gates,
went forth, and delivered the authors of those sturres and commotions: and that
when the said parties, as has been related before, were burnt quick, all the
rest obtained a grant of pardon for their trespasses. But Julian very proud
of these prosperous proceedings, carried his thoughts and conceits beyond the
ordinary compass and reach of men, as having by continual proofs and trials
found that unto him ruling now the city of Rome peaceably, favorable and
gracious fortune, carrying, as it were the words b Cornucopia, i. wealth and
abundance, presented unto him all glory and prosperity: adding moreover unto
the titles of his victories past, thus much, That whiles he held the empire
alone, he was neither troubled with civil commotions at home, nor any of the
Barbarians passed beyond their own bounds: and all nations (upon a lust and
desire they have evermore to inveigh against things past, and to blame them as
hurtful and noisome) were wonderfully inflamed with an earnest affection to
resound his praises. Having therefore after considerat deliberation disposed of
all things, according as the diverse causes and times required, and withal
animated his soldiers, what with many hortatorie orations, and what with a
competent stipend, inciting them more readily to make dispatch and put all
things in readiness; borne thus aloft with the favor of all men, and
addressing himself to go to Antioch, he left Constantinople supported with
very great means of a flourishing estate: for being there borne he loved and
esteemed it highly as the place of his nativitie. After he had crossed
therefore the narrow sea, and passed by Chalcedon and L^bussa, L^^ncla.
Libyssa, where Annibal the Carthaginian was buried, he came from thence to
Comidia, Naut. Nithor. Turc^^.
Nicomedia, a city before time famous, so enlarged at the great expenses of
precedent Princes, that for multitude of buildings, as well private as public,
it might be reputed to those that know it aright, a certain region or quarter
of that eternal city, Rome. The walls whereof when as he beheld how they
were resolved into woeful ashes and dead imbers, showing the anguish of his
mind by silent tears, he went toward the royal palace with a softer pace,
weeping for the miserable case wherein it was, in this regard especially, that
the magistrates and whole comminaltie met him in mournful and poor plight
now, which had been before time a most flourishing state. And some of them he
agnized, as having been brought up there under Eusebius the bishop, whose
kinsman he was, though a far off. Here also in like manner, when he had
given and allowed bountifully toward the reparation of those edifices which the
earthquake had overthrown, he came by Nicea, to the marches of (...), (...).
Gallograecia, whence bending his journey at one side toward the right hand,
he turned to (...) The^eto
Pessinus, for to visit the ancient temple of the great mother (...) gods.
Cybele. From which town, in the second (...) Annibal and the Cattha^^^^.
Punicke war, by the direction of Cibyls prophecy at Cume, Scipio Nasica
translated her image to Rome: As touching whose arrival into Italy, I have by
way of digression, together with other particulars belonging to this matter,
written somewhat in the acts of the Emperor Commodus. But why this town
should carry this name, the writers of hystories agree not: For some have
affirmed, that the city was surnamed so, by occasion of the said goddesses
image fallen from heaven, of (...), which with us, in Greek, signifies to
fall. Others report, that Ilus the son of Tros, and king of Dardanie, called
the place so. Theopompus avoucheth, That it was not Ilus who did so, but Midas
that most mighty king of Phrygia. Having therefore adored the divine power
there, and pleased the same with sacrifices and Angouri, B^ll^ni^
vows, he returns to (...), (...) the word (...) in the 25. book.
Ancyra: and as he was going further from thence, the multitude disquieted him;
whiles some required to have their goods given unto them which by violence and
extortion had been taken away: others complained, That they were unjustly
Decu^io^s, or Senators in Municip^j^.
tied and incorporated into the societies of the Curiae: and some again
without respect of danger, labored as if they had been stark mad, to bring
their adversaries within the compass of high treason: but he, a more grave and
severe judge than either Cassius or Lycurgus, weighing indifferently from point
to point their causes, awarded to every man his own, no where drawn away
from the truth, but sharply bent against slanderers and false accusers whom he
hated, as having tried oftentimes the malapert folly of many of this kind even
to his own peril, whiles he was yet in low estate, and a private person. And
for an example of his patience in the like business, this one, although there
be many besides, shall suffice to be put down. A certain person there was,
who in very troublous manner appeached an adversary of his, with whom he was
at variance, for speaking certain words in most bitter wise, tending to
treason. And for that the Emperor dissimuled, and made as though he heard not
the matter, he enforced the same still, and daily renewed his accusation: So as
at length being asked what he was, whom he thus called into question, he
answered, That he was a very rich or citizen.
Bourger. Which when the Prince heard, with a smiling countenance, What
presumptions (quoth he) had thou, to give thee light hereunto: Because
(says he) he is about to make himself a purple garment of a silken cloak. Who
being commanded after this, to go his ways with silence, and without harm,
like a base fellow accusing as base a companion of an high and heinous matter,
nevertheless was very instant and importunat still. Julian weary with this
busy and troublesome fellow, casting his eye upon the High Treasurer that
stood hard by, Command (quoth he) that there may be given a pair of or
shoes, pedu^ tegmina.
purple stockings to this dangerous prating companion, for to be carried unto
his adversary; who, as it is given me to understand by his report, has
lodged up for himself a cassocke of this color; that it may be known what
little good such rags and slender clothes can do, without very great power
and strength beside. But as these parts be commendable, and to be imitated by
good governors, so this was distasteful, and worthy to be reprehended, namely,
That during his regiment there was hardly any man, who being once shot at by
these Decu^ions, Bu^gesles, ^r Senators in corporat towns and cities, called
(...).
Curiales, how well soever he was strengthened and backed with privileges,
with number of years which he had served, with the strength also of any noble
descent mere foraine, could have remedy, were it never so just and reasonable:
in so much as most men herewith affrighted, were feign to buy out their
troubles with bribes and money given underhand. Well, having thus gone through
his journeyes, when he was come to Pylae (a place that parts the
Cappadocians and Cilicians asunder) the governor of that Province, named
Celsus, whom he knew since time they were students together in Athens, he
received with a kiss, took him up into his carroch to sit with him, and
brought him in his company to Tarsus.

CHAP. X. Julian wintereth in Antioch, and there gives good proofs of
patience, lenity, and equity: but as bitter and professed enemy of true
religion debarreth from the schools the Christian Grammarians and Rhetoricians.
But after this, hastening to see Antioch, the head city and beauty of the
East parts, by making ordinary journeyes, thither he came. Now, as he drew
near unto the city, entertained he was with vows, as if he had been some
God: and he admired the public voices of that mighty multitude, crying out
with one accord, That a star of salvation and health was now risen, and shone
upon the East parts. Now, it happened at the very same time, that when the
revolution of the year was finished, the solemnities called g Adonia, after
the ancient rites and ceremonies were celebrated, in honor of Adonis, the
darling of Venus; who, as Poets feign, was in his very flower unhappily killed
with the tuske of a wild bore; which is a sign of corn cut in their full
growth. And this seemed an ominous and unluckie praesage, that at the first
entrance now of the Emperor into this goodly city, the seat of Princes and
Emperors, there were heard on every side yelling lamentations and doleful
plaints. And here there showed it self a proof or testimony of his patience
and mildness, small though it were, yet admirable. He had hated one
Thalassius, sometime a (...). Some ^ead Proxim^. ^. an under clerk.
principal clerk in the office of Requests, a secret enemy to his brother
Gallus, and who laid wait for his life: who being forbidden to adore the
Emperor, and to be present with other honorable personages to do his duty,
his adversaries with whom he had suit in the judicial court, the morrow after,
when a superfluous multitude were assembled together, stepped unto the Emperor,
cried out with open mouth: Thalassius an enemy to your Grace, has violently
taken our goods from us. Then he, guessing that by such an occasion as this
the man might be undone and murdered, answered them thus: I acknowledge (quoth
he) that the party whom ye name, has justly offended me; but meet it is,
that you in the mean time forbear and hold your peace, until he give me
satisfastion, being his enemy too, and a greater man. So he gave commandment
unto the Prfect, sitting by him, That their matter should not be heard before
himself were reconciled to Thalassius. Whiles he there wintered to his hearts
desire and contentment, he enjoyed during that time no allurements of
pleasures, wherein all Syria throughout does abound: but under a show of solace
and reposing himself, employing his mind in the deciding of judicial causes,
which were of no less importance than martial affairs, distracted he was
with manifold and sundry cares; peizing with precise and exquisite docilitie,
by what means he might give every man his own, and that by just and
righteous sentences both the wicked might be chastised with moderat
punishments, and the innocent defended, with the safety of their goods. And
albeit in time of pleading and arguing a case, he was otherwhiles out of the
way, and spoke beside the purpose, namely whiles he would be asking
unseasonably every one of those that were at debate, What religion they were
of? and what God they worshipped? yet there is not a definitive sentence of his
touching any controversy known, squaring from the truth: neither could he
ever be charged either in regard of religion, or any other by-matter, to have
swerved from the straight line and rule of equity: For that is a desirable and
righteous judgment indeed, where by sundry examinations of matter, this is
found just, and that unjust: from which, that he might not exorbitate and go
aside, he was as wary, as if he avoided dangerous rocks. And this was he able
to attain unto, because acknowledging the levitie of his own nature, given to
be very hasty, he gave the Prfects and those that were next about him, leave
boldly by convenient admonition to curb and reine his passions, tending
(otherwise than became) unto that which was decent and comely: and he showed
otherwhiles, that he grieved at delinquencies, and joied in reformation. And
when advocats and defenders of causes with exceeding great applause highly
commended him, as a prince that had the true knowledge of perfect reason, being
moved hereat, he spoke thus by report: I would take joy, and were a proud man,
in case I might be praised of them who I knew were able also to dispraise me if
I did or said otherwise than well. Now, it shall suffice in lieu of many mild
examples of clemency, which he showed in the hearing of men's causes, to put
down this one, neither unpertinent to our present purpose, nor any way absurd.
A certain woman judicially convented and brought into the court, seeing her
adversary one of the Protectores, otherwise than she looked for, C^^ctum, out
of his gown, and in manner armed.
in his armor lightly appointed, found her self much grieved, and stormed at
this so strange a fashion: Whereupon the Emperor, Follow thy plea, good woman
(quoth he) if thou think thy self any way wronged; for, this man here is so
well appointed, that he may with less cumbrance go through the mire: little
harm can he do to thy cause. And by these and such like examples, as himself
used commonly to say, thought it might have bin, That the same ancient lady
Justice, whom because she was displeased with men's vices, Aratus exalts up to
heaven, in the time of his reign returned to the earth: but that he did some
things not according to the discretion of the laws, but after his own will,
and diverse times with his errors and delinquencies in that behalf, eclipsed
and darkened his courses so glorious in many respects otherwise. For, after
many other good acts, some of the laws also he reformed for the better, which
by cutting off their doubtful constructions, and long circumstances, showed
plainly what they bad, and what they forbad to be done. But this one inhumane
and unmercifull deed of his, would be buried in perpetual silence, That he
debarred the professors of d Rhetoric and of Grammar, to teach those of the
Christian religion.

CHAP. XI. Diverse men of great name, who had been sometime adversaries of
Julian, were punished sundry ways. A seditious uprore raised in Alexandria,
which bred many broiles and murders, by an edict of Iulianus is appeased.
AT the very same time Gaudentius that notorious Notarie, who had been sent,
as I said before, from Constantius, as an opposite unto Iulians designs in
Africa, as also Iulianus late deputy Prefect, or Vicegerent there, an
exceeding great supporter and abettor of the same side, were fetched back,
kept bound in prison, and by justice put to death. Then also it was, that
Artemius, who had been the Dux.
Marquis of Egypt, at the urgent and instant suit of the Alexandrines, charged
with a number of heinous crimes, was executed with the loss of his head: after
whom the son of Marcellus, late general of the horse and foot both, as one
that aspired to be Emperor, suffered death openly. Moreover Romanus and
Vincentius, Tribunes of the first and second band of the Scutarij, being
convicted to have plotted certain designs above their estate and degree, were
banished. And after some small time between, the Alexandrians given to
understand, that Artemius was dead, whom they feared, least upon his return
with power and command as before (for so he had threatened) he would, as one
highly displeased, sit on many of their skirts, turned the edge of their anger
upon an A^^ian.
Georgius the bishop, as who had oftentimes snapped, as I may so say, at them
with his viperous teeth. The soon he was of e Insulius by report, borne at
Epiphania, a town of Cilicia, and being grown to greatness, with the loss
and hinderance of very many, against the good of himself and of the
Commonweal, ordained bishop of Alexandria, a city, which of the own
inclination (and even when there are no causes at all) is usually given to many
seditious tumults and turbulent commotions, according as the very Oracles give
true report. The people here, having their minds already enraged, were much
more incensed by this Georgius also, who in the open ears of Constantius
ceased not to accuse many of them as rebellious and disobedient to his
commandments: and thus forgetting his own profession, which teaches him
nothing but just dealing and mildness, he forsook that course, and betook
him to the mischievous practices of dangerous promoters. And among other
matters he was said maliciously to have informed Constantius of this also,
That in the foresaid city all the houses, built sometime by Alexander the
first founder, with great charges and expenses of the State, and now annexed to
the soil, ought by right to yield profit and revenewes to the common
Treasury. To these mischiefs, this one more also he added, for which within a
while after he was driven headlong upon his own destruction. Being returned
from the princes court, as he passed by the beautiful temple of Genius,
guarded, as his manner was, with a great train about him, casting his eyes
aside toward the very temple, How long (quoth he) shall this sepulcher stand?
Which word of his being once heard, many were smitten as it were with a
thunderbolt, and fearing least he would give the attempt to overthrow it also,
they wrought by secret trains to raise what matter they possibly could to
bring him to ruin. And lo, upon the sudden arrival of joyful news,
importing the death of Artemius, the whole multitude of the commons, for this
unexpected joy set agog, and grinding their teeth, with a terrible noise came
upon Georgius, whom they haled and tugged with his legs and feet wide
straggling, trampling and spurning him with sundry sorts of evil entreating,
and putting him to pain and torment enough. And together with him, Dracontius
the Mint-master, and one Diodorus, by calling in manner of a (...) Comes. a
Comes his fellow, or under captain.
Comes, had their legs drawn through with cords, and so were killed together:
the former of them, for that he overthrew an altar newly set up in the
Mint-house, whereof he was the Master: the other, because whiles he was
over-seer for the building of a Church, he cut off very licentiously the locks
of boys hair close to the head, supposing that this fashion also smelled of
Idolatry. And the outrageous multitude not content herewith, after they had
mangled their dead bodies, laid them upon camels, and so carried them to the
lake: and when they had burnt them with a swift fire, flung the ashes into the
hard by the lake.
sea, fearing, as they gave it out alowd, least if their relics had been
gathered up together, there would have been churches built for them like as
for the rest, who being urged to forsake their religion, went so far in
keeping of their faith unspotted and undefiled, that they endured dolorous
torments even to glorious death, and now are termed Martyrs. And verily, these
woeful and miserable men, when they were led to cruel execution, might by the
help of Christians have been reseued, but that all the people one with
another bare so deadly hatred unto Georgius. The Julian.
Emperor certified hereof, bent fully to take revenge for so wicked an
outrage, and being now at the point to have the malefactors punished with loss
of life, was yet pacified with the gentle words of his nearest favorites: and
sending out an edict in a sharp and bitter Oration, detested the wicked act
committed, threatening extremity of death, in case any thing thenceforth
should be attempted, forbidden by justice and the laws.

CHAP. XII. Julian addresseth himself to the Persian war. His sacrifices,
Heathenish ceremonies, consultation of beasts inwards and bird-flight. The
temple of Apollo Daphnaeus by casual fire burnt, incenseth Julian against the
Christians. Certain Prodigies and Earthquakes, whereby Nicomedia was
overthrown.
Mean while, preparing an expedition against the Persians, which in the
highness and stoutnesse of his mind he had conceived before time, carried aloft
he was with an hot desire to the revenge of dishonours past, knowing and
hearing, that this most fierce nation had for the space almost of threescore
years together set their sure marks and cruel monuments in the East of
slaughter and saccage, as having oftentimes put whole armies of ours to the
sword. Now, a twofold desire he had that incensed him to this war: first, for
that impatient altogether of ease and rest, he dreamed of nothing all night but
trumpets and battles: again, because in the very prime and flower of his
youth, being presented and exposed to the wars of cruel nations, whiles the
prayers were yet fresh of kings and princes, who were thought might be
vanquished by force of arms, rather than hold forth their hands by way of
humble supplication, he had an ardent desire, among other ornaments of braverie
and glory, to insert in his style the addition and surname of Parthicus: which
imprease of his, when some idle and envious backbiters saw to be set forward
with great preparations, they kept a muttering, and gave it out, That it was a
foul indignity and pernicious, that by the exchange of one only body there
should so many stirs and troubles be raised, employing all their endeavor and
diligence in putting off this service and journey. Yea, and they commonly said,
even in the presence of those, who they supposed would bring what they heard to
the Emperors ear, That unless he went more calmely to work in this
excessive prosperity and success of his affairs, he would (like as corn
that is grown over-ranke and plentiful, soon fall to the ground, and lie
along with the weight of his own wealth and felicity. And thus harping much a
long time upon this string, with secret plots and close devices they came
barking in vain about this valiant man (who was nothing moved hereat) much
like unto the Pygmaeans or z Thiodamas, that rusticall pesant of Lydia, about
Hercules. But he for all this, as being of an haughtier spirit than all the
rest, never the later casting and devising with himself the greatness of this
voyage, endeavored earnestly to prepare all things meet and convenient
therefore. Notwithstanding all this, I say, he drenched and embrued the altars
exceeding often, with much shedding of blood, sacrificing otherwhiles an hundred
bulls at once, and infinite flocks of sundry smaller beasts, yea, and white
sheep sought for and gotten far and near by land and sea: so that the
soldiers every day, in manner, that went over their heads, full pampered and
frankefed as it were with plenty of flesh, living rudely and uncivilely, and
through their greedy desire of bibbing quite marred and grown diseased, were
feign to be set upon men's shoulders that passed by, and out of those public
houses, where they should have studied to punish feasting rather than give way
and liberty thereto, to be carried along the streets to their innes and
lodgings, and above all other, the ^ Petulantes and the Celtae, whose boldness
and audacitie was in those days grown above all measure. Moreover, the rites
of superstitious ceremonies were come to an excessive height with greatness of
expense, before time unusual and grievous to be endured: and every man (since
he might do any thing without impeachment) professing knowledge in prophecy,
as well the ignorant and unskilful, as the learned and taught scholar,
without all end, or any orders appointed beforehand, were permitted to seek
after the answers given by oracles, and the science of peering into beasts
bowels, which now and then discover future events: yea, and the faithful
information, where ever it might be found, of birds by singing, of fowls by
flying, and of osses let fall from the mouth, were with studious affectation of
variety sought for. And whiles these matters run on thus, as in time of peace,
Julian, who was very studious and diligent to learn many things, entered into a
new way of consultation, minding to lay open the prophetical and soothsaying
veins of the Castalian fountain, which Hadrianus Caesar is said to have
stopped up with an huge heap of great stones, fearing, least as himself found
by the prediction of the waters, that he was to take the charge and government
of the Commonweal; so others also might come by knowledge of the like:
and-forthwith appointed, that the bodies which had been enterred round about
it, should be translated from thence after that manner and fashion, as the
Athenians had purged the Isle Delos. At the very same time, even the 21. day of
October.
eleventh day before the Kalends of November, the most stately temple of Apollo
th Daphnaeus, which Antiochus Epiphanes (that irefull and cruel king built)
together with the image therein of Jupiter Olympiacus, equal in bigness to
the patron that it resembled, by sudden violence of fire was burnt. Which
being thus by so terrible a misfortune consumed, so far forth grew the
Emperor wroth and angry, that he commanded more straight and sharper
inquisitions to be holden than ordinary, and the Cathedral church of
Antiochia to be shut up: for he imagined, that the Christians had done that
deed upon spite and envy, for that against their wills they saw as an eyesore
the said temple enclosed round about with a sumptuous cloister, supported with
pillars. Now, the speech was, though grounded upon a very light and vain
rumor, That the same temple of Apollo upon this occasion was set on fire; for
that Asclepiades the Philosopher, of whom I have made mention in the acts of
Magnentius, coming unto that place by the city side, to visit Julian, did set
a little silver image of the goddess Caelestis, which he was wont to carry
about him wheresoever he went, at the very fe^t of that high Colosse or image
aforesaid, and when he had lighted certain torches and wax tapers, as the
custom is, departed: Whereupon, after midnight was past, what time there could
be no body present to help, the sparks flying from the torches, caught hold
upon that exceeding old wood whereof it was made, and so the fire light one
after another occasioned by the dry fuel they met withal, mounted up and
burnt what combustible matter it could possibly reach, although the same were a
great way in height from it. The same year, even when the mid-Winter was near
at hand, there fell out a fearful scarcity of water, in so much as some rivers
stood still and ran not, yea and the springs were dried up, which before time
boil up plentiful store of water: but afterward they came to their former
pass again as well as ever before. Also, the 4. The second day of December.
day before the Nones of December, when it grew toward evening, the rest of
Nicomedia with an earthquake fell down, and in like sort no small part of
Nicaea: Which accidents, albeit they struck the pensive prince into a dumpish
fit of heaviness, yet he neglected not the rest of his urgent affairs, until
the time came of his wished for fight.

CHAP. XIII. Iulianus writes a book called Mesopogon, against the
Antiocheans. He gently entreats Theodorus of Hierapolis, who had sided with
Constantius. The judgment of Ammianus Marcellinus, as touching the ox Apis
sought and found.
HOwbeit among such principal and serious businesses, he seemed to deal in
one thing that was superfluous and unnecessarie, in that upon a love that he
had taken to populari^^^ without any probable reason inducing him thereto, he
set his mind to bring down the price of all things to be bought and sold in
market; the cheapnesse whereof being ordered otherwise than is meet and
convenient, is wont otherwiles to breed scarcity and famine. And
notwithstanding the States of Antioch showed plainly, That it could not be
effected at the time when he willed it, yet would he never a whit leave off his
purpose: like for all the world to his brother Gallus, although he was not
bloudily minded. Whereupon faring afterward against them, as murmuring
detractors and contumacious, he compiled an invective volume, which he called
Antiochense, or Mesopogon, upon a malicious mind, reckoning up the shameful
reproaches of the city, and setting to more than were true. After which,
understanding there were many pleasant jests and skoffes made of him, being
forced to dissimule all for the time, he boiled and swelled again inwardly
with anger. For, mocked he was by these terms, as crafty flattere^, or a
wily ^ox.
^ Cercops, a little dwarf, using to stretch his narrow shoulders, carrying a
goats beard before him, and stalking with a wide pace, like as if he had been
a brother of l Otus and Ephialtes, those Giants whose tallness Homer infinitely
sets out in the highest degree. He was also termed in stead of Sacricola,
i. a devout server of God, Victimarius, i. the common sacrificer or butcher,
whereby many alluded to his often sacrificing. And very aptly was he blamed in
this behalf, when as for o^tentation sake, he used very boldly to carry
sacred oblations for the priests, accompanied with a sort of women, and he
took joy and pleasure therein. And although for these and the like causes he
fretted and chafed, yet he said not a word, but holding in his passion within
the power of his mind, he celebrated his sacred solemnities notwithstanding. To
conclude, upon a certain set festival day before appointed, he ascended up to
the mountain Casius, so full of woods, and with a round compass reaching up
on high, from whence at the second cock crowing the sun is seen first to
rise. And when he offered sacrifice, and celebrated divine service to Jupiter,
all on a sudden he espied one lying prostrat upon the ground, with a supplyant
voice, humbly beseeching life and pardon: And when he asked what he was, answer
was made unto him, That it was Theodotus of Hierapolis, one of the Presidents
train there, who among other honorable personages, accompanying Constantius
as he went from their city, by way of un^eemely and base flattering him (as
who doubtless should win the Against Julian.
victory) requested him, and that with tears and groans, which he had at
command, to send unto them the head of Julian that ungrateful traitor, in
such sort as he remembered the said Or lim, Memb^^^, i. the head.
Member of Magnentius was carried up and down all about: Which when he
understood, I have (quoth he) heard indeed long since by many men's relation, of
this thy speech, but go thy ways in peace, careless, and void of all fear,
through the clemency of thy Prince, who, as the wise man has advised, to
diminish the number of foes, and to increase the number of friends, of his own
accord and willingly striveth so to do. After he had performed the rites of
sacrifice, and was departed from thence, there was presented unto him a writing
from the governor of Egypt, avouching, That the ox Apis, which had been
sought with great diligence and industry, might yet after a time be found:
Which, as the inhabitants of those countries suppose, is a token of luckinesse,
of plentiful fruits, and diverse good blessings: as touching which matter, it
will be requisite that somewhat were briefly delivered. Among living creatures
by ancient observation hallowed, Mneuis and Apis are of more note than the
rest. Mneuis is consecrated to the Sun, concerning ^^^ch no memorable matter is
recorded: the other following, to the Moon: For, Apis is an ox, or bull,
lively pourtraied unto us with diverse figures of natural marks, but marked most
of al with the shape of the new Moon on his right flank: who when as after a
certain appointed time of life, he is deep plunged in a sacred fountain,
and departed out of this life, (for he may not live any longer than the secret
authority of mystical books does prescribe: nor but once in the year is
there presented unto him a cow, and the same found with certain especial
marks) another is sought for with public sorrow and lamentation: and if he
may be found with all signs right and perfect accordingly, he is brought to
Memphis, a goodly city, and ennobled with the presence of god Aesculapius: and
when by the ceremonious consecration of certain prelates, to the number of one
hundred, he is brought into a bedchamber, and begins to be sacred or
hallowed, he is said by manifest conjectures to show the signs of future
things, and seems by certain crooked tokens, to mislike some as they come
toward him: Like as upon a time, when he rejected and refused Germanicus
Caesar, as we read in the Chronicles, offering him meat, it portended what fell
out within a while namely his death
after.

CHAP. XIIII. An exact draught of things memorable in Egypt: and first as
touching the auncientie of the people: The site and limits of the kingdom:
then the heads, courses, mouths, or issues, and strange wonders of Nilus.
BEcause therefore this present time seems to require so much, the story of
Egypt would slightly and in few words be touched, considering that the
knowledge there of I have orderly put down at large, in the acts of the
Emperors Hadrian and Severus, reporting most things that I saw my self. The
Egyptian nation, the most ancient of all others, but that it contendeth with
the Scythians about antiquity, is on the South side bounded with the greater
S^^che de Ba^baria, or Baxos de Barbaria.
Syrtes, the Promontorie Cabo di Carena, or ^ax^^en
Phycus and Cabo de Teinnes
Borium, together with the Garamants, and sundry other kinds of people: where
it looks directly into the East, it lies along just before Elephantina and
Meroe, cities of the Aethiopians, the People dwelling by the Cataracts, or
Downe-fall of Ni^^^.
Catadupi also, and the Aza^^^^. D^^. Nigro. Man di India. (...).
Red Sea, together with the Arabians Scenitae, whom we now call Saracenes. The
parts bearing just against the North, are maine lands, cohering one to the
other a mighty way; whence Asia, and the provinces of Syria take their
beginning. On the West side, disjoined it is from the Continent by the sea
Golfo de Ala^^^ or Gia^za.
Issiacum, which some have named Parthenium. Meet it will be therefore, that
somewhat in brief I set down as touching Nilus (which Homer terms
Aegyptus) minding shortly to show other particulars which in these countries
are admirable. The spring heads and original of Nilus, as I for my part verily
am wont to think, the ages also ensuing hereafter, shall be ignorant of, like
as those have been heretofore to this day. But for as much as the fabling
Poets, and disagreeing Geographers deliver diverse matters as touching the
hidden knowledge thereof, I will dispatch in few words their opinions, such as
I suppose sound near unto the truth. Some Naturallists affirm, That in the
parts lying under the North, when the cold Winters bind and freeze all, there
be mighty great snowes congealed and gathered together: and these afterward
resolved through the force of the exceeding hot Sun, turn into clouds full
of liquid and flowing humors, which by the m Etesian winds driven into the
South quarter, and wrung out with excessive heat, minister plentious increase
of water to Nilus. Others are of opinion, That by occasion of great showers of
rain in Abezim, or Alhabas, inhabited by the Abyss^nes.
Aethiopia, which by report, fall abundantly in those tracts, in the time of
parching hot weather, the said river does rise and overflow at certain set
times of the year. But these opinions both, seem not to accord with the
truth: For, reported it is, That in Aethiopia either there falls no showers
at all, or else if they do, it is very seldom, and after great time between.
Another opinion there is, more embraced than the rest, That whiles the ^
fore-running Prodro^^.
winds blow and the Etesian blasts together, holding on continually for the
space of forty five days, they force back his stream, and by reason that
his swift course is thus restrained, he swells, and his waves overflow: and
so growing bigger still by a contrary spirit that striveth again, whiles
violent winds beat it back of one side, and the course of the ever-running
springs besides urge it forward on another, it rises on high, and covers
all: and having once got the ground under it, surroundeth the open fields, and
looks like a sea. But king Iuba grounding his opinion assuredly upon that
which he found written in certain Written by C^rthaginians.
Punicke books, shows, That he arises out of a certain hill, which
standing in The kingdoms of Maro^cho and Pesse.
Mauritania, overlooketh the Ocean. And he says, That upon these presumptions
and arguments, this opinion was set on foot, because the like fishes, herbs,
and beasts, are bred among all those marshes. Now, this river Nilus running
along by the parts of Aethiopia, having also gone through diverse names, which
many nations have given him as he passes along the earth, with a most rich
exundation, comes at length to the Cataracts, that is to say, certain steep
and broken rocks, down which as he falls, he seems to rush rather than to
run. Whereupon in times past the people inhabiting there by, when with
continual roaring of the water, they had much impaired the use of their ears,
and became hard of hearing, were forced of necessity to remove and flit up to
higher grounds. From thence passing on with a milder course, at seven mouths,
every of which both yield the use and carry also the face of so many running
rivers, he spreads himself through Egypt, without the help of any fortaine
waters. And beside very many rivers derived out of his channel, the father of
them all, and falling into other channels welneere as big as it: seven there
be navigable and full of surges, unto which those writers in ancient time
have given these names under written, to wit, Roset^o.
Heracleoticus, Sturioni.
Sebenniticus, Bolbiticus, Pathniticus, Damiate. Nig. Migni. B^n^^ct^l^.
Mendesius, Tanes. Nig. Cal^^en^. Bonac^.
Taniticus, and Carabes.
Pelusiacus. Moreover, rising from whence I have said, carried forward he is
from the marshes, unto the Cataracts aforesaid, and makes many islands;
whereof some are said to lie out so far along in the water, that hardly he
can leave any one of them behind him in three days sailing. Among which
islands there be two of great name, to wit, G^guere. Cas^a^d.
Meroe, and (...).
Delta, so called for better mark and distinction, of the triangled form of
that [greeke] letter D. Now when the Sun begins to pass through the sign
Cancer, Nilus rises higher until his course into Libra: and thus flowing
aloft for an hundred days together, begins afterward to decrease, and so
the hugeness of his water being abated, where as before he carried ships, now
he shows the fields passable by men on horseback. If it rise and swell
over-high, it is as hurtful, as unfruitful otherwise, if it flow not high
enough. For, by excessive store of water standing and soking the earth too
long, it lets tillage of the fields, and by the smalnesse thereof it
threatens slender and barreine corn. Neither does any holder of land wish it
to rise above sixteen cubits high. And if it happen to flow moderatly, the
seed cast upon a land of fat soil, yields increase diverse times threescore
and ten fold. And it is the only river that breeds and affoordeth no gales
of wind.

CHAP. XV. Furthermore he describes the beasts of Egypt, as well by land as
water. Among which, the Crocodile, Ichneumon, Hippopotamus, Ibis, and diverse
Serpents: as also Temples and the Pyramides.
Egypt abounds also with many kinds of beasts, among which there be some of
the land, others of the water. Some live on land and water both, whereupon they
are named Amphibia. And verily, on dry ground feed Roe-buckes, the Bucali, and
the Bisturitia, ridiculous deformed creatures, and other monsters, which it
booteth not to recount. But among the water beasts there be store of Crocodiles
every where all over those tracts. This Crocodile is a mischievous foure-footed
beast, a dangerous vermin used to both water and land.
elements, without a tongue, moving the upper jaw only, having rows of teeth
fashioned like combs, so that whatsoever it catched once between them, the
same it biteth pernitiously and holds fast: it lays eggs like to those of
geese: and as he is armed with claws, so if he had Pollices.
thumbes thereto, such strength he has, that he were able to overturne whole
ships also. For, reaching out otherwhiles ten cubits in length, all night
long he keeps the water quietly: in the day time he feeds on the land,
presuming boldly of his skin which he carries about him so strong, that the
natural fence he has upon his back, like an armor of proof, unneth can be
pierced through with the strong shot discharged from engines of artillery. And
the same wild beasts, notwithstanding they be always raging, yet become mild
and leave off all their outrageous felnesse for the space of those seven
ceremonious holy days, wherein the priests at Memphis celebrate the nativitie
of Apis. Now, beside those Crocodiles which die by Fortu^a morte: I suppose he
means that manner of death, which is not violent no^ occasioned by any
outward known cause: but coming of it self, which how it differs from
na^urall or inward disease. I cannot see.
casualtie, some burst asunder, by having their soft bellies dug into
underneath, or fretted, with certain hard crusts growing upon the backs of
beasts like unto Dolphins, which the foresaid river maintains: others again
perish and come to their end after this manner. The little pretty bird x
Trochilos, whiles it seeks for some picking of small food, flying gently
about him as he lies along, and by tickling his gombes somewhat hard, comes
at length to the very place near unto his throat: which when the water serpent
^ Hydrus, a kind of the Ichneumons, sees, he entieth into the passage of his
mouth, made open by the said bird that went before, and having gnawne through
the belly, and torn in sunder the vital bowels, breaks forth. This
Crocodile, as bold a beast as it is to them that fly from it, yet if he
perceive one venturous to set upon him, he is most timorous. Upon the land he
has a very quick sight, and for the four Winter months he is said to eat no
meat at all. There be engendered also in those parts the water horses
Hippopotami, of all other beasts wanting reason, most witty, shaped like
horses, but having cloven houses and short tails: of whose ready and quick
wit, suffice it shall to show two proofs. This beast having made his couch
among the high over-growne reeds, standing very thick together, with most
watchful care looks about him to see the coasts clear and all at rest, and
finding his time of liberty and opportunity, goes forth to feed upon the
standing corn: and when he begins now to return with his b^llie strut and
full, by going backward he makes many distinct paths, least the hunters
following the direct line of one plain and straight way, should light upon
him, and without any difficulty wound him to death. Semblably, when with
over-greedie eating his belly is swollen so big, that he waxes unlustie and
slow, upon the reeds that are new cut he walloweth and rolleth his thighs and
legs, that so by wounding his feet, the blood issuing forth might make him
light, who was before so crammed up and fed fat; and then the sore raw places
of his flesh he daubeth over with mud, until the wounds do cica^rice, and be
whole and even again. These rare beasts, held for wonders and monsters before
time, the people of Rome saw first in the Aedileship of Scaurus, father to that
Scaurus, whom whiles Tully pleads for, he commands the Sardi, That they
also would, together with the authority of the whole world, have a good
opinion of that noble house. And for many ages after, being oftentimes brought
hither, now can they be no where found (as the inhabitants of those countries
do conjecture) forced to flit (so weary were they of the multitude of hunters
coursing and chasing them still) unto the p Blemmyae. Among the fowls of
Egypt, the variety whereof is innumerable, the r Ibis is a sacred bird,
lovely and harmless in this regard, That ministering unto her young ones in
neast the Serpents eggs for food, she is the cause that such mischievous
vermin is consumed, and so grow to be fewer in number. The same birds
encounter whole companies of winged Snakes, which come out of the Arabian
fennes, casting deadly poisons: and the same Serpents, before they go out of
their coasts (after these birds have by fighting in the air vanquished) they
devour: and by report they bring forth their young at their bills. Egypt
breeds also an infinite number of serpents, to wit, the s Basilisks, or
Cocatrices, of all other most mischievous and pernicious: also the t
Amphisbaenae, the u Scytalae, the ph Acontiae, the ch Dipsades, and the ps
Vipers, beside many other: All which the o Aspis exceeds by far in bigness
and beauty; neither of his own accord fluenta egre^^t^^ Nil^.
goes he out of the river Nilus. Many things there be in those tract^ the
reading whereof would very well pay for the pains, out of which it will be
fit and meet to declare some few. There be hot baines.
Therma Lutra there, which the home-borne inhabitants call happily for Chythros,
or (...). Graece, (...), Po^s, or Ke^^les: such as Herod^^ lib. 7. (...) about
(...).
Cythrus. Temples also built every where of great height and bigness: the
seven Pyramides likewise, that are become wonders of the world; which, in how
long a time, and with what difficulty they were brought up so high, Herodotus
the writer of shows: Towers they be, erected to such an height, as exceeds
the handy work of man; of a huge breadth in the bottom, and rising to a most
sharp pointed top: which figure in Geometry is termed Pyramid, for that to
the form of fire ((...)) as we say, it comes to be small in the head, in
fashion of a Cone or Pine apple: the greatness whereof, because in climbing up
to an exceeding height, it grows small by little and little, consumes also
the shadows, by mechanicke reason. There be allo Syringes, i. certain
fistulous noukes under the ground, and full of windings: which, by report, the
skillful professors of old rites having a foreknowledge of a deluge; and
fearing least the memory of their ceremonies should be quite abolished, built
in diverse places within, digested orderly by curious and laborious delfes: and
upon the walls, hewed out of the very rocks, engraved many kinds of fowls and
wild beasts, yea, and infinite forms of other living creatures; which being
not understood of the Latins, they called aa Hieroglyphicke letters. Then have
you Asna, Ortel.
Syene, in which at the time of the aestivall bb Solstice, when the Sun
Southward stretches to the uttermost his Summer race, his beams going round
about all things that stand straight upright, suffer no shadows to pass from
bodies. Hereupon it is, that if any man shall stick a stake upright, or see a
man or tree standing about the very edges of their lineaments, he shall
perceive the shadows to be spent. Like as at Meroe, being that part of
Aethyopia which is next unto the Aequinoctiall circle, by report, it happens;
where for ninety days together the shadows fall contrary to ours: and
therefore the inhabitants thereof they term Antiscij. Which because they be
many wonderful things, exceeding the purpose of our small work, let us put
them over to deep and high wits, being minded only to make some brief
narration as touching the provinces therein.

CHAP. XVI. Lastly, the provinces and cities of Egypt and Alexandria by name,
are described: with addition of famous men's names, and Sciences flourishing in
times past in Egypt.
Egypt, as men say in ancient times, had three provinces, to wit, Egypt it
self, Gosen, or Rame^^^, or (...).
Thebais, and Lybia: unto which the posterity following adjoined twain,
namely, Fechna and Errif
Augustamnica, severed from the said province Egypt, and of ^. cities therein
Pentapolis, divided from the drier Lybia. Thebais therefore contains in it,
among many cities, these more famous than the rest, to wit, Hermopolis and
Cana, or Chana.
Coptos, or Antinoe Anthios at this day.
Antinoon also, which Hadrianus built in the honor of Antinous, a young
stripling [and darling of his.] As for Thebes having an hundred gates.
Hecatompylos, who knows it not? Within Augustamnica stands Belbais and
Belbin.
Pelusium, a noble town, which Pe^eus the father of Achilles is said to have
founded, being willed by the commandment of the gods to be purged in that
lake, which runs hard by the walls of the same city, what time as after he
had killed his brother Phocus, he was haunted and harried with the horrible
apparitions and specter of Furies: also Cassius, where stands the sepulch^e
of Pomp^y the Great (...). Ti^^t.
Ostracine likewise and (...) Nigr.
Rhinocorurae. In Pentapolis Lybia, (...).
Cyrene is situate, a city of good antiquity, but not inhabited, which Battus
the Spartane built: Also Acon, or Acre.
Ptolemais, and Sues. G^li^.
Arsinoe, the same that Teuchira: likewise Darnis and Benich, or Berbuch: of
some Ca^^, or Alcair.
Berenice, which also they call Hesperides: but in the drier Lybia,
Porto-rassa, or Berton.
Paretonion, or Chaerecla.
Cherecla, and Neapolis, among some few small free towns. Egypt it self,
which ever since that it became annexed to the Roman Empire, is ruled by
Praefects, over and beside many smaller cities, has Athribis, Oxyrynchus,
Thmuis, and Cairo, or Menchis.
Memphis, right great cities to beautify it. As for Alexandr^na. Curopot.
Alexandria, it is the very head of all cities, ennobled in many-respects, and
namely by the magnificence of the founder, that most high Alexander the Great.
prince, and the cunning of Dinocrates the master of the Works, and chief
builder thereof; who when he laid the foundation of the large and fair walls
for want of lyme (at the same instant unneth found) bestrewed all the circuit
thereof, drawn out by line, with meal, which by an accidental sign
foreshewed, that the city afterward was like to abound with plenteous store of
victuals: there the wholesome winds do blow; there is the air calm and mild:
and as experiments gathered in sundry ages has showed, there is no day almost
in the year, but the inhabibitants of this city see the Sun shine clear
and bright. This c^ast, that it should not as heretofore, annoy the sailors
with many dangers, by reason of the deceitful and perilous passages to the
land, Queen Cleopatra devised to set up in the haven an high tower, called of
the very Pharos the I^^^, now Fa^on, or Magrah.
place it self Pharos, yielding the means of giving light unto ships sailing
in the night season: whereas in times past, such ships as came out of the
Parthenian or Lybian sea, seeing along the flat shores, void of mountains, no
land-markes either of or Beawkens.
watch-towers or hills, ran on ground upon the soft and clammie sands, and so
were split in sunder. This very same Queen built the A place containing 7.
stadia or great furlongs of ground won out of the sea.
Heptastadium, no less wonderful for bigness than incredible almost for the
quick dispatch thereof, and that for a cause well known and necessary, which
is this. The Island Pharos (where Homer in his swelling vein of fabulous
Poetry devises, That Proteus kept with his herds of sea-Calves or Seals,
lying a mile from the strond, on which the said city stands) was bound to
pay toll for portage unto the Rhodians: which, when Publicanes, or fermers of
the customs.
some from thence came and demanded excessively, this lady, whose wits served
her at all times to work wyles, having under a color of solemn and
feastivall holy days trained forth the said fermors or toll-gatherers with
her to the places under the city side, caused by uncessant and restless
labor a piece of work to be finished: and in seven days, for so many stadia,
by making huge dams and banks within the sea, there was won land unto the
maine near adjoining: and thither went she then in her wagon, and said, The
Rhodians mistook and were deceived, who were to demand tollage of Islands,
and not of the Continent. Besides these, there are temples prowdly standing
with high lanternes and steeples; among which, The temple of Serapis.
Serapium carries up the head alo^t: which, although there be but few words
and little speech go of it, yet with most stately courts and porches supported
upon pillars, with lively portraicts and images, and with a number of other
artificall works so adorned it is, that excepting the Capitol, whereby
venerable Rome advaunceth it self in majesty for ever, the world cannot see a
more sumptuous and glorious thing. Wherein were libraries of inestimable worth,
and all the ancient records jointly do testify, That seven hundred thousand
books bestowed there, (such was the vigilant cate of Ptolomeyes the kings)
were in the Alexandrine war, whiles the city was sacked under Caesar
Dictator, burnt to ashes. Twelve miles from thence stands Bochir, or (...).
Canopus, to which, the Pilot of Menel^us, as ancient monuments bear
witness, there buried, gave that name: a place even to this day built
sumptuously with churches and goodly fair innes, through which the winds blow
that are of an wholesome temperature, insomuch, that any man living in those
tracts would think, that he makes his abode without our world, when
oftentimes he shall hear the winds make a gentle noise, with a warm air and
Sunneshine breath. But Alexandria it self not arising by little and little, as
other cities, but at the very first built large with a spacious compass, and a
long time grievously wearied with domestical dissentions, at last, after many
years, whiles Aurelianus was Emperor, what time as civil brawles brake out
to mortal broils, whereby the walls were ruinate, lost the greatest part of
her or ground lying w^^^in it.
territories, named Bruchion, after it had been for a long time the seat and
dwelling place of excellent and renowned men. Thence descended Aristarchus,
that famous and mostlearned Grammarian, Herodian also a diligent student and
searcher into the most curious arts; likewise Saccas Ammonius the master of
Plotinus, and a number of other writers in many noble professions of learning:
among whom, Chalcenterus Didymus, memorable for his enterprise of manifold
sciences, carried a great name: who in those six ^ookes, wherein sometime he
finds fault, though unperfectly, with Tully, following herein the ^koffing
Poets.
Sillographi, foul tongued and railing writers, blames the judgment of
learned ears, faring herein, with his unsavorie and affectate speech, like
unto a foolish whelpe, that afar off keeps a barking and baying about a
terrible roaring Lion. And albeit there were many more together with these,
whom I have named, that flourished here in old time, yet in the same city the
professions of sundry sorts of knowledge are not even in these days silent:
for both the masters of Mathematickes, after a sort here breath and live still,
and whatsoever lies dark and hidden, is discovered and laid open by the
Geometricians staff: neither as yet among them is Music altogether decayed
and gone, nor harmony hushed: and even yet among some, black though they be,
the skill and observation of the heavens motion and of the stars is hotely
professed again; and in one word learned there be among them not a few. Over
and besides, cunning they are in the science of prophecy and divination, which
opens the courses of the Destinies. And as for Physic, whereof, in this
life of ours (which can little skill of temperature and sobriety) the many
helps and means are right requisite and needful, the study and practice
thereof increases daily so, that although it stand most upon practice and
experience, yet in lieu of al experiments, it suffices for a Physician to
commend the authority of his skill, if he do but say, That he was trained up
therein, at Alexandria, And thus much verily may serve as touching these
matters. But if any man will with a quick understanding revolve the manifold
introductions into the intelligence of Divinity, and the original of
fore-knowing things to come, he shall find that such kind of learning was from
Egypt carried and spread over the whole world. Here first, men long before
others, came to the sundry rudiments and cradles, as they say, of Religion:
and the first principles of their sacred mysteries, they warily keep and save,
bestowed in secret sanctuaries. In this knowledge Pythagoras being instructed
and according to it secretly worshipping the gods, whatsoever he said or held,
he ordained the same to stand in stead of an ^^ approved authority: and
oftentimes he showed at Olympia his golden thigh, and was from time to time
seen to talk with an Angel. And hence it was that Anaxagoras foretold, That
stones should fall from heaven; and by handling the mud that was in a pit or
well, gave a prediction of the earthquakes that ensued. Solon also by the
helps he had from the opinions of the Egyptian Priests, by making laws
according to the direction of justice, brought the greatest strength and
validity to the Roman law also. From these fountains glorious Wisdom, in
imitation of Jupiter, marching on high with brave and lofty words, having not
seen Egypt, has as it were in warfare displayed her banners. Now, for the
Egyptians themselves, they be men for the most part somewhat of a dark swart
color and black, and much enclining to melancholy, lean and dry, upon
every motion wrathful and angry litigious, and most eagre demaunders again
[for any arrerages and duties behind.] If any one of them by his denial of
tributes could not show upon his body many black and blew marks, he would be
ashamed: And to this day there could not be found the torment so violent, as to
fetch out of any of their hearts obdurat and hardened in robbery, so much, as
to tell what his proper name was. And this one thing moreover is well known,
as appears by our ancient Annals, That all Egypt heretofore was ruled by
their kings, friends unto the State of Rome: but after that Antonie and
Cleopatra, were in the battle at Sea before Actium vanquished, it became
possessed by Octavianus Augustus, and took the name of a province. As for
Libya the dry, we attained unto it by virtue of the last will and testament of
king Apion. Cyrenae with the residue of the cities in Libya Pentapolis, we
received as a gift at the bountiful hand of Ptolemeus. Having thus launched
out a great way, I will return now to the order of my history begun.

THE XXIII. BOOK.
CHAP. I. Iulianus taking unto him Sallustius as Colleague, whom he ordained to
be Prefect for Gallia, goes in hand with the reedification of the Temple at
Jerusalem, but in vain. Being terrified with ominous signs, and prodigious
tokens, yet minds he to enterprise the Persian war.
THese were the acts, to say nothing of small matters and minutes of affairs
that passed this year in the Provinces: But Julian Ter Consul not ter Consule,
For ^ cannot find in the Chronology, that Saliust ^s was before this year
Consul with him: and the veri^ words following imply no less.
having been thrice Consul already, taking unto him ^ Sallustius the Prefect
in Gaul, to the fellowship of wearing the Consulare robe, entered himself that
most honorable magistracy the fourth time: And a strange noveltie it was
thought, to have a private person joined to the Emperor in that place of
dignity, a thing that no man could remember done since Dioclesian and
Aristobulus time. And although he with careful mind conceiving aforehand the
variety of accidents, hastened forward with ardent desire the manifold
preparations for the expedition; yet distrusting men's diligence every where,
and much desiring to propagat the memorial of his Empire by some great works,
he intended with excessive cost to reedifie that sumptuous and stately temple
in times past at Jerusalem, which after many mortal skirmishes and assaults,
during the siege that Vespasian first, and Titus afterward laid unto it, was
with much ado hardly forced and beaten down: And he gave the charge of
dispatching the business with speed, to Alypius of Antioch, who sometime had
been deputy a governor of Britannie. When as therefore the said Alypius was
earnestly bent upon this affair, and the ruler of the of Judea.
province did set to his helping hand; behold certain fearful flaming balls
of fire issuing forth near unto the foundations, and making many terrible
assaults, consumed sundry times the workmen, and made the place unaccessable:
and by reason that this element still gave the repulse, the enterprise was
given over. At the same time were sent from Rome unto the Emperor, as
ambassadors, noble personages of high birth, and for their approved life and
conversation known to be of good desert, whom he honored with sundry
dignities. As for Apronianus, he decreed, that he should be Prefect of Rome;
and Octavianus Proconsul of Affricke; to Venustus he committed the deputiship
of Spain; and Rufinus Arabius he promoted to be Lieutenant general of the
East, in the place of his uncle Iulianus late deceased. Which affairs thus
ordered, as meet it was, behold he was terrified with a certain ominous sign,
that took effect, as the event showed, most surely and with speed. For, by
occasion that Felix the Treasurer suddenly dyed of a flux of blood, and the
said Lieutenant Julian followed straight after him, the common sort having an
eye to the For it seems that this title, Foelix, was in his style, else it
could not now be ominous.
public titles, and putting all together, pronounced Iulianus, Foelix, and
Augustus. Now, there had gone before another fearful and adverse sign also:
For, upon the very The 1. day of Ian^ari^.
kalends of January, as he went up to the temple of Genius, whereto men ascend
by stairs, one of the college of priests more ancient than the rest, fell
down suddenly without any body thrusting him, and with that casual and
unexpected fall, yielded up his ghost: which the standers by, whether for want
of skill, or upon a mind they had to flatter, said, did pretend some such
accident unto the elder of the two Consuls, and namely to Sallustius: but as it
appeared, fore-shewed it was thereby, That death approached not unto him that
was more ancient in years, but precedent in power and authority. Besides
these, there were other smaller fore-tokens likewise, which otherwhiles
presaged that which happened: For, at the very beginning of making preparation
for this Parthicke expedition, word was brought, That Constantinople was shaken
with an earthquake: which the skillful Soothsayers in this kind, pronounced to
be no fortunat sign unto the ruler, that was in hand with the overrunning of
another Princes Realm; and therefore advised him to desist from this unhappie
enterprise: affirming, That these and the like tokens, thus far forth, and
not otherwise, ought to be contemned, if there be invasion made by a foreign
power: for then, this one rule abides firm and perpetual, By all means to
stand b upon our safeguard and defense, all violence of death whatsoever
notwithstanding. At the very same time intelligence was given unto him by
letters, That the prophetical books of Sybilla, being by his commandment
perused and consulted with at Rome, as touching this war, by a plain answer
forbad the Emperor that year to depart from his own limits. And yet among
these occurrents, the ambassadors of many nations that promised their aid,
after liberal entertainment had their dispatch, and were sent home again, with
this answer of the prince, proceeding from a brave confidence, That it no ways
became the State of Rome to be defended by help from strangers, whose means
meet it was should maintain their friends and allies, in case they were driven
upon necessity to call for and crave their succor: Only Arsaces king of
Armenia, he warned to gather his puissant forces together, and attend his will
and pleasure, as who should quickly know whereto he tended, and what he ought
to urge and set forwrd. Wherefore, upon the first opportunity that might stand
with his advised and considerat consultations, making have with a fore-running
rumor, to be seized of the enemies lands, having before the mid-spring sent by
his military companies a token or watchword, giving notice of an expedition,
he commanded them all to pass over Euphrates. Which being once known, they
all hie away speedily out of their wintering harbors, and having crossed the
river, as the history ensuing shall declare, were dispersed into sundry
stations, and expected their Princes coming.

CHAP. II. Being departed out of Antioch, he was troubled and haunted with
strange signs and dreams: but afterward comforted again by sundry
presages, and the arrival of a most puissant Armadoe, he proceeds in his
intended voyage.
But he, being ready to depart from Antioch, made one Alexander of Heliopolis,
a turbulent and cruel man, judge over Syria; and said withal, That the man had
not indeed deserved the place, but such a Justice as he was meet for the
covetous and spightfull Antiocheans. And when the multitude of all sorts
accompanied him to his departure, wishing an happy journey, and a glorious
return, beseeching him from thenceforth to be mild and gentle unto them, for
that his anger which he had conceived of their scornful reproves and
reproaches, was not as yet assuaged, he gave them rough language, saying, He
would thenceforth see them no more. For, he said, That he determined after the
expedition ended, to return a nearer way to Tarsus in Cilicia, there to
winter; and that he had written to Memorius the President, That in the same
town all things should be put in readiness fit for him: and in truth this fell
out indeed not long after. For his corpse being brought back thither with small
pomp of funeral obsequies, was enterred, as himself gave order, in a place
near the cities side. And now when the weather began to be warm and
lightsome, the The 5. day o^ March.
third day before the Nones of March he took his voyage, and with usual
journeyes came to Hierapolis: where, as he entered the gates of that most
spacious and large city, a gallerie on the left hand suddenly fell down,
and, besides a number that were wounded with the weighty fall of timber pieces
and tyles, crushed to death fifty soldiers as they were going under it. From
whence with all his forces assembled together, he advanced his ensigns into
Meredi^. Tost^ll.
Mesopotamia so speedily, that before any rumor ran of his coming (for thereof
he had taken very careful heed before) he surprised the Assyrians at
unawares. And in the end, having upon a bridge of ships passed over Euphrates
with his army, and the aids of Scythians, he came to Batne, a free town of
Osdroe^na, and there found he a sorrowful token presaging ill. For when a
number of camp slaves stood near unto an exceeding high stack of straw, for
to take from thence according to their custom foder (for in this manner in
those countries such kinds of farage are mowed up) whiles many were plucking
thereat, the whole mow or stacke being shaken was borne down, and with the
huge heap of that which fell, overwhelmed in semblable manner fifty men to
death. Departing from thence with heavy cheer, he rode apace and came to
Carrae, an ancient town, remarkable for the defeature and overthrow of
Crassus and the Roman army; whence there be two distinct high roadwayes,
leading into Persia: That on the left hand by Bo^^^. Castald.
Adiabena and Tigris, the other on the right hand by the Assyrians and
Euphrates. And having stayed there for certain days to provide necessaries,
and to offer sacrifice unto the Moon (which in those tracts after the rites of
the place is devoutly worshipped) it is reported of him, that before the very
altar, without admission of any one thither to be witness or privy to what he
did, he secretly delivered unto Procopius, his kinsman, his purple coat of
arms, and charged him boldly to enter upon the Imperial dignity, if he
understood that himself was slain in Parthia. And here, as Julian took his
rest and lay asleep, his mind disquieted with dreams, presaged some
unfortunat accident to follow. Wherefore, both himself and the expounders also
of visions, considering the present occasions, pronounced, That the day
following, which was the the 18. day of March.
foureteenth day before the Kalends of April should be well observed. But, as
it was known afterward, the very same night the temple of Apollo Palatinus
in Rome, whiles Apronianus ruled as Prefect, was on fire and burned: where, if
good help on every side had not come in, the flames of fire were so great,
that they had consumed also the prophetical verses of Sybylla. And after his
forces thus ordered, and dispose made of victuals in every kind, word was
brought even then by the light horsemen discoverers, who came blowing in all
have, That the troops of the enemies horse having broken through a certain
limit near adjoining, had forrayed and on a sudden driven away booties: With
the grievous occurrent of which adverse accident, being much troubled, he
forthwith, as he had purposed before, committed unto the said Procopius the
charge of thirty thousand select soldiers, joining with him in the like
commission Sebastian a or Iieutenant general. Comes.
Comes, late Dux: whereby it appears, that Comes was an higher dignity than
Dux, contrary to the practice of our days.
Marquess of Egypt: And then he commanded, That for the present they should
make their abode within Tigris, and have a vigilant eye to all places, least
from any side not surely guarded and observed, some sudden and unexpected
mischief might arise, as oftentimes many such chances, he said, had happened:
And he gave them in charge withal, That, if conveniently it might be, they
would join with king Arsaces, and together with him marching in a running
camp by the way of Corduena and Moxoena, having wasted Chiliocomus, that
fruitful tract of Media and other quarters, make speed to meet with himself,
whiles he yet abode in Assyria, and be ready at all assayes, and upon every
sudden and urgent occasion to assist him. Having ordered these affairs in
this wise, himself making semblance, that he would go out by Tigris, which
way he commanded also for the nonce to be laid with provision of sundry
sorts of furniture, turned on the right hand; and when he had passed that
night in rest and quietness, in the morning he called, as his manner was, for
his (...).
beast to ride upon, and there was brought unto him an horse named Babylonius,
which happening to be sore vexed with a sudden gripe or wring in his belly,
fell down, and whiles he was not able to endure the pain, walloweth along,
and happens to besprent his caparison and ornaments richly garnished with
gold and precious stones. At which strange sight he took great joy, and cried
out, with the applause of those next about him, That Baldach. Castald. Bagda,
C^ropala^ and according to diverse languages has sundry names
Babylon was fallen, and lay along on the ground dispoyled of all her
ornaments. And being stayed there a while, until by luckie and propitiatory
sacrifices he had ratified this fortunate token of praesage, he came to
Devana, a garrison fortress, whence the river Belias springing, pours it
self into Euphrates. Here, after they had well refreshed their bodies with
meat, they came the next day to Callinicum also O^tel.
Callinisum, a strong town of defense, and for rich chevisance and quick
traffic a most delectable place: where, upon the sixth day before the Calends,
on which at Rome annuversarie c feasts are solemnized with great pomp in
honor of the mother of the gods, and the chariot which carries her image, is
by report washed in the stream of Dachia, near unto the way Appia, and
runs into Tyber.
Almon, having after the ancient manner performed this sacred solemnity, he
took his rest quietly and slept all night, whereupon he conceived much joy
and contentment. The morrow next ensuing he departed from thence by the very
edge of the river banks, where the stream was big by occasion of other
brooks conflowing thither on every side, marching in warlike sort with his
forces armed and weaponed; and there he took up his station, and abode under
tents: where the potentates and princes of the Saracenes humbly upon their
knees presenting unto him a crown of gold, honored him as the Lord of the
world, and of their nations; who were gladly received, as men meet for warlike
brigandize and robbery. Now, whiles he was in communication with them, behold
there arrived the flet, comparable to the Armado of that most puissant king
Xerxes, under the conduct of Constantianus the Tribune, and Lucillianus the or
Lieutena^^.
Comes: which took up the most spacious river Euphrates so, as that hardly it
was able to receive it: as wherein were a thousand ships of burden, framed
of diverse pieces of timber, bringing with them abundance of victuals, with
store of castingweapons and engines of artillery meet for siege and assault.
Fifty warre-shippes there were besides, and as many more, necessary for
joining together, and making of bridges.

CHAP. III. A curious and exact description of certain warlike Engines meet
for siege and assault.
Upon this very occasion I am put in mind briefly, so far forth as my mean
wit will serve, to show the description of these kinds of instrumens for their
sake that be ignorant thereof: and first will I declare the form and fashion
of the Balista. Between two planks there is set in frame and fast joined a
strong and big iron, reaching out in length after the manner of a good great
rule or squire; from the roundbodie whereof, which in the midst is finely and
artificially made, there lies forth farther out a fouresquare beam or spire,
made hollow with a direct and straight passage of a narrow riggall or trough,
and fastened hard to it with many cords of wrythen and twisted sinews, and
thereto are two wooden skrewes most fitly joined; near unto one of which
stands an the balistier himself.
expert and artificial workman, and cunningly bestows in the hollow passage
of the beam or tiller, a shaft of wood, with a big head glewed fast to it:
which done, two lusty and tall young men nimbly turn and wind about the If
this description content you not, see the figure of it and others in Veget^^^
and Noti^^^.
wheels on the one side and the other; and when the sharp head of the shaft
is come to the upmost end of the strings or sinews aforesaid, out goes the
shaft with a forcible strength within, and forth of the Balista quickly flies
out of sight, otherwhiles sparkling with the exceeding heat that it catches in
swift flight, and oftentimes it happens, that before this dart is seen, the
body feels a painful and mortal wound. As for the Scorpion, which now they
call Onager, this is the form thereof. There be two plankes hewn of Oak or
Helm, and those are somewhat curbed, so as they may seem to bear up or stand
out with backs; and these in manner of a Serratoria machinae.
Saw-machine are tied fast together, as being bored through on both sides with
good wide holes, between which through the holes are strong ropes tied, keeping
in the whole frame together, that it fly and start not asunder. From the very
midst of these ropes there rises forth a beam of wood overthwart, and after
the fashion of a yoke spire or tiller erected, which is tied with cords or
strings at such measures and gages, that it may be set up or let down lower:
and to the top thereof are joined iron hooks, from which there hangs a
sling-socket of tow or iron: under which piece of wood there lies a huge great
bouttrisse or supporter, even hayre-cloth stuffed full of small straw and
chafe, fastened thereto with strong bindings, and planted upon turfes heaped
up together, or else a bank raised with raw bricks: for such a mighty engine
as this being set upon a wall of stone, forces asunder and breaks what ever
it finds under it; not for the weight, but the violent shake that it gives.
When as therefore it is come to the point of skirmish or fight, and that a
round stone is put into the sling, four lusty young men on the one side
unfolding the bars whereto the ropes are incorporate, draw back the style or
standard up to the hook: and so at length the master of the Engine standing
aloft, giving a mighty stroke with an hammer, sets open the rayles that
contain the binding of the whole work: whereupon the standard being now at
liberty with that quick stroke, and hitting against the soft haire-cloth
aforesaid, hurleth out the stone that will batter whatsoever is in the way. And
verily it is called Tormentum, for that out of it all the unfolding is whirled
and hurled out: but a Scorpion (because standing upright, it has a sharp
prick above; unto which also the modern time has imposed the name of Onager,
i. a wild ass, in this regard, that wild asses when they are coursed by
hunters) fling with their heels stones afar off behind their backs, so as
they pierce through the breasts of them that follow in chase, or break the
skuls of their heads, and dash out their brains. Hence will we proceed to the
Ram. There is choice made of an high Fur or wild Ash, the one end whereof is
shod with an hard plate of iron and a long, shaped out in the front like unto a
Ram, which form gave the name to this engine or battering piece: and thus
hanged up with overthwart plankes on both sides, and iron hoopes of another
piece of timber, held up it is as it were in balance: and the same according as
the measure or length thereof will permit, a number of men driving back,
thrust forward again to break whatsoever stands against it, with mighty
strokes and maine jurres, in manner of an armed man that comes upon one and
gives assault. By the manifold pushes whereof, as it were the violent force of
a thunderbolt coming to and fro, buildings are rent, and made to cleave and
chawne, yea, and the joints of walls being shaken and losened, fall down. By
this kind of work, if it be driven back by maine strength put thereto (and
let go again) rampires are laid naked of their defendants, and the strongest
cities that be, are with the case of siege laid open. In stead of these
devices of Rams, despised now, because they were so common, there is an engine
framed, well known to Historiographers, which the Greeks name Helepolis: by
the means and long use whereof, Demetrius the son of Antigonus, after he had
given the assault unto Rhodes and other cities, was called Poliorcetes: and
built it is in this manner. There is a mighty Testudo or frame made,
strengthened with very long pieces of timber, and fitted together with iron
spikes, and the same covered with ox-hides and new rods or windings drawn one
within another, the roof or upmost part whereof is bestrewed and laid over
with mud, to the end it may check the fall of fire or shot of casting-weapons.
Now, there are set fast in the front of it certain sharpe-pointed iron pikes
or heads, with three edges, very massy, much like in shape to those lightnings
or thunderbolts, that painters or forgers exhibit unto it; to the end, that
whatsoever it runs against, it may with those sharp heads that so bear
out, batter and break in pieces. This so strong and huge a frame, the
soldiers within ruling with wheels and a number of ropes, drive with maine
and speedy force against the weaker part of a wall: and unless the defendants
from above be the stronger, and quit themselves the better, it beats down
the walls, and makes wide breaches. As for the Malleoli, a kind of Darts,
shaped they be on this fashion: There is an arrow made of a cane, betwixt the
head and the steile, joined and couched close with an iron full of chamfers and
teeth: which arrow, after the manner of a woman's or rock.
distaffe, on which they spin linen thread, is finely made hollow within the
belly, yet open in many places thereof, and in the belly or hollownesse it
receives fire with some as namely, Bitumen and Nuphta.
fuel to feed it; and thus being discharged softly out of a weak bow (for
with violent shooting the fire goes out) if it take fast hold on any place, it
burns the same: and having water cast or sprinkled upon it, the hoter fire
it causes, neither is there any remedy to allay or quench the rage thereof,
but by flinging dust upon it. Thus much as touching pieces of Ordnance for
walls, of which some few have been showed. Now return we to the orderly
course of our History.

CHAP. IIII. Iulianus setting naught by the letters of the Prefect of Gaul,
passes over into Persia, and then plucketh up the bridge, to take away all
hope from the soldiers to return. And once again wearied he is with adverse
prodigies, whiles the Soothsayers and Naturalists disagree about the
interpretation of such strange tokens.
THe Emperor having taken to him the Aids of the Saracenes, which they offered
with most willing and ready minds, marching with quick pace toward Cercusium,
in the beginning of April entered into that fenced town, a place most safe,
and as finely and workemanly built; the walls whereof the rivers Giulap.
Aboras and Euphrates compass about, shaping out, as it were, the spacious
plot of an Island. This fort, being but small aforetime, and suspected,
Dioclesian enclosed round with high walls and towers, what time as in the very
confines of the Barbarians he did set out and ordain the inward limits, least
the Persians might raunge over Syria, as within few years before it chanced,
to the great detriment and damage of the provinces. For it happened at Antioch,
that when all was still and silent, at the solemn stage plays a dancing or
Buffon.
Tregetour sent in to make sport together with his wife, was acting and
counterfeiting certain gestures that were commonly and usually taken up, with
so pleasant and delightsome a grace, that the people were astonished thereat,
suddenly his wife, Unless I dream (quoth she) in my sleep, lo yonder be
the Persians. Whereat the whole multitude turning their heads back for to
decline and avoid the darts that came flying thick about their ears, were
dispersed every way. Thus the enemies, when they had burnt the city, and hewed
a number in pieces, who as in time of peace were stragled abroad very losely at
their pleasures, when they had fired also and wasted the villages and places
bordering upon it, laden with booties and pillage, returned home, without
receiving any hurt at all, after they had burnt the traitor.
Marea^es quick, who without good advisement had led them forth, to the death
of his own countrymen. And this fortuned verily in the days of Gallienus.
But Julian, whiles he stays at Cercusium, to the end, that by a bridge of
ships over Aboras, the army and all the train following might pass over,
received letters, That nothing pleased him from Sallustius, Prefect of Gaul,
who prayed him that the expedition against the Parthians might be put off, and
earnestly besought him, That he would not thus hastily and unseasonably plunge
himself into an irrevocable danger of destruction, having not as yet obtained
the grace and favor of the gods. Howbeit, rejecting the advertisement of this
most sage and wise counselor, he boldly advaunced forward still: for why,
Never was there any power or prowess of man able to merit and prevail so
much, but that which the fatal order of Destinies had once prescribed, must
needs take effect. And forthwith, having passed over the river, he caused the
bridge to be plucked in sunder and had away, that the soldiers might have no
confidence or hope remaining, to return back from their proper companies and
regiments. In like sort here also was seen a sight praesaging heavy and
unluckie fortune, to wit, the dead corpse lying along of a certain officer or
purveyor, executed by the hangmans hand, whom Sallustius the Prfect being
presentin place, had condemned to suffer death and loose his head, for that
having given his promise, to deliver an increase of victuals within a day
prefixed, was by reason of a cause of impeachment disappointed, and did
frustrate men's expectation. But when the poor man (a pitiful case) was done
to death, the very next morrow, as he had made promise, arrived another fleet
freight with plenty of corn and victual. From thence we departed and came to
Zaita, a place, which by interpretation is as much as the Olive tree. Here saw
we the brave and admirable tomb of the Emperor the younger.
Gordian, whose acts from the very beginning of his childhood, and whose most
fortunate conducts of armies, together with his death wrought by traitorous
conspirators, we have in order put down in due time. Where, when he had of his
inbred piety and devotion sacrificed to the Manes of that consecrated prince,
and was going forward to Dura, a dispeopled town, he espied a far off a
company of soldiers; whereat he stood still and stirred not a foot: and as he
was in doubt, what news they brought, there was by them presented unto him a
Lion of a most huge and mighty body, wounded to death with many a dart, as
he made toward the army. Upon which sight, giving now, as it were, a more
certain praesage of some more fortunate spectacle, he bare himself aloft, and
marched on with greater courage and jolitie. But such was the uncertain will
and equivocant decree of Fortune, that the event fell out otherwise. For indeed
the death of a king was thereby portended, but of what king it rested
doubtful. For we read, that even Oracles also were doubtfully delivered, and
such, as nothing but the accidents that happened in the end could distinctly
determine: as for example, the truth and proof of the Delphicke prophecy,
which foretold, That Craesus after he had passed over the river Halys, should
be the overthrow of a most d mighty kingdom: as also another, which by
crooked terms appointed the e sea for the Athenians, to try battle with
the Medes: yea, and an answer by Oracle later than these before cited, which
verily was true, but no less ambiguous and equivocant, Aiote f Aeacida Romanos
vincereposse, i. I say, thy self Aeacides the Romans vanquish may. Howbeit the
Tuscane Soothsayers which were in his train, and had skill in these prodigious
and presaging tokens, considering there was no credit given unto them, when
they oftentimes prohibited and dissuaded this expedition, brought forth their
books of rites and ceremonies, showed plainly the foresaid sight was a sign
prohibitorie, and contrary to a prince that invadeth (although justly) a
foreign princes kingdom. But down went they, and were trodden under foot, in
comparison of Philosophers that gainesaid them, whose authority in those days
was had in great esteem and reverence, who otherwhiles shoot wide of the
mark, and yet in matters whereof they have no perfect knowledge, stand
stiffely a long time. For they pretended and alleged, as a probable argument
to maintain the truth and credit of their skill, in that unto Maximian also
before time Caesar, being now at the point to join battle with Narses king of
the Persians, there was in like manner a lion and a huge wild bore also
tendered, slain both together: and he, say they, after he had vanquished that
nation departed in safety. But little considered these Philosophers, that
thereby destruction was portended to him that invaded and sought for other men's
lands: and well it is known, that Narses began first to seize Armenia into his
hands, which was subject to the Roman power and jurisdiction.

CHAP. V. Other presaging signs diversely expounded. A persuasive oration of
Iulianus unto his soldiers, as touching hot pursuit of the war against the
Persians.
SEmblably, the day following, which was the the^ day of April.
seventh before the Ides of April, when the Sun grew now toward setting,
suddenly of a very small cloud, the air so thickened, that all the light of
the day was quite gone; and after terrible thunder claps and flashes of
lightning that came thick one after another, a soldier named Iovianus was
stricken from heaven, and fell down dead, together with two horses, which he
was bringing back from the river after they had drunk their fill. Which when
he saw, he sends for the interpreters of these and such like signs, who
being demanded, What they thought thereof? avouched confidently. That it also
prohibited this expedition and intended war, showing that lightning was a
counselor: (for so are those termed which advise or dissuade any thing to be
done.) And therefore especial heed was to be taken hereof, because it killed
a soldier that carried an For, it alluded to Jupiter, and to hi^ that
succe^ded next in the Empire.
high and great name, together with horses, that are beasts for war: and
places smitten or blasted by this means, the books which treat of lightnings,
pronounce, That they ought not to be looked or trodden upon. On the contrary
side, That Philosophers argued, that the brightness of sacred fire suddenly
seen, is not significative, but only is the course or shooting of a swift and
vehement exhalation, thrust some way out of the sky down to the Iower parts:
or if aught were fore-tokened thereby, it showed before hand increase of honor
and renown unto the Emperor in his glorious enterprise: considering, that
certain it is, flames of their own nature, if there be nothing to check
them, fly up on high. Well, when this bridge, as has been said before, was
finished, and all were passed over the river, the Emperors chief and
principal care now, as he thought, was to make a speech unto his soldiers so
forward and fearelesse, presuming confidently upon their own valor and their
Generals prowess: By a signal therefore of trumpets sound, when all the
centuries, cohorts, and bands were assembled, himself standing upon a bank of
earth clods, and guarded round about with a company of great Celsarum
potestatum, as Colonels, Sergeant majors etc.
Commanders and officers of the camp, with a gracious countenance discoursed
unto them in this wise, as one highly favored with a joint consent and
affection of them all. Right valiant and redoubted soldiers, beholding how
vigorous ye are in regard of your exceeding puissance and lusty courage, I am
determined to make an oration unto you, and by many reasons to prove, That this
is not the first time, as some evil tongued folks secretly give out, that the
Romans have invaded the kingdoms of Persia. For, to pass by Lucullus or
Pompejus, who through the Albanes and Massagets, whom now we term The people
of Lithuania, or Li^taw, as VVillichius thinks.
Alani, having made way by force even through this nation have seen the
Caspian lakes, we know, that Ventidius also the Lieutenant of Antonius, made
an infinite number of slaughters and overthrowes in these tracts. But to leave
these acts of ancient record, I will rehearse what exploits be fresh in
memory, and of late date. Trajanus and Severus entered again thus far with
victories and trophies, and with the like honor and fame had Gordian the
younger returned, whose monument and supulchre we have newly seen honorably
erected, after he had discomfited and put to flight the Persian king at
Resaina, but that by the faction of Philip, that was Praefectus Praetorio,
together with the help of some few wicked persons, he was in this very place,
where he now lies buried, ungratiously wounded and killed: Neither wandered
his Ghost.
Manes long unrevenged; in that, as if Justice her self appeared evidently to
take vengeance, all that conspired against him were put to torture and dolorous
death. And as for these brave captains verily, whom I have named, carried they
were with a forward will and mind of atchieving high matters, unto the
enterprise of these memorable exploits: But, as for us, we are moved to
undertake these expeditions which we have intended, by occasion of the woeful
and miserable case of cities newly forced, of the unrevenged ghosts of whole
armies put to the sword, of the great damages sustained, and the loss of our
dear friends: to the end we may give comfort to our allies, redress and
remedy hurts past, and by procuring an honorable security unto the
Commonwealth on this coast of the world, leave unto posterity matter
sufficient, for which they may give us a noble report and commendation another
day. Present will I your Emperor be in all places with you, through the help
of immortal God, both to lead before you in the front as a Captain, and to
fight with you as a fellow souldior, and that with fortunat signs of success,
as I am persuaded. But in case Fortune, mutable as she is, should defeat me any
where in battle, sufficient it shall be for me, that I have devowed my self
to the Roman Empire, like as in old time Curtius, Mutius, and the noble race of
the Decij have done. Abolish we must and destroy this most troublesome nation,
upon whose swords the blood of our kindred is not yet dried. Our ancient
forefathers had many ages pass over their heads, before those were rooted out,
that annoyed and troubled them. Doubtful was the war, and of long
continuance, whereby The ruins thereof is at this day cal^ersack, somewhat
alluding to the ancient name Byrsa. Marmoli^s.
Carthage was overcome and subdued: but while the glorious conqueror feared
that it should still stand and continue, he subverted and rased it to the very
foundation. Scipio after he had gone through many chaunges and chances that
follow a siege, overthrew Garray, Moral^.
Numantia. Rome went down with Castle ^ubil^o, Erythra^^.
Fide^^, least it should grow up in an emulation to aspire unto sovereign
Empire; yea and destroyed both Mo^^e Fiascone.
Falisc^ and Marthe^iano, or Civi^a Castellana.
Veij, so, as that the record of ancient hystories has much ado to make us
believe that these cities were ever of any strength and puissance. Thus much
have I laid open, as a man well seen in antiquities: It remains now, that
setting aside all greedy desire of spoil and pillage, which oftentimes has
been the bane of Roman soldiers, every one march on close with the army,
ready to follow his own colors when it comes to the point of joining
battle; knowing thus much, that if he stay anywhere betime, he shall be left
shorter by the legs: For, nothing fear I, but the deceitful trains of our
enemies in this kind so exceeding crafty. To conclude, I promise unto you all,
That hereafter, when things are happily appeased and settled, without chalenging
any prerogative of princes, who in regard of their powerful authority suppose
whatsoever they speak or judge, is rightful and just, I will give a reason
and account, if any man require it, of whatsoever I have advised, be it well or
otherwise. Wherefore, now pluck up your hearts, I beseech you, be resolute, I
say, and presume of much, as those that shall together with us in the same sort
and equal measure, undergo what dangerous service soever shall occur, and
making this account, that victory is always wont to join in company with
equity. When he had finished his speech with this most grave conclusion, the
martial and warlike soldiers rejoicing in so glorious a leader, and conceiving
greater hope of prosperous success, held up their targuets and shields aloft,
and cried all with one voice, That they would reckon of no danger or
difficulty, under such a General and Commander, as who had enjoined himself
more painful service than he did to common soldiers. But most of all, the
companies of the Gauls, by a more joyful and jocondnoyse showed the same: as
bearing well in mind, that sometimes whiles he their leader conducted them, and
traversed to and fro among the ranks and fyles, they had seen some nations
defeated, and others brought to humble supplication upon their knees.

CHAP. VI. The description of the kingdom of Persia; to wit, the beginning of
it, the first kings, the rising and increase, the situation and limits thereof.
FOrced I am by the course of the story that is devolved now thus far, by way
as it were, of a quick digression, to show the site of Persia, which has bin
curiously described by Geographers, of whom very few and those hardly have
delivered a truth. Now, whereas this discourse shall fall out to be somewhat
long, avail it will to the perfect knowledge of the thing. For whosoever he
be, that in the narration of unknown matters affects too much brevitie, he
seeks not that so much which he should very plainly declare, but what ought
indeed to be overpassed. This kingdom in times past small, and for such causes
as I have often related, called before time by many names, what time as Alexander
the great, was taken away by untimely death in Babylon, became subject to
Arsaces the Parthian, a man of obscure parentage, and no better in his
youthful days than a ringleader of thieves: but by little and little turning
over a leaf, and changing his purpose to the better, by a continued course and
train of noble deeds, he advanced himself to an high estate: Who after he
had achieved many glorious and valiant exploits, vanquished Seleucus Nicator
that succeeded the foresaid Alexander (who for his manifold victories obtained
that surname) and driven out the garrisons of the Macedonians, himself leading
a more peaceable life, proved a moderat ruler, and mild judge of such as
yielded obedience. And in the end, when he had subdued unto him all the
borderers, either by force of arms, or by a due consideration of his equity,
or else by fear, so that Persia now was replenished with fortified cities,
strong castles and pyles, and became dread unto all the neighbor inhabitants,
of whom before time it was wont to stand in fear, himself in the middle race
of his age departed this life in peace. And by the uniforme accord and consent
as well of the noble Peers, as the common people, striving a vie who might be
most forward, became the first, that according to the due rites of consecration
was inserted (as they be persuaded) and ranged among the stars. Whereupon in
those days the high minded and proud kings of the same nation can well abide
to be styled the brethren of Sun and Moon. And like as our Emperors love
well and wish the title of Augustus, even so to the Parthian kings (who before
time were abject, ignoble, and base) through the happy auspices and government
of Arsaces, there accrewed even the greatest titles of dignities that might be:
and therefore they worship and adore him no less than a god, and so far
forth are his honors spread and enlarged, that even to our very days, there is
not a prince preferred before all other to the rule of that kingdom, unless
he be of the line and race of Arsaces: yea, and in every civil brawle and
contention, which daily happen among them, there is not one but avoideth, no
less than sacrilege, to lay violent hands upon any, descended from Arsaces,
bear he arms, or be he otherwise a private person. And well known it is,
that this nation having vanquished and subdued many States, dilated the bounds
of their dominion as far as Propontis and Thracia; how ever, through the
pride of their hautie minded leaders, who licentiously encroched upon far
countries, and committed outrages there, by receiving very great foyles and
overthrowes, it became much impaired. First, through Cyrus, whom, after he
passed over the Lost^etto di Constantinopoli.
Frith of Bosphorus with a fabulous and incredible multitude, Tomyris Queen of
the Scythians, in a most eagre revenge of her g sons, discomfited, and put
his host to the sword. Then, what time as Darius, and afterward Xerxes, by
altering the use of the very elements, invaded Greece, all their forces in
manner, as well on land as at sea, were quite defeated, and themselves could
hardly find means to escape with safety: to say nothing of the with Alexander
Magnus.
Alexandrine wars, and how by will and testament the whole nation was
transferred under the government of one successor. Which affairs thus
achieved, and long times passed under the Consuls government, and then
afterward, our State being reduced under the power of the Caesar's, those
nations now and then waged war with us; sometimes they went their ways on
even hand, otherwhiles with loss, and sometimes again with victory. Now will
I set down the situation of the places therein as summarily and briefly as
reason will permit. These countries lying out largely spread in length and
breadth, environ about on every side the Persian gulf, so full of Islands, so
famous, and so much frequented: the mouths of which sea are by report so
narrow, that from Cabo Lasquette, Ortel.
Harmozonta, a cape or promontorie of Cherman.
Carmania, unto another that stands over against it, and which the
inhabitants call Maces, a man may kenne without any impeachment at all. After
which straits one passed through, and that the open sea spreads it self
exceeding wide, men use to sail directly as far as to the city Balfero.
Ortel.
Teredon; where, after many downefals, Euphrates is drowned in the sea: and the
whole gulf, if a man measure along the shore, as if the whole space were
wrought round by a Turners brake, takes up in circuit twenty thousand stadia;
upon all the coasts and sides whereof, stand towns and villages thick, yea, and
there is frequent passage to and fro of shipping. When as therefore ye have
sailed through the foresaid straits, ye come to the gulf of Armenia, lying
into the East: and after a certain distance between, occasioned by a neck or
Isthm of land, there opens a Bay or Gulf in the South, named Cantichus; not
far from whence there is another, which they term Chalites, under the
Sunnesetting. Then, after a number of Isles passed by, of which but few are
known, they join upon the Indians Ocean sea, which is first of all others
that entertaineth the fervent heat of the Sun rising, being of it self also
exceeding hot. And according as the Geographers pen has in their Cards made
the draught, in this manner is the whole circuit aforesaid by parcels divided.
From the North pole to the Caspian straits it confineth upon the Cadusij, with
many nations of the Scythians, and the Arimaspi, men with one eye, and savage:
on the South side it meets with the Armenians and a mountain.
Niphates, as also the Albanes, seated in Asia; with the red sea, and the
Arabians Scenitae, whom the posterity ensuing named Saracenes: under the South
point it over-looketh Mesopotamia: and where it lies afront opposite into the
East, it stretches to the river Gangan. Casta^^. Cantan. Merca^^^. Gualgas.
Theveto.
Ganges, which cutting through the midst of the Indian lands, is discharged
into the South sea.

CHAP. VII. The regions thereof: the Praefects or Rulers in it: the wonders of
Nature and Cities that it shows.
NOw there are contained within the whole compass of Persia these countries
that be of greatest name, and those ruled under Vitaxae (that is, captains of
horsemen) kings and princes termed Satrapae (for those of the lesser sort,
they be so many in number, it were a difficult and needless piece of work, to
recount) namely, Adriu^a. N^gr. and diversely named by sundry Geographers.
Assyria, Cus. Nigr.
Susiana, Cordini Haithon^ Servan. Castald.
Media, Farsi. Mercator. Pharsic. Theveto.
Petsis, Arach. Mercator.
Parthia, Cherman. N^g. or Turquestan. Gitav.
Carmania the greater, Diargument. Mercator. Hyrach. Erythr^^.
Hyrcania, Ieselbas. Castald.
Margiana, Carass^n. Castald. Batter. Ram^sio.
Bactriani, Maurenha^^. Mercator.
Sogdiani, Sas. Nigr. These three countries last named, Marius Niger comprise^h
under Tartaria Zagathea.
Sacae, part of Cathaia.
Scythia lying beyond the mountain or Emodus. Magbali. Castald
Emodes, Cambal^. Gir^^.
Serica, Sernere Mer^^t.
Aria, Turks, as Ga^ a reports out of Gemistius Pletho.
Paropamissadae, Segistan, or Segastan. Mercator. and N^gr.
Drangiana, Chesimur. Merc.
Arachosia, and Gest. Mercator.
Gedrosia. The next unto us and on this side all the rest, is noble Assyria,
for being well peopled, and much frequented, for greatness also in compass
and fruitfulness many ways, most wealthy: which having lain in times past,
spread into large countries and territories, and being full of them, and
plenteous withal, grew into one name, and all of it now is called Assyria.
Where, among abundance of Berries and other vulgar fruits, grows h Bitumen,
near unto a lake named Sosingites, by whose belly or channel Tigris being
swallowed, and running under ground, after he has gone a great way, arises
and appears again. Here is engendered i Naphtha, clammie and glutinous like
unto pitch, and it also resembles Bitumen: upon which, if a little bird
settle, she loses her flight, sinketh down, and is drowned quite out of
sight. And when this kind of liquor begins one to catch fire, man's wit is
not able to devise any means, save only dust to quench and put it out. In
these territories there is likewise to be seen a gaping hole within the
ground, from whence exhaleth a deadly breath or vapor, which with the strong
smell or sent whereof kills what living creatures soever stands near unto
it. Which noisome and pestilent vapor arising forth of a certain deep pit,
when it once passed the wide mouth thereof, before that it walmed up higher,
caused (through the contagiousnesse thereof) the grounds lying round about it
to be inhabitable. The like hole unto this, was (as some report) seen
heretofore at Hierapolis in Phrygia: from which in semblable sort an hurtful
spirit or air issuing, by the continual smell that it yielded, killed
whatsoever came near, unless they were guelded: what the cause might be of
this accident, I refer to the reasons that may be made out of natural
Philosophy. Also, at the temple of Jupiter Asbameus in Almasia. Castald.
Gen^ch. Theveto. ^occato Alaluli^n. ^incto.
Cappadocia, where that great and most renowned Philosopher Apollonius is
reported to have been borne in the town Tyana, there is to be seen a
fountain running forth of a poole, which swelling big with abundance of water,
and drinking up himself again, yet never surroundeth his banks. Near unto
this circuit is that part of Assyria, called in ancient time Botan. Castald.
Adiabena, which by long use turned to this name, for that being situate
between Oena and Tigris, two navigable rivers, there was no found that ever
gave access in to it. For we in Greece express a passage over to a place by
the word (...). And this verily is the conceit of those in old time. But we
have learned, that in these countries there be two everrunning rivers, which my
self also has passed over, namely, Diavas and Adiavas, having bridges upon
them of ships set together. And hence we are to understand it took that
denomination, even as of very great rivers, Egypt (as Homer says) India, and
or Euphratesia.
Euphratensis, beforetime Azar. Nigr^
Comagena: likewise Iberia, now Spain, of ^bro.
Iberus, and of the river Guadalquivir.
Baetis that famous province Andalusia.
Baetica. In this Adiabena stands the city Ninive, otherwise called ^ussula,
Moss and Mosal. ^^gr. and Leo^^.
Ninus, which in times past was possessed of the kingdoms of Persis, and
shows the name of Ninus, that most mighty king, sometime the husband of
Semiramis: also Tauris. Castald.
Ecbatana, Arbela, and Gaugamela, where Alexander after many adventurous and
dangerous battails, in heat of martial blood gave Darius an overthrow. Now,
within the compass of Assyria there be a number of cities, among which, the
principal is Traxt. Rawol^^o.
Apamia, surnamed Mesene; also Ballera. Ortelio.
Teredon, Apollonia, and Vologessia, together with many other like unto them:
but for show and name, these three only be most glorious and of greatest note,
to wit, Baldach. Castald.
Babylon, the walls whereof Semiramis laid with Bitumen (for the tower or
citadell thereof that most ancient king Belus built:) Dakia. Beniam. Tudeles.
Ctesiphon, which Vardanes in old time founded, and afterward king Pacorus,
when he had bettered it with strength of inhabitants and strong walls, gave it a
Greek name, and made it the very chief seat and mirroir of all Persis: and
then Seleucia, the sumptuous and stately work of Seleucus others name him
Nicanor.
Nicator; which being by the captains of Verus Caesar sore shaken and brought
to ruin (as before I have related) the image of Apollo of Cho^^a, a city in
Lyc^a, where he was honored.
Chomeus being displaced, unshrined, and brought to Rome, the Prelates bestowed
in the temple of Apollo so called of the ^ill Palatium in Rome.
Palatinus. And the voice goes, That after this very same image was thus
carried away, and the city burnt, the soldiers in rifling and ransacking the
temple, met with a narrow hole; which when they had laid open, therein to find
some precious treasure, out of a certain sanctuary, shut up sometimes by the
privy counselors of the Chaldaeans, sprung forth that original disease and
corruption, which having once conceived the force of an incurable malady, in
the days of the same Verus and Marcus Antoninus, from the very bounds of
Persia unto Rhene and Gaul, infected all places with contagion, and bred much
mortality. Here hard by lies the Chaldaeans country, nourice of the ancient
Philosophy, as themselves report, among whom the truth of divination and
credit of prophesies first shone forth and gave light.

CHAP. VIII. The rivers of Persia which are of greater note: The many tracts
therein. The Magi: and a wondrous medicinable oil.
MOreover, there run through these same lands, as the nobler rivers above
others, these which before I have named, also Marsyas, and the Naar-malcha,
which he mentions afterward, signifies as much.
kings river, together with Euphrates, that passes all: which carrying three
channels, is in all his streams navigable; and as he runs round about
Islands, and above all the industry of husbandmen waters the corn grounds,
makes the same both pliable to the plough, and meet also for breeding up of
woods and groves. Upon these tracts join the Susiani, who have not many
towns; but among other Sustra. Castald.
Susa holds up her head, as having been many times the seat and habitation
of the kings: likewise Arsiana, Sela, and Arecha: the rest are but small, and
obscure beside. But many rivers there be, that run here and there in these
places: among which, more excellent than their fellows, are Oats, Harax, and
Mesus, by the sandy straits that keep the red sea and the Caspian sea
asunder, flowing into the sea. But on the left side, Cordini. Haith^n^
Media confineth and opens upon the Servan. Castald^.
Hyrcane sea: which country before the reign of Cyrus the elder, and the
growth of Persis, we read was the Queen of all Asia, namely, when it had
subdued the Assy^ians, a number of whose territories, changed into the name of
It carries diverse names according to the countries that coast upon it.
Atropatena, it possessed in right of war: a martial nation, and next to the
Parthians, who only are their conquerors, Sirvan. Leuncl^^.
right dreadful, inhabiting certain regions, shaped in manner of a
fouresquare figure. All the inhabitants of these lands spread very far, and
take up an exceeding breadth, and over them there peake up passing high
mountains, which they call Zagrus, Orontes, and Iasonium. Also they that dwell
in the West part of Ba^a^afi. Castald.
Coronus, a very high hill, have a number of fields yielding abundance of corn
and wine, for their fatness and fertility right pleasant, and in rivers and
clear veins of Springs as rich. With them a man shall see the fresh green
meddowes: there shall ye find a race and breed of generous horses, on which
(as ancient writers show, and our selves have seen) brave men are wont to be
mounted, when in great jolitie they go to battle, and give the charge with
all their force; and such they call Nisaei. It has abundance of cities also,
such as Media is stored with; of villages likewise built in manner of towns;
and is as well peopled. And that I may speak fully at a word, it is the most
plentiful habitation and seat of kings. In these tracts lie the fertile fields
of the Magi: as touching whose sect, study, and profession, for that we are
hither come, convenient it is that some brief discourse were made. Plato a
most substantial author of notable opinions, shows us, That Magia is by a
mystical word no other than Machagistia, which signifies the most incorrupt
and sincere religion and observance of divine mysteries: to which knowledge in
ancient times Zoroastres the Bactrian added many things out of the Chaldaeans
secrets, and after him the most wise prince Hystaspes, father of Darius: who
when he adventured far into the inward parts of the higher India, came unto a
certain wilderness full of woods, the silent and quiet seat wherein, the k
Bracmans, men of high reach and deep conceit, enjoy: and by their instruction
being taught so far forth as he was able to conceive and apprehend, the
manner and order of the heavens motion and of the stars, together with the
pure rites of religion; of such principles as he learned, he infused some into
the minds of the Magi, for their better knowledge: which, they together with
the skill and prescience of things to come, deliver every man successively by
his own children and progeny unto the posterity ensuing. From that time for
many ages together, even to this present, a number proceeding out of one and
the same line and race, be dedicated to the worship and service of the gods.
And it is said also (if we may believe so much) that there is kept burning
among them perpetually upon harthes, the fire that fell from heaven: and men
say, That some small parcel thereof, in token of good luck, went in times
past before the kings of Asia. The number of them at their first beginning was
of old but very small, and the mysteries of their profession the Persian
Rulers and potentates solemnly used in their sacrifices and divine service. And
a most heinous offense it was, to go unto the altars, or to handle an ost or
sacrifice, before that a Magus had by a set form of prayer powered forth
certain praecursarie of wine (...)
libations. But being by little and little increased in multitude, they grew at
length to the greatness and name of an entire nation: and inhabiting villages
not fenced nor fortified with walls, and permitted to use their own laws, in
regard of religion they were held honorable. Of the race of these Magi, as
ancient books record, there were seven, that after the death of Cambyses,
took upon them the royal govern^ment of Persia: which records also testify,
That they being over-weighed and borne down by the faction of Darius, at the
beginning had the said government allotted unto them by the neighing of an
horse. In this region there is a medicinable oil made, where with an arrow or
dart being anointed, if it be gently shot out of a weak bow (for with swift
flight the virtue thereof is quenched) and stick in any place, it catches
fire, and continues still burning: and if a man would wash it away with water,
he makes the same to burn more violently. Neither by any other means go^th
it out, than by casting dust upon it. Now, the making of it is in this manner:
They that are skillful confectioners, take common oil infected with a certain
herb, and this being condited preserve it a long time, and as it gathers to
a thicker consistence, harden it by means of a substance issuing out of a
natural vein, like unto gross oil: and this kind of drugge, is engendered
among the Persians, which, as I have said already, they used to call by a
term of that country, Naphtha.

CHAP. IX. The morefamous and better frequented towns of Persia. A narration
as touching the Parthians, Arabians, Carmans, and Hyrcanes their neighbors, as
also of their towns, manners, and commodities
IN these countries there stand a number of cities dispersed, and the
principal of them all, be Zombis, Patigra, and Gazaca: among which also for
wealth and large walls, these be conspicuous, Heraclia, Arsacia, Europos,
Cycopolis, and Ecbatana, seated all under the mountain Iasonium in the lands
of the Syro-Medians. Many rivers there be that pass along these regions, of
which the greatest are Choaspes, Gyndes, Amardus, Charinda, Cambyses, and
Cyrus: which carrying a great and spacious stream, Cyrus the elder, that noble
and amiable king, so named, when he had a bolished the old name thereof, what
time as he made a voyage for the conquest of the kingdom of Scythia: both, for
that it was so strong, as himself also was reported puissant: and also
because, with mighty force making itself way, as he also did, it runs into
the Caspian sea. Beyond these confines, next unto the sea coasts is ancient
Persis inhabited, stretched forth along the South tracts; a country rich in
the smaller sorts of grain and fruits, as also in vines, and for plenty of
water most delectable. For, many rivers have their course through it into the
gulf aforesaid, the biggest whereof are these, Vatrachites, Rogomanis,
Brisoana, and Bagrada. And the inland towns are very great and large. For, in
what regard they built nothing of any note along the maritime coasts, it is not
certainly known. Among which cities Siras, and of some Siaphas.
Persepolis bears a great name, like as Ardea, Orobatis, and Tragonica. But
there are no more than three islands there seen, to wit, Tibiana, Phara, and
Alexandria. Near bordering upon these are the Parthians scituat under the Sub
aquilone, or North, if you expound it at Large.
North-east, inhabiting lands full of snow, and frozen all over: whose
countries the river Choatres bigger than the rest, divides in the mids. And
for towns, these be of more account than the other all, namely, Genonia,
Charax, Apamia, Artacana, and Iex, Thev^^^.
Hecatompylos: From the bounds whereof, along the Caspian sea shore, unto the
very straits thereof, are reckoned a thousand and forty stadia. The
inhabitants of all the territories there, be fierce, and given to fight; and
such delight take they in skirmishes and wars, that he is deemed among all
other right happy, who spends his life in battle: For, such as depart
otherwise by casual or natural death, they rail at and revile, as base
persons and mere cowards. Upon these, on the East and South side, bound the
happy Arabians, so termed, for that they be so rich in come as well as in
plenteous increase of cattle, in vines, and odoriferous spices of many kinds:
and a great part of them reach unto the red sea, and namely on the right side:
for on the left hand they border hard upon the Persian sea, and so are
acquainted with all the blessings and commodities that both elements can
afford: Where also there be both rodes and quiet harbors very many, also
towns of merchandise standing thick, and retiring houses for the kings,
passing sumptuous and beautiful: besides most wholesome and medicinable
fountains of waters naturally hot, together with a number of brooks and
rivers running clear, and a temperature of the air very healthy, so that
whosoever consider^th all things aright, may well think there is nothing
wanting for the accomplishment of felicity in the highest degree. And although
it has store of cities as well (...).
Mediterranean as maritime, and abound in plenteous fields and vales, yet these
it has of greatest state above the rest, to wit, Geapolis, Nascus, and Baraba;
likewise Nagara, Mephra, Taphron, and Dioscurias. Moreover, furnished it is
with many islands hard at hand along both seas, which to reckon up it skilleth
not. But of more note and name than all other is Turgana, wherein stands, by
report, the greatest temple of Serapis. Beyond the marches hereof, which
contain a mighty ground, Carmania the greater mounteth up with lofty hills,
and reaches even to the Indian sea, decked with the increase that comes of
fruits and trees: but much more obscure, and far less than the land of the
Arabians, howbeit as well replenished with rivers, and for fruitfulness of
soil nothing inferior to it. But these be the rivers in it of greater name
than the rest, Sagareus, Saganis, and Hydriacus. There are in it cities also,
although in number few, yet for fare and apparel passing full and rich. Among
which, Carmania, mother of them all, carries a brave show, so does Ortospana;
also Alexandria and Hermupolis. But as you travail further within the
country, you meet with the Hyrcani, by whom a sea of their name flows, and
among whom there be very big clods of earth, glittering again with gold.
Little set they by tillage and husbandry, but they feed upon venison in
variety, whereof a wonder it is how they abound. Where also are seen many
thousands of Tigres, and a number of wild beasts, which by what sleights and
devises they are wont to be taken, I remember well that a good while since I
have related. And yet for all that, are not they unskilful of holding the
plough tail: but some parts of these countries are sowed with seeds, namely,
where the soil is rich and fat: neither be hortyards, vineyards, and groves
wanting in places meet to be planted: and a number of the inhabitants be
sustained with merchandise and commodities of the sea. Here also be two very
notorious rivers, Oxus and Maxera, which the Tigres when they be hunger-bitten
swim over sometimes, and at unwares do much mischief in the parts bordering
upon them.

CHAP. X. Diverse nations of Persia, the Abij, Margiani, Bactriani, Sacae,
Scythians, Laxa^ae, and Galactophagi, together with the chief cities, are
described.
MOreover, among smaller towns they have also strong cities: two verily upon
the sea coast, namely, Socunda, and Saramanna: other also within the land, to
wit, Azmo^na, Sole, and Hyrcana more noble and famous than they. Over against
this nation, under the Sub aqu^lone, taking it strictly.
North-east are the Abij said to converse; a people most godly and devout, as
who use to contemn and tread under foot all worldly things, whom (as Homer
very fabulously poetizeth) l Jupiter beholds from the Idaean mountains.
Beyond the Hyrcans, in the next places are seated the Margiani, enclosed in
manner all on every side with high hills, and therefore disjoined from the
sea. And albeit most parts lie there desert, and unhabited for scarcity of
water, yet have they certain towns; but Iasonion, Antiochia, and Nisea, be
better known than the rest. The next limits to these, are possessed by the
Bactrians, a nation before time warlike and most puissant, evermore infesting
the Persians, before that they drew all the people seated round about them to
their devotion, and the or society.
alliance of their name: governed in ancient times by kings dreadful even to
Arsaces. The most parts of this country, like as Margiana, be far remote from
the sea coasts, but plenteous of such things as breed and grow upon the ground:
the cattle also in the champian places and the mountains, is big limmed,
compact and strong made, as the Camels well show, brought from thence by
Mithridates, and which the Romans saw the first time at the siege of Chi^ico.
Sophia^^.
Cyzicum. To these Bactrians many nations yield obedience, which till the
plains and level fields; and the same after the manner of Italy are
overflowed with many rivers, of which Artamis and Zariaspes, that meet in one
confluence before, likewise Ochus and Orgomanes, with their streams concurring
together, and joining in one channel, wonderfully increase the river Geichon,
Ra^^^sio. Deistan, Nigr.
Oxus. There be cities also here (which diverse rivers run just by) giving
place to these as their betters, namely, Cathra, Charte, Alicodra, Astacia,
Menapila, and Bactra it self; of which the kingdom and nation took the name
first, scituat at the very bottom and foot of the mountains which they call
Sogdij. Among which rivers there pass two very capable of ships and
Navigable, Araxates and Dymas, which by hills and vallyes running headlong with
a great downe-fall into the champian plains, make the marish named Oxia spread
far in length and breadth. And here among other towns, Alexandria, Tribatra,
and Drepsa the mother city, are famous. Upon these join the Sacae, a savage
nation, inhabiting foul and over grown places, commodious only for cattle,
and therefore not planted with cities: over whom stand aloft the mountains
Ascanimia and Comedus: near to the foot whereof, and a town which they call
as one would say. Stone-tower.
Lithinos-Pyrgos, there lies a very long and open way passable for merchants
that otherwhiles go to trade and traffic with the Seres. About the breaches
and edges of the mountains, which they term Immavi and Tapurij, are the
Scythians within the bounds of Persia, confining with the Sarmatae of Asia, and
reaching to the utmost side of the Alani. Who living as it were in some ^ooke
and by-place, and bred up in a solitary life, are dispersed a great way a
sunder, used to live upon homely and poor food. And verily there be sundry
nations that in habit these tracts, which now to reckon up, making have as I
do to other matters, I think superfluous. Yet, thus much would be known,
that among these nations, unaccessable in manner by reason of the exceeding
rigor and roughness of the country, there be some men mild and kind, as are
namely the Laxartae and Galactophagi, of whom the Poet Homer makes mention in
this verse:

(...) That is to say, Of the Galactophagi (people that live by eating milk)
and the Abij, (among whom no violence bears sway, or who have no regard of
their food or life) most righteous men. Moreover, among many rivers, which in
these lands nature either joyneth to greater, or by their course afterward
draws into the Sea, much talk there is of Roemnus, Iaxartes and Talicus: But
these nations are not known to have above three cities, Aspabota, Cauriana,
and Saga.

CHAP. XI. Likewise the Seres, Ariani, Paropamissadae, Drangiani, Arachosij,
and Gedrosij.
TEyond these places of Scythia the one and the other, full upon the East
climat, the tops of high hills linked as it were in a chain, compass within a
round circle, as one would say, the Seres for plentiful and large countries
much esteemed; who on the West side join upon the Scythians: North and East
they bound upon the snowie wilderness, and Southward they lie out as far as
India and Ganges. Now the same mountains before said, are called Aria,
Nazavitium, Asmira, Emodus, and Opurocarra. This plain therefore environed on
every side with a steep downfall, and these lands stretched so spatiously in
breadth two famous and renowned rivers, Oechardes and Banthisis, with a still
and slow stream run through; and of the diverse tracts herein the nature also
is different: in one place large and open, in another lying flat and low with
an easy fall and descent: in which regards they have abundance of corn,
store of cattle, and plenty of hortyards, and such like. Now, this soil so
fertile and fruitful as it is, sundry nations do inhabit; of which Here
Ptol^^^^e places the Anthropophagi, ^. Feeders of men's flesh.
Alitrophagi, Carambusi, Syzyges, and Chardi ly open, and full upon the
Northern winds and frosts. But the Rabannae, Asmirae, and Essedones, the
noblest and most famous of them all, face the Sunne-rising, unto whom, from the
West part join the Atharae and Asparatae: but the Betae bending toward the
high mountains in the South, are much renowned for their cities, which though
they be not many, yet great they are and wealthy; whereof, Asmira, Essedon,
Asparata, and Pherae are most beautiful and best known. Now, the people
themselves, I mean the Seres, live very quietly, without use of arms at all
times, without trial of battles, and (as rest is to stayed and peaceable men
delectable) they are to none of their neighbors troublesome. The temperature
of the weather among them is pleasant and wholesome, the constitution of the
air clear and pure, the blowing of gentle winds most commodious, and the
woods have pretty store of light within and under them: from whence, the people
with much sprinckling of water, softening that which the trees yield and bring
forth like unto certain fleeces, kembe a most fine and tender matter, mixed of
a kind of down and liquid substance, and spinning thread hereof, make silk,
serving for the use of nobility and gentry before time, but now for the
basest sort also, without any difference and respect. They themselves are above
others most frugall, lovers of a still and quiet life, shunning the companies
of other mortal men. And when as strangers are passed over the river, to buy
their thread, or some other commodities, without any speech to or fro the
prices of wares set forth to sale, are esteemed only by the eye. And so void
are they of covetousness, that delivering forth what things grow and are bred
among them, they themselves buy nothing brought in from other countries. Beyond
the Seres live the Ariani, subject to the cold Boreae, precisely the Northwest
wind
Northren wind, through whose lands there runs a river named Arias,
sufficient to bear ships, and makes a huge lake, carrying likewise the same
name. Moreover, this selfsame The Region, Scrnere. Mercator. Turquestan.
Pineto.
Aria has a number of towns in it: among which, these be much resorted unto
and of great name, Bitaxa, Orbitana, Sotera, Nisibis, and Alexandria, from
whence it is a thousand and five hundred stadia sailing to the Caspian sea.
Next unto these places are seated the Paropamissadae, who on the East side look
toward the Indians, and to Caucasus on the West, they themselves also enclining
to the breaches and ends of the hills, through whose country runs the river
Ortogordomaris (bigger than all the rest) which arises from the Bactriani. And
these people have also some cities among them, of which more famous than the
other, are Gazaca, Naulibis, and Ortospana: from whence if a man sail along
the shore unto the bounds of Media next lying to the Caspia portae, he shall
find two thousand and two hundred stadia. Unto this nation aforesaid join the
Drangiani, linked together by hills. They go under the denomination of
Arabians, because from them they descended; and among other towns of theirs
they vaunt much of twain, Prophthasia and Ariaspe, which are rich indeed, and
highly renowned. Next overagainst them Arachosia shows it self, bending
toward the right side, and lying just upon the Indians: which, a river much
less though it be, arising out of Indu Castald. Hijnd. Nig^.
Indus the greatest of all others; whence those countries took their name,
waters plentifully, and makes the marish named Arachotoscrene. Here also
among other base cities, are Alexandria, Arbaca, and Choaspa. In the most
inland part of Persis lies Gedrosia, on the right hand reaching to the borders
of the Indians, made more fruitful by the river Artabius, beside other of
smaller stream: and there have the Barbitane mountains an end, out of the
foot and bottom whereof spring other rivers that intermingle their waters with
Indus, loosing their own names, in regard of that which is the greater. And
here also there be cities: among these cities, beside the Islands, Sedrasyra
and Gyn^con Li^en.
(...), that is, The women's Haven, are esteemed better than the rest. Least
therefore whiles showing in particular the Bays along the maritime coast that
flow hard upon the borders of Persis, we should wander overfarre from our
purpose, sufficient it shall be thus much to say, that the sea passing along
from the Caspian mountains by the North side, unto the straits aforesaid, is
reckoned to contain nine thousand stadia: but the South side, from the mouths
of the river Nylus unto the frontiers and entrance of Carmania, is by measure
fourteen thousand stadia.

CHAP. XII. The bodies of the Persians: their manners, laws, and arts as well
of peace as of war: their decking and trimming especially with pearl: as
touching the breeding and nature whereof, a brief discourse.
AMong these so many and dissonant nations, the people also and the places be
of diverse and sundry sorts. But to describe in general their bodies and
manners, they be in manner all slender and lanke, somewhat black, or of a
swart palish color, their eyes looking grim, as those of Goats do, their
brows bending like unto half circles, do meet, wearing their beards not
unseemely, and the shag hair of their heads long: but all of them one with
another indifferently, even at their meat, and upon feastivall holidays, are
seen with swords by their sides. Which ancient manner of the Greeks the
Athenians first laid away, as Thucydides, a most sufficient author, records.
Most of them were wont excessively to be given unto fleshly lust; and hardly
contenting themselves with a number of concubines, they cannot skill of the
unnatural abuse of boys: and every man according to his wealth contracteth
marriages more or fewer; whereupon among them their love and affection,
distracted and dispersed by so sundry lusts, is to their children cold or
dull. They eschew no less than a very bane and plague all exquisite fare and
lavish expense at the table, but especially the greedy desire of drinking:
neither is amongst them (setting aside the kings board) any set dinnertime: but
every man's belly is his dyall or clock, which when it strikes, they fall to
whatsoever comes next hand: neither does any man, after he has once satisfied
hunger, engorge superfluous meats. And wonderful it is to ^ee, how strait
laced, careful, and wary they are, that whiles they pass now and then among
their enemies hortyards and vineyards they neither desire nor touch ought, for
fear of poison and witchcraft and sorcerie.
secret arts. More than this, there is hardly seen a Persian, either when he
stands making of his water, or when he goes aside to ease his belly, so
precisely declineth he these and other businesses of the like kind, for fear
of shame. But so dissolute they be, and with the looseness of their joints and
wandering pace they keep such a flinging of themselves, and jetting in their
gate, that a man would take them to be mere effeminate, whereas indeed they be
most fierce warriors, but rather wily in cunning slight, than hardy in manly
fight; and afar off they are very terrible: full of vain words, speaking
after a brainesicke and wild manner, big boasters, shrewd and mischievous,
given to threats alike in adversity and prosperity, crafty, proud, cruel,
challenging and taking upon them power of life and death, both over their
servants and the meaner sort also of the common people. They flay off the skins
from men alive either by peecemeale, or all whole: neither is it lawful for a
servant among them that waits and stands at the table, to open his mo^th,
to spe^^e or to spit, so muzzeled and bound up are all their lips with prickly
and sharp pointed skins. The laws with them are mightily feared, among
which for severitie and rigor those exceed, that are enacted against
unthankful persons and traitorous revolts: and others there are as detestable
and to be abhorred, by virtue whereof, for the offense of one man all the
kindred must die. To sit in judgment and decide controversies, are such
appointed, as are for worldly experience tried, and of approoved integrity,
who also little or nothing at all need the counsel of others: whereupon they
laugh at our custom, which otherwhiles sets eloquent Orators and most
learned in the common laws, at the back of unlearned Judges, to prompt them.
For, that another Judge was forced to sit upon the skin of that Judge, who was
condemned for unjustice and doing wrong, it was either a fained tale devised by
those in old time; or if it were an ancient received custom, it has had an
end, and is no more put in practice. For military furniture and discipline,
for continual flourishes of encamping and using their armor and weapons,
which I have oftentimes described, dreadful they were even to the greatest
armies, boldly and confidently presuming upon the prowess of their Cavallerie,
in which service all their nobility, gentry, and gallants labor, that they
sweat again. For the footmen, covered all over in manner of these
Sword-fencers, termed m Mermillones, do their commandments like base
campe-slaves: and all the sort of these follow evermore, as awarded to
perpetual slaverie, neither relieved at any time with wages, nor rewarded with
gifts: and this nation has put under the yoke of subjection much people
otherwise, besides those whom they have fully subdued; so bold and so
thoroughly trained up and exercised in martial feats, that continually they
were held occupied and troubled with wars either civil or foreign. The most
part of them are so clad in garments, and the same glittering with sundry
lightsome and bright colors, that although they leave the laps and sides of
them unsowne and loose, to be shaken with puffes of wind, yet is there nothing
seen uncovered from the crown of their heads to their very shoes. After they
had subdued India, and vanquished Croesus, they used to wear bracelets,
ouches, and jewels of gold, precious stones also, but pearl especially. And
now occasioned I am, by the matter so requiring, to deliver some few words
succinctly, as touching the generation of this gem or stone. Among the Indians
and Persians both are found these pearls, within strong and bright shells of
the sea-fishes, conceived at a certain time of the year by a commixtion of
deaw. For these shell-fishes being desirous to engender, as it were, with a
certain humor, by often yawning and gaping catch it from an influence and
sprinckling of the Moon. And hereupon being conceived and great with young,
they bring forth two or three little ones, or pearls called Unions, for that
the little shells of that land otherwhiles are delivered of one apeece, but the
same are of a bigger size. And this is a good proof and argument, that this
young fry (as I may so term them) of pearls are hoth bred and fed rather
with some influence from the sky or air above, than by any food that sea does
yield, because the drops of morning deaw, infused or drstilling upon the same,
makes them bright and round stones; but the evening deawes cause them to be
contrariwise soft and fluxible, yellow and reddish, yea, and otherwhiles full
of spots. Now fashioned they are, as it falls out, diversely, either very
small, or great, according to the quality of the draughts they take of deaw.
But oftentimes so shaken be these shell fishes with the fear of flashie
lightenings, that they become empty, or bring forth ^eeble young ones, or at
leastwise by some abortive defects they slip and run out. The fishing for them
is hard, and the catching dangerous; their price also high for this reason,
that they shunning, as some think, the shores which are wont to be much
haunted, by reason that fishermen lay wait for them, they lurk close about by
rocks and holes where Sea-dogges do keep. To conclude, we are not ignorant,
that this kind of gem is both engendered and gotten in the noukes and creckes of
the British sea also, although they be not of like worth to those of India.

THE XXIIII. BOOK.
CHAP. I. Iulianus in vadeth Persia with a most puissant army. Anatha is
surrendered unto him. The Roman army is sore troubled with tempestuous
whirlewinds, and the sinking of certain ships laden with corn.
IVlianus, after he was assured of his armies cheerful readiness, which in
one uniforme heat, with an usual cry affirmed, That their invincible prince
could not be vanquished; thinking verily to make an end betimes of this whole
enterprise and exploit, when he had taken out his rest and sleep in the night,
commands the trumpets to sound the march: and so having provided beforehand
all furniture and means that the painful difficulties of war required, by
that time it was now fair day light entered the marches of Assyria, and in a
brave spirit above all others riding gallantly before the bands and squadrons,
incensed them all with an emulation of him to perform the parts of valor and
fortitude. And as a noble leader thoroughly grounded by experience and
instructions both, fearing least through the strangeness of the places he
should be intercepted by secret trains and ambushments, he began to march in
fouresquare battailons. And verily, a thousand and five hundred light horsemen
he appointed as out-riders to go softly before, who pacing the way warily, had
an eye on both sides, and likewise afront, that no enemy might at unwares
break in and rush upon them. As for himself, he had the conduct in the
midst of the Infanterie, which was the very strength of his whole power, and
gave commandment, That on his right hand certain legions under the leading
of Nevita should pass along the banks of the river Euphrates: But the left
wing, together with the cavallarie, he committed unto Arintheus and Ormisda, to
be led more thick and close together, over the plain fields and easy ways.
And Dagalaiphus, together with Victor and Secundinus hindmost of all, Marquis
of Osdruena, conducted the rereguard. After this, to the end that he might
strike a terror and fear of a greater multitude than he had unto the enemies,
if happily they should ^ally forth in any place, or epsy them a far off, he so
enlarged the ranks, and displayed forth in length both horses and men, that
the tail of the army was almost ten miles distant from the front and foremost
ensign bearers: a stratagem that with mavelous polilicie and skill was
oftentimes, by report, practiced by Pyrrhus that noble king of the Epirots, a
captain most skillful in encamping where places yielded best advantage, and
spreading also of purpose, or making less the show of his army, that
wheresoever he came, they might be esteemed many or few. The packs and
campe-slaves, the followers and attendant servitors to the camp, unmeet for
fight, together with all kinds of carryages, he bestowed betwixt both sides of
the companies as they marched forward, least if they wanted the protection of
such a convoy, they might by some sudden violence be carried forcibly away, as
oftentimes it chances. Now the fleet, although it passed along the river which
with many winding and crooked reaches continnally turned in and out, was not
suffered either to lag behind, or make speed before. Thus therefore having gone
two days journey, we came to Dora, a city forlorn and unpeopled, scituat
upon the very side of the river: In which place we happened upon many herds
of stagges, whereof some shot into the body with casting weapons, others
knocked down and brained with weighty ores, fed us all, and gave us our fill:
But the most of them being used to swim, after they had passed over the swift
stream, ran away, and could not be stayed, but escaped unto their known woods
and wilderness. From thence, after we had gone forty easy days journey
forward, when the evening came on, Lucillianus the Lieutenant, for want of the
Princes happily in se^ service.
skill, was sent with a thousand light appointed soldiers embarked, to win
the fort Anatha, which (as all others for the most part) is watered round about
with the river of Euphrates: and having, according to a commandment and
direction given, dispersed the ships in places convenient, he beset the said
wherein Anatha stood.
island, considering that the mistie and dark night shadowed this secret
enterprise and assault intended: but after that the day brake indeed and became
light, one that was gone out for to fetch water, discovering suddenly the
enemies, set up a loud and howling cry, whereby he raised the defendants of
the piece, and caused them with tumultuous noise to arm. And anon the
Emperor himself having from a very high Tote-hill, or Barbican, viewed the
situation of the said Pyle, and the fortifications about it, right speedily by
the help of two ships passes over the river, and many other vessels followed
behind, which carried engines and pieces of ordance for battery. And now by
this time approaching the walls, when he considered that there could be no
assault or skirmish there without many dangers, partly with gentle words, and
in part with rough speeches and threatening language, he moved the defendants to
yield: who calling for Ormisda to a parley, and induced by his fair promise,
and oaths that he took, were much persuaded of the Romans clemency. At
length, driving before them an ox decked with a coronet (which with them is a
token of embracing peace) they came down in humble manner: and forthwith, when
the fortress was wholly burnt, Puseus the captain thereof, Marquess after of
Egypt, was advanced to the honorable place of a Tribune: all the rest with
their wives, children, and household goods, were sent over in poor and simple
array, to Chalcis a city in Syria. Among these, a certain souldior, who had
been left sick in these parts, when Maximianus in times past forcibly invaded
the frontiers of Persia, a man then in the very prime and flower of his youth,
having, as he said himself, wedded many wives, according to the guise of that
nation, being now far stepped in years, and stooping for age, with a
numerous progeny much rejoicing, and the principal counselor that persuaded
the betraying and surrender of the fort, was brought into our province,
affirming constantly, and that by witnesses, That long since he both foreknew
and foretold, that when he came to the point of being an hundred years old, he
should be enterred in Roman ground. This done, the Saracene fore-riders
presented unto the most joyful prince, certain of the enemies side, and were
sent back again to perform the like service. But the morrow after there fell
out a shrewd mischaunce: for, there rose a certain tempestuous wind, which
raising many whirle puffes, had shuffeled together and made such confusion
among their places of harbor and shelture, that many pavilions fell down, and
a number of soldiers were laid along either on their backs, or grovelling, for
that the wind would not suffer them to hold their footing sure. And the very
same day, there happened another accident no less perilous: for, by occasion
that suddenly the river overflowed his banks, certain ships that used to bring
in corn were drowned by reason that the scluces or floudgates made of stone
work, to let out or restrain the waters, that used to water the fields, were
plucked away: which whether it chanced by some treacherous practice, or through
the violence of the stream, it could never be known.

CHAP. II. After that Anatha was burnt, and the standing corn together with
the country sheds and ^ovels consumed: after also the garrisons of certain
castles were in vain assailed, the army sets on fire Diacira and
Ozogardana, after they were ransacked and left empty. A skirmish between the
Persians and Romans.
AFter this city, the first of all other, rased and burnt, and the captives
sent away, the army carried now with a more assured hope to confidence, with
loud voices showed the favor and good will they bare to their Prince;
supposing verily that from thenceforth the heavenly providence would be
assistant unto them. And for that in countries unknown there was to be had a
more suspicious care of secret and hidden practices, they much feared the wily
sleights of the nation, and their sundry devises to delude and deceive them.
Wherefore, the Emperor one while marching in the vauntguard before the
ensigns, another while busy in leading the rereward, with a company of nymble
skirmishers, lightly appointed, searched and scoured the rough places full of
shrubs, and the vallyes, least some secret ambush should lie hidden within:
restrayning withal, either by way of affability and fair language (which was
naturally in him) or by threats, those soldiers who even licentiously and
rashly would straggle to and fro afar off: yet permitted he the enemies
fields rich in all kind of fruits, together with the standing corn and their
cottages to be set on fire, but not before every man had gathered necessary
provision for himself in great abundance: and by this means was the life and
health of the enemies wounded, ere they knew of it. For, our fighting men took
much pleasure to make use of what they had gotten with their own right hands,
supposing they had now found other garners of their virtue and valor; and
rejoicing, that they having plentiful store of the means also to maintain
life, they saved the victuals that were shipped and conveied by water. And here
a certain fool-hardie souldior, when his head was full of wine, without any
urgent need driving him thereto, would needs pass over to the bank on the
further side of the river, and there within our sight was taken by the enemies,
and killed. These designs, with such an accident between, performed, we came to
a strong fortress or castle, named Thilutha, scituat in the mids of the river,
a place mounting up with a certain mighty high top, and by natural strength
fenced round about, as it were by the work of man's hand. The inhabitants
whereof being by gentle means solicited to surrender it, as meet it was, for
that the rough and craggie height thereof was by force of arms imprenable,
said plainly, That it was unseasonable then and overtimely to revolt: But thus
far forth they gaged their answer, That when the Romans marching on forward
should become masters of the more inland parts, they also as the followers and
tail of a kingdom, would join with the conquerors. And after this, as our
ships passed along close to the very walls, with a modest kind of quietness,
without any stir at all, they viewed them. After we had passed this fort, and
were come to another strong hold, named Achaiacala, and the same entrenched, as
it were, about with the course of the river, difficult both for passage over,
and access also unto it, repelled we were with the like answer, and so
departed. The morrow after, other castles and pyles abandoned of the
inhabitants, by reason of the weak walls, we set on fire, and pass beyond
them. But the next two days following, when we had marched two hundred stadia,
we came to a place called Barax-malcha: from whence, after we had crossed
over the river, we enter Diacira, standing seven miles off, where was a city
void of inhabitants, full of corn and fine white salt, wherein we saw a temple
seated upon a citadell, and bearing a lofty head: Which city, after we had
burned, and put some few women to the sword, whom we there found, as also
passed over a certain fountain, out of which issues plenty of Bitumen, we
seized the town Ozogardana, which likewise the inhabitants forsook, for fear
of our armic coming toward it: in this town was showed for a ^ight, the
Tribunal of Traian the Emperor. When we had consumed this town also with
fire, and allowed our selves two days for the refreshing of our bodies, toward
the latter end of the night that followed two days after, Surena a potentat
among the Persians of high place and dignity for his deserts, next under the
king, and one named Malechus Podosaces, a chief Phylarch^^.
Tribune of the Saracenes Assanitae, a notorious Brigand, who with all manner of
cruelty had a long time committed ou^rage in our marches, having laid wait for
to intercept Ormisda (of whom they had an inkling and intelligence given them,
by what means I wot not, that he would go forth in espiall to discover the
country) were disappointed of this their attempted enterprise, for that the
narrow passage of the river running between (such was the depth thereof) could
not be waded over. And at the first appearing of daylight, when as now the
enemies were within view (as who before time had not been in sight) all
glittering with their bright helmets, and terribly clad in stiff and stubborn
jacks, our soldiers eagre of fight, and sharply set to give battle, charged
upon them right valiantly. And albeit they bent their bows with mighty
strength, and the brightness of their swords and weapons glittering again,
had been enough to increase the Romans yet anger gave such an edge unto their
valor, that being covered with a ^ence of targuets and shields couched thick
and close together, they empeached them so, as that they could not discharge or
shoot an arrow from them.

CHAP. III. Our army passes over Naar-Malcha, i. the Kings river; and then
both besieges and also assaulteth Pyrisabora, a large and populous town.
Our soldiers encouraged and emboldned with so good beginnings, came to a
small town named Macepracta, wherein were seen the remains of a ruinat wall:
which in old time stretching out in a great length, was reported to be a fence
for Assyria from inrodes and invasions: From hence one arm of the river is
divided with a large stream, leading to the more inward tracts of Babylonia,
to serve the fields, country villages, and cities, lying round about: and
another named Naar-Malcha, which is by way of interpretation, The Kings river,
runs along by Ctesiphon: In the very first entrance whereof, there rises
up a passing high tower in manner of a a Pharus; and this b^aunch of the river
all our footmen passed over upon bridges wisely and warily placed: But the
horsemen in arms, together with their beasts under them, swam over the stream
of the river, which was so much the milder, because it runs a crooked
course: others were charged suddenly with a volley of the enemies shot, whom
our auxiliaries being gone forth, and most lightly appointed for speedy
footmanship, followed hard upon their necks in chase as they ran away, laid
along on the ground, and seized on them, tearing them in pieces as they had
been fowls. Which exploit being likewise gloriously achieved, we came before
Pyrisabora, a large and populous city, fenced round about with a trench and
rampire like an island: Under the walls and plot whereof, on which it was
seated, the Emperor riding about, with all wariness and circumspection began
the siege, as if with the fear only of him, he would drive the townsmen from
all mind of making defense; who having been often dealt withal by way of parle,
when there could not a man of them be brought to yield either by promises or
threatenings, he began to give an assault. And so environing the walls with a
three^old circle, or course of armed men, for the first day until the night
began, he maintained skirmish with shot, and discharging of pieces against
them. Then the defendants, whose courage and strength was not behind, spreading
wide on every side about their bulwarks, large haire-clothes, to keep off the
violent force of darts and casting weapons, fenced also with shields before
them, wrought of most tough and strong oysiers, and the same covered also with
thick raw hides, most valiantly resisted, as who themselves made a show all
over of iron and steel, for that the plates fittted aptly close one to another
to serve the liniaments and proportion of every lim and part of the body,
with a sure armor of proof covered the whole man. And howsoever sundry times
they craved earnestly to have conference with Ormisd^, as being borne and bred
among them, and a prince beside of the blood royal, yet no sooner came he
toward them, but they reviled and railed at him, with opprobrious terms, as a
disloyal traitor and revolter. And thus after the most part of the day was
spent, with trifling cavillations, in the very beginning of the still and
dark night, advanced forward there were engines of many fashions, and then,
the deep trenches began to be filled up and laid even. Which the defendants
wisely beholding, before it was any thing full daylight, as also that the
forcible and violent push of the Ram, had thirled an hole through a
corner-tower, they leaving the duple wall of the city, put themselves within
the citadell joining hard thereto, situate upon the broken plain of a rough
and craggie hill; the middle part whereof raised up to a great height, with a
round compass resembled an Argive buckler, save that from the North side, what
was wanting of roundnesse, the cliffes and raggie rocks lying forth aloft over
the river Euphrates running beneath, surely fenced the same: in which citadell
the battilments of the walls excelled, as being made of small bricks laid with
Bitumen, which is known to be the surest building that can be. And now our
soldiers being more fierce than before, after they had gone through the city,
which they saw void of people, fought sharply against the townsmen, that from
the citadell let fly shot and casting-weapons of many sorts. For when the same
defendants were troubled sore with the brakes, crosse-bowes and balists of our
men, they themselves also from aloft set up their bows strongly bent, the
crooked horns whereof arising at both ends, were so stiffely bowed, that the
strings driven with the violent stroke of fingers, sent away shafts headed with
iron, which striking upon the bodies that were against them, stuck fast in
the^^, and gave a deadly wound. Nevertheless, the skirmish held still on both
sides with storms as it were of stones flung by hand: and thus in doubtful
balance enclining to neither side, the conflict continued with great
resolution from the break of day to the shutting in of night, and then gave
over on even hand. And therefore the morrow following, when as the fight was
hot, and many were overthrown on either side, so that equal forces
counterpoised their acts even, the Emperor, hastening among these mutual and
reciprocal foyles to hazard all the chances of the dice, environed with a
squadron strongly couched together, and fenced from the stroke of arrows with
a thick course of targuets, advanced forward apace with those of his company,
as ready and resolute as himself, and approached the enemies gate, laid all
over with thick plates and bars of iron: and although to the peril of his
life he was sore assailed with stones, bullets, and other casting-weapons, yet
crying out continually unto them that were about to pierce and work into the
sides of the double-leafed gate, that they should lay open an entry into the
place, he departed not thence, until with the multitude of darts and shot that
by heape-meale were flung and cast upon him, he saw that he was ready now to
be overwhelmed therewith. Howbeit, he escaped with all his company, whereof
some few were lightly wounded, himself receiving no harm, but somewhat
abashed and modestly blushing for shame: for he had read, that Scipio
Aemilianus, together with Polybius a Megalopolitane and Arcadian (I mean the
Historiographer) and 30000 more with like violent attempt dug under the gate
of Carthage. But the received testimony and truth of ancient writers
justifies sufficiently this late and fresh deed of his. For Aemilianus came
under a gate that was covered over head with a roof or vaul^ of stone, under
which standing safe and hidden, whiles the enemies were opening the maine
stone-worke above, he brake into the naked city. But I^lian being entered in an
open place, when the face of the air over head was overshadowed again with
fragments of huge stones and other shot, hardly and with much ado was repelled,
and departed thence.

CHAP. IIII. The besieged when they saw once the warlike engine called
Helepolis, yield themselves unto Iulianus: who having driven back the
avant-curriers of the Persians, renews the ancient discipline of war
against certain Tribunes and souldi^rs; and by making an Oration, labors to
keep his army in order and dutiful allegiance.
THese devices being thus in have and in tumultuarie manner practiced, when he
perceived well, that the working about the Frames called b Vineae, and the
raising of mounts (considering other urgent occasions) was most laborious,
painful and combersome, he willed with all speed the commanding engine named
c Helepolis to be built: by means whereof (as I have before showed) king
Dem^trius won many towns, and was therefore surnamed Poliorcetes. To this
huge frame, like to overtop the battlements of the high towers, the defendants
casting their eye advisedly, and thoroughly considering it, besides the firm
resolution of the assailants, all on a sudden fell to prayer and entreatie,
standing as they did, spread all over the towers and battlements of the walls,
and with stretched out arms protesting openly the Romans protection, they
requested life and pardon. And when as they saw the works were given over, and
the pioners attempting no farther matter, which was a sure sign of quietness
and rest, they required to have liberty of conference with Ormisda. Which
obtained, Mamersides captain of their Garrison soldiers, being let down by a
rope, and sent unto the Emperor, so soon as he requested life and impunitie
for himself and his consorts, and the same upon an assured covenant, was
permitted to return unto them. And when he had reported what he had done, the
whole multitude of both sexes one with another, now that he had wrought them
all according to his mind, upon a peace concluded by religious oaths, after
the gates were set open, went forth, crying with one voice, That a saving
Genius andtutelar Angel, even Caesar, a mighty and merciful prince, shone
from heaven upon them. Now these that thus yielded, amounted to the number of
2500. For the rest of the multitude suspecting the siege aforehand, had
embarked themselves in small vessels, and passing along the river, departed.
Within this citadell was found very great store of armor and victuals: out of
which, when the winners had taken sufficient to serve their own turns, the
remains they burnt, together with the place. The next morrow after these
exploits achieved, heavy news came unto the Emperor, as he was leisurely and
in peace taking his repast, namely, That Surena the Persian or Tribu^^.
Commander, was come unawares, had set upon three troops, a part of our
fore-riders, but slain very few of them, and among those a d Tribune, whom
when he had laid along dead, he took away one banner: and forthwith, being
moved in a great fit of anger, he sped himself apace with a company in arms,
and with weapon in hand; and the very have he made was it that wrought him the
most safety. Now, after he had discomfited the said Brigands, and put them to
a shameful foil, the other two Tribunes that were left alive, he cassed and
discharged from their military oath, as slothful and lazy cowards: but ten
of those soldiers that ran away he condemned to suffer death, following herein
the laws of ancient discipline. To conclude, after the city, as has been
said, was burnt down, standing upon a Tribunal raised of purpose, he called
together the army, and when he had given them thanks, he exhorted them all
to exploit the like acts from thenceforth: and after he had promised to them an
hundred silver e deniers apeece, perceiving them chafed and ready to mutiny,
for so small and niggardly a promise, himself growing also to indignation, yet
full of gravitie: Behold (quoth he) here be the Persians flowing in abundance
and plenty of all things. The wealth of this nation is able to enrich us all,
in case with one heart and accord we bear our selves manfully. The Roman
Commonwealth, trust me truly, is from infinite riches become exceeding poor,
and even by those, who to fill their own purses, have persuaded Emperors to
return home with peace, that the savages and barbarous have bought for gold.
The treasury of the State is hereby sore laid upon, Cities are drawn dry,
and Provinces be wasted. And for my self, I have neither wealth to uphold me,
nor kindred to back me, descended though I am of noble parentage; only my
heart is fearelesse: neither shall it be a shame for an Emperor, who reposeth
all goods in the furniture of the mind, to profess honest poverty. For
Fabricius also, poor in household goods, rich in honor and glory, managed
most dangerous wars. And all these things we may have abundantly, if ye,
devoid of fear, will demean your selves more mildly, following the wise
guidance and direction of God and my self, so far forth as humane reason
does require. But if ye go out and resist authority, turning again to the
dishonorable presidents of seditions in old time, go on hardly, and do so
still: I for my part, as becomes an Emperor and noble Commander, after I
have run my race, and performed so many brave courses, will alone die standing
on my feet, ready to contemn this life of mine, which some little fever or
other, will bereave me of: or at leastwise I will go my ways and leave the
field: for I have not lived so, but that I may one day become a private person.
Howbeit, I glory in this, and rejoice, that there be with us most approoved
captains and tried leaders, such as in all kinds of martial skill be
accomplished.

CHAP. V. The Persians practice means of let and hinderance: which when Julian
had with much ado overcome, he found countries more commodious, and therein
Date trees, of which there be some strange reports. Julian after his army was
refreshed comes to Euphrates, where he is divided into many branches, and
near unto Maiozamalcha was privily assailed by ten Persians, but
notwithstanding this great danger of his life, escaped in safety.
BY this modest speech of the Emperors, carrying a current between courtesy
and severitie, the soldiers for the time were appeased, and putting on a
greater confidence, with expectation of better matters, promising to be
tractable and obedient, extolled up to heaven his authority and highness of
spirit: which, when it is said truly and from the heart, love is wont by a
small noise to be showed and declared. After this, when he returned again to
the tents, according to that store which the present would afford, he
refreshed himself with food and rest at night. Now, the manner was of Julian
to animate his army, swearing evermore, not by such things as were dear unto
him, but by the great exploits and affairs that were begun; as for example, So
might he subdue the Persians: So might he repair the shaken estate of the
Roman Empire. Like as it is reported of Traian, That otherwhiles he was wont
to bind his words and promises with such oaths as these, So may I see Dacia
reduced into the form of provinces: So may I pass over Ister or Euphrates
upon bridges, and many such like words. After this, I say, when we had passed
fourteen miles forward, we came to a certain place that with abundant
overflow of waters enricheth the fields and makes them plentiful: which way
the Persians being informed that we would go, plucked up the floud-gates, and
suffered the waters to flow and spread all abroad. By reason therefore that the
ground stood all as it were on a standing poole, the second day the Emperor
giving his soldiers rest, went forth himself, and on many floored bridges
made of f leather bougets and ships supported with pyles, as also of hewn logs
and plankes of Date tree, with much difficulty he transported his army. In
these countries there be many fields planted with Vines and sundry sorts of
fruitful trees, where Date trees are wont to grow, and take up a great deal
of ground, reaching in manner of mighty forests as far as to or Adiabene.
Botan Castaldo.
Mesene and the great The mediterranean sea. Ortel. The Levant sea, according
to the Spaniards.
Sea: and which way soever a man goes, he sees continually branches of
Palme-trees, and the Dates hanging thereupon; of the fruit of which trees
abovesaid is made plenty of honey and wine: and as touching the very Date
trees themselves, it is said, they be married and wedded as it were one to
another: also, that the sexes may easily be discerned. It is reported moreover,
That the females anointed with the seed of the male, do conceive and bear,
yea, and by report, they delight in mutual love: which appears hereby, in
that they do bend in the head and lean one against another, so as that they
are not with the very puffing blasts of wind turned another way. And in case
the female according to the usual manner, be not so besmeared with the seed of
the male, she loses by an abortive defect her untimely fruit: and if it be
not well known what tree it is that the female is in love with, the stock or
stem of it is besmeared with the ointment thereof, and then the other tree
naturally conceives the sweet odor, and so by these tokens is bewrayed the
certainetie, as it were, of their generation. With this food the army
replenished plentifully, passed by many Islands, and where they were afraid
before of want and scarcity, there they feared fullness and surfeit. Well, the
Emperor in the end being assailed covertly by the enemies archers, and yet not
without revenge again, drew near to a place, where the greater part of
Euphrates divides it self into many rivers with their diverse and sundry
streams. In this tract there was a city, for the low walls thereof abandoned
by the Jews, which the soldiers in an anger set on fire. This done, the
Emperor marched on further still with greater courage and confidence, as
thinking he was assisted by the gracious help of the divine power. And when
he was come to otherwise called Bithra in Zo^i^^^.
Majozamalcha, a great city and encircled with strong walls, he pitched down
his tents, and carefully provided, that his camp might not be troubled with
any sudden rode of the Persians horsemen, the valor and puissance whereof in
champian and open grounds is wonderously dread of all nations. And having taken
this order, guarded with some few light appointed skirmishers, being himself
also on foot, minding diligently to search and view the situation of the city,
he happened to plunge himself headlong into a mischievous ambuscado, and
escaped in the end the utmost danger of his life. For at a blind and secret
gate of the town there went out ten Persians armed, who passing closely on
their knees under the bottom of the cliffes, suddenly with great violence
charged upon our men: and two of them espying the Emperor himself (as he was
evident to be seen and known by his rich apparel) with their drawn swords
laid at him, but by lifting up his broad shield, he warded the blows, and
under the sure fence thereof, himself in a brave and bold resolution ran one
of them with his sword into the side: and the other after many a stroke and
wound given, was slain by his guard aforesaid; the rest (whereof some were
hurt) ran away: and so after he had disarmed and divested those twain, he
brought back his companions in safety, returned with their spoils unto the
camp, and was with great joy of them all received. g Torquatus took from an
enemy whom he laid along, a collar of gold: h Valerius, surnamed afterward
Corvinus, by the help and defense of a or Ra^^n.
foul, overcame a most bold and bragging Gaul: and for these brave exployts
were commended unto posterity. We envy not their glory, but yet I would have
this noble and worthy act registered also in ancient records.

CHAP. VI. The siege of Maiozamalcha enterprised and begun by Iulianus.
THe day next following, after he had floored over his bridges, transported the
army, and in a more wholesome place pitched his camp, compassed about with a
double trench and rampire (because, as I said bebefore, he feared the plain
and open deserts) he began to lay siege to the said town, supposing it would
be very dangerous unto him, if marching still forward, he should leave those
at his back whom he was to fear. Whiles with great endeavor he made this
preparation, It seems by Po^pon^^^ L^t^^, and by Ma^cellin^^ elsewhere. That
Surena was no proper name, but a title of the highest dignity, next unto the
king
Surena the great Commander of the enemies, having set upon our beasts which
grazed in the date tree groves, was by our cohorts appointed to drive him
back, welcomed with the slaughter of some few, and so went his ways without
effect: and the inhabitants of two cities, which stand as islands environed
round about with rivers, some upon a confidence of their own strength, hastily
betook themselves to C^esiphon a walled town; others running through the
thickets, and some again conveying themselves over the washes and marshes in
flotes and troughes of hollowed trees, betook themselves to the only and
chief help that remained, namely, to get away far enough off, meaning to go
into the more remote parts of the land. Of whom, some that made resistance, our
soldiers slew, who also themselves skoured the coasts up and down in flotes
and boats: and others now and then they toooke prisoners and brought in. For,
with deliberat and advised consideration this order was taken, That whiles the
regiments of footmen were besieging and assayling the walls of the town, the
troops of the horsemen, divided into certain cornets and companies, ^hold be
employed busily in raising and driving away booties, out of the fields: and by
this provident forecast, without any loss and hinderance at all of the
provincial people, our soldiers preyed and fed upon the enemies bowels. And
now by this time our Emperor having encircled with a threefold course of
shields, the town, aforesaid, which had a double wall about it, in hope to
atchieve his enterprise, with maine force gave the assault. But as the attempt
was necessary, so the effecting thereof was most difficult: for, the avenue
unto it, being on every side for the danger thereof doubtful, by reason that
the cliffes aloft in their turning were i cloven and rent, as also for that
their ascents and tops were full of crooked windings, denied them all means of
access; especially, for that the towers standing so thick and high, made a
terrible show, and were equal in height to the craggie mount naturally rising
aloft, on which the citadell stood, and the plain descent falling to the river
side, was fortified with strong bulwarks. To all these difficulties, there was
another mischief no less troublesome than the rest, namely, that the
besieged, who were a picked number of valiant men, and furnished with store
every way, could by no allurements be induced to yield, but as making full
account either to win the victory, or devow and betake themselves to be
consumed with the ashes of their country, withstood their enemies. Now, by
this time were our soldiers hardly and with much ado held back, advancing
themselves foolishly and prowdly forward, calling also for fight even in plain
field, and set battle: yea and when the retrait was sounded, still pricked on
they were with courageous stomach and hot endeavor to preasse upon the enemy.
Howbeit the counsel of our captains overcame at length that exceeding
forwardness and violence of theirs: and so when the service and work was
divided, every man most speedily takes him to his several charge appointed
unto him. For, of the one side were raised high mounts and terraces, on the
other side some filled up the deep ditches, and made them level with the
ground, whiles others were busy elsewhere in making hollow trenches with
passages along within the earth. There were cunning Mechanikes also, that
planted engines and pieces of ordnance, to batter the walls, such as would as
they were discharged make a horrible and deadly noise. And verily of
undermining and the fabrickes fore-covert and defense, Nevita and Dagalaiphus
had the charge: but the Emperor himself gave direction for skirmish, as also
for saving the frames and engines as well from fire as sallies. And when as all
the preparation for the overthrow and rasing of the city, with much painful
labor was finished, and nothing now but fight called for, Marquess Victor
returned, who having sounded and discovered all the ways as far as to
Ctesiphon, brought word, That he found no stops or lets in his journey: For
joy of which news, all the soldiers were so set a god, and bare so confident
and resolute minds to fight, that they armed presently, and waited for the
signal to proceed unto the assault.

CHAP. VII. The most strong assault of the said city. The painful toil,
industry, and fortitude, as well of the besiegers as besieged. At length by
undermining the walls are overthrown.
ANd now whiles the trumpets sounded out alowd the battle, the soldiers on
both parts shouted amain: and first, the Romans with many a run, and with a
minatorie noise charged upon the enemies all covered on every side with plates
of iron in manner of thin and slender feathers, and bearing themselves bold,
for that the darts and casting weapons hitting upon the slipperie hard iron of
their armours, rebounded back: and otherwhiles the knitting together of the
Romans shields, under which, as under a roof of arch work, that cannot well
be described, they were most fitly protected, with continual stirring and
motion, opened somewhat wide a sunder. On the contrary ^ide the Persians
sticking close to their walls, so far forth as they could do or strive again,
assayed to check and make void our deadly violence. But when as now the
assailants carrying before them hurdles of tough ^y^ier windings, were upon the
point to skale the walls, the slingers and archers together, with others also
tumbling down huge stones, with firebrands and fireballs, set them further
off. Then also the Balists bent and fitted with shafts of wood were wrested up
and discharged with a great noise, sending forth headed arrows exceeding
thick: the Scorpions likewise whither soever by skilful hand they were
directed, discharged from them round stones. Thus, after redoubled conflicts
one upon another, the heat of the weather still increasing until noone (by
reason that the Sun did cast scorching hot vapors from him) called them all
away, as busy as they were in preparation of their works, and desirous of
fight, being tired out, and running all to sweat. With the same purpose and
settled resolution, the day also following both parts bickering one with another
in sundry sorts of fight, depart on even hand neither winners nor loosers. But
at every hard pinch and dangerous service, the prince in person joining close
to the fighting men, called instantly upon them, to have the city forced and
destroyed, because he would not lie long about the walls, and overslip greater
designs that he projected. But as it falls out in cases of urgent
extremity, there is nothing so slight and small, but otherwhiles, even
contrary to all hope and expectation, it yields occasion and advantage of
greater matters. For, when as both sides fought so faintly, as if oftentimes
they had been at the point to depart asunder, behold, by the stroke of a Ram
long time disused, and which a little before was brought against the wall,
down came a tower higher than all the rest, and built most strongly of brick;
the fall whereof brought after it with a mighty crash, that side of the wall
that joined unto it. Then and there by occasion of sundry accidents and
occurrents, the painful labor of the besiegers, and the diligent industry of
the besieged, was notably showed by brave and worthy exploits. For our fighting
soldiers were so enkindled with anger and dolor, that they thought no service
hard, and the defendants running as they did, and bestirring themselves for
life, nothing was dread and terrible. Now, when the fight had continued hot a
long time in even balance, and doubtful terms, after much bloodshed, and
many a man slain on both parts, it determined with the end of the day, and so
at length respect and consideration was had of their weariness. And whiles
these things were a doing in open day light, word was brought unto the
Emperor, full of watchful care, That the legionarie soldiers, who had the
charge of digging trenches and undermining, after they had wrought under ground
hollow ways, and upheld them with props, had pierced through the very
foundations beneath, ready now to rise above the ground, if he did so direct
them. When as therefore the most part of the night was past, upon signal given
by sound of trumpets, to go forth, running there was on all hands to arm and
to fight: and on purpose the assault was given on both sides affront the walls,
that whiles the defendants are skudding to and fro about the walls, to put by
and repel dangers, so that neither the tinging sound of the iron tools
digging hard by could be heard, nor any man remained within forth to make
resistance, a company of myners all on a sudden show their heads. Which being
so ordered, as agreed it was before, and the defendants busily occupied, and
the lurking caves laid open, up starteth first a souldior, one of the number
that before was overcome, after whom Magnus a Tribune, and Iovianus a Notarie,
whom a bold and hardy multitude following, after they had stabbed those whom
they found in the house, through which they came forth to light, marching on
softly with a silent pace, they killed all the watchmen, as they were with loud
and shrill voices extolling, as the manner is and custom of that nation, the
justice and felicity of their king. Thought it was sometime, that Mars
himself in person (if the laws of divine majesty permit that gods may be
entermingled with men) was assistant to k Lucinus when he invaded the camp of
the Lucanes. And men verily believed so much, because in the very middle and
heat of skirmish, there was one seen of a huge and terrible bigness, all
armed, carrying ladders: and the next day, when a review was taken of the
army, such an one could not be found, though he were with a special care
searched for: whereas, if he had bin a souldior, he would willingly of his own
accord have showed himself, knowing as he did what a memorable act he had
done: But as it was altogether unknown then, what was he that performed so
brave a deed: so now they that did most valiantly show themselves, and were
seen above the rest, rewarded with obsidionall coronets, and praised in open
place before the whole army assembled, according to the custom of our
ancients.

CHAP. VIII. The city thus forcibly won, is wasted with fire and sword. A
dumb boy and a tumbler or player of feats falls in the pillage to Iulianus
his share: the singular continence of the said Emperor. The hunting of the
Romans; their coming to Seleucia. And then was Nabdates captain or governor
of Maiozamalcha executed accordingly.
AT length, the city laid thus naked, and by reason of many breaches and ways
made into it, ready to fall, was forcibly entered into, and without regard
either of sex or age, whatsoever violence found, the power of angry soldiers
made havocke of, and put to the sword. Others, for fear of imminent
destruction, seeing fire threatening of one side, and drawn swords presented on
another, weeping their last, flung themselves down from the walls with their
heads forward, and so being disabled in all their limbs disjoynted, led for
the time a life more woeful and miserable than death it self, whiles they were
killed by little and little. Now, there was fetched forth alive, Nabdates
captain of the garrison, with fourscore of his guard about him, whom the
gracious and merciful Emperor, when he was brought before him with others,
commanded to be kept unhurt and untouched. When the saccage therefore was
divided and dealt, with consideration of every man's desert and pains taken,
himself (as he was one that stood content with a little) took for his share
a dumb boy, brought unto him, one of these tumblers and dauncers kind, who
also could express by most lovely and dainty jestures, what he had skill of,
and valued at l three pieces of gold, him (I say) he took for a pleasant and
acceptable reward (as he esteemed it) of victory obtained. But of the virgins
that were taken prisoners, and beautiful with all (as in Persia where the
women be passing fair) he would neither touch nor see one: Following herin the
example of Alexander and Africanus, who declined these temptations, for fear
they might be overcome of lust, who every where showed themselves of labor
and travail invincible. In the time of these conflicts the Architect and
master Carpenter of our side, whose name comes not to my remembrance, as he
chanced to stand behind the engine of a Scorpion, by the reverberation or
recoyling back of a stone, which the enginer had bestowed loose and tottering
in the sling socket, was stricken down therewith on his back, and his breast
so squized, that presently he lost his life withal: and the knitting of his
joints was so disjoined and torn in sunder, as that the tokens verily of his
whole body could not be known. As the Emperor went forward on his journey
from thence, there was one informed him for certain, That about the walls of
the town thus subverted, there was a company lay close in ambush within
certain deceitful and blind caves, such as there be many in those tracts: to
the end, that from thence at unwares, they might set upon the back part of our
army, and have the killing of the hindmost. And straight ways for the
fetching them out of their holes, were sent footmen of approoved valor. Who,
when they could neither make entrance into the said caves, nor drive them forth
that were bestowed within, to fight, gathered a deal of stubble, straw, and
vine cuttings, which they laid upon heaps at the very mouth of the holes.
Whereupon, the smoke being gotten into the narrow and strait passages within,
and by that means the thicker, stopped the vital breath of some and killed
them: others, the hot breath of the fire mingled therewith me^ withal, and
forced to come forth upon their own present death. And so, when they were all
dispatched out of the way, what with fire, and what with sword, the soldiers
quickly returned back to their colors. Thus a large and populous city rased
by the prowess of Roman forces, fell to dust and utter ruin. After which so
glorious exploits, when we had passed over diverse bridges joining one to
another by reason of the concourse of many rivers, we came unto two forts,
built with hollow and vaulted houses: where the kings son advauncing forward
from Ctesiphon, with many nobles, and a multitude in arms, went about to
debar Victor the Comes, as he went before the army, from passage over the
river: but he having once spied the companies of our soldiers following, he
went his way. And so we marched on until we came to certain groves, and
fields all fresh and green with the blade of young corn there sown: where
also we found an house of the kings, built after the Roman fashion; and for
that it pleased us well, it stood untouched. For, there was in this very
quarter a large piece of ground lying round, and enclosed all about with a
mound, like the fenced circuit of some hold, containing within it wild beasts
appointed for the kings game and delight, to wit, Lions with shaggemaned
necks; wild Boars with brisly shoulders, and Bears likewise (for such they be
in Persia) beyond all measure savage and raging, beside other beasts chosen for
the nonce with mighty maine bodies: all which, after we had broken the boults
and bar^es of the gates, our horsemen with their hunting lances, and a number
of shot and casting weapons, sticked and slew. These places are seated in a fat
soil, and well husbanded, not far from which stands Coche, which they call
Bachad. N^gr.
Seleucia: where the prince after he had cast a trench and rampire about his
camp in tumultuarie have, and for two days space refreshed the whole army by
the opportunity they found of water and food, marched before with the
avant-curriers, and as he viewed the city forsaken and left desolat (as which
in times past had been destroyed and rased by Verus C^sar of sacred memory)
wherein also an ever running fountain sends forth a mighty great poole,
running down into the river Tigris, he beheld hanging upon gibbets many bodies
of his near friends and kinsfolk, who (as I said before) betrayed the city
Pyrisabora. Here was Nabdates also burnt quick, who (as I showed ^rewhile) was
with fourscore besides drawn out of the lurking holes of the city lately
forced. For why, having at the beginning of the siege secretly promised to
surrender the city, he fought notwithstanding moststoutly: and yet when beyond
all hope he had obtained pardon, brake out to that height of insolency, that
he reviled Ormisda, and gave him all the opprobrious terms that could be.

CHAP. IX. Iulianus upon the intercepting of certain Roman forragers, and
avoiding of a great danger, bes^egeth amost strong fenced pyle, which he
wins and burns, after he had thrust certain h^rsemen to the service on
foot, who cowardly received the brun^ of certain Persian Brigands: And then by
joining of bridges together, the army passes over Tigris.
THus after we had marched a pretty way further, stricken we were into our
dumpes with a cross and adverse accident. For whiles three bands of our
out-riders skirmished lightly with a regiment or company of Persians, which
the city by setting open the gates, had suddenly put out, others that brake
forth from the contrary bank of the river, intercept and kill the horses and
beasts that followed us together, with some few forragers that straggled
loosely at their pleasure. Whereat the Emperor being wroth, and for anger
gnashing his teeth, took his journey forward, and approaching now the
territory about Ctesiphon, he met with an high castle and passing well
fortified, to the view whereof he adventured to go near, being unknown and
unseene, as himself thought, and with a few in his company rode about the
walls: but when he was found once to engage himself over-farre, even within
the reach of dart-shot, he could no longer be unknown: and presently, being
coursed and assailed with a voley and cloud, as it were, of sundry
casting-weapons, slain he had been with an engine from the walls, but that,
after his Esquire or armor-bearer that stuck close to his side was wounded,
himself covered with a roufe of shields couched close together, escaped this
great danger and departed. For this cause, being moved much, and in an
exceeding chase, he determined to besiege the said fort, notwithstanding the
defendants were hotely bent to resist, for that they presumed upon the place,
in manner unaccessable, and because the king in person marching apace with a
royal army, was verily thought would be shortly there: and now, when the
Fence-fabrickes and all devices else requifite for a ^iege, were in readiness,
toward the end of the near midright.
second m watch, when the night happening to be very light with the Moon
shine, showed all things evidently to those that stood upon the bulwarks,
suddenly a multitude gathered together in one plumpe, opened the gates at
once, and sallied forth: and charging a cohort of our horsemen at unawares,
slew may of them; among whom a Tribune also chanced to loose his life, as he
went about to repel the danger. Whiles these things are thus in doing, the
Persians in like manner as before, from the opposite river bank setting upon a
part of our men, killed some, and took others alive: and withal, for very
fear, because the enemies were thought to have come with a greater number, our
soldiers as then bestirred themselves but slowly. But when they had taken
heart again, and were grown more bold, so that in the very tumult they
hastily armed, and caught weapons in hand, whereby the army also was raised
with the sound of trumpets, and made more have with muttering in minatorie
wise, the foresaid enemies that brake thus forth upon them, were affrighted,
and returned before they were fought withal: And the Emperor himself in a
great passion of anger, thrust all the rest of that cohort (who basely and with
faint courage had abidden the brunt of the said Brigands) down to serve as
footmen, a place of more pains and of less reputation. After this, in heat of
revenge he converted all his diligence and care to the subversion of that
castle where he was in such jeopardie, himself in person stirring not a foot
any way from the vauntguard, that fighting so among the foremost, he might give
the soldiers good example to behave themselves valiantly, as being a beholder
and approver of their acts. And after he had been a long time much conversant
in the very highest extremities of danger, at length, such was the variety of
munitions and weapons, such was the joint resolution also of his fighting men,
that the same castle was won, sacked and burnt. And after this, considering
the dangerous service and occurrences both past, and also ready to ensue, the
army out-toyled and tired with excessive pains, rested, and had plenty of
many things meet for the sustentation of this life, dealt among them. Howbeit,
from thenceforth the rampire and fence of the camp was more surely fortified
with a pallisado of stakes standing thick, and with deep trenches, seeing
that now they feared from Ctesiphon so near at hand, sudden outrodes and
other privy practices. Hence we came to the river dug by man's hand, named
Naarmalcha, which by interpretation is as much as the Kings river, the channel
whereof was then dry. This river Traiane beforetime, and afterward Severus,
had with passing great care caused to be dug, and the earth to be cast up in
manner of a mighty large gutter or channel, to the end that by a watercourse
derived thither from Euphrates, shipping might pass to Tigris. And in all
respects it was thought the safest policy to have the same place cleansed,
which in times past the Persians fearing the like accidents, had stopped up
with a dam of many big stones laid together. And after this Botone was
skoured, with a mighty deal of water let in upon the plucking away of the
sluice, the fleet which had been driven back for the space of thirty stadia,
was cast with security into the channel of Tygris: and forthwith the army
upon bridges made of ships couched together being set over, took their journey
toward Coche. And to the end that convenient rest might follow upon such
wearisome travail, we sat us down in a rich territory, most pleasantly
garnished with Hortyards, Vines, and green Cypress trees: in the midst
whereof stands a shadie and delectable retiring place of pleasure, showing in
every rowme of the house, after that country fashion, pictures representing
the king in many sorts of hunting, killing Dear and wild beasts: for there is
nothing else among them either drawn in picture, or cast in counterfeit, but
sundry kinds of slaughter, and wars.

CHAP. X. After the ships were delivered out of extreme danger, the armies on
both sides were put in ordinance of battle, whereupon ensued a sharp
conflict here described, whereby the Persians were chased as far as the walls
of Ctesiphon, when they had lost 2500 of their men.
THe Emperor therefore, after so good speed in all affairs achieved to his
hearts desire, holding now a more lofty and stately pace against all
difficulties whatsoever, and grounding so great hopes now upon his fortune,
which yet was never foiled, that oftentimes he did set in hand with many
adventures which savoured strong of rashness, caused the tallest vessels of
those that carried victuals and engines to be discharged of their freight, and
manned them with Octogenis This place, no doub, is corrupt: read therefore
Oct^ngent^. that 15, 800. or else exposid [octogenis] distribut^ veli, i. 80
apeece.
80 armed soldiers: and keeping still with himself the better strength of his
navy, which he had divided into three parts, the one of them he appointed to
be sent out with Victor the Comes in the beginning of night to the end that
having crossed the river hastily, he might possess himself of the banks on
the enemies ground. Which when the captains, as sore afraid, joined altogether
by prayer and entreatie to assay if they might hinder, and yet could not alter
the resolute purpose of the prince, behold all on a sudden five ships with
flag set up aloft, as commandment was given, launched forth, and soon went
out of sight: and when they approached once the bank, they were so assailed
with firebrands and all kind of fuel apt to catch fire continually flung
among them, that they and the soldiers within had presently been burnt, but
that the Emperor started with a cold swawme of fear that quickly came over
his heart, and crying with a loud voice, that our men, as they were commanded,
had erected the signal given unto them, and were upon the point to land,
caused all the Armada to make have and row apace after them: whereby both the
foresaid ships were recovered safe and sound, and the rest of the soldiers
also (pelted though they were with stones and casting-weapons of diverse sorts
from above) after a most sharp skirmish gained the passing high and difficult
banks, and firmly kept their standing. And now do Histories (forsooth) make a
wonder of Sertorius, who keeping about him his weapons and corselet, swam over
the river Rhosne.
Rhodanus; when as at this very instant certain soldiers much troubled, and
fearing to stay behind after the mark or signal was set up, bearing close and
fast with their breasts grovelling upon their shields, which were broad and
bending, welding also the same, though unskilfully, made shift through that
river, so full of whirlepits, to make way and keep swift pace in company with
the ships. Against these forces the Persians opposed the troops embattailed of
their horsemen, armed at all pieces, and those raunged so thick and close
together, that their bodies which way soever they turned fitted with plates,
dazzeled with the brightness thereof all that looked full against them, whose
horses also (whereof they had a number) were defended all over with leather,
armor, and furniture: behind whom, the companies of footmen placed in
supply, and fenced with long and crooked shields, which they carry before them
made of platted oysiers and ^aw leather, advaunced forward in thick ranks.
After these, the Elephants making a show like so many hills marching together,
and mooving their monstrous bodies, threatened death to those that came near
unto them, as which, by proof and experiment made in former times, were very
dreadful. Hereupon the Emperor appointed the middle ward between the two the
vauntg^ard and re^eward.
battles for the strong bands of footmen, according to the ordinance of
embattailing that Homer describes; least if they being placed afront in the
vaward, and happening to recule, should shamefully turn all the rest back
with them: or again, if they were cast behind all in the rereward, might have
more liberty to run away, whiles none were to stay them; and himself with the
light armed auxiliaries traversed to and fro between the foremost and hindmost.
When as then the Romans saw on the one side and the other the armies in
battaile-ray near adjoining, they glittering in their crested helmets, and
shaking their shields, advanced gently forward, as if they footed the measures
of the metricall foot (...)
Anapaestus, and with the launcing of sharpe-headed darts and other
casting-weapons, wherewith the skirmishers running forth, gave the first essay
of battle, the dust was raised on every side, and carried with the swift
whirling of the wind. Now, when there was a shout and outcrie made on every
hand, as the usual manner is, and the trumpets sounding battle, gave an edge
to the courage of the soldiers, they joined the medley with javelins and
drawn swords on both parts, and fought close and near at hand: and verily our
soldiers, the more have they made to get within, the better were they secured
from the danger of arrow-shot. Mean while Iulianus doing the part, as it were,
of a common souldior and commander both, made have to uphold those that were
sore laid at with fresh supplies, yea, and to stir up and incite such as
made slow have. The vantguard therefore of the Persians brake their array, and
giving back with a gentle and soft pace, in their hot armor went toward the
city that was hard by: after whom followed our soldiers, wearied likewise in
fighting from the morning betimes to the evening in the scorching hot fields,
and preassing hard upon their hindparts and necks, drove them all headlong,
together with Tigranes, Surena, and Narses, the principal chiefetaines, as
far as to the walls of Ctesiphon, laying upon the hams of their legs and on
their backs as they ran before them. And intermingled in the very companies of
them that thus slipped away and fled, they had broken through within the entry
of the city, but that Marquess Victor with lifting up as well his hands as
voice, forbad them, being himself slightly shot into the arm with an arrow,
and fearing least these hasty soldiers, found inconsideratly within the
circuit of the wall, and not meeting with any way out again, might be enclosed
with maine multitudes. Let the old Poets sound out the battails that Hector
fought, and extol withal the fortitude of that Thessalian captain Achilles:
Let the posterity long time after, talk of Sophanes, Aminias, Callimachus,
and n Cynegirus, those famous thunderbolts that shook the Medes war in
Greece; evident it is by all men's confession, that some of our men behaved
themselves as valiantly that day as ever those did.

CHAP. XI. Iulianus preparing a number of sacrifices unto Mars, was terrified
with an ominous sign. Leaving therefore the siege of Ctesiphon, he forrayeth
and wastes the countries round about: and not well advised, sets on fire
and consumes all his ships, save only twelve of a lesser sort.
AFter the fear was past, and the enemies bodies trodden, on heaps as they lay,
underfoot, the soldiers, embrued as they were with the blood that they had
justly shed, being assembled before the Emperors pavilion, gave him his due
praise and rendered hearty thanks, for that unknown in every place, whether
he were a leader or a souldior, he had achieved then so fortunat a victory,
as that with the killing of two thousand and five hundred Persians more or
less, there were but threescore and ten of our men lost their lives: who also
for his part, calling most of them by their names, whom himself as an eye
witness and judge saw to have performed with resolute heart any brave service,
rewarded them with Naval, o Civik, and Campe-Coronets. And being now fully
persuaded, that the like prosperous successes would shortly hereafter follow,
he made preparation of many sacrifices to Mars the Revenger: and whereas ten
most beautiful bulls were to this purpose brought in place, nine of them,
before they were presented to the altars, of themselves fell down dead in most
heavy and fearful manner; and the tenth, who brake his bonds and got away,
was hardly brought back again, and being slain, showed ominous signs of ill
luck. At the sight whereof Iulianus falling into a grievous fit of
indignation, cried out, and swear by Jupiter, That he would now offer no more
sacrifice unto Mars, neither did he ever sacrifice again, as being surprised
soon after by speedy death. And so, after he had debated in counsel with
the principal captains and officers of the army, as touching the besieging
of Ctesiphon, concluded it was according to the advice and mind of some, who
knew it was an adventurous and unreasonable piece of service to take that
enterprise in hand; for that both the city by the very situation thereof
inexpugnable, was defended, and also thought verily it was, that the king would
be there out of hand with a dreadful power: So the better opinion took place,
the utilitie whereof, when he a most prudent prince had approoved, he sent
Arintheus with a power of light appointed footmen to forray and spoil the
countries lying round about, which were rich in cattle and corn, who with
like industry was to pursue the enemies also, that being lately put to rout
and dispersed, lay hidden in thick over-growne ways and holes, wherewith they
were so well acquainted. But Julian.
he again of a greedy humor at all times to be encroaching and gaining more,
little weighing their words that willed the contrary, and rebuking the chief
leaders and officers, because for sloth and desire of ease, they gave counsel
to forgo the kingdoms of Persia which were in manner already conquered;
leaving the river on his left hand, by the direction of unluckie guides that
led the way, determined with speedy pace to take the midland.
Mediterranean ways, and, as it were, with the deadly and cursed firebrand of
Bellona, commanded fire to be put under the ships, and to burn them all, save
twelve of the less sort, which he gave order to be carried in carts, as meet
for the joining of bridges. And he thought herein, that he had taken a
profitable course, for fear (forsooth) that a navy being left behind, should
serve the enemies in good stead, or at least wise, that twenty thousand
welneere of fighting men (as from the very beginning of the expedition they
had done) should be employed in haling, towing, and governing the said ships.
After this, when every man fearing in his own behalf, secretly mumbled, and
the plain truth evidently spoke, that if happily the soldiers were put back by
reason of drouth or high hills, they could not return unto the waters: when
also the fugitives openly confessed upon the rack, that he had erred and done
amiss, in a great hurly burly commandment was given, That the flaming fires
should be quenched. And for as much as the fire caught so mighty an head, as
that it had consumed the most part of them already, twelve ships only could
be saved without hurt, which were set apart, that they might be kept still.

CHAP. XII. The Persians having burnt the grown grass and standing corn,
drive the Romans destitute of shipping, and distressed with the distemperature
of weather and soil, both into many straits, yea and forces them to alter
their journey.
BY this chance the fleet being lost, at such a time when it behoved not,
Iulianus trusting in his united army, now that none of the armed soldiers
were employed in diverse places and affairs, and standing upon his great
numbers, marched (I say) to the inland parts, having the wealthy countries
yielding plenty of victuals unto him: which being known, the enemies to
pinch s^ with hunger, set on fire the grass on the ground, and the standing
corn full grown: and by reason that with this general fire, we were stopped
of our passage forward, we trusted upon our standing camp, until the flames
began to slake. And the Persians a great way off, insulting over us with their
bravadoes, one while for the nonce displayed their forces all abroad,
otherwhile made head more thick and close together: that it might be thought
of those that looked far off, the kings aids were already come, and that we
should think they brake out therefore to such audacious outrodes and unwonted
attempts. But all this while the Emperors soldiers both sorrowed hereat, for
that they neither had means to frame bridges, having so rashly lost their
ships, nor could encounter the forces of strange enemies, new come in, who were
already in place, as it appeared by the glittering brightness of their armor,
artificially wrought to bend with every limme. And to help the matter well,
there happened another no small infortunitie, namely, that the succors which we
waited for to come with Arsaces, and our own captains, seemed for the causes
aforesaid let and stayed. In regard of these occurrents, the Prince to
comfort the distressed and disquieted soldiors, commanded the prisoners, lanke
and slender of themselves (as all the Persians in manner be) and by this time
also grown carrion lean, to be brought forth before them; and casting his eye
again upon our men, Lo (quoth he) who they are that these martial hearts
reputemen even deformed, foul, and stinking goats: and as many events by
experience have taught us, ready to fling their weapons from them, and to run
away before they come to join battle. Which said, and the captives voyded,
they sat in counsel about the maine business in hand: and after much arguing
pro and contra, when the unskilful multitude said with open mouth, We must
return the same way we came, the Prince earnestly gainsaid that opinion, and
many together with him showed by plain demonstration, That it could not be,
considering that throughout the spacious and open plains both forage and corn
was consumed, and the remains of towns and villages late burnt, were in
extreme want and poverty: because also, that all the ground was besobbed and
drenched with the mid-Winter frosts that now thawed, and the waters being up
and swollen, had carried away the bounds of their banks, and were become very
rough: for that also, to increase the difficulty of this affair, in those
countries which grew hot by the sultrie heat of the Sun, all places be
haunted with a multitude of flies and gnats, which as they fly shadow both the
daylight, and the bodies of stars that shine by night: when as now the wit
of man could not prevail to meet with these mischiefs, after long wavering to
and fro, and standing in doubtful terms what to do, we reared altars, killed
beasts for sacrifice, and consulted with the gods, to know their will, whether
we should return by the way of Assyria, or marching softly beside the foot of
the mountains, suddenly overrun and wast Chiliocomus, scituat near unto
Corduena: but neither of these two ways was by inspection of the beast bowels
waranted unto us. Howbeit, we resolved upon this in the end, That seeing all
hope of better was cut off and gone, we should take the way of Corduena. And so
upon the sixteenth 16. day of Iu^^.
day before the Kalends of July, when our ensigns were set forward, and the
daylight now begun well entered, there appeared a smoke, or a certain round and
sharp topped cloud of dust, occasioned, as a man might think, by herds of
wild Asses, whereof in those tracts there are infinite numbers, going all
together for this purpose, that by so thick a troop of them thrust together,
they might be able to check and frustrat the fierce assaults of Lions: Some
were of opinion, That the captains of Sacena were coming, raised already by
our rumors spread, That the Emperor would with maine force assault Ctesiphon:
others affirmed, That the Persians were up in arms, ready to stir new
troubles. And therefore, considering how doubtful the case stood, for fear
least some disasterous accident should light upon us, by sound of trumpet our
battailons in their march were called back, and so in a fair green vale full
of grass, near unto a river side, having pitched our tents round in the form
of a circle, with a manifold rank and course of shields to protect us, we
rested with more safety. For, by reason that the air continued thick and
mistie until evening, we could not discern what it was that seemed so foul
and ill favored.

THE XXV. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. The Roman army encountreth and joineth in fight by many a skirmish
with the Persian host. The armor of the Persian men at arms on bard horses.
The terrible show of Elephants. A battailefought with a mighty overthrow and
slaughter of the Persians.
ANd this night verily, wherein no bright stars shone to give light (as
commonly it falls out in doubtful cases and distresses) we passed so, as not
one of us durst either sit down or sleep one wink for very fear. But so
soon as it was fair daylight, the glittering habergeons trimmed all about
with white guards, the bright curets made of iron plates, discovered a far
off, showed the kings power to be at hand. At the sight whereof, when the
soldiers enkindled with courage, made have to encounter them, by reason of a
little river that severed them asunder, the Emperor forbad them: and not far
from the very rampire there was a cruel fight between our fore-riders and
those of the Persians, wherein Machameus, a leader of one regiment of ours, was
slain; in whose quarrel and defense his brother Maurus, Marquess afterward
of Phaenice, killed him who wounded his brother to death, terrifying every one
that came in his way; him self also sore hurt in the shoulder with a dart, was
yet able with maine force to rescue and draw forth of the battle Machameus,
looking wan and pale at the point of death. And when on both sides they waxed
faint with intolerable heat of the weather, and so many conflicts that they
had sustained, in the end the troops of the enemies were with a foul repulse
broken and scattered. As we retired somewhat far from hence, the Saracenes
for fear of our footmen constrained to return back, within a while after,
intermingled with a multitude of the Persians, suddenly charged, with a full
mind to carry away the Roman carriages: but so soon as they espied the
Emperor, they returned to the wings that lay in supply. After we were gone
out of this region, we came to a village named Hucumbra; where for two days
space being refreshed beside our hope with all things meet for our use, and
having gotten corn enough, we departed: and presently all the rest, save only
that which the time would give us leave to convey away, was consumed with fire.
The next day after, as our army marched easily forward, the Persians having at
unwares set upon those that were hindmost, who by chance that day had the
charge of the rereward, had with little ado killed them every one, but that
our Cavallerie that was near at hand having intelligence hereof, being spread
over the open and wide valeyes, repelled this great danger, by wounding those
that thus surprised them. In this skirmish was slain Adaces, a noble peer of
the kingdom, who had been sometime sent in embassage to the Emperor
Constantine, and courteously entertained; the killer of whom offering unto
Iulianus his spoils, was rewarded, as it well beseemed. The same day a cornet
of the a Terciaci horsemen was much blamed and accused by the legions, for that
when these brake into the enemies battle, raunged full against them, they by
little and little slipping away, had like to have discouraged the whole army.
Whereupon the Emperor growing to indignation, as good reason he had, took
from them their guidons, brake their lances, and as many of them as were by
just proof known to have fled, he enjoined to march among the carriages,
packes, trusses, and captives: but their leader, who only had fought manfully,
was made captain over another troop, whose Tribune was convicted to have
shamefully forsaken the field and fled. Moreover, there were cassed also and
discharged of their military oath other Tribunes of certain companies of
horsemen, for the like foul and cowardly part: For, with this mild and
moderate allay and temper of correction, considering the difficulties and
dangers toward, was the Emperor contented. When as therefore they had
journeyed forward seventie b stadia, by occasion that there grew scarcity of
all things, for that both grass and corn was burnt, every man was feign to
catch out of the very flaming fire, and keep for himself what corn and
forage he was able to carry. Leaving therefore this place also behind them,
when the whole army was come to a certain tract named Maranga, in the
twylight, somewhat before day, there appeared an infinite number of Persians,
together with Merenes General of the horsemen, two of the kings sons, and
many potentates and lords of the country. Now were all their bands and
regiments harneised in armor of iron, having every part of their body covered
so close and thick with plates, that the stiff joints thereof were meet for
the knitting of their lims: and vizards of men's faces were so curiously fitted
to their heads, that whereas their bodies all over were plated, the shot
lighting upon them, could there only take hold and stick, where were little
holes full against the eyes to admit a small sight, or where at the very tips
of their noses the narrow passages served for their wind and breath: of these,
some ready to serve with pikes, stood firm and kept their ground so, as a man
would have thought they had bin fixed fast, and held with chains and ropes of
brass: hard by them were marshalled the archers, in which feat the whole
nation from their very cradle has bin passing confident of their skill, and
mighty in the practice thereof: and these drew their bent bows with their
arms so wide asunder, that the strings came close to their right breast heads,
and the arrow heads lay just upon their left hands, and with exceeding skill in
the stroke of their fingers, the shafts flew out with a whistling and singing
sound, carrying with them mischievous and deadly wounds. After them were placed
the Elephants, the terrible sight of which beasts all glittering together, with
their grim and cruel yawning of their mouths, fearful minded men could
hardly endure: upon whom sat their masters, carrying fast tied unto their right
arms knives with hafts, as bearing in remembrance still the defeature and
loss they received at Nisibis: and if the unruly beast could not be restrained
by the strength of his master, for fear least turning back upon their own
men (as it fell out then) he might overthrow the common soldiers, with a
mighty stroke they made a gash into that turning joint that parts the head
and neck asunder. For the experiment was once made by Asdruball the brother of
Anniball, that this was the ready way to dispatch such beasts, and bereave
them of their life. Which being seen not without great terror, the most
confident and resolute Emperor, guarded round about with armed Cohorts, and
the principal captains, according as this extraordinary puissance and cruel
forces required, arraunged those bands which were to affront and encounter the
enemy, in form of a or half moon.
Crescent, with bowing and winding sides. And least Archers running forth
might disray the ranks and companies of our men, he advaunced forward the
banners more speedily, and thereby brake the violent force of their shot: and
after the usual manner, after he had given the signal of battle, the Roman
footmen standing thick together, with preassing hard, thrust back the
thronged fronts of the enemies vaward: and as the medley grew hot, such a
sound there was of shields, such a clattering noise also, as well of the men
themselves as their weapons, making a doleful din, as among whom there was
now no hoe nor stay at all of their hands, that all the fields were covered
over with blood and slain bodies lying along: But the Persians were they that
fell faster to the ground: who being oftentimes faint in conflict, found a
great hinderance and inconvenience in this close fight foot to foot, as wonted
otherwise to bear themselves valiantly afar off; and if they perceive at any
time their battailons to give ground and recule, by retyring toward the back
of them, in manner of showers and storms to shoot their arrows straight, and
so to fright their enemies from any bold and confident pursuit. The Parthians
therefore being driven back and borne down by maine force, our soldiers
out-toyled a long time, and sweltered with the flaming heat of the Sun, after
the sound given of retreat, return again to their tents, emboldened by this
good hand, thenceforth to attempt greater exploits. In this battle it was
evident (as I said before) that the slaughter of the Persians was very great,
and of our men as small. But among the variable chances that fell out in these
conflicts, remarkable above the rest was the death of Veteranio, a brave
warrior, who commanded the legion of the c Zianni.

CHAP. II. The Roman army afflicted with famine. The frugalitie of Julian.
His own Genius and a Star appears in menacing manner unto him.
AFter this, during the truce appointed for three days, whiles every man was
busied in curing his own wounds or his fellows, destitute were we of
victuals, and pinched with hunger, by this time intolerable. And for as much
as by the burning as well of forage as corn, men and horses both were driven
to extremities; out of that provision of food which the beasts of the Tribunes
and or lieutenants, or captains.
Comites carried, a great part was dealt among the meanest common soldiers who
were in extreme want. And verily the Emperor, for whom there were provided no
dainty eats as kings use to have, but for his light supper, which he was to
take under the little pillars of a tent, or hole, a small pittance of thick
(...), or such like (...), as ^^ hasty (...) etc.
gruell (which a very common and etiam (...) gregano.
base drudging souldior would disdain to eat) look whatsoever was made ready
for his service, careless of himself, distributed and sent it away among the
poor and needy soldiers. And himself being drawn for a little while to
take a pensive repose between sleeping and waking, when being quite broken (an
usual matter with him) of his sleep, in imitation of Julius Caesar, who was
wont to write somewhat whiles he lay in camp, he passed the dead time of the
night musing and meditating upon the sentences of a certain Philosopher, he
saw (as himself confessed to his inmost friends) in very simple and poor
plight the resemblance of that public Genius, which when he was mou^ting to
the imperial diadem he beheld in Gaul, and the same in sad and heavy wise,
with Cornu Copia covered over, departing by the tapistrie hangings of his
pavilion. And albeit for the present he was amazed and stricken therewith
astonished, yet as one not stouping at all to any fear, he committed the future
events unto the will and decree of god in heaven: and forsaking his couch or
pallet that lay upon the very ground (as being risen when it was now midnight)
in making supplication and prayer unto the gods by the means of certain
depulsorie sacrifices, he thought that he saw a very light burning flame, like
as if it fell, to shoot along in the air, and to vanish quite out of sight:
and hereupon he trembled all over and quaked for fear, least it had been the
planet Mars that appeared so evidently menacing. Now this fiery bright or
Meteore.
impression, which we term (...), did neither fall at any time, nor touch the
ground: For he that thinks celestial bodies can fall, is justly deemed a
profane and foolish person. Now this Meteore or apparition above comes many
ways, of which it shall suffice to show a few. Some think they be sparks set
afire, and glowing by the vigorous heat of the sky; but not able to go far,
do go out: or at leastwise, that certain flaming rays hitting against
thick clouds, by a quick touch do sparkle: or else when some light meets
close and joyneth with a cloud: For that being shaped like a star, runs a
course verily, so long as it is held up with the strength of fire; but the
body thereof being in so long a way and spacious passage emptied and spent,
turns into an exhalation, going to that substance, by the forcible rubbing
and fretting whereof, it caught heat. Streightwaies therefore, ere the day
began, were the Tuscane wizards and Soothsayers sent for, and being asked their
judgment, What strange accident this kind or apparition of a star portended?
answered, That most wisely he must beware and forbear to attempt any thing at
that time; showing out of Tarquitius his books, how in the title De rebus
Divinis, this Aphorism was set down, That if such a fire-light were seen in
the sky, there ought no battle be fought, nor any such matter attempted.
Now, when as he despised this warning also, as he had done many other, the
Soothsayers besought him, That he would yet put off his journey, if it were but
some few hours; but they could not obtain so much as this; so cross was the
Emperor, and ready to withstand all the skill of divination and prophecy:
but so soon as it was full day light he dislodged and removed his camp
forward.

CHAP. III. The next day Iulianus raised and stirred with the foil and
overthrow of his own men, whiles forgetting his Brigandine, and catching up
his shield he hasteneth to the battle, chanced by a horsemans staff or
spear to be run into the ribs; but whiles he assaieth to pluckeforth the head,
he fell from his horse, and out of the battle, which was to both parts
lamentable, was brought back into the camp.
NO sooner were we departed hence, but the Persians, who greatly feared the
steedie fight of footmen, as having been oftentimes beaten therewith, laid
their amhushes, and closely accompanied us, avoiding our battailons on either
side, and lying in espiall to view our march from the tops of the high hills,
so, that our men suspecting so much, all the live-long day might neither cast
up a rampire, nor fortify themselves with a pallaisadoe. Thus verily whiles we
firmly guard our sides, and the army according to the site and position of
the ground, marches in six square battailons displayed at large with thin
ranks, word was brought unto the prince, being as yet unarmed, and gone forth
forward to discover the quarters before, That suddenly those who behind were
gathering up their armor and weapons together, had a charge given them at
their backs. At which accident he was much troubled, and catching up hastily
in this tumult his shield, but forgetting his corslet, and making have to help
those in the rereward, was called back again with another new alarm, whereby
advertised he was, that the avant-guard also, from whence he was lately
departed, felt the like distress. Which, whiles without any regard at all of
his own peril, hec hasteneth to recover and set upright in order again: from
another part a company of Parthyans in couplet harneis sets upon the
centuries in the The maine battle.
mids, and spredding themselves fiercely all over the left wing, which began
already to shrink (whiles our men could not with patience abide the strong
strength and braying noise of the Elephants) fought with pikes and casting
weapons, which they discharged thick. But as the Prince setting spurs to his
horse, rode with full carrier among the most dangerous skirmishes, out went our
light armed companies, and charging them behind, laid at the houx and back
parts as well of the beasts as the Persians themselves, and all to cut and
hacked them. Whom, when Iulianus (forgetting to look to himself) by lifting
up his hands aloft, and crying alowd, made evident demonstration to be
disrayed, and fearfully scattered, and withal stirring up the anger of those
that followed in chase, engaged himself boldly far into the battle, d
Can^ida^^.
the Gallants his followers, whom fear had disperkled, cried out unto him on
both sides, That he should decline the huge multitude of those that fled, no
less than the fall of some ill framed and disjoynted loover of an high
building: and therewith all on a sudden an horsemans javelin, whence it came
God he knows, having slightly rippled the skin of his [left] arm, pierced
within his short ribs, and stuck fast in the nether lappet or fillet of his
liver: which whiles he labors to pluck forth with his right hand, he
perceived, that with the sharp edge thereof on both sides the sinews of his
fingers were cut through: and thus falling forward over his horse head, and
conveied back into the camp by those that were present, who speedily came
running about, by the means of Physic and Chyrurgerie, he was dressed and
cherished accordingly. And soon after, when the pain was a little assuaged,
he gave over to fear, and with a great spirit striving against death, called
for his horse and armor, to the end, that by revising the battle again, he
might repair the confident hope of his own men, and seem in a rechlesse
neglect of himself, wonderfully possessed with a care for the life and
preservation of others. Showing herein the same vigorous courage, though in a
case unlike, that Epaminondas that renowned captain did: who being wounded to
death at Mandigna, or Mandi, L^un^l.
Mantinea, and returned out of the battle, sought carefully for his shield,
and when he saw it near unto him, died of his wound more joyfully: and he
that without fear forwent his life, was afraid to loose his shield. But when
Iulianus his strength was not answerable to his will, and that the flux of
blood sore followed him, he stood still and stirred not: and hereupon grew he
afterward past all hope of life, because by inquiry made, he understood, that
the place where he fell was called Phrygia: for he had intelligence given him
aforetime by a written answer from the Oracle, that even there he must dye.
When the Prince was brought again into his pavilion, a man would not believe
in what heat the soldiers enchaufed with anger and grief hastened to revenge,
rapping their shields with their spears, fully bent even to dye for it, if the
case so required. And although the dust flew upon their eyes, and the weather
growing hot hindered the agilitie and bestirring of their limbs, yet, as if
with the loss of their leader they had been discharged of their oath, and
freed from all military discipline, they ran desperately without any respect or
spare of themselves, upon the pike and swords points. On the other side, the
Persians more courageously shot their arrows so thick, that the volley and
flight thereof took away the Suns light: opposing their Elephants withal, who
going but slowly with their big bodies and terrible crests, affrighted both
horse and man. The buckling together therefore of men in their armor, the
groaning of those that fell to the ground, the blowing and snuffing of the
horses, and the ringing noise of weapons, was heard a great way off; so long
until both sides were wea^ied with wounds good store, and the night now dark
parted the fight. Fifty Potentates and great Lords of the Persians, together
with the most part of the common souldior were that day left dead in the field:
and in this confused medley Merena and Nohodares, two principal commanders
were slain. Now let antiquity in her high and lofty words, stand amazed at
the twenty battles which e Marcellus fought in diverse places: Tell they
besides, with brave speech, how f Siccius Dentatus was adorned with a number of
military crowns: wonder they moreover, at g Sergius, who, by report, was
three and twenty times wounded in sundry foughten fields, whose noble and
glorious praises Cateline, the last of that race, blurred with the blots of
everlasting dishonor. Howbeit, there were some heavy occurrents that defaced
these joyful events. For, whiles these brave feats were every where performed
after the decease of the General, together with the foil of the right wing of
the army, and the killing of Anatolius, for the time master of the offices,
Sallustius the Prefect was driven headlong into present mischief, and by the
means of an officer of his, rescued out of danger; and when he had lost
Phosphorius a counselor, who then assisted him, the army chanced to escape by
flight: certain soldiers also, through many dangers having put themselves for
refuge into a fortress hard by, could not before three days after join with
the army.

CHAP. IIII. The Oration of Iulianus to those that stood round about him in his
pavilion; which being ended, he distributed his private house-goods among his
nearest favorites: And then discoursing exactly as touching the sublimitie of
men's souls, having drunk a draught of cold water, he departed this life in the
three and thirtieth year of his age.
IN this mean while Iulianus lying in his tent, spoke unto those that stood
about him, all cast done and heavy, after this wise: The time is now come
(quoth he) my friends and companions, and the same right seasonable, for me to
depart this life, which (as a debtor of trust) to render unto nature, calling
for it again, I rejoice with all my heart: Neither do I grieve and sorrow
therefore, as some do think, having learned by the general sentence and
doctrine of Philosophers, how much happier the soul is than the body: and
considering beside, that so often as the better state and condition is severed
from the worse, we are to joy rather than to grieve: observing thus much also,
That even the gods in heaven have unto some most godly and devout persons given
death as the chief and best reward. And that this office is laid upon me, I
know passing well, namely, neither to yield unto painful perils, nor
desperately at any time to overthrow and cast my self away: as having by
experience found; that all dolorous griefs as they insult and triumph over base
cowards, so they give way unto those that constantly persist. Neither repent I
of my deeds past, nor wounded am I with the remembrance of any foul and
heinous act committed, either when I was a scholar and student within doors
and private corners, or after I had entered upon the government of the Empire,
descending upon me, as it were, from the kindred of heavenly wights: but have,
as I suppose, preserved my self unstained, both in mannaging civil affairs
with moderation, and also in raising and repelling wars upon advised and
considerat reasons: Albeit prosperous issues, and good consultations do not
always and in every place concur together, because the superior powers in
heaven, challenge unto themselves the event and success of all enterprises and
designs. And considering thus with my self, That the end of a lawful and
righteous government, is the profit and welfare of obedient subjects, I have
been evermore, as ye know, inclined to peace and quietness, banishing from
mine acts and proceedings, all licentious liberty, the corruptrice of States
and manners both: Right joyful also, and wittingly much more, have I stood
firmly grounded and resolute, wheresoever the Commonwealth as an imperious
mother has exposed me to apparent and evident dangers, a^ one used to
contemn the whirling storms of all casualties. Neither will I be ashamed to
confess, That long since I understood by the foretelling of a true and
unfallible Oracle, that I should die by the violent force of a weapon. And in
this regard I worship the everliving God, that I depart this world, not by way
of any privy trains of treason, nor by reason of long and grievous sickness,
no nor by the ordinary end of delicat folk; but in the mid-course of
flourishing and glorious acts, I have deserved this honorable decease. For, if
a man judge equally, Both he that desires to dye when he ought not, and he
that refuses to dye when it is beh^vefull, are fearful and cowards alike.
Thus much it may suffice, that I have spoken considering my vigor and strength
begins to fail. And now as touching the creation of another Emperor, I do
of purpose warily hold my peace, least by ignorance I should unawares pass by
a worthy person, or if I name one whom I deem sufficient, and another happily be
preferred before him, I should thrust him into danger in the highest degree:
But as a doubtful child, and profitable member of the Commonwealth, wish there
may be found a good Ruler after me. These words mildly delivered, distributing
(as it were by his last will, among his inward favorites, his household goods,
he asked for Anatolius, Master of the offices: and when Sallustius the Prefect
answered, That he was blessed and happy, he knew thereby he was slain: and
bitterly bewailed he the case of his friend, who with an high spirit before
contemned his owue. And as they all that were present hereat wept bitterly, he
carrying still an authority and majesty with him undaunted, rebuked them;
saying, It was a base and abject part to bewail a Prince arraunged among the
stars in heaven. Now when hereupon they kept silence, he together with
Maximus and Priscus, two Philosophers, disputing profoundly, as touching the or
immortality.
sublimitie of the soul, by occasion that the wound he had in his hurt side
opened very wide, and the tumor of his veins and arteries stopped his
spirits, as also with drinking a draught of cold water which he craved at the
very cold time of midnight, he was thereby now easily dispatched of his life
in the alter^ ^t tricesim^
two and h thirtieth year of his age.

CHAP. V. The virtues of Iulianus are at large by Ammianus Marcellinus
described.
BOrne he was at Constantinople, left a destitute orphan from his very
childhood, by the death of his father Constantius, who after the death of his
brother Constantine, whom he was to succeed in the Empire, happened among many
others to be killed by the i multitude, and his mothers name was Basilina, a
Lady of noble desert from her very ancestors: a man, I assure you, to be put
in the rank of heroicke Princes, as well for his famous and brave
achievements, as also for a natural majesty that he bare, glorious and
remarkable. For whereas there be, as the learned do define, these four
principal virtues, Temperance, Prudence, Justice, and Fortitude, and others
from without-forth appendant unto them, to wit, Military knowledge, or
greedily.
Authority, Felicity, and Liberality; with earnest affection he studied and
embraced them all, as if they had been but one. And first of all, for
unstained chastity he so excelled, that after he had buried his wife, he never
meddled with any act of Venus; having a good eye to that which we read in
Plato, namely, That Sophocles a writer of Tragedies, now far stepped in
years, being asked, Whether as yet he had any dealing with women? answered, No;
and said moreover, That he was now glad he had avoided and escaped the love of
such things, no less than a certain raging and cruel master. Likewise, more
strongly to confirm this purpose of his, he revolved and repeated oftentimes
this sentence of the Lyricke Poet Bacchylides, whom he took delight to read,
saying, That as an excellent Painter draws and shapeth to the life a
beautiful visage, so chastity adorneth a Vitam, For so does (...) otherwhiles
signify in Greek.
mind that mounteth and aims at great matters. The defect and blemish of
which virtue, in the very full-strength of his youth he so warily eschewed,
that he could not be charged, no not by the inward servitors of his privy
chamber, so much as with the suspicion of any lust and wantonness; a fault
incident many times to other. And his temperance in this kind, was much helped
and furthered by this exceeding spare diet, and short sleep, which he took
unto, and used both at home and abroad. For, in time of peace his slender fare
at the table, to as many as can judge aright, was admirable; as if he had meant
shortly to return again to his book in the University. And during the time
of diverse and sundry warre-services, he was seen sometimes after the manner
of an ordinary souldior to take a short and homely pittance standing. Also,
when he had refreshed his body, hardened by toilesome labor, with a small
repose of sleep, when he awakened, he would alone by himself walk the round,
look to the sentinels, and see how they watched and warded by turns, betaking
himself after these serious exercises to the deep studies of learning. And if
his lights that burned in the night, by which he studied, could possibly
speak, they would verily show and testify, that there was great difference
between him and some princes, considering they knew, that he took not his
pleasure and solace so much, as to content the necessities of nature. Then,
concerning his prudence and wisdom, therewere very many signs and
testimonies, of which it shall suffice to reckon a few. Most skillful he was in
feats of arms, and in the civil profession of gowned arts passing studious,
ascribing and taking so much only to himself as he thought was betwixt
contempt and pride: elder in virtue than in years; studious to gain all kinds
of knowledge: Sometimes an inflexible and constant Judge; in reforming of
manners a most quick and severe Censor; a meek contemner of riches, and a
despiser of all worldly things. To conclude, this was an Apothegme of his, That
it was a shame for a wise man having a soul to seek for praise and
commendation from the body. Now what good and commendable parts he had of
justice, many particulars do show: first, that he was in a respective
distinction of all matters, terrible, but not cruel: then, in that with the
peril of some few he restrained vices: and more again, because he rather
shook the sword, than struck with it. Last of all, to pass over many
examples, certain it is, that against some open enemies of his and such as
^ought to take away his life, he proceeded so gently, that the rigor of their
punishments he moderated by a natural clemency that he had: His hardiness
in fight, the many wars that he made sufficiently do prove; as also his
patient enduring of extreme cold and heat both. The service of the body is
required properly of a souldior, and the deed of the mind of a General and
Commander. As for him, in his own person he would boldly encounter hand to
hand a stern and cruel enemy, and him at one blow kill outright: and diverse
times himself alone would by opposing his own breast restrain and hold in
our soldiers, when they were at the point to give back and recule. Also,
whiles he conquered and subdued the kingdoms of the furious Germans, and
conversed in the smoothering and sultrie hot dust of Persia, by fighting
personally among the foremost in the vaward, he encouraged and heartened our
men. The skill that he had in military and campe-affaires, many things, and
those well known, do declare; his assaults of cities and castles, the many
forms of embattailing and setting his forces in array at the very point of
dangers and extremities, the pitching of his tents for holesomenesse and
safety, his fore-fences, corpse de guard, and frontier stations without in the
fields, ordered wholly with good reasons and considerations. As for the
countenance and authority that he carried, it was so great, that being most
entirely loved, yet was he dread withal: and howsoever he seemed a fellow in
perils and painful toils, yet in the hotest conflicts he could command idle
cowards to be punished; and being as yet but Caesar, he could without pay rule
his soldiers even when they were opposed against savage nations, as has been
said erewhile: and making a speech on a time to his soldiers all armed, when
they snuffled and became unruly, he threatened, That he would betake himself
to a private life again, unless they left their mutinies. To be short, this
one proof of his authority, instead of many, it shall be sufficient to know,
That upon an exho^tation he gave in a mild and submissive kind of Oration unto
the Gallicane soldiers, inured only to frosts, and acquainted with the river
Rhene, he drew them along with him, after wide and spacious countries travailed
through by hot Assyria, even as far as to the confines of Media. To speak
of his felicity, so conspicuous and notable it was, that being carried after a
sort upon the very shoulders, as it were, of fortune, who continued a pretty
while a good Pilot and directresse unto him, with trains of victorious courses
he overcame infinite difficulties. And after that he was gone out of the West
climate, so long as he lived upon the earth, al nations rested in quietness
and peace, as if a certain Mercury of this world had with his rod enchanted
and appeased them. Last of all, of his liberality there be many and those most
true testimonies, among which these may go. Very light and easy tributes were
by him levied, the tax or imposition of coronets was pardoned, many debts
grown great by continuance of time, were remitted and forgiven, the suits
about the princes revenues and those of private persons were indifferently
heard, customs and tols were restored unto cities together with their lands,
all but those which the governors in the foregoing times had alienated (as it
were) lawfully by sale. And that he was never a covetous hoorder up of money
(which he thought indeed was most safely kept in the owners hands) he would
otherwhiles give out, That Alexander the Great being asked, Where his treasure
lay? answered kindly, Among my friends.

CHAP. VI. Hereto is annexed a brief recital of his vices.
HAving thus set down in order the good parts in him, so many as we could
know, let us come now to relate his vices, although they have been lightly
noted already. He was by nature Lentior is ingen^^, and therefore happily so
studious: unlesle you expound it, stubborn naturally: such as Tiberi^^ Caesar
was, whose nature is said to be Lent^, in S^eton.
overdull and slow; but this infirmity he tempered with a very good and wise
course that he took, suffering himself to be corrected and reformed,
whenever he did exorbitate and swerve from the way of honesty. Full of
words he was, and very seldom stood his tongue still: given too much to
hearken after praesages; so as in this behalf he seemed to equal the Emperor
Hadrian: rather superstitious, than a devout observer of any religion, killing
for sacrifice, without any spare, an infinite number of beasts; insomuch as men
judged, if he had returned from the Parthians, there would not have been Oxen
enough for his sacrifices: like for all the world unto that Marcus Caesar, upon
whom I have heard went this byword, (...), ^. White Oxen to Marcus Caesar,
greeting: If thou win the victory, we are all but dead. Ioying much in the
applause of the common sort, he was an immoderat seeker for praise, even from
the least things that were; in a desire of popularitie, affecting oftentimes to
speak with vile and base persons. Howbeit, for all these imperfections it
might have been deemed, that as himself used to speak, That Justice of the
old world, whom taking offense at men's vices, Aratus extolleth up to heaven,
and there places, whiles he was Emperor did return again to the earth, but
that in doing some things according to his own will and pleasure, otherwhiles
he seemed far unlike himself. For he made and enacted laws nothing
grievous, and those absolutely commanding or forbidding certain things to be
done, except some few: among which he showed himself in this one unmercifull,
for that he prohibited k professors in Rhethoricke and Grammar to teach
Christians, for fear the Gentile professors: ne transiret a numinum cultu.
they should forsake their religion, which was idolatry. And this also was an
intolerable act of his, that he suffered some unjustly to be tied and
incorporated to the companies of municipall to be De^^tions or Curial^s, and
^enatours in their towns and cities.
societies even mere strangers, or such as either by virtue of privileges or
birth were far removed from these fellowships. And verily, for feature and
shape of body, this it was: mean of stature, the hair of his head lying
smooth and soft, as if he had kembed it, wearing his beard, which was shagged
and rough, with a sharp peake devant; his eyes had an amiable cast, with a
quick and shining aspect bewraying pusillanimitie, his eyebrows comely his nose
passing straight, his mouth somewhat with the greatest, and his nether lip
parted; a fat neck, and bending forward; his How is it then, that in the 22.
book, the Antiochians skoffed at him as one, humeros extentans angustos?
un'esse you admit there the figure An^phrasis, i. to speak by the contrary.
shoulders big and broad; from the crown of his head unto the very toe nail
ends carrying a just proportion and uniforme knitting of his lineaments,
whereby he was both strong and swift of foot. And for as much as backbiters
laid to his charge, That he raised new troubles and wars, to the great damage
and hurt of the Commonwealth; let them know, and that by evident instruction of
the truth, That it was not Iulianus but Constantius that kindled the Parthian
broiles: whiles he gave ^are oversoone to the lies that Metrodorus brought unto
him (as erewhile I have at large related) and in a thirsty desire of revenge
grew to indignation; as where diverse times our military bands had bin taken
captive, our cities rased to the ground, our forts either ransacked or pulled
down, our provinces impoverished by great expenses, and where the Parthians
(as appeared by their threats tending to effect) sought to have all even from
Persia to Bithynia, and the coasts of Propontis. And in Gaul, whiles the
wars by a continued train grew every day more than other, when the Germans
were spread over our provinces, and now that the Alps were at the point to be
broken through for the wasting of Italy, and the people had suffered many and
those horrible outrages, there was nothing left but tears and frights: where
both the remembrance of calamities past was grievous, and the expectation of
those at hand more woeful. All which enormities this young gentleman being sent
into the West parts in show and title of Caesar, and coursing the kings he
there found like base slaves, reformed in manner every one with such celeritie,
as is wondrous to be spoken. And therefore to the end he might with like
endeavor and diligence repair the East, he gave the attempt upon the Persians,
like no doubt from thence to bring away both a triumph and P^^thicus.
surname, if the heavenly decrees of God above had accorded with his worthy
policies and noble acts. And since we know by experience, that some run on still
so unadvisedly, that otherwhiles after they have been once defeated they
return to new wars, and having suffered shipwreck, go again to sea, and
betake themselves to undergo those difficulties, which oftentimes they have
shrunk and sunk under: some there be that find fault with this prince, for
that winning in all places victory, still he put himself upon the like
exploits.

CHAP. VII. Consultations and variances among the principal captains and the
chief officers of the army as touching the creation of a new Emperor. At
length Iovianus is chosen, who was received with different affection by the
army.
NEither was there after this any leisure for solemn mourning and weeping. For
when the corpse was once ordered and prepared according as their present store
and the time would give leave, that it might be enterred where himself before
time had appointed, the very next morning early, which fell out to be the 17.
day of June.
fifth before the Calends of July, even whiles the enemies lay spread on
everyside, the captains of the army calling to them the principal officers
of the footmen and horsemen.
legions and troops, fell to consultation about the creating of a new prince.
And for that they were divided into turbulent factions, Arintheus, Victor, and
those that remained of Constantius his court, sought for a meet person out of
their side: contrariwise Nevita, Dagalaiphus, and the nobles of the Gauls cast
about for such an one out of their companies. But whiles this choice stood in
doubtful terms, so that they could not agree, at length in one accord, and
with the good will of all they inclined unto Sallustius. But as he alleged for
his excuse his sickness and honorable old age, a certain souldior marking how
stiffely he stood against it, stood up and said: And what would ye have done my
masters, if the Emperor had in his absence, as oftentimes it has bin seen,
committed the charge of that war unto you? Would ye not (quoth he) setting all
other businesses apart, deliver the soldiers out of these instant and imminent
distresses? Let that be your deed now, and if we may but have a sight once of
Mesopotamia, both the armies will join in giving their voices, and declare a
lawful Emperor. During the small time they had to bring about so important a
matter, by the instigation and setting on of some few (as oftentimes it has
happened in the point of extremity) before their opinions were thoroughly
weighed and considered, elected there was for Emperor Iovianus, the chief of
the company or rank of the i. Pentioners of the guard in ordinary.
Domestici m, a man in regard of his fathers deserts indifferently commended.
For the son he was of Varronianus, a Comes of right good note; who not long
before, after he had laid down the charge he had of warfare, departed to a
more quiet course of life. And incontinently, being clad in princely robes, and
suddenly brought forth of his pavilion, he presently rode among the regiments
and companies, as they were providing to take their journey. And for as much as
the army set in array reached out in length four miles, those in the vaward
hearing some crying out alowd, Iovianus Augustus, resounded the same note much
more: For being stricken almost amazed with the affinity or neerenesse of a
name, that differed but in one letter, they thought that Julian being come
again to himself and refreshed, was accompanied with favorable applauses, as
he had wont to be. But when Iovianus was seen coming toward them, stooping
forward and taller than the other, suspecting that which fell out indeed, they
fell all to weep abundantly, and to lament. Now, if some Gra^^is quid^^^
aquitatis prava^^^^tor. I suppose here is a manifest Catachresis, no strange
thing in this our Author.
severe Censor and precise Iusticer blame this act or election of theirs in
this extremity of the State, lying thus a bleeding, as one would say, and at
point of death, as done unwisely; he will more justly find fault with those
seamen, who letting a skillful pilot go by in blustering winds and rough sea,
have committed the helm that should steer and direct the ship, to any
companion or partaker, it skilled not who, of their danger.

CHAP. VIII. The Persians hearing of Iulians death, by a certain
Ensigne-bearer that was a fugitive, set upon the Romans, who after certain
skirmishes, when they had discomfited and driven away the Saracen
spoyle-takers, approach the city Dura.
THese matters thus wrought by a certain blind judgment of Fortune, the
ensigne-bearer of the n Ioviani, whom Varronianus had conducted, being at
variance of late with this new elected Emperor, then a private person, as who
was an intemperat traducer and backbiter of his father, fearing danger toward
from an enemy stepped now above the degree of the common sort, revolted to the
Persians, and having audience granted unto him to speak what he knew,
advertiseth Sapor, who now approached, That upon the death of him whom he
feared, Iovianus no better than a o Protector, an unskilful person and an
effeminat, was in a tumultuous stir of drudges and camp slaves, taken to bear
the name and shadow of an Emperor. When he heard this (which always in his
timorous prayers he wished for and desired) being set aloft with this unlooked
for prosperity, joining a number out of the roial cavallery, unto those who
had fought with us, he determined with a speedy marching pace to have the
tail of our army charged. And in the end, whiles beasts for sacrifice were
ordained to and fro in the behalf of Iovianus, upon inspection of their bowels
pronounced it was, That if he stayed within the camp (as he thought to do) he
should loose all, but if he went forth he should have the upper hand. And
therefore as we began to go forth, the Persians with their Elephants leading
the way, gave the onset upon us. At the terrible braying and fearful approach
of which beasts, after that both horse and man at the first were much troubled
and disordered, the Ioviani and p Herculani, when they had killed some few of
the said Elephants, manfully resisted the horsemen armed at all pieces. Then
the legions of the Iovij and q Victores, in helping their fellows that were
distressed, slew two Elephants, with no small number of their enemies. And in
the left wing of the battle, three right valiant warriors lost their lives,
namely, Iulianus, Macrobius, and Maximus, Tribunes or Colonels of those legions
which then were the principal of the whole army. After whose funerals
solemnized, as the present necessity would permit, near unto the shutting in
of the evening, whiles we were marching apace to a fortress named Sumere, the
body of Anatolius there lying, was known, which in hasty and tumultuarie
wise was committed to the earth. Here also we recovered threescore of our
soldiers, together with the r Palatines, who, as we related before, were fled
into a fort named Vaccatum. Then the day following, according as the place would
permit, we encamped in an even valley, enclosed round about, within the
circuit, as it were, of a wall (all save one place to go forth at, and the
same lying open) with sharp stakes pitched on every side, and standing out in
manner of so many sword points. And when the enemies saw this, out of the woods
and forests, they let fly at us sundry sorts of darts and casting weapons,
reviling us also in reproachful terms, as perfidious traitors, and murderers
of a most valorous and excellent Prince: for they had heard (as the very
fugitives reported) by occasion of an headless rumor that ran abroad, how
Julian was slain by the hand and weapon of a Roman. In the end also certain
cornets of horsemen having broken through the s gate Praetoria, were so bold
herewith, as to come near unto the very Princes pavilion: but after many of
their own side slain, were repulsed with maine force. Being gone from thence,
the next night after we entered upon Charcha, a place in this regard safe, for
that by reason of the high banks of the rivage being by man's hand raised, to
the end, that the Saracens might not from thenceforth over-runne Assyria, there
was not one as before time that trobled our squadrons in their march. And when
as on these very the first day.
Kalends of Iulie we had marched 4 miles for 7 stad^a and an half make a mile.
thirty stadia, and drew near to a city named Du^a, by reason that our
horses were weary, their riders in the hindmost tail going on foot, had forth
with been environed by a multitude of Saracens, and slain every man, but
that the more vigorous and lighter appointed troops of our horsemen rescued
them in danger. Now the reason why we were thus infested and troubled with
the Saracens, was, for that being debarred by Julian to receive as in times
past, many salaries and gifts, and making thereof complaint unto him, they
could get no other answer but this, That a warlike and vigilant Commander used
to have yro^ and not gold.

CHAP. IX. The Roman soldiers wearied with so often assaults of the Persians,
instantly crave leave, notwithstanding Iovianus stood against it, to pass over
Tigris: whom, for all that they wrestled with hunger, Sapor feared.
IN this place (so obstinatly persisted the Persians in molesting us) we spent
and lost four days. For, marched we forward at any time, they followed us
hard at heels, and with their many provocations drew us back: made we a stand
as pressed to fight, they would by little and little retire, and thus vex us
with long delays. And now by this time (as usually mere forged rumors are
wont to give content unto those that fear the worst) by occasion of a flying
report, That the frontiers of our limits were not far off, the army with
open mouth called importunatly to have leave granted, for to pass over
Tigris. Against whom the Emp^^our and the great captains opposing themselves,
and showing how the river swelled now at the rising t of the Dog-staire,
praying them not to hazard their lives in the dangerous stream and
whirlepooles thereof: affirming, that a number of them were unskilful in
swimming; and adding moreover, that the enemies fo^ces had gained al^eadie on
both sides the skirts of the river overflowne. But when as he redoubled these
reasons oftentimes, and gainsaid them, but all in vain, so that the soldiers
crying out alowd, in maine heat and big words, threatened to do their worst,
the Emperor made proclamation to stay the march, and that the Gauls,
practiced swimmers, should first before all others take the river; to the end
that when they had been swallowed up, or carried away with the mighty stream,
the wilful stubbornness of the rest might be daunted: or if they had performed
the deed safely, the passage might on all hands be attempted more boldly. And
to this business were fit men chosen such as from their childhood had been
enured to swim over the greatest rivers of all others in their own native
countries: who taking advantage of the still and dark night, being let forth at
once (as it were) out at a casement sooner than a man would have thought raught
the bank on the further sides and having trodden under foot and cut in pieces
many of the Persians, who being then bestowed to keep the coasts, were in
quiet security fast asleep, with holding up their hands, and shooting of
darts, they gave signal how their adventure had taken effect and sped. This
being espied a far off, our soldiers ho^ set upon their passage, stayed
only for this, that the masters of the works promised to frame bridges of
budgets or bottels made of the beasts hides that were slain. Which, while
these projects are gone in hand with, and enterprised in vain, king Sapor,
both absent a far off, and also when he was come nearer, was advertised by the
true reports of his discoverers sent out, and fugitives coming in, what
valiant acts our men had done, what shameful foyles and overthrowes his own
had taken; and that of Elephants there were more killed than the king could
ever remember had bin before time: also that the Roman army hardened with
uncessant travailes and pains, after the death of their glorious Prince,
sought not (as he gave it out) to save their selves, but to be revenged, and
were minded to end these instant dangers and painful troubles, either by an
absolute victory, or by a memorable death. In these regards he cast in his
mind many and those fearful consequences, namely, how our forces spread all
over the provincial nations, might, as he had experience thereof, be assembled
with a small watchword: knowing also, that his own people after the loss of
the greatest part of the common soldiers, was sore dismayed and affrighted;
and finding withal, that in Mesopotamia there was left an army of the enemies
behind, not much lesser. And above all these things, that which daunted his
perplexed and careful mind, was this, That five hundred of their men swimming
together at one time, had passed in safety over the river when it was risen
high, and having killed the Warders of the coasts, stirred up the rest of their
consorts to the like bold and hardy exploit. Mean while, when the surging and
swelling waves would not suffer the said bridges to be framed, and all things
meet for meat were consumed, our soldiers having spent two days in a
miserable case, pinched with hunger, and chafed with anger, grew into a rage,
making have to loose their lives like men by the edge of the sword, rather than
by famine, the basest and most cowardly kind of death that is.

CHAP. X. The embassage of Sapor, for the concluding and confirmation of a
peace: Iovianus for want of skillful policy provideth badly for the Roman
army, and whatsoever the ambassadors of Sapor asked, without any strife he
yields to. Upon pledges on both sides taken that peace dishonorable to the
Roman Empire and name, by a new and fraudulent practice of the Persians turned
to the overthrow and undoing of many. The Roman soldiers in wicker floats and
boats made in have, pass over the river Tigris, and notwithout their great
loss and disadvantage escape with life.
HOwbeit the eternal power of the heavenly God was on our side: and the
Persians, beyond all hope send first (as touching the treaty and conclusion of
a peace) their Orators, to wit, the a name of dig^^tie, (...) to the King.
Surena, and another noble Peer of the realm: for they also were out of
conceit with themselves, as whom the Romans in all battles welneere having
the upper hand, afflicted sore every day more than other. Now, the conditions
that they tendered were very hard, precise, and intricat. For, they pretended,
That in regard of mortality and men's estate, their king a most merciful
Prince, was content, that the remains of our army should return, namely, if
^. the Emperor.
Caesar together with his principal counselors, and great men about him
performed such points as he commanded. To countermatch these, was Arintheus
together with Salustius the Prefect sent: but whiles there was sitting in
consultation with sage advisement, what was to be done, four days went over
our heads, the which tormented and plagued us with hunger, and were unto us
more grievous than any punishment whatsoever. Which respite of time, before
these were sent, if the Prince had made his use of, and by little and little
departed out of the enemies ground, certes he had reached to the strong
garrison towns of Corduena, a country both plentiful and our own, and
besides, not above one hundred miles distant from the place wherein these
affairs were treated of. Now, the king claimed hard and required to have his
own (as himself said) which long since Maximian had taken from him: but as it
appeared in the handling, he required for our ransom (as it were) and
redemption, five countries beyond. Tigris, to wit, Arzanena, Moxoena, and
Zabdicena; likewise Rhehimena and Corduena, with fifteen castles: also
Nisibis, Singara, and Castra Maurorum, a strong hold of very good importance.
And whereas it had been better to have fought ten fields, than that any one of
these should be surrendered, yet the crew of flatterers came about the timorous
Prince, buzzing and whispering in his ears the dread name of Procopius, who
unless he made the more speedy return, taking knowledge of Iulians death,
would easily with the power of those unfoyled soldiers whom he had in his
regiment, work an alteration in the State, and proclaim himself Emperor,
whiles there was none to make head against him. With these pernicious words
iterated continually unto him, he grew enkindled, and without any farther
hafting or holding off, delivered up all that was demanded: after that with
great ado he obtained thus much, That Nisibis and Singara, without the
inhabitants therein, should pass under the dominion of the Persians: also,
that from the forts or holds which were to be alienated, the garrisons that
were very Romans should be suffered to revert into our hands. To these
capitulations was added another article also most mischievous and impious,
namely, That after this composition passed, Arsaces, a friend unto us at all
times, and a trusty confederat, we might not aid, if he craved it against the
Persians. Which was devised for a twofold reason; partly, that the man might be
punished, who at the Princes commandment had wasted Chiliocomus; and partly,
that there might remain still some occasion of quarrel, under color whereof
they might from time to time invade Armenia at their pleasure. Whereby it
happened afterward, that the same Arsaces was taken prisoner alive, and the
Parthians among these dissentions and troublous garboyles, went away with the
greatest side of Armenia, confining upon the Medes, together with a city.
Choi^. ^ov^^.
Artaxata. When this dishonorable decree was confirmed, to the end that during
the cessation of arms, there should be nothing done contrary to the
covenants, there were given on either side in show of hostages, great persons
of quality, to wit, on our part, Nevita, Victor, and Mellobaudes, Tribunes of
notable and valiant bands: but on the other, Bineses, one of the rank of the
nobility, and other three Lords or Potentats of right good note. Thus after a
peace for thirty years was concluded, and the same surely ratified by the
solemn complements of a religious oath, we returned another way, and because
we avoided the places adjoining to the river, as comberous and rough,
distressed we were for want of drink and meat both. And so this peace granted
under color of courtesy and humanity, turned to the destruction of many; who
being pinched with extreme hunger to their very last gasp, and therefore
secretly going before, were either for want of skill in swimming swallowed up
of the rivers stream; or else, if they passed and overcame the violence of the
waves and came to the banks, by the Saracenes or Persians (whom, as I said,
the Germans had expelled a little before) killed like sheep, or sent far off
to be sold as slaves. But when as the trumpets sounding together, openly gave
signal of passing over the river, a wonder it was to see with what a heat
every man rashly venturing upon all advantages of trial, and putting himself
before all the rest, made have to shun many fearful dangers: whiles some
sitting upon hurdles, made at all adventures, holding their horses as they swum
on either hand; others upon bottles; and some again turning and winding diverse
ways in the point of necessity, with crooked courses cut and pierced through
the billows and waves beating full against them. The Emperor himself with
some few others, having crossed over in those small barks which remained after
the burning of the fleet, as I have showed, appointed the same vessels to pass
to and fro between, until we were all conveyed over. And in the end we came
to the banks on the further side (all save those that were drowned) through
the gracious favor of the heavenly power, having by hard chances escaped out
of jeopardie. Whiles we stood yet in fear of calamities and troubles hanging
over our heads, given we were to understand by therelation which our
fore-riders made, That the Persians were making of a bridge far out of our
sight, to the end, that now after peace and covenants established, whiles the
tempestuous storms of war were allayed, they might set upon our sickly and
crasie folk as they went secure and fearelesse, as also our beasts, long
wearied and tired out of heart. But when they perceived how they were
discovered, they relinquished this their wicked design.

CHAP. XI. After they had marched six days journey with penury of all
things, refreshed they are with new provision of victuals. Iovianus goes in
hand with establishing the state of the Empire. The Nisibenes hearing that
their city, of all others in the East the strongest, was surrendered to Sapor,
burst into tears.
BEing now freed from this suspected danger also, we made have, and by long
journeyes approached Ha^ra, an old town, situate in the midst of a desert,
and long since dispeopled; which when Traianus and Severus, wa^like princes,
attempted at sundry times to raze down to the ground, they were with their
armies like to have been utterly defeated, according as in the history of
their acts I have orderly set down these particulars also. From whence,
knowing that along this plain, stretching out threescore and ten miles in
these dry countries, there could be found neither water to drink, but such as
was salt and stinking, nor any thing else ^o feed upon, but Sothernwood,
Wormwood, Dragonce, and other kinds of most bitter or biting herbs, all the
vessels which we carried with us, were filled with fresh water; and by killing
our cammels and other beasts of draught and carriage, we made shift for food,
though it was unholesome. And after six days journey, when there was not found
so much as grass to give comfort ^^ our extreme necessity, C^ssian^s Lord
Warden or Marques^e of Mesopotamia, and Mauricius a Tribune, sent before of
purpose, came to a castle in Persia named Vr, bringing with them victuals out
of that provision, which the army, left with Procopius and Sebastian, had
saved by living frugally. From hence another Procopius, a or Secretari^.
Notarie, and Memorius a military Tribune, were dispatched to the tracts of
Illyricum and of Gaul, to carry tidings of Iulians death, and that Iovianus
after his decease was advanced to the dignity imperial. These men the prince
had given in charge, to urge Lucilianus his wives father, who after his
military charge given up, was retired to a private life, and who made his abode
as then at Sirmium, after they had presented unto him a patent for the
mastership of horse and foot both, that he should make have to Millaine, there
to settle the state that stood upon doubtful terms; and (which was more
feared) if any new occurrences should arise, to oppose himself. Beside these
Mandats, he gave them letters also unto him of more secrecy, willing
Lucilianus likewise to bring with him certain choice men of approved industry
and fidelity, whose help he meant to use, according as the incident affairs
should require. And in good and wise policy he commanded Malarichus, who had
been a dealer for him in his household business, living as then in Italy, to
succeed Iovinus in the ^ mastership of ^. Horse.
Arms in Gaul, sending unto him the ensigns and ornaments of that office;
foreseeing herein a two fold commodity, namely, that both a captain of high
desert, and therefore suspected, should be removed out of the way, and that a
man of inferior hope being thus preferred to an higher place, might with great
study and affection establish the estate of his found^r, which as yet was but
wavering and uncertain. Moreover, commandment was given to those that were
to go about the accomplishing of these businesses, That they should extol the
whole course of the late acts, and make the best of them, yea, and spread
abroad what way soever they went light rumors, according all in one tune,
namely, That the Parthian expedition was brought to an happy end: and that in
travailing speedily night and day together, they should insinuate unto the
rulers of provinces, and leaders of any forces, the new Emperors writings; and
after they had in secret manner sounded the minds of them all, return quickly
with their answers: that thus upon intelligence given, what was done in remote
parts, there might betimes be some wise course found out for the establishing
of his Empire. But Fame, that prevented these messengers, flew all about the
provinces most swiftly, telling tales of heavy accidents, and struck the
people, but the Nisibenes above all, into grievous sorrow, when they understood
once that their city was yielded unto S^por: whose anger and secret grudge
they feared, as calling ever and anon to mind, what mortal foiles and
overthrows he had continually there sustained, when many a time he went about
to assault it. For it was full well known, that the compass of the East
Empire might have been brought in subjection to Persia, but that this city,
so well seated and so fortified with mighty walls, made resistance. How beit
these poor wretches, although they much more feared future calamity, yet
comforted they were with this small hope, that the Emperor either of his own
free accord, or at their prayer and entrea^ie, would in the same state keep
this city, the strongest port-cluse and key of all the East.

CHAP. XII. When these victuals were spent, the army is distressed with
hunger. Iovianus refuses to enter into Nisibis: which city, Bineses in the
name of Sapor takes possession of, notwithstanding the loyal and faithful
citizens, who in vain stood against him, and whose pitiful departure out of
it is here described.
WHiles diverse rumors dispersed abroad in all places the order and course of
these proceedings, after the small store was spent of victuals which were in
the army, and brought thither as I have said before, men were of necessity to
feed on their own bodies, but that the flesh of their laboring beasts which
they killed lasted in some sort a while; whereby it came to pass, that most of
their armor, weapons, and baggage were so feeble they were that they were not
able to carry them.
cast away. For so grievous and extreme was the famine whereby we pined, that
if in any place there was but one x Modius or peck of meal found (and that
happened but seldom) it was exchanged for ten pieces of gold. Being thence
departed, we came to Thisaphalta, where Sebaslianus and Procopius, together
with the Tribunes and principal captains of the soldiers (committed to their
charge for the defense of Mesopotamia, as the solemn order required) met with
us, and being courteously received, bare us company. After this, the prince
having made have in his journey, and gladly seen Nisibis, pitched his standing
camp without the city: and being earnestly requested by many prayers of the
people, that he would enter the city, and as the custom was of other
princes, lodge within the palace, he stiffely refused, as being abashed and
ashamed, that whiles he conversed within the walls, the city, otherwise in
expugnable, should be delivered up into the angry enemies hands. Then and
there, when the evening waxed dark, Iovianus, the principal of all the or
Secretaries.
Notaries, who at the siege of the city Majozamalcha (as I have said) escaped
with others through a mine under the ground, was violently taken from supper,
and being brought into a place out of the way, and pitched headlong into a dry
pit, was overwhelmed with a number of stones cast upon him: for this cause
verily, that when Julian was slain, he also being by some few nominated as
worthy of the Empire, after the creation of Iovianus behaved not himself in
modest terms, but was overheard to whisper somewhat as touching that affayre,
and other whiles invited to feasts the martial men of the camp. The next day
Bineses, one of the Persians, who (as I said) was a noble and right honorable
person among others, making have to accomplish his lord and kings commandment,
called instantly for the performance of promise and by permission of the Roman
Emperor entered the city, set up the banner of his own nation upon the
citadell, denouncing unto the citizens their lamentable remove and departure
out of their native seat. And being presently commanded all to flit and be
gone, they stretched forth their hands, and besought there might be imposed
upon them no necessity of departing, saying, That they alone, without the
public allowance of victuals and soldiers, were able to defend their
dwelling houses, trusting assuredly, as they had oftentimes found by
experience, to find justice hereafter also fighting for the place wherein they
were borne. And in this wise verily the States and the Commons humbly prayed:
but they spoke in vain to the very winds, as they say; whiles the Emperor
made semblance (fearing indeed other things) that he declined the heinous sin
of perjurie. Then Sabinus, a man forwealth and birth renowned among his fellow
citizens and burgesles, having a rolling tongue of his own, made a speech to
this effect: That Constantius in a world of fierce and cruel wars, was
otherwhiles vanquished of the Persians, and brought in the end by flight with
some few, to Hibita, no sure nor fenced station, where he lived with a piece of
bread which an old woman of the country at his much entreatie reached unto
him; yet for all this, lost he none of his Seignories to his dying day: and
Iovian now at his first entrance into his Empire has parted from the very wall
of the Provinces, by the bar, as one would say, whereof they continued time
out of mind, without taking any harm. But when as he could not prevail,
whiles the prince constantly pretended the conscience of keeping the oath he
took: and when as he received at length with much ado and by constraint a
Coronet presented unto him, which he a good while refused, one Silvanus an
advocate, that used to plead in the defense of men's causes, crying boldly
alowd: So crowned (quoth he) o Emperor, may thou be by all other cities
b-sides. At which word he grew so angry, that he commanded them all within
three days to depart out of the walls, detesting and cursing the present state
of the time. So there were set certain of purpose to force and drive them
forth, threatening death also to as many as delayed their departure; whereby
the city was full of sorrow and lamentation: and throughout all the streets
and parts thereof there was nothing heard but groaning and wailing on all hands;
whiles the matron, ready to be thrust, as banished out of her house wherein
she was borne and brought up, ^are the hair of her head; whiles the mother
bereft of her whom she had buned there.
children, and the widow of her husband, was to be driven away far from
their or their graves.
Manes; and whiles the lamentable multitude clipping the posts, cheeks, and
lintels of their entry doors, piteously wept. Hereupon were sundry ways full
of those that departed, every one as they could make shift: For why? many of
them conveyed away by stealth their own riches, which they thought might
handsomely be carried, setting naught by the rest of their household goods,
whereof there was much, and that of great price: for all this left they behind
for want of laboring beasts.

CHAP. XIII. The judgment of Ammianus Marcellinus as touching the condition of
the Roman Empire in those days. The corpse of Julian was enterred in a
Suburbian place near Tarsus. The army comes to Antioch, where are seen
many and dreadful sights: and namely a Comet, as touching the reason and
nature whereof there is put down a natural discourse.
ANd here in this place art thou, the fortune of the Roman world, justly
blamed, who when the storms were up, blowing and beating fore upon the
Commonwealth, did commit and betake the reins or helmethereof, newly
stricken out of the hands of a skillful leader and pilot of the State, unto a
raw young man, not comes as yet to his proof: who being not known for any
notable thing during his former life in such affairs, can by right neither be
blamed nor commended. But this one thing went to the very heart of good men,
that whiles he stands in fear of a concurrent, and whiles he thinks
seriously upon Gaul and Illyricum, and casts in his mind, how some have many
times aspired to high matters, he making have to prevent the fame of his
coming, under a pretense of avoiding perjurie, committed an act unbeseeming an
Emperor, by loosing Nisibis, which ever since king Mithridates his days stood
out with might and maine, that the East Empire should not come into the
possession of the Persians. For, never since the city of Rome was first
founded, can we find, as I suppose, though you read over all the Annals, that
either Consul or Emperor gave away the right of any part of our territories,
or that triumphall honors were ever conferred upon any for the recoverie of
aught that had been taken away, but for the enlarging of our dominions. Hence
it was that unto Publius Scipio, for the regaining of Spain, unto Fulvius,
when Capua, after skirmishes and assaults made a long time, was won, and unto
Opimius after diverse battles ended, what time as the Fregellanes then mortal
enemies, were forced to yield themselves, triumphs were denied. Thus much also
we learned out of the ancient records, That in extreme cases covenants made
with a general and chief leader, after that the parties on both sides took an
express and formal oath, were streightwayes by making wary afresh undone and
void: as for example, in old time at the streits or gullet Caudinae, when the
Roman legions were in Samnium put to the yoke: also, when by Albinus in Numidia
a peace was wickedly thought and treated of: and lastly, when Mancinus the
author of an agreement made dishonourably in have, was delivered up unto the
Numantines. Well, after this, when the citizens were fetched forth, and the
city rendered, and Constantius a Tribune sent to assign and set out the
garrison forts with their territories, unto the Persian Lords and great
Captains, Procopius was sent with the relics of Julian, to interre the same
in the suburbs of Tarsus, as he had given charge in his life time. Who taking
his journey to execute this business, presently after he had buried the body,
departed: neither could he be found any where, although with great diligence
he was sought for, until that long after he was seen at Constantinople all
on a sudden invested in his purple robes. These matters in this wise brought
about, and our journeyes thus dispatched, we came to Antioch, where, for many
days together (as if God had been offended) were seen many fearful and
strange sights, the events whereof, such as were skillful in prodigial learning
foretold and prophesied, would be woeful and lamentable. For, both the statue
of Maximian Caesar, which stood in the very porch or entry of the kings
house, lost suddenly the brazen ball, fashioned to the form of the or heavenly
globe
Pole which he carried: and also with an horrible noise the beams and posts
within the Consistories made a sound. There were seen likewise in the daytime
blazing stars: as touching the nature whereof the Natural Philosophers vary
much in their reasons and arguments. For some hold, That therefore they be
called Comets or hairie stars, for that when a multitude of stars be
gathered together, by the flashing of fire from them, certain hairs seem to
be scattered. Others are of opinion, That of a dry exhalation of the earth
steeming up aloft by little and little they catch fire. Some again do think,
That the rays or beams of the Sun, being kept from going downward by the
opposition of a thick cloud between, and casting a brightness upon a gross
body, represent unto man's eye a light, distinguished, as it were with stars.
And there be also those that are thus conceited of them, That such a sight as
this then appears when a cloud drawn up higher than usually it has been,
shines by reason of the vicinitie of those eternal heavenly fire: or at
leastwise, that they be certain stars like unto the rest, the rising and
setting whereof at what times they be appointed, men's wits could never reach
unto. Much more besides concerning or bl^^ing stars
Comets we have read in authors that be learned in Astronomy: which I may not
here set down, for that my pen makes have to write of other matters.

CHAP. XIIII. Iovianus comes to Tarsus, and being departed from thence,
establishes his imperial dignity by all the means he can: But within a
while after, when he was come as far as to the confines of Galatia and
Bithynia, he was in the night found dead. His virtues and vices are briefly
touched.
WHen the Emperor had stayed a pretty while at Antioch, sore troubled with
diverse weighty cares, a wonderful desire he had to be gone. And therefore
sparing neither beast nor man, he sets forth from thence in the very mids of
cold Winter, notwithstanding, as it has been said, many ominous signs
crossed the same, and entered into Tarsus, a noble city of Cilicia, the
original foundation whereof I have showed before. And making exceeding great
have to go out of it also, he appointed to have the sepulcher of Julian trimly
garnished, scituat within the precincts of that way which leads to the
straits of the mountain Taurus: Whose relics and ashes, if he had then done
right and been well advised, C^ra^^^, L^^^^^
Cydnus should not have seen, a most pleasant and clear river though it be:
but to perpetuat the glory of his good deeds, Tiberis that runs through the
mids of that immortal city Rome, and touches the monuments of the ancient
Emperors of sacred memory should have passed by. From Tarsus when he was
departed, he took long journeyes and came to Tyana a town in Cappadocia, where
Procopius the foresaid Notarie, and Memorius a Tribune, in their return meet
him, and open the whole course of their proceedings: beginning, as order
required, at this, namely, That Lucillianus being entered into Millane, with
Seniauchus and Valentinian, two Tribunes whom he had brought along with him,
knowing that Malarichus refused the of arms, or of the forces.
Mastership abovesaid, rode in post to Remes: and as if there had been no
rumors up, but all quiet in that nation, ran forth as we use to say, without
the lists: and very unseasonably and over soon, before as yet all things were
well settled, of an ordinary Clerk gave himself to be an Auditor. Who being
privy to himself of his own fraudulent and naughty dealings, fled unto the
army, and devised, That Iulianus being yet alive, a certain man of mean
condition was risen up to make an alteration in the State, and himself
Emperor. At whose false and deceitful forgeries, the soldiers mightily
moved and grown to a tumultuous broyle, slew both Lucillianus and Seniauchus.
As for Valentinian, who soon after became Emperor, being in great fear and
doubtful whither to fly, his friend and host Primitivus had packed him away in
safety. But upon these heavy occurrents there came other news as joyful,
namely, That the soldiers sent from Iovinus were at hand, such as military
men use to call Capita y Scholarum, and these brought tidings, That the army
serving in Gaul, gladly embraced Iovianus as Emperor. Which being known for
truth, the second form or rank of the Scutarij was committed unto the
regiment of Valentinian who returned with them: and Vitalianus a souldior
serving in the band of the z Heruli, was taken into the company and society
of the Domestici; and he long after being advanced to the dignity of a Comes,
fought unfortunatly in Illyricum. And straight after, was Arinthe^s sent into
Gaul, bearing letters with him unto Iovinus, exhorting him to keep his place
still, and remain constant: given also he was in charge, That the principal
rayser of the foresaid tumult should be punished accordingly, and that all
authors of sedition should be sent over bound unto the Emperors or Court.
Counsel. After these matters disposed of as seemed expedient, at Aspuna, a
little enfranchised town of Galatia, the a soldiers serving in Gaul, showed
themselves unto the Emperor: and being admitted into the Consistory, after
gracious audience given of those or having recounted what they had suffered and
endured, Qua pertule^an^.
errands which they brought, they were rewarded and commanded to return unto
their colors. And when the Emperor was come into Anguri, Belloni^.
Ancyra, after all things put in readiness, which according to the present
time were requisite to a solemn pomp, he entered upon his Consulship, taking to
him in the fellowship of that honorable dignity, his own son Varronianus,
a young infant, whose wrawling (whiles he strugled hard, and made means not to
ride in the b Curule chair, as the custom was) portended that which soon
after happened. Hereupon also the prefixed time that Iovianus was to end this
life, made a quick dispatch of him. For when he was come to (...), P^olo^^.
Dadastana, a place that divides Bithynia and Galatia asunder, he was found
dead in the night: as touching whose death many doubtful reports have gone
abroad. For, it is said, that he could not endure the smell of his bed chamber
newly daubed or pargetted with mortar made of lime: or that he came to his end
upon a tumor or swelling of his head, occasioned by an huge fire, kindled of
coals: or at least wise, upon greedi^ feeding of a number of meats, he crammed
his belly so full, that he dyed of surfeit. Now, he departed out of this world
in the three and thirtieth year of his age. And whereas both he and Scipio
Aemilianus chanced to end their lives alike, yet find we not that there was
any inquisition made, or commission sitten upon, about their death. His manner
of gate was grave, his countenance most pleasant, his eyes gray: big he was
of making, and withal very tall, in so much as a long time there could not
be found in the wardrobe, any regal garment meet for the measure of his
body: And a willing desire he had to imitate Constantius, employing himself
in serious affairs otherwhiles after noone: and he used to jest openly with
his favorites and familiars. An affectionat lover and professor he was also of
the Christian Religion, and sometimes a right honorable embracer thereof;
meanly learned therein, and rather inclined in kindness to them than
otherwise: one also, as appeared by those few whom he promoted, that would be
very precise and considerat in choosing of Judges. But a great eater he was,
and much given as well to wine as fleshly lust: which vices happily he would in
time have amended, in regard of the Imperial Majesty that he carried.
Furthermore, it was said, that his father Varronianus foreknew long before that
which happened, by a certain dream that told him as much, and that he
acquainted two of his most faithful friends therewith: and said thus much
moreover, That himself also should have the Consular robe of estate conferred
upon him. But as the one part of his dream took effect, so he never attained
unto the other: For hearing for certain of his sons fortune, before he could
see him he was by fatal death prevented. And for that it was foretold unto
the old man in a dream, That the said most honorable Magistracy was
portended to this name, his nephew Varronianus, as yet an infant, was, as I
said before, together with his father ^ovianus declared Consul.

THE XXVI. BOOK.
CHAP. I. When Iovianus was dead, Valentinian was elected Emperor.
HAving with very great care delivered the whole order and course of State
affairs unto the times next proceeding our late and near remembrance,
beseeming it were now to draw back, and proceed no farther in matters so well
known, to the end we may both decline the dangers, which many times are
attendant upon the truth, and not be subject to the censure of unreasonable
examiners of this work now to be compiled forward, who keep a great stir as
^ore hurt, in case we should overslip what the Emperor spoke at supper, or
omit for what cause the common soldiers were chastised in the camp about a
Principia: who also would be ready to find fault, and say, That in the
manifold descriptions of countries, we ought not to have been silent as
touching small pyles and forts: as also that all their names who assembled at
the office or court of the Citie-Praetor, were not expressly set down: and many
the like particulars not suting with the rules of History, which is wont to
discourse and run through high and important affairs, and not to search into
the small points of low and mean matters: Which if any man would desire to
know, he may as well hope, that those indivisible little bodies or motes flying
up and down in the air, such as we call Atomi, may be numbered. Which
inconvenience some of the ancient Hystorians fearing, published not unto the
world the notice of sundry acts (when they were penned and put down in a
flowing style) so long as they lived: according as Tullie also, a reverend
witness, affirms in a certain Epistle unto Cornelius Nepos. And therefore
contemning such vulgar ignorance, proceed we to the narration of that which is
behind. These mutable and horrible accidents making an end with a lamentable
issue and doleful death: after a small time coming between, when the corpse
of the prince deceased was dressed accordingly, yea and sent to Cons^antinople
to be interred among the relics of other Emperors, when the a^^ie also was
gone forward toward (...), (...)
Nicea the mother city in Bithynia, the civil magistrates and martial
officers, enwrapped in great cares about the State, and some among them puffed
up with a vain hope, made inquiry after a governor of long proof and
gravitie: and in a running rumor and dark whisperings of some few, there was
nominated Equitius Tribune as then over the first company of the Scutarij: Who
being misliked by the better sort that were in authority, as one rigorous and
somewhat rude, from him their voice turned and went, after a slight manner, to
a kinsman of Iovianus, named Ianuarius, who had the chief charge of all
necessaries belonging to the army in Illyricum: who also being rejected, for
that he lay far off, Valentinian with an uniforme accord, by the favor and
grace of the heavenly deity was elected, as a fit and meet person for that
affair about which they went, one who being captain of the second company of
the Scutarij, was left at Ancyra, to follow afterward, as it was ordained. And
for that this was thought without the gainesaying of any to stand with the good
of the Commonweal, whiles some were of purpose sent to admonish him for to
come with all speed, for ten days space there was none to steer the helm
of the Empire, which the Soothsayer Marcus, by inspection of beasts bowels at
Rome, had pronounced to have happened at the same time. Mean while, to the end
that nothing might be practiced or done contrary to that which was decreed,
nor the unconstant soldiers, often mutable, should make choice of some one
there present, diligent forecast was had by Equitius and Leo together (which
Leo, as yet under Dagalaiphus General of the horsemen, kept the accounts of
receipts and expenses for the military bands, and afterward prooved a
mischievous master of the offices) who framed and wrought all that ever they
could the mind and judgment of the whole army, as being Pannonians and
favorers of the Emperor elect: who being upon sending for come, and having a
presage or perceivance of the business to be performed (as he had an
inckling given him even by continual dreams) would neither be seen nor come
abroad for two days, avoiding the Bissext or odd day b of the Leap year in
the month February, which then was coming, and which he knew had been
diverse times unfortunat to the Romans: the certain knowledge of which day I
will now declare.

CHAP. II. A discourse and speculative consideration as touching the Bissextile
or odd day of the Leap year, so precisely observed by Valentinian.
THe space and revolution of the year, the ancient writers, learned in the
motion of the heaven, and in Astronomy, among whom, Menon, Euctemon,
Hipparchus, and Archimedes excel, define in this wise: namely, when the Sun
having by the everlasting law and order of things celestial run through the
circle of the [twelve] signs, which in the Greek tongue is termed the c
Zodiake, a course that he performs in three hundred threescore and five days
and nights, is returned again to the same point: as for example, if setting
out at the second degree of Aries, he returns after his course ended to the
same again. But most truly, the space of one year is fully determined in the
days aforesaid, and six hours besides, namely, until noone; and then the
next year shall begin after the noone.
sixth hour, and reach unto the evening: the third day taking his beginning at
the first ^. 6. of the clock in the evening.
watch, extends to the sixth hour of the midnight
night: and the fourth, from midnight holds on until it be clear 6. of the
clock in the morning, after the ^quinoctiall hours, when days and rights be
equal.
day light. Least therefore this computation, by reason of the diverse
beginnings of the year, and for that, as one runs out or ends after the
sixth hour of the day, so another after the sixth hour of the night should by a
disorderly division confound all knowledge: and least the Autumn month might
be found at any time in the Spring, thought good it was, that those odd six
hours, which in four years arise to four and twenty, should make the full
measure of one day and night, for to be put unto the rest. Which being deeply
considered, with the accord of many learned men it came to pass, that the
revolution of the yearly course being brought to one distinctend, is neither
wandering nor uncertain, ne yet from thenceforth appears the order and
motion of the heaven shadowed with any error, and the months keep just their
appointed times. The Romans for a long time, before they had far enlarged
their dominions, were ignorant hereof, and for many ages together being
enwrapped with obscure doubts and difficulties, wavered then most in the deep
mist of errors, when they had transferred upon the priests the power and
authority of d Intercalation: who gladly gratifying the Publicans or suitors
at law for their commodities, at their pleasure abridged or augmented the
times. And beside this, there arose many other deceivable errors, which to
relate I think it now superfluous. All which abuses Octavian Augustus having
abolished, in imitation of the Greeks reformed the disorder, and composed this
inconstancy, by collecting together with great deliberation the spaces of
twelve months and six hours: and so the Sun running by eternal motion
through the houses of the twelve signs, concludes the space of the whole
year. The reason of which odd day in the Leap year being thus allowed, Rome
also (which by the help of Almighty God is to live so long as the world shall
last) has established. Wherefore let us proceed to the rest.

CHAP. III. Valentinian before the whole army is pronounced sovereign ruler
of the Empire, whiles some can hardly brook it, whom he in a grave Oration
rebukes and represseth.
WHen this day was past, unmeet (as some think) for important affairs, and the
evening now came on, ordained it was, and proclamation made under pain of
death, by the motion of Sallustius the Prefect, and the ready assent of all
men, That no person in place of high authority, or suspected to aspire unto
great matters, should the next morning go forth of doors in honorable habit.
And when with the irksome weariness of many, who were vexed with vain vows,
at length the night was ended, and day begun, all the soldiers assembled
together, and Valentinian went forth into the plain field: where being
permitted to mount up to the Tribunal erected on high, in show of a Parliament
assembly, and with most forward good will of all that were present, he was
pronounced as a grave personage, Governor of the Empire. And anon being
invested in regal robes, crowned also and styled [Augustus] with ample
praises, such as sweet noveltie could devise, he addressed himself to make a
premeditate speech, and as he put forth his arm, that he might speak more
readily, there arose a great mumbling, with a noise of the Centuries, Maniples,
and all the Cohorts, urging instantly, that out of hand there might a second
Emperor be declared with him. Which albeit many thought was done by the
corruption of some few, in favor of those that had been rejected, yet by this
one thing it seemed they were utterly deceived, because the cry went not as
voices purchased with money, but like an uniforme accord of the whole multitude
wishing and willing one thing; as fearing much by the fresh example they had of
late, the frailty and brittlenesse of high fortunes. Then from secret
whisperings it appeared evidently, that there was a more violent tumult raised
of the army, making a mighty noise; and doubted it was, what the soldiors
confident boldness might prove, which otherwhiles breaks out into
mischievous actions. Which Valentinian fearing more than all others, least it
should come to pass indeed, holding happily up his right hand as a most hardy
and redoubted prince, daring to rebuke some of them as seditious and stubborn,
delivered his mind without interruption of any in this manner. Most valiant
defendors of the provinces, I rejoice and acknowledge now, and ever shall, that
your virtues have conferred upon me, as the worthiest of all others, the rule
of the Roman world, without any hope or desire at all of mine. That therefore
which lay in your power to do, when there was not yet any Governor of the
Empire elected, ye have profitably and with glory performed, in taking him to
the highest pitch of honor, whom from the prime of his youth, even to this
ripeness of years, ye knew by experience to have lived in much honor and
integrity. Wherefore listen (I pray you) with quiet and peaceable ears, what
after mine opinion in plain and simple words delivered, is expedient for the
Commonweal. That there ought against all chances whatsoever a colleague to
be joined in fellowship of authority, sundry considerations so requiring, I
neither make doubt nor gainesay, as who even my self also, being a man, fear
heaps of cares and sundry changes of accidents. But we must with our whole
power endeavor to have peace, by which even the least things become mighty:
and that will easily be obtained, if your patience, joined with equity, shall
willingly yield that unto me which belongs unto my charge. For, as I hope,
Fortune (the adiutrice of good purposes) will give the same unto me, seeking
diligently (so much as I am able to effect and attain unto) after a
temperature and moderation. For, as wise and learned men define this point, not
only in the matter of an Empire, where the greatest dangers are, and those
happening most often, but also in private and daily affairs, when any wise man
has judged a stranger meet for his friendship, he ought then to take him, and
not when he has taken him, then to judge of him. Thus much promise I, with
hope of more prosperous proceedings. As for you, retaining still your constant
and faithful doings, while Winters repose gives leave, repair the vigor of
mind and body both, who forthwith are to receive your due, for declaring and
saluting me Augustus. The Emperor having ended this speech, which an
unexpected authority had made more confident, won them all to his mind: and
they following his way and advice, who a little before with most earnest voice
required another thing, conducted him (environed round about with standards and
banners, royally also guarded with companies of diverse degrees and states, and
now terrible to see to) into the palace.

CHAP. IIII. Apronianus P^^fect or Governor of Rome, puts Poysoners and
Sorcerers to death.
WHiles the volubilitie of inconstant fortune produces these occurre^ces in
the East parts, Apronianus an upright and severe judge, who then ruled Rome,
among other principal and important matter, with which this Praefectship is
often troubled, chiefly set his mind and whole endevor upon this, That
Sorcerers (who then began to spring up here and there) being apprehended, and
openly convicted, after examinations and trials past, that they had done hurt
to some, and having discovered also such as were privy unto them, should be
put to death: and so with the peril of a few, for fear of the like measure,
to drive the rest away, if happily any lay close hidden And this he did (by
report) the more effectually, for that himself being promoted by the choice of
Julian, who then abode in Syria, had lost one of his eyes in his journey: and
suspecting that he was laid at by these wicked arts and practices, upon a just
grief verily, but yet unusual, he made diligent inquisition after these and
other the like: whereupon he was thought of some over-rigorous and cruel, in
that he would seem to look into these criminal matters in the highest
degree, even in the race of the Amphitheatre, where otherwhiles the commons
flock and conflow together like so many waves. In the end, after many such
like offenses punished, he condemned to loose his head Hilarious a
chariot-runner, convicted, and that upon his own confession, That he had put
forth a son of his, scarce undergrowne, unto a Sorcerer, to be taught
certain secret casts forbidden by law, so as that without the privitie of any
one he might by himself have the help of some hidden and inward means: who,
as the executioner had but slender hold of him, slipping suddenly away from
under his hand, fled for sancturie to a chapp^ll of the Christians, and being
pulled out from thence, had forthwith his head stricken off. But these and such
like heinous practices, by order then taken for, to be punished streighwaies,
men were wary to commit, and none or very few offenders in these foul and
odious crimes insulted over the public justice: but in the time ensuing long
impunitie nourished lewd enormities, and licentiousness grew to so great an
head, that a certain Senator followed the example of Hilarious; and proved it
was against him, even almost by his own handwriting, That he had put unto a
teacher of these cursed crafts a servant of his, for to be inducted and
schooled in these horrible secrets, and was feign to buy out his punishment
with a round sum of money, as the report commonly went. And this selfsame
party now, delivered and freed from this kind of slander that went of him,
whereas he should have been ashamed of his life and fault committed,
endeavored not to wipe away this stain; but, as if he alone, among many
reproachful persons had been void of all offense, mounted upon a rich trapped
horse, and prauncing over the paved streets, draws after him, being but one
man, many troops of servants and pages, affecting by a certain new kind of
badge and cognizance, more earnestly to be gazed at: like as we have heard,
that Duillius in old time, after those glorious battles which he fought at
sea, took thus much upon him, as to return home unto his house after supper
with a minstrell piping softly before him. Howbeit, under this Apronianus there
was such plenty from time to time of all necessaries, that there could not so
much as any grumbling at all be heard for want of victuals: a thing that
falls out continually in Rome.

CHAP. v. Valentinian takes unto him to be Colleague in the Empire, his
brother Valens: and when he was come to Constantinople pronounces him
Augustus. Throughout the whole Roman world there be troubles and commotions of
the people, which the Emperors endeavor to quench.
But Valentinian declared Emperor, as I have before said in Bithynia, after he
had given forth the signal of setting forward in his journey against the third
day following, and assembled the chief governors and officers of the camp,
intending, as it were, wholly to follow such designements and counsels as were
right Qua sibi plas^nti^
pleasing to himself, did put to question and demanded, Who it was that must
be assumed into the fellowship of the Empire? and when all the rest held their
peace, Dagala^phus General of the horsemen for the time being, boldly answered
thus, If thou love thine own (quoth he) most gracious Emperor, thou have a
brother: if the Commonwealth make further inquiry for another. At which words
he was angry, but saying never a word, and concealing what he thought, after
he had travailed apace, he entered Nicomedia the first day of March, and there
with the dign^tie of a Tribuneship, made his brother great Master of his
stable. And when he was come from thence to Constantinople, casting many
things in his mind, and considering that he now was about to manage great and
urgent affairs, he supposed there was no lingering about the matter, but
producing the same Valens to a place by the city side, with one general
accord of all (for no man durst say against him) pronounced him Augustus: and
being adorned and invested in Imperial robes, and wearing a diadem about his
head, he brought him back in the same chariot with him: one verily, who was a
lawful partner with him in power and authority, but yet duetifull unto him, as
if he had been a Sergeant, or such like attendant officer, as the process of
mine History shall declare. Which businesses thus brought to an end, without
trouble and interruption by any one, both the Emperors having been long sick
of hot burning agues, when there was assured hope of life, as they were more
industrious to look into businesses than to compose them, granted out a
commission to make strait inquiry into the suspicious causes of their
sickness, unto Vrsatius Master of the offices, a fierce and cruel Dalmatian,
and to Iuventius Siscianus, at that time Questor, raising matter of envy and
malice, as the constant bruit went, unto the memory of prince Julian, and to
his friends, as if they had by some secret practice been hurt. But this storm
soon blew over and came to nothing: for there was not so much as a word found
to lead unto any presumption or suspicion of traitorous dealing. At this time,
as if the trumpets had sounded the battle throughout all the Roman world,
most fell and savage nations rose up in arms, and invaded the next limits unto
them. The Austri^, Carinthi^, Car^iola, and (...).
Alemans wasted at once both Gaul and Rhaetia: the Sarmatians and Quadi made
spoil in Pannonia both the one and the other. The Picts, Saxons, Scots, and
Attacots, infested the Britans with continual troubles. The Austorians and
other Maurite nations made rodes more fiercely than they had wont, into
Affricke. Certain bands of Gothicke Brigands and rovers rifled and ransacked
Thracia. The king of Persia laid violent hands upon the Armenians, hastening by
all forcible means to reduce them a fresh to his own dominion, but unjustly;
pretending and alleging thus much, that after the decease of Iovianus, with
whom he had established league and peace, there ought to be nothing to the
contrary, but that he might recover those things which he showed to have
before time appertained unto his ancestors. After therefore that the Winter
was passed over in quietness and peace, the two Emperors agreeing most
jointly together, the one in name having pre-eminence, the other, for outward
show, equal in honor, after they had passed through Thracia, came to Naessum,
where, in a certain Suburbian country town which is called Mediana, and
stands three miles from the city, as if they meant shortly to part, divided
their Comites between them. And verily unto Valentinian, after whose will and
direction the State was managed, f^ll Iovinus, promoted a good while since by
Julian to be Master of the men of or horsemen.
Arms in Gaul, and Dagalaiphus whom Iovian had preferred to be Colonel of
the footmen. But to follow Valens into the East, was Victor appointed, who also
by the choice and judgment of the foresaid Prince, had been advanced, and
with him was joined Arintheus. For, Lupicinus promoted likewise before by
Iovian, to be Master of the horsemen, had the charge of the East parts. Then
also was Equitius made Colonel of the army that served in Illiricum, not or
General.
Master as yet, but Comes. And Serenianus, who long since was discharged of his
military oath, entered into arms and warfare again, as being a Pannon^an,
accompanied Valens, and became captain over the company or band of the
Domestici. Which things thus digested and ordered, there was a partition made
also of the military bands: and after this, when both Princes entered into
Sirmium, and had divided their Palatine train, as it was thought good unto the
elder and better of the twain, so that Valentinian departed to Millain, and
Valens to Constantinople. And verily in the East parts governed Sallustius as
Prefect: but Mamertinus ruled in the same authority both Italy, Affricke, and
Illyricum, like as Germanus the Provinces of Gaul.

CHAP. VI. Whiles Valentinian intends to make war upon the Alemans,
Procopius in the East parts aspireth to be Emperor: Whereupon Valentinian was
busied with new cares.
WHiles therefore the two Princes kept their resiance in the said cities, they
put on their first Consular robes of Estate: and all this year was the Roman
Empire afflicted with grievous losses and damages. For, the Alemans brake
through the limits of Germany, provoked thereto with a more mischievous mind
than usually they had been, upon this occasion: Whereas upon their ambassadors
sent unto the Princes court, there should have been bestowed of duty certain
set gifts appointed by custom, allowance was made of smaller, and those of
less value than had been used: which they, when they should receive, faring
in furions manner, flung away, as a most shameful indignity offered unto
them: and after they had been ve^ie roughly entreated by Vrsatius the Master
of the offices, an angry and cruel man, they re^^rned home, and aggravating
this fact, stirred up most fell nations, as if they had been contumeliously
despised, to rebellion. And about that time, or not long after, Procopius in
the East rose up in arms, and plot^ed to usurp the Empire. Which news
happening near about the the first day.
Kalends of November, were reported the very same day unto Valentinian, as he
was coming to Paris. And for the Alemans verily he commanded Dagalaiphus to
march forward with speed, and to make head against them: who having wasted the
places nearer at hand, were departed and gone a great way off, without loss of
blood. But about the repressing of the design and attempt of Procopius before
it might grow to greater strength, he was distracted with doubtful cares, and
in this regard especially troubled, for that he wist not whether he affected
and reached at the foresaid Empi^e, whiles Valens was alive, or after his
death. For Equitius, upon relation and intelligence given by Antonius a Tribune
(who had the command of the forces in the mid-land parts of Dacia) which gave
knowledge of nothing but the occurrent it self, and that obscurely upon
hearsay, had also himself before the thing was known for certain, in bare
words acquainted the Prince with what was done. Upon knowledge hereof
Valentinian having honored the said Equitius with the dignity of Great
Master, or General, purposed to return unto Illyricum, least the rebel
become dread now after the overrunning of Thracia, should in hostile manner
make rodes into Pannonia. For, exceedingly terrified he was with the late and
fresh example, as calling to mind how Julian a little before (contemning that
Emperor who every where in civil war went away on the winning hand) before
he was either feared or expected, passed with incredible celeritie from one
city to another. But as hot set as he was upon return, yet his heat became
allaied by the counsel and advice of those about him, persuading and
beseeching him, not to expose Gaul unto the barbarous enemies, threatening as
they did nothing but deadly mischief; nor upon this pretense and allegation to
forsake the Provinces needing his helping hand: And together with them joined
the ambassadors of noble cities, praying and entreating him not to leave the
said Provinces in this hard and doubtful estate, unprotected and without
defense, which with his personal presence he might deliver out of great
dangers, by affrighting the Germans only with the majesty of his name. At
length, pondering thoroughly and with good advisement, the utiliti^ of the
thing, as bending and framing himself to yield unto the opinions of many, he
otherwhiles would say, That Procopius was enemy indeed but only to himself
and his brother, whereas the Alemans were to the whole Roman world and Empire,
and so determined not to stir any whither for the time without the confines
of the Gauls, being gone forward already as far as to Remes: Yet having a
careful regard of Affricke, least the enemies should suddenly break into it,
he took order that Vulterius, afterward Consul, then Notarie, should go to
the defense thereof, as also Masaurio, one of the Domestici Protectores, upon
this consideration, that being brought up there in times past under his father
Cretio a Lieutenant or Captain.
Comes, he knew all the suspected and dangerous places: and with these he
joined Gaudentius a Scutarius, whom he knew of old to be true and faithful
unto him. Now, for that there were most woeful tempests and storms up in both
parts of the Empire at one and the self same time, we will digest every thing
in due place; first reporting what was done in the East, and then relating the
Barbarian wars [in the West:] For that the most part of these occurrences
fell out in the same months, both in the West, and also in the East part of
the world: least whiles we make have by leaps to return other whiles out of
one place to another, we should in a confusion of all, enwrap the order and
course of the story with very foul obscurity.

CHAP. VII. What this Procopius was, and by what devises and policies he went
about to usurp the Empire.
PRocopius descended of noble parentage, borne and brought up in Cilicia, in
this regard that he was near of kin unto Julian afterward Emperor, from his
very first degree arose and showed himself: and as one for his life and
behavior very orderly and precise (although he was of a close and silent
carriage) serving in the wars a long time in good credit and show in quality
of a Notarie and Tribune, and now being next in place unto the best and chief
officers, after the death of Constantius, in that change of the world aspired
high: as who was a kinsman of the Emperors, and raunged in the rank and
fellowship of the Comites. And apparent it was, that he, if ever it mightlye in
his power, would trouble the quiet estate of the Commonwealth another day. This
Procopius, Julian when he entered into Persia had left behind him him with
strong regiments of soldiers in Mesopotamia, joining to him in equal power
Sebastianus: and had given him in charge, as whispered it was by a dark report
(for there was no certain author to be seen of this mandate) that he should
deal according to the course of things and occurrents known: and if he
perceived at any time the ayds of the Roman State to go down the wind, he
should take order, that himself with all speed might be nominated and styled
Emperor. Who carrying himself in civil and wary wise in the managing of
that which was enjoined unto him, when he understood of the death of Julian,
upon a false rumor running abroad, that the same Julian lying at the very
point of death, delivered thus much, That it was his mind and pleasure, that
the government of the Empire should be put into the hands of Procopius,
fearing least for this cause he should be killed, without process of law and
condemnation, got himself out of sight: but terrified most of all after the
death of Iovianus the chief of all the Notaries; whom upon the decease of
Julian nominated by some few soldiers as worthy of the Empire, and suspected
afterward to aspire thereunto, he understood to have been with much torment
put to death. And for that he had learned how himself was with great diligence
laid for, to avoid the heavy load of grievous envy, he departed out of the
way (as I said) into remote and secret parts. And when he perceived that
Iovianus the Emperor had his spies abroad, to seek out his lu^king holes, and
was beside weary of this manner of life: for, being cast down from an high
estate to a low degree, he was sore pinched also with hunger in ill favored
and foul countries: he wanted the speech and conference with men: and driven
in the end to extreme necessity, by journeying through wilds and by-ways, he
came into the territory about Chalcedon, where because that seemed unto him a
sure place of refuge, he kept himself close with a most trusty friend one
Strategius, who of a Palatine souldior was become a Senator: going many times
secretly, as he might, between his house and Constantinople, as it appeared
evidently by the same Strategius, who disclosed all, after that there had been
often inquisition made into the adherents of that faction. After the guise
therefore of a most cunning and subtle spy, altogether unknown (in visage,
he looked so poor and lean) he harkened after all the flying rumors that
began then to run thick abroad (as commonly things at their first beginning
be eve^ more distasteful) bruited by many persons, who seemed to blame Valens,
as if he were hot and greedily bent to make spoil of other men's goods: to the
enkindling of whose rigor and cruelty, there was a mischievous firebrand
ready at hand, his his wives father.
father in law Petronius, promoted with a sudden jumpe from being a captain
of the soldiers ^ Martenses, to be a f Patritian, a man in mind and habit of
body deformed. Who being wonderfully sharpe-set to strip all men without any
respect, even to their very skins, after exquisit torments bound the innocent
as well as the offenders with fourfold bonds, raking and scraping for debts
due even from the very days of Aurelianus the Emperor, and sorrowing
exceedingly, if he had absolved or enlarged any, without receiving some hurt
and damage. Whose intolerable conditions this mischief also made the worse,
for that being enriched with the piteous sorrows of other men, he was
inexorable and cruel: as he carried also an enraged heart, so he was therewith
most rude and untaught, not fit at any time either to yield or admit reason:
more odious than Cleander; who governing as Prefect under the Emperor
Commodus, in a high strain (as it were) of outrage and madness, made havocke
(as we read) of diverse men's estates: more grievous and irksome than
Plautianus; who being likewise Prefect under Severus, swelling and puffed up
beyond all measure, would have made a confusion of all things, had he not died
upon the revenging edge of the sword. These lamentable proceedings, which by
the instigation and setting on of Petronius under Valens, had shut up many
houses as well of poor as rich, and the more horrible fear of mischiefs
toward, stuck close to the very heart root of the provincial people and
soldiers both, who groned under these burdens alike: and every man wished for
a day, though in dark and secret terms, and that with joint groans on all
hands, that by the help of the highest God there might be an alteration in the
State. Which Procopius closely taking vantage of, and supposing that when that
blessed and happy day should come, with small ado he might be taken up to the
very top of the highest dignity, lay close in espiall, waiting as a savage
beast for his prey, ready forthwith to bounce out, if it could see that which
might be caught. Unto whom, so eagre of the bit, Fortune ministered this
occasion in exceeding good season, to make up his mouth.

CHAP. VIII. Whiles Valens is far removed by occasion of war against the
Goths, Procopius putting forward his intended business, is by tumultuarie
acclamations saluted Emperor.
WHen Winter was spent, Valens speeding himself apace toward Syria, and being
now entered the marches of Bithynia, was informed by the relation and reports
made from the Lord-marchers, That the Goths, a nation at that time unfoyled
and not meddled with, and the same most cruelly banding together, were putting
their forces in readiness, to invade the confines and borders of Thracia. This
being known, to the end that himself in person might without any let go
forward whither he meant, commanded a sufficient aid of horse and foot both to
be sent unto those places, wherein it was feared there would be any rodes of
the barbarous enemies. When the prince therefore was far remooved, Procopius
worn away with long miseries, supposing any grievous death more easy and
tolerable than the painful afflictions which he endured, threw at a venture
the dye, and hazarded at one cast all perils whatsoever: and in a desperate
resolution leading the way, nothing at all afraid now to suffer any
extremities, sets in hand with a most bold enterprise. The g Divitenses and
Tungritani of the younger sort and later enrolment, appointed among others to
make have unto the urgent service in Thracia, and purposing to abide after the
solemn manner two days in Constantinople, he hastened to solicit by the
mediation of some out of the same companies with whom he was acquainted
(because it was a perilous and difficult matter to speak with them all) and
made choice of some few to put in trust: who being won through the hope of
great rewards, promised and bound it with a religious oath, to do whatsoever
he willed them; yea, and gave their word for the favor also and assistance of
their fellow soldiers, among whom themselves carried a great sway, and might
do much by persuasion, as having the greatest pay, and being of best desert.
According to appointment, and when it was fair day light, the said Procopius
distracted into sundry cogitations, went to the Baines h Anastasianae, so
called of Constantines sister, where he knew the military ensigns were
bestowed, and being informed by those that were privy to their secret
counsels, that all of them, upon an association made in the night, agreed to
side with him, with assurance of safe conduct being gladly admitted unto them,
environed he was with a multitude thronged together of vendible or sale
soldiers, by way of honor I must needs say, but yet pent up amongst them as
one besieged: who, like as the Praetorian cohort in times past, after the death
of Pertinax, received Iulianus, cheapening (as one would say) the imperial
dignity, and making offer what price he would give for it: even so they also,
bent to every thing that would yield them advantage and profit, defended
Procopius, plotting to enter upon an unfortunate soveraignetie. He stood
therefore among them as one half pined and consumed (a man would have taken
him to have been a ghost raised from the dead) by reason that a rich regal
mantle would no where be found, clad in a coat beset with embossed gold, like
unto one of these kings yeomen of the guard.
servants, arrayed from the heel to the share in manner of a nice and pretty
page, wearing also purple shoes and hose: and as he bare a javelin or spear
in his right hand, so he carried in the left a pretty piece of purple cloth; so
as one would have thought, that in a stage play within the Theater, either some
notable image and counterfeit through the tapistrie curtains, or else a
mocking delusion to make folk laugh, suddenly came forth and appeared. Well
then, being thus after a ridiculous manner lifted up to this degree, in
disgrace (as it were) and mockery of all honors, and by way of servile
flattery having made a speech unto the authors of this benefit and advancement
of his, yea, and promised unto them great riches and dignities for this hansell
and first fruits (as it were) of his Empire, forth he went in procession into
the streets, guarded with a multitude of armed men: and there in stately port
he marched on with the ensigns borne aloft upright, enclosed on every side
with a dreadful noise of shields and targuets, clattering in doleful wise:
which they, for fear least from the high houses they should be pelted with
stones or broken tyles, fitted close and thick to the crests of their helmets.
As for himself, going timorously as he did, the people neither withstood nor
favored: howbeit, ravished they were with a sudden pleasure and joy in such
a noveltie, a thing naturally given to most of the vulgar sort: and this was
the rather set on foot, because (as I said before) all folk with one mind
detested Petronius, growing on to such wealth by violent means: as who raised
up against diverse orders and degrees of citizens new troubles and suits; yea,
and revived bills and writings of debt long since buried. When as therefore the
said Procopius was mounted up to the Tribunal, and by reason that all the
people looked down on the ground, and stood astonished (which silence of theirs
gave suspicion of some mischief toward) supposing there was prepared now (as
he feared) a readier way to his death, by reason of a trembling that went over
all his joints (being of himself not ready of speech) he stood a long time
silent. Yet after he had now begun to say somewhat with an interrupt and dead
voice, whereby he pretended his near alliance unto the blood and line
imperial, with a low whispering of some few that were hired thereto of purpose,
and afterward with tumultuarie noises and cries of the common people, being
named Emperor, disorderly and in great have he went to the the Senate house.
Curia: where finding none there of claris^^morum.
Senators degree, but some few, and those ignoble and base persons, he went
apace, but with a most unfortunat and wicked foot, and so entered the palace.

CHAP. IX. Valens hearing of this bold action of Procopius, changes his
purpose: Procopius by sundry crafty devices, and in the end by an army levied
and assembled, provideth for himself.
SOme marvel, I assure you, that such ridiculous beginnings, unwisely and
rashly taken in hand, have broken forth in the end, to the woeful calamities of
Commonweal; as ignorant perhaps of former precedents, supposing the same to
have happened then first, and never before. Thus Andriscus the Adramytene, a
base fellow, and of the meanest condition, raised up to the very name of or
counterfeit name of Philip.
Pseudophilippus, was the cause of the third grievous and bloody Macedonian
war. Thus whiles Macrinus the Emperor abode in Antioch, Heliogabalus i came
forth of H^man and Hamsa. Bellon.
Emesa, and became Antoninus. So also by an unexpected assault made by
Maximinus, was k Alexander, together with Mammaea, stabbed to death. In
Afric, the elder Gordian, haled by force to usurp the Empire, for very
trouble and anguish of imminent dangers strangled himself with an halter, and
ended his life. Well, procured there were and taken in to the doubtful issue
of this strange occurrence, some against their wills, and some willingly,
C^p^diarum vili^^ mercatores: happily he means caters, and such like officers
for provision.
merchants of trifling cates and such as gave attendance within the palace, or
had given over to wait: those also who having been enrolled soldiers, had
betaken themselves now to a more quiet life. And there were again, who
supposing all conditions of life better than the present State, slipped away
secretly from the city, and with speedy journeyes made have unto the
Emperors camp. All these, Sophronius, then a Notarie, Prefect afterward of
Constantinople, outstript and prevented by riding most swiftly, and turned
back into Galatia, Valens, ready then to depart from Caesarea in Cappadocia,
intending now, that the hot and sultring constitution of the weather in
Cilicia was allayed, to go through, and that with speed, to the habitation and
seat of Antioch: him, I say, he averted from his journey, after he had declared
the whole order of the proceedings aforesaid unto him, much troubled and
astonished, as he was, by reason of his doubtful hopes, (as in such cases it is
an ordinary thing) and minding to take hold of these matters, yet standing
upon fearful and ticklish terms. But whiles he makes speed and takes
great journeyes, Procopius with most earnest and watchful care from day to day
spent the whole nights, showing abroad certain suborned and counterfeit
persons, who with confident boldness faining, that they were come, some out of
the East, others out of Gaul, brought word, that Valentinian was dead; yea,
and gave it out in plain terms, that all lay clear and open for this new
and much favored prince to enter upon. And because such rebellious usurpations
of Empires malapartly taken in hand, are wont otherwhiles to be strengthened
with quick dispatch, least any thing should be omitted that might strike a
terror, forthwith Nebridius, newly by the faction of Petronius promoted in the
rowme of Sallustius to be Praefectus Praetorio, and Caesarius Prefect of the
city Constantinople, were cast into prison and laid up fast: and Phronemius
had commandment to rule the city after the wonted government, and Euphrasius
to be master of the Offices; both of them Gauls, and men most approved for
their erudition and learning: and the managing of military and campe-affaires
was committed very inconsiderately (as the end showed which bewrays what
things are) unto Gomoarius and Agilo, who were called back again to take a
new oath of souldiorie. And because Julius the captain or liuetenant.
Comes having charge of the forces in Thracia, was like from the near stations
to suppress these rebels, if he understood once of their attempts, and
therefore feared, there was this effectual and cunning policy devised; and
he, by commandment as it were of Valens, being sent for to Constantinople by
the letters of Nebridius (as yet in prison) violently wrung from him, under a
color to treat about the troubles of the barbarous enemies, was there detained
in strait hold close prisoner. And by this crafty and deceitful fetch the
warlike nation of Thracia being without bloodshed won to the side, brought
exceeding great aid and maintenance to these tumultuarie attempts. After which
so achieved with prosperous success, Araxius also by laboring those of the
palace, and procuring of their voices, became Praefectus Praetorio: and Agilo,
who married his daughter, helped him forward also, with his good word: many
others likewise were admitted to sundry places and employments in court, as
also to the administration of provinces, some against their wills, others of
their own accord offering themselves with money and rewards in hand. And, as
it usually falls out in civil and domestical dissentions, diverse rose up
even out of the very dunghill and rascalitie, directed only by desperate and
blind projects: contrariwise, some again there were, who being nobly borne,
fell from high estates down to very death and exile. Now, when as by these and
such like practices there seemed to be a faction firmly framed, it remained
that there should be good store of military forces raised: and easily was that
brought about, a thing that diverse times in public broils and commotions
has hindered brave exploits, enterprised even upon just and lawful motives.
For the troops and companies as well of horsemen as footmen which were levied
through Thracia, to perform the expedition as they passed along, being
courteously and liberally entreated, and all assembled together, so as they
made a show of an army, gaping after most large promises, under pain of
cursed execrations swore allegiance unto Procopius, promising in their behalf
this constant resolution, That they would not fail, but defend him with their
own arms and forces. And verily he met with a very fit occasion and
opportunity to allure them unto his part, for that himself carrying all about
with him in his own arms a little daughter of Constantius (whose fresh
memorial was highly honored) pretended kindred even with Julian. He found also
another thing, that suited very fitly with the present time: for that he did
upon him the ornaments of Imperial vesture, when as Faustina mother of the
said girl was by a certain mere chance present in place. To these he
adjoyneth another piece of policy, which with all diligence was to be put in
practice; namely, certain picked men for the nonce, and foole-hardie, were
sent to seize upon Illyricum, trusting upon no other help but malapert
sauciness, who, forsooth, handsomely devised certain pieces of gold made with
the stamp of the new Emperors face, beside other means of allurements: Whom
Equitius, General of the forts in those countries apprehended and put to
diverse sorts of death. And then fearing the like practices, he stopped up three
most narrow ways and passages, by which the Northern provinces are assailed,
the one by Dacia Along the rivage for difference of Mediterranea, i. the inland
country
Ripensis, a second, and that right will known, by Succi, and the third by the
Macedonians, which they term l (...). And by this wary prevention the
usurper of an undue and unlawful government, being put quite beside his vain
conceit and persuasion to get Illyricum into his hands, lost great means of
maintaining wars.

CHAP. X. The legions armed against Procopius, and ready to fight, through his
seditious words as it were, enchaunted and bewitched, are wrought against
Valens and Valentinian, and acknowledge Procopius for Emperor. After this he
gains to his side Nicea and Bithynia. Valens having escaped extremity of
danger, by his best and most select captains encountreth the rebels.
WHiles these things are thus in contriving Valens astonished at so heavy and
fearful news, and now in his return through Gallograecia, hearing how
things went at Constantinople, marched diffidently and in much fear: and
considering this sudden affright confounded all the ways of providence and
forecast, so much was he discouraged and cast down, that he thought once to
throw away his Imperial robes, as an heavy burden. And so had he done indeed,
but that through the gainsaying and opposition of his inward friends next about
him, he was dissuaded from that base and unseemely purpose, and strengthened
with the advice and opinions of the better sort, commanded two regiments to
go before, named Iovij and Victores, for to break into the rebels camp. As
these now drew near, Procopius being retired from Nicea, whither he was lately
come, having in his company the m Divitenses, and a confused rabble of rebels
and revolts, which almost in six days space he had gathered together, he made
have to Mygdus, a place watered with the river Sangari, Bellon. Zagari, Nigr.
Sangarius: where, when the legions were ready to join battle and fight,
among those that discharged arrows and other shot to and fro, he alone, as if
he meant to advance forward, and by way of skirmish to charge the enemies,
brake out into the mids before them all: and such was the guidance of his good
fortune, that seeming to agnize one Vitalianus out of the opposite battle (and
whether he knew him or no uncertain it is) after greeting in the Latin tongue,
he gently led him forth, and after he had given him his right hand, and saluted
him with a kiss, when they were all on both sides amazed hereat, Lo (quoth he)
the ancient fidelity of the Roman Armies, and the oaths bound with
firmereligious complements. And is it indeed your mind and pleasure, most
valiant warriors, that for unknown strangers so many swords should be drawn
of your own country men; and that a base and misbegotten Hungarian.
Pannonian, marring and treading down all under foot, should enjoy an Empire
which he never durst so much as conceive in his mind or wish for, and that we
should groan under your and our wounds? Nay, rather follow the royal race and
line of the highest blood, raising now most just and lawful war, not to
tyrannize and make havocke of other men's goods, but rather to restore the same
unto the full and whole estate of ancient Majesty. With this mild speech they
were all appeased that came fiercely to fight, and debasing the tops of their
ensigns and standerds, willingly revolted unto him: and with a terrible cry,
which the barbarous sort term Barritus, they styled him Emperor, and in one
consent, with a strong guard about him, as the manner is, brought him back
into the camp, and in souldior-like sort cried unto Jupiter, and prayed, That
Procopius might be invincible. This good success of these rebels had a better
to second it. For, Rumitalca a Tribune, being taken into the society of the
Procopians, and having entered upon the charge of the Palace, and therewith
complotted in good time this design, and communicated it with the soldiers,
came by water to a town before time named Ponto Sabia, and Trapani, Mormotio.
Drepanum, and now Helenopolis, and so from thence possessed himself, sooner
than men would have thought, of Nicea. To the besieging whereof when
Vadomarius, sometime a great leader, and king of the Alemans, was sent, with
such as were skillful in this kind of service, Valens goes forward to
Nicomedia: From whence being departed, very earnest he was with great forces
to assault Chalcedon: from the walls whereof they let fly at him reviling and
reproachful terms, calling him injuriously Sabaiarius: (now is Sabania a
kind of poor folks drink in Illyricum, made of barley or wheat converted into
liquor:) But wearied in the end for want of victuals, and through the exceeding
obstinacy of the defendants within, that would not relent, he was now at the
point to depart: And see, in this mean while, those which were besieged within
Nicea, suddenly setting open the gates, and issuing forth, after they had
slain a great number of the pioners and assailants, with their most hardy and
bold leader Rumitalca, made have in this heat of blood to come upon the back
of Valens (who as yet was not gone from the suburbs of Chalcedon) and to
compass him in round about. And verily effected they had this exploit, but
that by a certain rumor that went before, he having intelligence of this
imminent mischief, with departing speedily by the lake Sunonensis, and the
winding cranks of the river Gatippo, Piner.
Gallus, he deluded the enemy hard at hard at his heels, and following after
him in vain. And by this accident Bithynia likewise was brought under the
hands of Procopius. From whence, when Valens was by speedy journeies returned
to Ancyra, and advertised, that Lupicinus was coming toward the East parts
with certain puissant companies of armed men, being now put in greater hope of
better success, he sent Arintheus a most select captain to encounter the
enemies by the way. Who being come to Dadastana, a certain station wherein
Iovianus dyed, all on a sudden espied Hyperechius ready to affront and and
make head against him with an army, one who before time was truly termed
Apparitor Alluding by way of agnomination to Castrensis, i. Military.
Gastrensis, that is, a A parasite or glutton.
Minister of the belly and throat: unto whom as to a friend Procopius had
committed the conduct of his ayds. And disdaining in fight to vanquish such a
contemptible person, bearing himself bold of his own authority, a goodly
tall personage, commanded the very enemies themselves to bind their ruler. And
so this unfortunat Carpet Knight, a chiefetaine, forsooth, of armed troops, was
apprehended by the hands of his own followers.

CHAP. XI Procopius besieges Cyzicum, and by the good service of Alison a
Tribune wins it by force, as also by keeping in most strait ward Serenianus
the Prefect, sent unto Nicea. Which done, bearing and vaunting himself over
high, he neglects the opportunity of his affairs.
WHiles these affairs in this manner proceed, Venustus a certain Minister or
Officer belonging to the Treasury, under Valens, sent long before to
Nicomedia, for to receive gold, and distribute it as wages poll by poll among
the soldiers that were dispersed all over the East parts, understanding of
this heavy news aforesaid, considering the time was unfit for that business,
went quickly to Chyzico.
Cyzicus with those moneys which he had gathered up; where by chance he found
Serenianus, then or Captain.
Comes of the Domestici, of purpose sent to keep the treasure safe: who with
the help only of a tumultuarie garrison kept the city, well known, even upon
ancient records, to be compassed with imprenable walls: to the winning whereof
Procopius had appointed a strong power, that being lord of Bithynia, he might
be master also of Hellespontus. But by reason that the companies of the
besiegers were oftentimes sore troubled with arrows, bullets, and other shot,
as also for that through the industry of the defendants there was devised a
bar, by a very strong iron chain bestowed in the very mouth of the haven
(which, because the enemies ships armed with piked-beake-heads, might not rush
in, was bound fast at either end) long it was ere the siege took effect. This
chain, after sundry pains that both soldiers and captains took (who
already were out-toiled with most sharp conflicts) one Aliso, a Tribune, and
an expert warrior, cut away by this device. Upon three ships joined together,
he built a roof over head in this manner: Upon the foremost hatches or rowers
banks stood armed men close together with their shields couched thick over
their heads, others also behind them stooping somewhat lower, and a third sort
by degrees bending their bodies down: so as the hindmost resting upon their
houghes or hammes, made a show of an arched building: Which kind of Fabric
against fight from walls, is framed in such a form for this cause, That the
shot of casting weapons and of stones, as they light and fall, might glance and
glide off like shewers of rain, and so take no effect. Thus therefore Aliso
being saved for a while from the violence of darts and other shot, with
mighty strength of body putting underneath a sound pyle or post, with the
huge stroke of an axe so clave and burst the chain aforesaid, that it fell
asunder, and gave a large entrance to the city. And so by the working of this
feat the city lay open and undefended, to the violence of the enemies. For
which cause what time as afterward (Procopius) the author of all this proud
and audacious rebellion, was put to death, and the adherents and accomplices of
this faction cruelly executed, this very Tribune in regard of so noble an
exployt, keeping his life still, and the place he had in warre-service, dyed
long after in Isauria, stabbed and killed by a sort of robbing Brigands. When
Cyzicum was by this service laid open, Procopius made have thither, after
pardon granted in general to all those that had made resistance, only
Serenianus he commanded to be led bound unto Nicea, and there kept in ward
most straightly. And forth with upon Ormisda, a forward and ripe young gentleman,
the son of that noble Ormisda, a [Persian] Prince of the blood royal, he
conferred a Proconsulship, with commission to manage after the manner of old
time, as well civil causes, as war affairs. Who dealing mildly in his place
according to his accustomed manner, when he should have been surprised, and
caught up in a sudden incursion, by those soldiers whom Valens had sent by
the wilds and bywayes of Phrygia, with so vigorous a courage escaped, that
being once embarked he would never lie open to such doubtful and dangerous
chances: and had away with him his wife that followed in safety,
notwithstanding a cloud (as it were) of arrows flew all about, when she was at
the point to be taken prisoner: a wealthy dame she was, and nobly descended,
whose modest carriage and glorious constancy delivered her husband afterward
from extreme dangers. Procopius upon the foresaid victory vaunting himself
above the condition of mortality, and not knowing, that any man be he never so
happy to day, with the turning of Fortunes wheel, may once before evening
become most miserable, commanded the house of Arbetio, full (as it was) by
reason of those inestimable escheats (which house before time he had spared as
his own, as reckoning him for one of his own accomplices and adherents) to be
rifled and ransacked clean, taking stomach and indignation against him, that
being sent for sundry times to come unto him, he always made delays,
alleging for his excuse the lets of old age and sickness. And although for
this cause he, a presumptuous usurper, might well fear some grievous
inclination and turning of the balance: yet whereas he might now at his
pleasure with the willing assent of all men (there being none to make
resistance) have invaded the East provinces, desirous all to see some new
change, as irked with that rigorous and rough government wherewith they were
held under: yet by lingering on, and making longer stay, for to allure unto him
certain cities of Asia, and to choose out skillful miners for the getting of
gold ore, as those that might stand him in good stead against his wars, which
he expected would be many and great, he became dull and blunt in manner of a
keen and fine edged sword: Like as in times past Pescennius Niger, sent for
oftentimes by the people of Rome, to relieve and succor the hope of the State
lying in extremity, whiles he lingered a long time the invading of Syria, was
vanquished in the gulf Golfo de Aiazze
Issicum (which is in Cilicia, where Alexander defeated Darius) and being put
to flight, died by the hand of a common souldior, in a certain Suburbe-village
of Antiochia. These were the acts that passed about mid-Winter, whiles
Valentinian and Valens were Consuls.

CHAP. XII. Valens using the service of Arbetio an old experienced captain,
draws unto him many of Procopius his footmen and horsemen both: At length
Procopius himself bound in chains by his own men, and brought unto Valens,
had his head stricken off, and so buried quite the troubles of a civil war
which was begun.
BVtwhen that most honorable magistracy was transferred to Gratianus as yet a
private person, and to Dagalaiphus, and the Spring began, wherein all things
gather strength, Valens joining unto him Lupicinus, with strong auxiliaries,
speedily advaunced his ensigns toward Possene. Theveto.
Pessinus, a town in times past of Phrygia, and now of Galatia: which when he
had quickly fortified with a garrison, least any unexpected accident might at
unawares arise in those tracts, he intended to take his journey by the foot of
the high hill Olympus, and the rough craggie lanes, minding to set upon
Gomoarius, whiles he lay secure and negligent. But crossed he was in this
design by many, that jointly and resolutely agreed together, upon this
consideration especially, That his enemy (as has been related before) by
carrying about with him in a litter the little daughter of Constantius, with
her mother Faustina, both in the way as he marched, and also when battles
approached one another embattailed, he enkindled the courage of the soldiers,
to the end, that for this imperial progeny, whereto he said moreover that
himself was linked, they might fight more boldly. Like as upon a time the
Macedonians, ready to strike a battle with the Illyrians, placed their king
(as yet an infant in his swathling bands) behind the army raunged in battle
ray; for fear of whom, least he should be carried away captive, they fought
more valiantly, and vanquished their enemies. Against these crafty fetches,
the Emperor in sage policy, to help the matter thus wavering and ready to
reele, took good order, and exhorted Arbetio sometime Consul (who this long
time had lived privately) to repair unto him, to the end that by the reverent
regard of him, a captain under Constantius, the rebels fell stomach might be
appeased. And so it fell out in very deed. For when he, in years elder, and in
dignity higher than all the rest, showed his reverend gray hairs unto many,
that were otherwise inclined to perfidious treachery, he calling Procopius
himself a traiterous rebel to the State; but the soldiers that now followed
his error, sons and parteners with him in travailes and paines-taking long
ago, requested them rather to follow him, as a father known unto them for his
most happy conducts, than to be ruled by a lewd varlet, who would even anon
beforlorne, and at point to take his final overthrow. Which being known,
Gomoarius, when he might well enough have deluded the enemies, and returned
safe to the place from whence he came, taking the vauntage of the near
distance, in pretense and color of a captive passed over to the Emperors
camp, as if he had been beset with the rode of a multitude, that he
suddenly espied. Upon this good success, Valens marched on with a running
camp toward Phrygia; and near unto Einagiol. Louncl.
Nacolia, when they were come to join battle, the captain of the adverse
side Agilo, at the very instant of a doubtful fight, by riding suddenly out
of the rank, betrayed all: and in imitation of him a number of others now
shaking their javelins and swords, go over to the Emperor, bearing their
banners and shields reversed: a most manifest sign of revolt. This being once
seen besides all men's expectation, Procopius perceiving himself cut off from
all means of escape, betook him to his heels, and ran within the secret
noukes of the woods and woulds that stood round about: and after him there
followed Florentius, and Barchalba a Tribune, whom being well known for his
service in most bloody wars, even from Constantius his days, necessity,
and not his own will, had drawn into this leawd and wicked action. When as
therefore the greater part of the night was past, and the Moon, which from
evening shone until day light, augmented their fear, Procopius seeing on
every side himself destitute of all means of escaping, not knowing what to
do (as it falls out commonly in such hard cases) expostulated with his
lamentable and heavy fortune: and so, over whelmed with a world of sundry
cares, was suddenly by his own companions fast bound, and upon the return
now of day brought into the camp, and presented to the Emperor, saying never
a word, and looking downward; and immediately having his head smitten off, he
buried with him the troubles of civil discords that were growing: according to
the example of Perpenna in old time; who after that he had murdered Sertorius
as he sat at his meat, having enjoyed a while the Soveraignetie, was plucked
forth of the shrubs under which he had shrouded himself, and being brought
before Pompeius, at his commandment was slain. And in the like heat of
blood, Florentius and Barchalba, who brought him in, were streightwayes killed,
without any regard and consideration had of reason. For, if they had betrayed
their lawful prince, even Justice her self would have pronounced, they were
rightly killed: if a rebel and enemy of civil peace (as he was named to be)
they ought to have had ample and large rewards given them for so memorable an
act. Now, Procopius departed this life, when he was forty years old and ten
months over: a man not uncomely of body, nor of mean stature, somewhat
stouping, and in his gate looking always downward to the ground, and by his
close and sad behavior, like for all the world to that Crassus, of whom
Lucillius and Tully make this report, That he laughed but once all his life
time: and that which is to be wondered, so long as he lived, not stained with
bloodshed.

CHAP. XIII. Marcellus captain of Nicea, after that Serenianus was slain, and
Chalcedonpossessed, takes upon him the shadow of a deadly and woeful
Emperor: but within a little after is suppressed. Then was there cruel
proceeding against the accomplices of Procopius and Marcellus, and that beyond
all measure: for which Valens, an implacable man, whose greatest fault it was,
deserved blame: whose cruelty here is described.
Near about the same time, Marcellus a Protector, and a cousin of the same
Procopius, captain also of the garrison at Nicea, having intelligence given
him of the soldiers revolt, and death of Procopius, came upon Serenianus at
unawares in the dead time of midnight, shut where he was within the palace,
and slew him; whose death was the life of many: for, if he had survived this
victory, being a man rough hewn, rude of behavior, and for resemblance of
conditions and vicinitie of native soil well accepted of Valens, observing the
close disposition and pleasure of the prince, too much inclined to cruelty,
would no doubt have massacred many innocent persons: who being slain,
Marcellus aforesaid riding presently unto Chalcedon, and seizing it into his
own hands, at the cry and shout of some few, whom their base condition and
desperate estate thrust forward to mischief, takes upon him the momentanie
shadow of an Emperor, that cost him his life; induced thereto by two motives,
which failed and deceived him: for that both the three thousand Goths, which
upon the pacification of the kings were sent to aid Procopius, pretending that
he was of kin unto Constantius, he thought might be brought with some small
reward and consideration to side with him; and also, for that the proceedings
in Illyricum were as yet unknown. Amid these fearful occurrences, Equitius
being given to understand by faithful espials, That the preparation of the
whole war was turned upon Asia, departing by Succi, assayed by great force
and violence to open Philippopolis, called in old time Eumolpiada, shut up and
kept by the enemies garrisons, a city of very great importance, and like to
impeach his coming, in case he should be forced when he was to bring the aids
that were left behind unto Valens (for as yet he knew not what had been done
at Nacolia) to hasten unto Haemimontum. But a little while after, when the
vain presumption and usurpation of Marcellus was known, there were sent
adventurous and resolute soldiers, who having apprehended him, cast him into
safe custody, as a slave yielded up for to receive punishment. Whereupon the
next day following he was brought forth, and after his n sides were most
cruelly cut and mangled, together with his consorts, that suffered the like
torments, he died; in this regard only favored and loved, for that he
dispatched Serenianus out of the way, as cruel as o Phalaris, trusty both to
one and another, even to the teaching of cruel or policy.
learning, which he showed upon small and trifling occasions. After this
mortal and deadly war was by the fall of the chief captain rooted out,
more rigorous proceeding there was against many, than either their errors or
trespasses required: but most of all against the p defendors of Philippopolis,
who hardly and with very much ado yielded up both the city and themselves,
but not before they had seen the head of Procopius, which was carried into
Gaul. But to gratify those that made much entreatie, some were chastised more
mildly: among whom, Araxius was a chief man, who by ambitious laboring for
voices, and the intercession of his daughters husband Agilo, in the very heat
and broile of all attained to be Prefect, and he (I say) was for his
punishment confined to the Islands, but shortly after escaped. As for
Euphrasius and Phronemius likewise, they were sent into the West parts, and
exposed to the will and determination of Valentinian: and verily Euphrasius was
quit and set free; but Phronemius was had away into Cherrhonesus, and in the
same business more unmercifully punished, because he was a favorite of
Iulianus of sacred memory; whose memorable virtues, both the princes,
brethren, depraved, being themselves neither his like, nor coming near unto
him. Besides all this, other exemplarie punishments there were more grievous,
yea, and far more terrible than those executions that fall out in battles:
For the tormentor, the drags and iron hooks, with bloody examinations,
without respect of age or dignity made foul work in all estates and degrees;
and under the pretense of peace, a most detestable vice was put in practice;
whiles all men generally cursed this unluckie victory, more grievous than any
deadly war whatsoever. For among weapons yet and sounding trumpets the
equality of condition makes the dangers lighter, and the power of martial
valor either preventeth that which was attempted, or if death happen
suddenly and unawares, it carries no sense at all of ignominy and shame,
but brings with it both end of life and pain together: But when wicked and
impious purposes have right and laws for their pretense, and the Judges sit
them down with a false color, and set upon them either of a Catonian or Cui
bono fuerit, and such like.
Cassian sentence, and whatsoever is done, is done according to the will of a
great ruler or magistrate puffed up with pride, and to satisfy his pleasure,
matters of great importance, even of life and death, are weighed and considered
accordingly, there must the issue needs fall out to capital mischief in the
highest degree. For as any one in those days was in any respect powerful, or
toward the Court, and burning in greedy desire to seize upon other men's goods,
although he were openly known to accuse an innocent person, yet was he
welcomed as a familiar and faithful friend shortly to be enriched with other
men's misfortunes. For the Emperor, ready enough to do hurt, lying open to
all accusers, and procuring deadly informations, proceeded most fiercely to
sundry sorts of punishments, and therein took delight, ignorant as he was of
that worthy saying of Tully, who shows, That unhappie are they, who think
they may lawfully do all things. This implacable rigor, in a most righteous
cause verily, but foulely blemishing a victory, exposed many innocent folk to
the tormentors hand, and either brought their heads bending under the rack, or
laid them along with the stroke of the grim executioner: for whom it had been
better to have lost ten lives apeece in fight, if by nature they could have
had so many, than thus (faultlesse as they were) with their sides gashed and
rent, and their Fortunis gementibus (...): or thus: Whereat all estates and
degrees g^^ned again.
whole estates groaning, as it were, to suffer punishment as traitors, having
their bodies all torn and mangled before, which is more dolorous than all the
deaths in the world. After this, when as his cruelty (overcome with so many
woeful executions) became assuaged, men of higher place and calling endured
proscriptions and banishments, and such like; which although they be grievous,
yet seem to some but light: and to the end that another person might be
enriched, a man of noble birth, and happily for his deserts become very
wealthy, stripped and turned out by the head and shoulders of his livelod, and
thrust into exile, either pined away, and died for anguish, or else was feign
to live upon the devotion and benevolence of others: neither was there any end
of these mischievous practices, until the prince and his favorites were
satisfied with their goods and blood.

CHAP. XIIII. Fearful tremblings or quakings of the earth at one and the same
time throughout the whole earth.
WHiles this usurper [Procopius] whose manifold acts and death I have declared,
was yet living upon the 21. day of July.
twelfth day before the kalends of August, whiles Valentinian was the first
time Consul with his Valens.
brother, most fearful earthquakes suddenly happened, that shook the whole
earth, the like to which, neither fabulous tales nor true reporting records of
antiquity deliver unto us. For a little after Sunnerising the whole weighty
and stedie mass of the earthly globe shook, with flashes of lightening most
fiercely shot going before very thick: the sea also driven aside, with the
waves and billows tumbling out backward, went away so, that the deep gulfes
being discovered and laid bare, a man might have seen many sorts of swimming
creatures sticking in the mud: also the vast vales and mounts, which nature had
set far away under the huge waters, saw (as men thought) that day the beams
of the Sun. After therefore that many ships were bedded fast (as one would
say) in dry ground, and a number of people straggled at their pleasure in the
small remains of water, o take upfishes and such like with their hands; the
waves of the sea disdaining (as one would say) and loath to put up this repulse,
rose up all at once and turned again, and violently among the surging
shallowes, beating upon the islands and promontories of the continent reaching
farreinto the sea, overflowed, and laid level an infinite sort of things in
cities, yea and houses where any were found. And therefore in this furious
discord of the elements, the surface of the world being covered, represented
strange and wonderful sights. For, the mighty mass of the sea being
returned back again, when it was least looked for, killed and drowned many
thousands of people: and with the swift and violent whirling of the tides
running back, certain ships after the swelling of this liquid substance or
element was abated, were seen sunk to the very ground, yea and by reason of
shipwrackes many dead bodies lay along either on their backs or grovelling.
Other mighty ships also driven out by violent winds, settled upon the tops of
palaces, as it happened at Alexandria: and two miles almost off, far from the
shore were some of them flung, as we our selves in passing by beheld one of
Laconia near unto the town Metson, almost rotten for age.

THE XXVII. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. As the Alemans make new preparation for wars, Carietto and Serenianus
encounter them with a power of armed men: And when both of them were slain in
fight, Iovinus a brave captain gave the Alemans, leaping for joy of victory,
three battles. Valens sends over the head of Procopius unto Valentinian
lying at Paris.
WHiles these things which we have reported, upon diverse occurrences pass in
the East empire, the Alemans after grievous losses, and sore blows, which in
their often conflicts with Julian being Caesar they had sustained, having at
length resumed their strengh, though unequal to that which they had before, for
the cause aforesaid being now much feared, invaded the limits of Gaul. And
immediately after the the first day of the year.
Kalends of January, when the rigorous and bitter Winter weather froze hard
all over the ycie tracts, a number of them went forth by plumpes, and stragled
abroad at their pleasure. To encounter the foremost company of these, Carietto
Lieutenant general for both the Germanies, a man most forward to give
battle, went out, taking to him for his companion in this painful service,
Severianus a Lieutenant likewise, but of no valor, and aged besides, who at
Calydona had the command of the Divitenses, and the a Tungricanes. The Romans
therefore having joined their forces together, marched with their squadrons
embattailed close and thick one by another; and when they had with sure speed
passed over the bridge that stood upon a little river, no sooner saw the
Barbarians afar off, but they assailed them with arrows and other light
darts, which they again for their parts valiantly shot back as fast. But when
the troops met and fought with drawn swords, the battle of our men sore
shaken with the fierce charge of the enemies, found no means either to resist,
or to fight manfully, as being for fear all of them put to flight, when they
once saw Severianus unhorsed, and shot into the mouth with a casting weapon.
Carietto likewise himself, at last, whiles very venturously with opposition
of his body, and words from his mouth in a chiding accent delivered, he
stays them, and labors with bold standing to it a long time, to wipe away
so shameful a dishonor, was wounded mortally with a dart and so dyed. After
whose death the banner of the Eruli and Batavi was caught away, which the
barbarous enemies leaping and dancing with many a friske, erected often and
showed on high, but after great conflicts it was recovered again. When
knowledge was taken with exceeding great sorrow, of this overthrow, Dagalaiphus
to make amends for this dishonorable foil, was sent from Paris. But whiles he
a long while trifled out the time, and alleged, That himself was not able to
set upon the barbarous enemies, so scattered and spread in sundry parts, and
was soon after sent for to take upon him the dignity of a Consul together
with Gratian, who as yet was but a private person, Iovinus General of the
Cavallarie addressed himself to this business: and being well appointed and
ready in battle ray, having a most watchful and wary eye to both the sides
of his army as it marched, drew near unto a place named Scarpaigue, Ortel.
Scarpona: where suddenly and unlooked for, he surprised the greater multitude
of the said Barbarians, before they were armed, and in the turning of an hand
flew them every one. This worthy and notable captain leading forth his
soldiers (rejoicing for this glorious battle, which cost them no loss of
blood) for to defeat likewise the other company behind, and marching softly
on, was informed by a trusty espial, That the forces of these spoiling
brigands having rifled the villages near at hand, rested hard by a river: and
approaching then anon, and lying close hidden in a dark vale set thick with
groves and woods, beheld how some of them were washing and bathing themselves,
others busy in coloring the hair of their heads yellow, and making the same
shine like gold, (as their manner is) and some again drinking garaus. Thus
having met with a very seasonable time of advantage, all on a sudden he gave
the signal by sound of trumpet, and brake into the camp of these robbers. The
or Dutch.
Germans on the contrary side, in bragging wise rapping out nothing but vain
sounds and noyses of threats, were not permitted (the conqueror pressed so
hard upon them) either to make ready their arms and weapons scattered here
and there, or to put themselves in order of battle, nor so much as to pluck
up their spirits and resume strrength. A number therefore of them pierced
through with javelins and swords, were slain, besides those who ran away, and
with good footmanship gat into the crooked and narrow lanes, and there hid
themselves. Iovinus now fleshed and more emboldened with this happy exployt,
which virtue and fortune together had achieved, leading on his soldiers, and
sending out before a diligent scout-watch to discover the coasts, made have
with a running camp to charge upon the third regiment of them which remained.
And having sped himself apace in this journey, he found them all near to the
About Chalous in Champaigne.
Catelauni most ready to join battle. When as therefore he had encamped
himself within a rampire in a place convenient, and as the time would give
leave refreshed his men with meat and sleep, at the very dawning of the day
he arraunged his army displayed at large with politic skill in an open
plain, to the end that the Romans, inferior in number, yet equal in
puissance, taking up so large a ground, might seem to match the enemies in
multitude. When as therefore the trumpets had sounded the battle, so that
they began to fight close hand to hand, the Germans affrighted with the strange
sight of our glittering banners, stood still. Who being for a while daunted,
but soon after taking heart again, so that the conflict held unto the end of
the day, our men with great force pressing hard upon them, had gained the
honor of a brave day, without any loss at all, but that Balcobaudes Tribune
of the b Armaturae, a man made altogether of big words, but cowardly withal,
when as now the evening came on, reculed in disorder: whom if the rest of the
cohorts had followed and gone away, the matter would have grown so far forth
to an heavy issue, that there could not possibly one have remained alive to
tell what had been done. But our soldiers standing to it with resolute and
fierce courage, quit themselves so well with strength of arms, that having
sore wounded four thousand of the enemies, they left other six thousand dead
in the place: but they themselves lost not of their fellows above two hundred,
and two hundred likewise and no more were hurt. Thus therefore when by the
nights coming the battle was ended, and the wearied bodies of our men
refreshed, our brave leader toward daylight having stretched forth his army
in form of a four square battle, and found that the barbarous enemies
taking vantage of the darkness, were secretly slipped away and gone, secure
of any ambushments, followed through the open champian grounds and easy plain
ways, riding over them as they lay along half dead, who by reason that the
sharp cold air drew their wounds together, were killed with extremity of
pain. After this when he had gone further in his return finding no enemy,
he learned that the king of those regiments of the enemies, with some few taken
by the c Hastarij (whom himself had sent out another way to ransacke the tents
of the Alemans) was hanged on a gibbet. Hereupon in his anger he purposed to
punish the Tribune, that durst do such a deed without the advice of an higher
power; and verily had condemned him, but that it appeared by evident proofs,
that this foul and cruel fact was committed in the soldiers hot blood. After
this, as he returned toward Paris, upon the exploiting of this brave service,
the Emperor with great joy met him, and afterward named and elected him
Consul: and this, I assure you, augmented the measure of his joy, For that the
very same time he had received the head of Procopius, sent over to him from
Valens. Besides all this, there were many other skirmishes fought, less worthy
the relation, in sundry tracts of Gaul, which here to set down were
superfluous labor, considering that neither the proof and issue thereof
brought any great matter of gain and importance, nor beseeming it is to draw
our an history in length by such base and slight particulars.

CHAP. II. A portenteous prodigy seen in the town Pistoriensis, presaging
bloody seditions, as Rome especially, and that among the Christians, for the
strife and contention of Damasus and Vrsicinus about the bishopric.
AT this time, or a little bfore, there appeared a strange and portenteous
sight in Tuscane.
Thuscia d Annonaria, and what might the end and effect thereof be, the
skillful and learned in such prodigious signs were altogether ignorant. For,
in the town Pistora, Ortel.
Pistoriensis near the third n^ne of the clock in the to c^oone wi^h us
hour of the day, in the sight of many, an Ass having mounted up to the (...)
bench of justice.
Tribunal was heard to keep a great braying: and when all there present, as
also they that understood so much by report of others were astonished hereat, and
none able to guess the future event thereof, that fell out afterward, which
was then portended or signified by it. For, Terentius, a man of base parentage,
borne in the of Rome
city, and a P^stor, alluding to istonensis aforesaid
Baker, by way of recompense and reward, because he had given information of
one that had been Prefect, for robbing the Treasury, administered the office
of a or Governor.
e Corrector in this self same province: and taking upon him afterward in
this presumptuous confidence of his, to be meddling very busily, in the matter
and affair of Ship-Masters, and convicted to have dealt falsely therein, as
the voice went, dyed by the hangmans hand, whiles Claudius governed Rome. But
long before that this chanced, after Apronianus succeeded Symmachus, a man
worthy to be named among the principal paternes and examples of learning and
modesty: during whose as Prefect of Rome.
being in place, that most sacred city enjoyed the blessings of peace and
wealth in more plentiful manner than usually it had done; and vaunteth much of
a sumptuous and exceeding strong bridge, the which himself built and dedicated
with great joy of the citizens, unthankful persons they, as the truth most
evidently showed: who after certain years gone over their heads, burnt a most
beautiful and goodly house of his in the c tract beyond Tiberis, as taking
much offense and displeasure hereat, because a certain base commoner devised
and fained that he should say, (and no man else there was to declare and
testify so much) That he would more willingly with his own wine quench the
lime-kills, than sell the said wine at the price they hoped for. After him
followed in the regencie and government of the city, Lampadius, who had bin
Praefectus Praetorio: a man that would take the matter very hainously, if he
were not praised even when he did but spit, as who (forsooth) had a special
grace above all others, to do that also with wisdom: but yet otherwhiles he
was grave and of good government. This man, what time as he exhibited, being
Praetor, stately games and plays, with a bountiful largess, not able to
endure the tumult of the commons instantly oftentimes calling upon him, to have
many things bestowed on unworthy persons, for to show himself liberal, and a
despiser of the multitude, sent for certain needy and poor persons out of
the f Vatican, and them endowed with great riches. But to show his vanity
(that we rove not much abroad) it shall suffice to put down this one example,
a small matter though it be, yet such as Judges ought to take heed of. For, in
every part of the city which had been adorned at the expenses of sundry
princes, he would use to write his own name, not as REPAIRER of old, but as
FOVNDER of new works: (Of which disease Traian the Emperor is said to have
labored; whereupon by way of jest and skoffe they used to term him the
herb g Parietina.) This Prefect was troubled with many commotions, and one
above the rest, when the rascal commons gathering together, with throwing of
firebrands and firebals, had quite burnt his house near unto h Constantines
Baine, but that his slaves and or household servants: familiarium.
friends speedily ran and assembled themselves, and from the house tops pelted
them so with stones and tyles, that they were glad to depart. With which
violent attempt, and the noise of a seditious tumult growing to be more hot,
himself affrighted, retired to Ponti Molle.
Pons Milvius, which the elder Scaurus is said to have built, waiting for the
appeasing of a tumult there, that arose upon this just and grievous occasion.
Going in hand to erect new edifices of the city, or to repair some old, he
caused the charges thereof to be raised not out of the accustomed Such as the
Fifteenths in London.
levies and taxes: And if any iron, lead, brass, or such like stuff were to
be provided, his ministers or officers were sent forth, who like to chapmen
should buy and carry away diverse sorts of wares, but never pay therefore:
whereupon much ado he had (though he went away as speedily as he could) to
avoid the anger of poor men, enchafed and bewailing their losses for such
commodities as had been taken from them. Then came in place his successor
Viventius, ex Quaestore palatij.
who had been Treasurer of the Emperors household, an upright man and a wise,
a Pannonian borne, whose government was quiet, peaceable, and flowing
abundantly with plenty of all things. And he likewise was terrified with the
bloody seditions, which stirred up such a broyle as this. Damasus and
Vrsicinus exceedingly hot set upon the getting of the Episcopal See, by
divisions and factions contended most bitterly, so that the partakers of both
sides proceeded as far as to dealing of bloody blows, and even to danger of
death. Which stirs Viventius not able either to redress or appease, upon
great violence compelled, retired himself apart into a country house by the
city side: And in this skuffling Damasus had the upper hand, so instant was
that part which favored him. And known for certain it is, that in the which
happily was become a Church.
great Hall of Sicininus, where there is holden a congregation and meeting of
Christians, there were found in one day an hundred and seven and thirty dead
bodies of them slain: as also, that the common people, grown hereupon to be
outrageous a long time, were hardly afterward pacified. Neither can I deny,
beholding the glorious braverie of the city, that the competitors, desirous of
this Episcopal dignity, for the attaining of that which they desire, have
good reason to strive all that ever they can, considering that when they have
gotten it, they shall be so void of care and thought taking, that they are
enriched with the oblations of matrones, ride abroad mounted in coaches, and
therein gloriously arrayed, keeping profuse and riotous fare, insomuch as their
feasts surpass kings tables: who might be happy and blessed indeed, if
despising the greatness of the city, by which they pretend to cloak their
vices, they would live according to the example of some provincial bishops;
whose slender diet in eating and drinking most sparily, whose low priced
apparel also, and eyes looking down to the ground, commend them as pure and
modest persons to the eternal God and his true servants.

CHAP. III. Ammianus Marcellinus going about to describe the Goths war,
first of all presents unto us the limits, the ancient nations, provinces,
and principal cities in his time of Thracia.
THus far forth it shall suffice that we have digressed out of the way, now
return we to the orderly process of our History. Whiles these matters above
said proceed thus in Gaul and Italy, new wars arose in Thracia. For Valens,
as it seemed good unto his brother, whose advice he asked, and after whose will
and pleasure he was wholly ruled, levied arms against the Goths, moved
thereto upon a good and just cause; namely, for that they sent aids to
Procopius, when he entered into civil wars. Meet it is therefore by way of a
brief digression to discourse as touching their original and the situation of
their countries. As for the description of Thracia, easy it were, if the
ancient writers thereupon did accord: but for as much as their obscure
variety helps not a work that professes truth, sufficient it shall be
briefly to tell, what I have to mine own remembrance seen. That these lands
extended in times past a mighty way, as well in plain and pleasant champian
fields, as also in high hills, the ever-during authority of Homer does show,
who faineth, That the two winds aquilonem, if you take it precisely.
North-east and West do blow from thence: which either is a fabulous fiction,
or else all those tracts that spread far and wide abroad heretofore, and were
appointed for savage nations, went all under the name of Thracia. And verily a
part thereof was inhabited by the Bofnachi, or Bossen.
Scordisci far removed now from the same provinces, a people cruel in times
past and terrible, as ancient records bear witness; procuring the propitious
favor of i Bellona and Mars by sacrificing of captives, and greedily drinking
blood out of men's skuls. By whose rigorous and rough dealing, the State of Rome
after many foughten fields oftentimes sore troubled, lost at length their whole
army and leader both. But as now we see it, the same places shaped in manner
of a crescent or new Moon, portray unto us the fair resemblance of a Theater:
In the very top whereof Westward, the straits of Succi, standing thick with
high and steep hills, begin to open, dividing Thraciae and Dacia asunder: but
that part on the left hand lying toward the North stars, is enclosed with the
lofty mountains of Haemi^mentana celsitudines. Catena Mundi, and Monte
Argentato. Pinet.
Hmus and the river Hister, whereas it runs hard by Roman ground, and has
many cities, castles, and forts seated upon it. On the right hand, which is the
South side thereof, are stretched out the craggie cliffes of Rhodope: and where
the Sun rises, bounded it is with a narrow sea; against which as it runs
with surging waters out of the Euxine sea, and passes forward with reciprocal
ebbes and flows to the Aegean sea, there opens a narrow partition of lands.
Howbeit, out of the East angle it joyneth to the Macedonian marches by certain
narrow and steep ways, which are termed Acontisma; hard by which lies the
vale Arethusa and a station, wherein is to be seen the sepulcher of Euripides
that Poet famous for his lofty penning of Tragoedies: also Macra. Niceta.
Stagria, where we have heard say Aristotle was borne, who (as Tully says)
pours from him a river of gold. These places also were in old time held by
barbarous nations far different in variety of manners and of language: among
whom there is, beside others, mention made of the Odrysae, as of people
exceeding outrageous and savage, so accustomed to the shedding of men's blood,
that when they want enemies to fight with, themselves at the very board, after
they have engorged themselves with meat and drink, turn the edge and point of
the sword one upon another body, as if they were strangers. But when our
State was grown great, during the flourishing government under Consuls, Marcus
Didius with mighty resolution and constancy subdued these nations, untamed
always before time, and wandering licentiously without civilitie or laws:
Drusus reduced them within proper bounds of their own; and Minutius, near
unto the river Februs, which runs from the high hills of the Odrysae, in a
battle vanquished them: after whom, those that remained, were in a cruel
battle by Appius Claudius Proconsull utterly destroyed. For the Roman navies
were possessed of the towns standing upon Bosphorus and Propontis. After these
came Lucullus, that noble warrior and conqueror, in place, who was the first of
all others that struck a battle with that most bold and hardy nation of the
Bessi; and in the same journey defeated the Haemimontanes, that stoutly made
resistance: who whiles he hovered over those parts, all Thracia throughout was
reduced under the subjection of our ancestors. And in this manner, after many
doubtful battles fought with the hazard of the Commonweal, six provinces
were gained: among which, the first, which confineth afront upon the Illyrians,
is by a special name called Thracia, adorned with two spacious cities,
Philippopolis, called in old time Eumolpias, and Beroea. Next to it,
Haemimontum has in it Hadrianopoli.
Hadrianopolis, which was called Vscudama, and Anchialo.
Anchialos, great cities: Then Mysia, where stands Martianopolis, surnamed of
Traianus the Emperor his sister: also Drista, or Dristra, or Dora.
Dorostorus, Nicopoli Soph.
Nicopolis, and Vama Nigr.
Odyssus: and hard unto it Scythia, wherein Nerg Costald.
Dionysopolis, ^omisuar Ortel.
Tomi, and Pandalla. Nigr.
Calatis, are the towns of greatest name: And the last of all, Europe; which
besides borough towns shines again with two cities, Ap^i Soph.
Apris, and Perinthus, called also by the posterity ensuing Heraclea. Rhodopa,
which is annexed unto this, has Maximianopolis, Marogna. Soph.
Maronea, and Oeno. Nigr.
Aenus; which when Aeneas had built and left, he after wandering travailes a
long time, by a perpetual train of prosperous Auspices arrived in Italy. Now
it is for truth known, as continual rumors from time to time have bruited,
that in manner all these country people, which in the regions aforesaid
inhabit round about the high mountains, outgoe us in health of body, and a
certain peculiar prerogative of long life. And this happens, as folk
think, hereupon, for that they abstain from feeding of many meats together,
and by reason that a continual freshness of deaw with cold sprinklings
binds and hardens their bodies, they enjoy the sweetness of a purer air,
and are besides the first of all that see the Sun beams (which of their own
nature give and maintain life) before they are infected with any corruption of
earthly things. Having thus digested in order these matters, return we to that
which we began.

CHAP. IIII. Valens rejecting the frivolous excuse of the Goths, who had
maintained Procopius and his side, passed over Hister, and meeting none to make
resistance, returns with his forces. The war being in the years ensuing
renewed, at length the Goths by the intercession of Athanaricus obtain peace;
and Valens goes back to Constantinople.
AFter that Procopius was vanquished in Phrygia, and the matter of civil
dissentions laid asleep, Victor General of the Horsemen, was sent unto the
Goths, to know in plain terms, For what cause that nation, friend unto the
Romans, and obliged by covenants of a free peace, had given aid by arms unto
one that warred against lawful and natural princes: who, that they might
seem by their first plea to justify the deed, presented unto him the letters
of the same Procopius; alleging, That he took upon him the Empire, due unto
him as a near kinsman of Constantines race, and avouching, that the error was
worthy to be pardoned. Upon knowledge whereof, by the relation of Victor,
Valens making small reckoning of this their most vain excuse, advaunced in
warlike manner against them, who had foreknowledge already of this trouble
coming toward them: And in the beginning of the Spring having assembled his
forces together, encamped near unto a strong hold named Daphne; and upon a
bridge floored with flanks over the hatches of ships, passed the river Hister,
without resistance made of any. And now bearing himself aloft with great
boldness, when riding up and down, he could find none that he might overcome
or terrify (for all men stricken with fear of our soldiers, approaching with
a brave show of preparation, were retired to the mountains of the Accursius
rendeth Succi.
Serri, which were very high and inaccessible but only to such as were skillful
in the ways) least that having spent the whole Summer, he should return
without any exploit done, by sending out Arinibeus, colonel of the footmen,
with certain companies to wast and spoil, seized on part of their families,
such as, before they came to the broken and winding ways, might be taken
straggling and wandering over the plain fields. And thus having achieved this
only that Fortune presented to his hands, he returned with his forces in
safety, having neither given nor received any grievous blow. The year
following when he assayed with like courage to enter into the enemies land,
being hindered with the streams of Do^w.
Danubius, that overflowed far beyond his banks, he rested still, pitching
his standing campeneere to a village named Carporum, until the end of Autumn:
Whence, because nothing could be done, by reason that the great floods kept him
off he departed to Martianopolis, there to Winter. Semblably, the third year
also holding on his purpose still, having broken into the ground of the
barbarous enemies by Novidunum, and that by means of ships joined together
for to pass over the river, after continual journeyes taken, he set upon the
Grutungi, a warlicke nation, that inhabited further off; and after some light
skirmishes, constrained for feate of extremity Athanaricus to take his flight,
who in those days was a most puissant ruler, and who with a power that he
thought more than sufficient, dared to make resistance: and then himself with
all his forces returned again to Martianopolis, there to keep his Winter; a
place as in those tracts meet and convenient. Now, after sundry accidents that
fell out in these three years space, there were good motives and reasons to
end the war. First, for that the enemies fear increased by the princes long
abode in these parts. Then, because the barbarous people being debarred of
traffic and commerce, were distressed for exceeding want of necessaries, in
so much as they sent ambassadors oftentimes in manner of suppliants, and craved
pardon with peace. Unto whom, the Emperor unexpert, I must needs say, but a
most equal and indifferent considerer as yet of things, before that he was
beguiled with the pernicious allurements of flattery, and afflicted the
Commonwealth with slaughters and executions for ever to be lamented, taking
sage advice for the common good, decreed, That it was behovefull to grant
peace. And he sent forth by turns Victor and Arintheus, who then had the
managing of the horsemens service. Who when they had given true intelligence by
their letters, That the Goths condescended unto the conditions proposed, there
was a meet place appointed for the conclusion of a peace. And for as much as
Athanaricus avouched, That he was bound under the fearful curse of an oath,
and beside, by his fathers commandment expressly forbidden, to tread at any
time upon Roman ground (in which regard he might not be compelled) and withal
it had been an unseemely and base thing, that the Emperor should go over to
him, thought good it was by them that were wise, that in certain vessels
guided by ores into the mids of the river, where were embarked the Emperor and
the foresaid Judge of the nation, together with their Esquiers, they should, as
before it was determined, pass the covenants of a league and peace together.
Which business being dispatched, and pledges received, Valens returned to
Constantinople, where afterward Athanaricus driven out of his native country
by a faction of his nearest kinsmen and followers, yielded unto nature, and was
enterred with solemn and sumptuous funerals, after the guise of our country.

CHAP. V. Whiles Valentinian lies sick of a grievous disease, certain of the
principal officers and rulers lay their heads together, about choosing Rusticus
Iulianus, Master of the Rolls, or Severus, Colonel of the footmen, to be
Emperor. But the said Emperor recovering, declares Gratianus his son for his
Colleague and Augustus both, after he had in a grave oration recommended him
unto the army, which generally accepted of him: and when he was adorned with a
coronet and imperial robes, exhorts him to do his devoire, with the
exceeding applause of them all.
WHiles Valentinian in this mean time lay grievously sick, and thought no
other but like to dye, at a feast where the Gauls secretly met, who served in
the Emperors army, Rusticus Iulianus then k Master of the or principal
remembrances.
Rolls, was, as it were, in a furious fit or motion of madness nominated to
the Empire, one as bloud-thirstie as any savage beast, as he well showed whiles
he governed Affricke in place of Proconsull. For in his Prefecture of the
city, during which he dyed, fearing the dangerous and ticklish days of
tyranny, by the will and pleasure whereof, he had climbed up to that high
dignity, for default, as it should seem, of worthy persons, enforced he was
to show himself mild and very tractable. Against these Gauls, some there
were who in a deeper reach and drift labored in favor of Severus, then
Colonel of the footmen, as a man fitted for the obtaining thereof: who albeit
he was rigorous and dread, yet more tolerable, and every way to be preferred
above Rusticus aforesaid. But whiles these matters are thought upon to no
effect, the Emperor somewhat refreshed and recovered by the means of many
remedies, and perceiving that himself was scarce yet delivered from danger of
death, had a full purpose to adorn with the imperial ensigns his own son
Gratian, a pretty young stripling, and well grown: and having provided all
things in readiness accordingly, and wrought the soldiers to accept thereof
in good gree and willingly, when Gratian was come he went forth into the field,
and ascended up to the Tribunal: where being environed with a gallant company
of noble persons and Officers of State, he took the youth by the right hand,
brought him forth before them, and with a solemn public oration recommended
him (as ordained Emperor) to the army, in this wise: In this habit of
princely place and dignity which I carry about with me as an ample sign of
your favor enlarged toward me, by which I am deemed a more worthy personage
than many others, and those right honorable, I will before you my associats in
counsels, and fore-men in desires and wishes, in due office of piety and
kindness, set in hand with a matter, God saying Amen, and promising good
success, by whose eternal aid and help the Roman State shall stand firm and
invincible. Understand therefore, I beseech you, with peaceable minds, ye
right valiant Knights, what our desire is, considering thus much withal, that
these things which the laws of love and natural affection ordain to be done,
we have been desirous not only to pass with your knowledge and privitie, but
also to have approoved and ratified, as meet and expedient for us, by your
authority. This my young son Gratian (whom for that he has been a long
time conversant among your children, ye love as a dear pledge common to me
and you) I am about, for the better assurance on all sides of public peace and
tranquillity, to take into the fellowship of imperial service and warfare, in
case the propitious favor of the heavenly power above, and your majesty,
shall second and assist the love of his father: one not brought up from his
cradle hardly as our selves, nor enured to the enduring of the hard world, nor
capable as yet of martial toil, as ye see: but answerably according with the
prayse-worthie virtues of his family, and the noble deeds of his ancestors,
like shortly to come behind very few of them, for fear, as they say, of any
envy. For, as I am wont to think and conceit of him, weighing many times, as
I do, his manners and motions (though the same are not yet come to maturitie in
these tender and youthful years of his) for as much as being polished with
humanity, and the studies of witty sciences, he shall peise and examine by
incorrupt judgment the deserts for well and evil doing, he will so order the
matter, that good men shall understand there is knowledge taken and regard had
of them: He will advance and put himself forward to perform brave exploits,
ready to stick close unto the military ensigns and Aegles: he will endure
the hot parching Sun, the cold frost and snow, long thirst and watching: he
will otherwhiles, if need so require, make good and defend the camp: he will
venture and expose his own life for his partners in perils; and, that which is
the chief and principal point of piety, he will be able to love the
Commonwealth, as the very house of his father and ancestors. These words,
before he had made an end of his speech, being heard with joyful assent,
every souldior according to his place hastening and striving a vie, with glad
heart one to out-goe another, as if they had been partakers of commodity and
joy, declared Gratian Augustus, intermingling with a most loud sound of
trumpets, the gentle noise and clattering of their armor. Which when
Valentinian perceived, rejoicing now with greater confidence, after he had
adorned his son with a crown, and the robes of highest estate, he kissed
him: and thus all gorgeous and goodly to be seen, and giving attentive ear to
that which he said, he spoke unto him in this manner: Behold (quoth he) my
son Gratian, thou have upon thee Imperial garments, as we all hoped for,
conferred with luckie osses and acclamations by the judgment of my self and
our fellow soldiers: Arm thy self therefore according to the importance of
urgent affairs, as the Colleague of thy father and uncle both, and enure thy
body without fear to go over with the whole regiments of footmen, the rivers
Hister and Rhene, passable on foot with ice; to stand next unto the armed
soldiers; to spendthy blood and life both consideratly for them whom thou
doestrule; yea and to think that no strange ground which reaches to any side
of the Roman Empire. Let it suffice for this present, to have given thus much
in charge: for the rest, I shall not cease to admonish thee accordingly. Now,
those of you beside, who are the chiefest maintainers of the State, I desire
and earnestly beseech, That with grounded and firm affection ye preserve this
hopeful Emperor in his rising and growth, committed as he is to your
faithful protection. When these words were with all solemnity confirmed,
Eupraxius Caesariensis, a Moore, Magister Memoriae.
Master of the Rolls at the same time, first of all cried out in these terms,
The family and lineage of Gratian deserves this honor: and presently being
promoted to be Questor, he left behind him many examples of good loyalty and
trust, swerving no way aside from the state of a fearelesse nature, but
constant always, and like unto the laws which we observe to speak with one
and the same voice in many and sundry causes: who also persisted then more
steadfastly in any part of justice undertaken, when the Emperor in threatening
and violent manner shook him up, as he advised him to any good ways. After
this they fell all at once to resound the praises of the elder Emperor and the
young Prince both, but especially of the youth himself, whom a lively, a quick
lightsome eye, a most pleasant grace as well of countenance as the rest of the
body, besides a singular towardness of wit and mind did commend: which had
made an accomplished Emperor comparable with the best that ever were in
ancient times, if the Destinies would have given leave, and his inward
favorites besides, who with their leawd and wicked acts darkened his virtue,
which as yet was well settled. Howbeit, in this affair, Valentinian
transgressing the manner and custom taken up of old, nominated his brother and
son in much kindness and affection, not Caesares, but Augusti. For there was
not any man aforetime that assumed unto him a Colleague in equal power and
authority, save only the Emperor Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus.
Marcus, who made his adopted brother L. Aurelius Verus Commodus: ex Iulio
Capitol.
Verus (without any abridgement at all of imperial majesty) his fellow and
companion.

CHAP. VI. Valentinian letting slack the reins of anger, cruelly fares and
rages against many innocent persons, notwithstanding that Eupraxius and
Florentius opposed themselves.
THese matters thus ordered according to the mind and will of the Governors
and soldiers both, scarce passed there some few days between, when
Avitianus, sometime a deputy Prefect, accused, for robbing the treasure,
Mamertinus, Prefect of the Pretorium, being returned from the city, whither he
had gone before to redress some things that were amiss. Whereupon there
succeeded after him Vulcatius Rufinus, a man accomplished every way, and
canying before him, as it were, the reverend ornament of honorable old age,
but one that under hope of being unseene, never ollersliptany fit occasions or
opportunities to gain: Who being in high favor with the Prince, and having
ready access unto him, procured thus much, That Orfitus, late Prefect of the
city, should be delivered out of exile, and with the restoring of his livelode
which he had lost, be sent home again. And albeit Valentinian, a man in the
beginning of his reign openly known to be cruel, for to mitigate the opinion
of rigor that went of him, endeavored sometimes to hold in and master his
fierce and cruel passions, yet this vice of his creeping close, and delayed
for a pretty while, brake out more licentiously to the mischief of many, and
the same increased by bitter and boiling anger. For, the learned wise men
define ire to be an ulcer or sore of the mind, long lasting, and otherwhile
perpetual and incurable, and the same springing usually from a soft nature and
tender spirit, which they aver upon this probable argument for that sick
persons be more teastie and angry than the sound, women than men, old folk
than young, and those in misery more than they that are in prosperity. But
among other executions done at that time upon meaner persons, the death of
Diocles late Or Receiver of the revenewes and tributes th^^^.
Treasurer for the Emperor in Illyricum, was notable, whom for certain small
trespasses he commanded to be burnt: Likewise of Diodorus, who had been a
Pursuivant or Intelligencer; and of three officers belonging to the deputy
Prefect in Italy, for this cause put to cruel and dolorous torments, for that
the said Treasurer complained unto him, that Diodorus for his part had after a
civil manner craved the benefit of law and justice against him; and the
officers or ministers abovesaid, durst at the judges commandment give him
summons, as he was taking his journey, to answer according to the law: whose
memorial the Christians at Millain solemnly keeping to this very day, call the
place where they were buried, as one would say. S. Innocents.
Ad Innocents. After this, when as in the matter and business of one
Maxentius a Pannonian, upon an execution which lawfully by warrant from the
judge was hastened, he had given commandment that the or principal Eurgesses.
Ordines, or Senators.
States of three towns should be massacred, Eupraxius then Questor interrupted
him, and said, O deal more favorably, most merciful Prince: for these whom
thou commaundest to be put to death as malefactors those of the Christian
Religion honor as Martyrs, that is to say, men beloved and accepted of God.
Whose boldness tending to do good, Florentius the Prefect following, when he
heard how for a venial fault he in a fit of anger had commanded that out of
the Senators degree in many cities there should three be executed: And what shall
be done (quoth he) if some town of these have not so many such or Senators.
Curiales.
Burgesses? And among the rest this also ought to be paused upon That if they
have them, they should be slain. This like wise (an horrible thing to be said
and done) aggravated his unmercifull rigor, namely, That if any man came unto
him with this request, for the avoiding the judgment of some mighty enemy,
to have another Judge assigned him, he might not obtain this suit, but was
referred over unto the same party whom he feared, notwithstanding he alleged
many just and sufficient reasons. Likewise, there went speech abroad of another
cruel and horrible part of his, to wit, That when any debtor was said to be in
such poverty that he was not able to satisfy and make payment, he would
pronounce sentence then, That he must dye for it. Now, these and such like
prankes play some Princes at their pleasure in the height of their pride, for
that they deny their friends liberty and means to reform any naughty
designs or deeds of theirs, and with the greatness of their power they
terrify their enemies for speaking. Neither is there any question or inquiry
to be made of lewd acts and enormities among them, who think, whatsoever they
will, to be the greatest virtues.

CHAP. VII. The war in Britannie happily achieved by Theodosius a most
valiant leader, after he had repressed the Picts, Saxons, and other enemies.
BEing departed then from ab Ambianis.
Amboise, and making have to Treviros.
Triers, he was stricken with heavy news, giving him to understand, That
Britannie by a general conspiracy and banding of the barbarous nations was
sore distressed and brought to extreme misery: also, that Nectaridius, l
Lieutenant or Admiral of the maritime tract, was slain, and Buchobaudes, L.
Warden of the marches, by a train of the enemies forelayed and assailed on
every side. Which when he understood, with great fear and horror he sent
Severus, even then m Comes of the Domestici, if fortune would happily speed his
hand, to redress whatsoever had happened amiss: but when he within a little
while after was called back, Iovinus being gone into the same parts, sent in
great have before unto Proventusidem celeri gradu praemifit: I wot not well
what to make of this: the text I suspect be faulty.
Proventusides, to crave the aid of a puissantarmie. At the last, in regard of
many and those fearful accidents which rumors continually reported as
touching the same Island, there was elected and appointed thither to make speed
Theodosius, a man most happily known and approoved for his martial feats: and
so with a select power of legions and foot and horse.
cohorts both, he marched forward, with brave boldness and resolution leading
the way. And forasmuch as when in compiling the acts of Constans the Emperor,
I declared and laid open to my power the motions of the Ocean both flowing and
ebbing, as also the maritime tract and sea coast of Britannie, I have thought
it superfluous to return unto those matters which have bin once in order set
down: like as Vlyxes in Homer, among n the Phacians, is for the exceeding
difficulty of a matter afraid to unfold it, and make a recital thereof. Yet
thus much it shall suffice to deliver, That the Picts in those days, divided
into two nations, to wit, The Western Pict^.
Dicalidones and the Fast Picts, both inhabiting Scotland. Guil. Camden.
Vesturiones, the Northren Britains dwelling between the two frontier walls
of Severus and Hadrian Buchanan.
Attacots likewise a warlike kind of people, and the Scots raunging in diverse
parts, wasted and spoiled much. As for the tracts of Gaul, the Frankners and
Saxons, their near confining neighbors then, wheresoever any of them could
break forth and make rodes by sea or land, made havocke therein, by raising
cruel booties, firing towns and places, yea, and killing men and women, their
captives. For the restraining of these outrages, if happily fortune might grant
good success, this right puissant captain taking a voyage to the end of For
so was Britanie thought to lie.
the world, when he was come to the coast of Bologne.
Bononia, which is severed from the land over against it by a narrow channel
of the sea, that ebbeth and flows interchangeably, and uses to rise and
swell with terrible tides, and again to settle and lie even (without hurt of
the sailors) in manner of plain champian fields; from thence having leisurely
crossed over the said narrow sea, he arrived at Rich borough, or Rochester,
near Sandwich.
Rutupiae, a quiet rode and harbor opposite unto it. Whence also, when the o
Batavi, Heruli, Iovij and Victores, bold and hardy companies, who followed hard
after, were arrived, he went forth, and marching toward London.
Lundonium, an ancient town, which the posterity afterward named Augusta,
having divided his power into sundry bands and regiments, he charged upon the
forces of the enemies, as they were spoiling and wasting here and there, laden
also with much pillage and baggage: and having quickly discomfited and
scattered those that drove before them as well men and women bound, and also
cattle, he stripped them of the booty which the poor and miserable
tributaries had lost. And in the end, having made restitution of it all, save
some small parcels distributed among the wearied soldiers, he entered with
exceeding joy, in manner of a petie triumph, into the said Civitatem: which he
called before Oppedum. London.
city, overwhelmed before time with many distresses and calamities, but now on
a sudden refreshed so far forth, as it might hope for perfect safety. And
here, upon this prosperous success encouraged to greater attempts, he abode
doubtful of the future; and casting what course safely to take like to speed,
as being informed as well by the confession of captives as the relation of
fugitives, that these diffuse companies of sundry nations spread so far
abroad, and raging so cruelly, could not possibly be vanquished but by privy
sleights, secret ambushes, and sudden excursions: To conclude, after edicts
published, and promise made by proclamation of impunitie, he called unto their
colors and service again such as had forsaken the field and were run to the
enemy; as also many other, that having free pasport and license to go and
return at their pleasure, were dispersed in sundry parts. At which warning
given, when most of them were returned, being thoroughly kindled and set on with
courage, yet curbed with heavy and pensive cares, he required to have Civilis
by name sent unto him, for to govern Britannie as deputy Prefect, a man of a
very sharp wit and quick spirit, but withal a good justicer and observer of
righteousness: likewise Dulcitius, a captain renowned for his skill in deeds
of arms. And thus went the affairs in Britannie.

CHAP. VIII. The most miserable state of Afric under Romanus the Lieutenant
(without the knowledge of Valentinian) whose cowardice and cruelty Ammianus
Marcellinus taxes. The rovers and robbers out of Isauria are repressed.
Praetextatus Prafect of Rome, a righteous and wiseman, is put down for the
pattern of an excellent magistrate.
But as for Afric, ever since the beginning of Valentinian his reign it was
all in combustion through the outrage of barbarous enemies, wholly set upon
slaughter and spoil, that they made by bold and adventurous outrodes: which
thing was much increased through the idleness of the soldiors and the covetous
desire to encroch and seize upon other men's goods, but especially of one named
Romanus, or Goveme^^.
lieutenant there: who forecasting what would come, and his crafts-master in
deriving all envy from himself unto others, in regard of his cruel demeanor
was hated of many, for this cause especially, that relying himself upon the
affinity he had with Remigius, then master of the offices, he strived to
outgoe the very enemies in wasting of the provinces: by the means of which
Remigius, who stuck not to give wrong and false information, the prince, who
took himself to be most wary and wise, was the longer ignorant of those
losses which the men of Afric sustained. But the full and whole order of the
proceedings in those countries, as also the death of Ruricius the President,
and of the ambassadors, with other lamentable accidents, I will more exactly
deliver, when reason shall so require. And for that there is now offered free
opportunity to utter what we think, let us plainly speak it out, to wit,
that this Emperor was the first of all others that exalted military men to a
great pitch of pride, even to the hinderance and damage of the weal public,
whiles he raised on high their dignities and wealth: and that which was a thing
both in public and private to be lamented, punished the errors and
delinquencies of common soldiers with inflexible rigor, and spared the great
ones: who, as if they had gotten a dispensation and indulgence for all faults,
grew to stain themselves with horrible sins: who hereupon puffing and taking
on, suppose the estates of all men to depend upon their will and pleasure;
whose proud blasts and heavy hands the first devisers of ancient laws
seeking to restrain, have passed their doom, for the putting to death
otherwhiles even of some innocent persons. Which oftentimes happens, when for
the crimes of a multitude, some harmless folk (such is their hard lot) are
punished as culpable: For this has reached sometimes to the cases of private
persons. But in Isauria, the brigands passing by plumpes and companies along
the towns adjoining and the plentiful villages, spoiling them at their
pleasure, put Pamphylia and the Cilicians to great losses: whom, when Musonius,
deputy Prefect then of Asia, who before time had been a professor of
Rhetoric at Satine.
Athens in For twelve cities there were of that name. Ortel.
Attica, perceived to wast and consume all in bloody and cruel manner, when
their state lay a bleeding in desperate plight, and the soldiers who should
have helped, grown feeble with looseness and riot, he taking unto him some
few half armed men, whom they term p Diocmitae, assayed to set upon one
squadron of those robbers, if peradventure he could have found his advantage:
but passing by a certain narrow winding lane with a steep descent, he fell
into the inevitable danger of an ambushment, and there (together with those
whom he led) was stabbed and hewed in pieces. These brigands exceeding proud
and bold for this good success, and raunging more confidently sundry ways,
the maine army at length went forth, and after some few of them slain, forced
them to the blind craggie mountains which they inhabit; where having neither
liberty to rest, nor means to meet with victuals, beside a truce, they
required to have peace granted unto them, and that through the motion and
persuasion of the inhabitants of Germanicopolis, whose authority (like unto
the vantguard in battle) has always been among them of great force to sway
the rest: and so after they had put in their pledges, as they were enjoined,
they continued a long time quiet, and attempted no hostility at all. During
these affairs, Praetextatus, who in stately port managing the Praefectureship
of the city, by many deeds of integrity and honesty, whereby from his very
youth he became famous, attained to that which sildome happens; namely, that
albeit he was dread, yet lost he not the love of the citizens, which commonly
is wont to be grounded upon threats, especially toward rulers and judges that
be feared. By whose grave authority and just sentence going with the truth,
when the tumult was appealed (which the debates and jarres of the Christians
had raised) and Vrsicinus put to the repulse and expelled, there grew together
with a joint purpose of Roman citizens, and the honor of their noble
governor, who ordered and disposed many profitable things, a most settled and
uniforme peace. For he took away all those juttying galleries of pleasure
called q Meniana, which even by ancient laws also were forbidden to be built
in Rome, and he caused a partition to be made between the walls of private men's
houses and sacred temples, whereto before they unseemely joined: and he
ordained certain weights throughout all the r regions or wards of the city,
when otherwise there could be no means found to meet with the greediness of
many, that made false balances according to their pleasure. Moreover, in
trying and deciding of controversies, thus much above all others he gained,
which Tully reports in the commendation of Brutus, That doing nothing at all
for love and favor, yet all things seemed lovely and acceptable that he did.

CHAP. IX. The expedition of Valentinian and Gratian against the Alemans in
battle discomfited and put to flight with a great overthrow.
ABout the same time well near, whiles Valentinian was gone forth warily, as
he thought, to an expedition, an Aleman Regalu.
Prince, named Rando, making preparation long before for that which he
designed, entered by stealth with a crew of soldiers lightly appointed to kill
and rob, into Moguntia, Majence, or Mentz.
Magontiacum, when it was without a garrison. And for that he found there by
chance a solemnity holden of the Christians, he led away without any let and
impeachment a sort of both sexes undefended, it skilled not of what estate they
were of, together with no small store of household goods. Within a little while
after there shone upon the Roman Empire an unexpected hope of better days.
For when king Vithicabius, the son of Vadomarius, in show an effeminate and
diseased prince, but of courage bold and valiant, kindled oftentimes hot
wars against us, great care and diligence was employed, that he might be made
away and murdered, it mattered not how: and for that being assailed sundry
times, he could not either be openly vanquished, or privily betrayed, at the
earnest solicitation of our men murdered he was by the deceitful hand of one
of his own ministers, belonging to the privy chamber. After whose death, the
enemies in some sort gave over their hostile rodes and incursions: howbeit, the
murderer, for dread of punishment which he feared, in case the business had
been discovered, got himself over as fast as he could into Roman ground.
After this, preparation was made with good pause and deliberation, as also by
sundry kinds of forces, of an expedition against the Alemanes, and the same of
greater puissance than usually had been, considering that the defense of the
State required no less; because the faithless stirs of a nation, whose
forces might soon be renewed, were feared: and our soldiers nevertheless
were enkindled against them, for their suspected conditions; who feeble now and
suppliants, yet shortly after threatening deadly and mortal hostility, gave
them no rest at all, nor cessation of arms. Valentinian therefore, together
with Gratian, having assembled an huge host, well furnished as well with arms
as victuals, and sent for Sebastian the lieutenant, together with the bands of
Illyricum and Italy, whereof he had the regiment to join with them, in the
very fresh prime of the year set forward, marching in four square battailons
close together and undivided; himself in the midst having Iovinus and
Severus, s expert and approoved warriors, flanking the sides of the ranks on
both hands, for fear they might be suddenly assailed. And so from thence, by
the guidance of those that were perfect in the ways, having discovered
beforehand the avenues through the plain countries, lying out a great length,
the soldiers advauncing softly forward, yet very eagre of fight, as if they
had found the enemies already, in threatening manner gnashed their teeth for
anger. And for that during certain days journey they could meet with none
that made resistance, there was put forth a regiment of certain cohorts, who
with the devouring flame of fire consumed the standing corn and houses that
they could set eye upon, all save only such food, as their doubtful state
wherein they stood forced them to gather and keep. This done, the prince going
further forward with a milder pace, when he was come near to a place named
Solms. Heroldo. Bretta. Lazio.
Solicinium, stood still, as if a bar had been set in his way, informed by a
most true relation of his out-riders, that the barbarous enemies were
discovered afar off; who seeing no way or means left to save their lives,
unless by a speedy encounter they defended themselves, presuming boldly upon
their skilfulnesse in the ways, with one mind and accord gained a very high
mountain, by the means of rough and craggie hills, steep and unaccessable on
every side, save only the North, whence it has an easy and gentle fall or
descent. Where having out of hand pitched down their standerds, as their
manner is, and cried the alarm on all hands, our soldiers easy to be
directed at the commandment of the Prince and leaders, stood their ground,
waiting until the banner were set up aloft, which was the signal to begin
battle in convenient time. Now, for as much as there was little or no time
allowed to take any deliberation, whiles the impatient Roman soldiers terribly
took on and fumed on the one side, and the Alemans made horrible noyses on the
other, this course only the shortness of time and quick dispatch admitted,
namely, That Sebastian with his companies should possess himself of that
North part of the hills, which I said had an easy descent, there with little
ado, if good luck were, to have the killing of the Germans as they should fly.
Which was not thought good to be put in practice in have. And while Gratian was
detained back about the Corpse de guard, and ensigns of the Ioviani, as who
for his tender years could not yet endure the toylesome perils of battails,
Valentinian as a captain that liked well to hold off, and work safely,
vailing bonet, and saluting the centuries and maniples (without making any of
the great commanders privy to his secret designement, and having none of his
guard about his person) rode out with some few in his company, whose industry
and fidelity he had good proof of, to view and discover the bottomes of the
hills; giving it out (as he was an arrogant prizer and prayser of himself)
That there might be some other way found out, leading up to those high and
difficult cliffs, beside that which the fore-riders had discovered. As he went
therefore out of the way, through unknown and moist marshes, he had surely
lost his life by a sudden rode of the enemy, bestowed in ambush among the
craggie and broken cliffes, but that he took himself to the last help in
time of necessity, and setting spurs to his horse, galloped through the
slipperie mire, got away, and shrouded himself within the bosom of the
legions, and so escaped a sudden and unlooked for danger, whereto he was so
near, that a gentleman of his chamber who carried his helmet richly set with
gold and precious stones together with the very case perished quite, and could
never after be found alive or dead. After rest therefore granted for the
refreshing of their bodies, and the banner erected, which is wont to give
signal and warning to battle, at the menacing sound of the trumpets kindling
their courage, Salvius and Lupicinus, two valiant young Knights, chosen of
purpose to give the onset in dangerous service; the t one a or one of the
guard.
Targuetier, the other of the Gentiles band before all others readily stepped
forth and led the way with a most bold resolution, toward the battailons as
they began to advance, with a terrible noise stirring and enticing them
forward: and thus brandishing their spears, when they were come to the
foresaid cliffes that stood against them, and endeavored maugre the Alemans
(who shoved and thrust sore upon them) to gain the higher ground, thither came
all the maine force of the army: and in the end, following hard after these
ringleaders through the thickets of bushes, and rough brambles and briars,
with much straining of their strength got up to the high tops of the
mountain. With a great stomach therefore of both parts the conflict began by
the deadly dint and point of the sword to be tried: and of the one side the
Romans more skillful soldiers, and on the other the barbarous enemies, though
fierce, yet unwarie and inconsiderat, coped and joined hand to hand. And verily
our army displayed very large, and spreading forth the wings to enclose the
enemies on both sides, assailed them sore, terrified as they were with hideous
outcries, neighing of horses, and sounding of trumpets: yet nevertheless took
they heart again and boldly resisted. And thus for a while the hosts in equal
balance of fortune maintained fight with no small ado and endeavor, whiles the
conflict continued with mutual killing and slaying on either side. At length
such was the valiant courage of the Romans, that the enemies ranks were
broken, and for fear so shufled together, that the foremost were mingled with
the hindmost: and whiles they seek to get away by good footmanship, pierced
through they were with casting darts and javelins that the enemies launced at
them. And in the end, whiles they run fetching their wind short and all weary,
they laid open to them that followed their hammes, the calves of their legs,
and their backs. In conclusion, after many of them were beaten down,
Sebastian placed with a fresh company for supply at the back of the
mountains, slew part of them that had slipped and escaped away, by reason they
were hemmed in on that side that they took no heed of: the rest dispersed,
betook themselves to the lurking corners of the woods. In this conflict there
dyed of our part also, men of no small account, among whom was Valerianus, the
principal of all the Domestici.
guard in ordinary, and a certain esquier or targuetier, borne a very
evirate Eunuch, but such an expert and approved warrior, that he might be
compared either with old Sicinius or Sergius. These exploits thus performed
with such variety of accidents, the soldiers returned unto their Winter
harbors, and the Emperors to Triers.

CHAP. X. Probus, Pretorio Prefectus, or L. chief Justice, a most cunning and
experienced Courtier, is here lively depainted.
IN these days when Vulcatius Ruffinus was departed this life even in the time
of his For he was Prefect of the Pretorium.
government, Probus was sent for from the of Rome.
city, to rule as Prefectus Pretorio, a man for noble parentage, power, and
wealth, known all over the Roman world, in which throughout, almost from the
one end to the other he held possessions and livelodes dispersed here and
there, whether by right or wrong it lies not in my simple judgment to set
down. This man, a certain twofold u fortune (as the Poets feign) carrying with
her flight-wings, showed unto the world one while a bountiful benefactor and
advauncer of his friends to great fortunes, otherwhiles again a vengible
wayt-layer, and by bloody grudges and displeasures doing much mischief. And
albeit he could do much all his life time, by giving great largesses, and
suing continually unto those that were in high authority, yet was he now and
then timorous in any opposition with those that were bold, but bearing himself
big over such as were fearful: so that he seemed when he presumed of
himself, to creake and vaunt in a lofty tragical note, and whenever he
feared, to debase himself lower than a comicall actor. And, as all the kind of
fishes and swimming creatures driven out of their own element, live not long
upon dry land: even so drouped he, and could not hold up his head without
Prefectures, which he was forced to take upon him for the troubles and
law-suites of great families, which by reason of their infinite desires are
never innocent; and to the end they may be able to effect many designs without
punishment, use to engage their Lord deeply in the affairs of State and
government. For, confessed this must be, that being bred up in that
magnanimity as he was, he never commanded either appendant.
Client or servant of his, to do any unlawful action. But if he found that
one of them had committed any crime or heinous offense, although even Justice
her self said nay, without due inquiry made into the matter, without respect
of goodness or honesty, he would patronize it: a fault, that Cicero by way of
reprehension notes in these words: For, What difference is there (quoth he)
between the counselor to a fact, and the defendor of a fact? Or what
mattereth it whether I would have a thing done, or rejoice that it is done?
Howbeit of his own nature suspicious he was, and of a base and faint heart;
and smiling also after a bitter sort; yea and glavering otherwhiles upon a man
to do him harm (and that is a notorious and evident bad property in such
conditions, and then especially, when it is thought it may be concealed;) so
implacable and hard hearted, that if he purposed once to do a man a shrewd
turn, he could not possibly be entreated nor inclined to forgive so much as
light errors and delinquencies: and therefore his ears seemed to many men
(though they were not indeed) close stopped up. In the highest pitch of
dignities and riches, full of care, and taking thought, and in that regard
troubled always with light diseases. In this order passed the affairs in the
West parts.

CHAP. XI. Sapor King of the Persians invadeth Armenia. King Arsaces he takes
prisoner, and after dolorous torments kills him: And whiles he goes about to
murder and make away his wife and son, there fall out some accidents, which
were the seeds of a new war between Romans and Persians.
But Sapor thus long living king of the Persians, and a prince from the very
beginning of his reign much given and addicted to the sweetness of pillage
and robberies, after the decease of the Emperor Julian, and the covenants of
so dishonorable a peace concluded, seeming together with his people for a
while to friend us, brake the faithful bond of the articles of agreement made
under Iovianus, and reached at Armenia: that, as if the strength of the said
capitulations had been reversed and cancelled, he might lay the same unto his
own dominion. And first of all, by diverse false and deceitful fleights, he
put the whole nation that withstood his intent, to some small and light
damages, soliciting certain of the chief rulers and great lords of the
country, and surprising other by sudden rodes and invasions. After this, when
he had caught the king himself, Arsaces, by the means of fine allurements,
and those interlaced with perjuties, he invited him to a feast, and then
commanded him to be drawn away to a secret back door: and when he had caused
his eyes to be plucked out of his head, bound him with chains of silver, which
among them is reputed some solace and easement yet (vain though it be) for
punishment inflicted upon honorable persons, and so sent him away to a castle
named Agabana, where after much torture the executioners sword bereft him of
his head. This done, because his perfidious treachery might overpasse nothing
unpolluted and profaned, after he had deposed and driven out Souromaces, who
by the Roman authority was ruler of Hiberia, he conferred the said Potestat^m
huiusmodi, for candem.
place of government upon one Aspacures, and gave unto him beside, the royal
diadem of that nation, thereby to show, that he contemned and trod under
foot the judgment and election of our State. Which after he had effected with
a most wicked and ungodly mind, he committed the regiment of Armenia unto
Cylaces an Eunuch, and to Artabanes, whom he had in times past entertained as
traitorous fugitives from their Prince: (now one of these, before time a
captain or Prefect of that nation, was said to have been General of the
forces) and them he gave in charge, with special care to raze Artogerassa, a
town strongly walled, and stoutly manned, which had the keeping of Arsaces his
treasure, with his wife and son. These chieftaines therefore as it was
appointed, began the siege; and for that the said fortified place scituat upon
a rough and stony mountain, by reason also it was extreme cold weather, and
nothing but frost and snow, was inaccessable, Cylaces being an Eunuch, and a
meet fellow to deceive a poor woman, taking to him Artabanes, approached
quickly near unto the very walls, upon assurance given and taken of safe
return: who being with his companion received, as his request was, into the
town, persuaded the defens^^^bus.
defendants and the Queen, by a speedy surrender to appease the menacing mood
of Sapor, the most unmercifull man in the world. After this, when many words
had passed to and fro, and the woman pitifully bewailing the horrible hard
fortune of her husband, these motioners, as hot as they were for the betraying
and yielding up of the town, inclined to mercy, and changed their minds: and
upon hope also of better gain and preferment, by secret conference plotted and
ordered the matter so, that in the night season at a certain appointed hour,
the gates at once being set open, a strong company should sallie forth, and
suddenly with bloody sword assail their enemies camp, promising that
themselves would betray them into their hands, so that the attempters of this
explo it would keep their own counsel. Which when they had with a religious
oath confirmed, they went forth accordingly, and constantly avouching, that the
besieged had craved two days to be granted unto them, wherein they might
deliberate what course to take, brought the besiegers to this pass, that they
sat still and did nothing: So, whiles the sentinels by reason of security were
sound asleep that they sonored again, the city gate was set open, and out of
it there issued a nymble crew of lusty young gallants: who treading softly for
making noise, and creeping close with their swords ready drawn, entered into
their camp that feared no such matter, and whiles no man made resistance, slew
a number of them as they lay. This unlooked-for revolt, and unexpected
slaughter of the Persians, raised mighty quarrels and causes of discord
between us and Sapor: and this also aggravated the matter, for that the
Emperor Valens had entertained Para the son of Arsaces, who by the persuasion
of his mother was departed with some few other out of the said fortified town,
and commanded him to abide in Thocato, Barbaris. Nisan, Bellan.
Neocaesarea, a city of great name in Pontus x Polemoniacus, there to be kept
with liberal diet and in apparel meet for his person. With which courteous
usage Cylaces and Artabane^ allured, sent their orators, and craved of Valens
aid, yea and required to have the said Para to be their king. But aid for the
present being denied, Para was by Terentius captain conducted back into
Armenia, to reign for a time over the nation, without any regal ensigns: a
thing upon good reason and consideration observed, least we might be taxed for
the breach of covenant and peace.

CHAP. XII. After that the widow of Arsaces was taken prisoner, and her son
by cursed devices reconciled unto Sapor, the Romans help the Armenians:
whereupon the king of the Persians addresseth himself to war upon the
Romans.
WHen Sapor understood how these proceedings framed, he took on and raged
beyond all measure; and so rising in arms with greater preparation, by way of
open reises and raising of booties wasted all Armenia. At whose coming Para
being affrighted, as also Cylaces and Artabanes, looking about them for no
aid-forces, withdrew themselves into the noukes under those high mountains,
which confine between our limits and Lazica: where lying close for five
months together, among the secret woods and winding woulds, they deluded the
manifold attempts of the king. Who perceiving all his labor was lost,
considering the pinching season of mid Winter, after he had burnt all trees
bearing apples and such fruit, fortified also those piles and forts which he
had gotten either by force, or treason, with the whole puissance of his army
he beleaguered Artogerassa: and after many skirmishes and assaults with
variable event, when the defendants were toyled out, and the town laid open,
he burnt it: out of which he fetched forth the wife of Arsaces, with the
treasure aforesaid, and led her away: For which causes, Arintheus a lieutenant
was sent with an army to succor and help the Armenians, in case the Persians
should attempt to assail them again with fresh war. Mean while Sapor,
wondrous wily and crafty, as who could carry himself lowly or aloft for
his better advantage, pretending a show of some future alliance and society,
by secret messengers rebuked Para as negligent and forgetful of his own
estate, thus under a color and pretense of royal majesty to be a slave unto
Cylaces and Artabanes: whom he (too too forward in trusting these trains of
flattering and fair enticements) made no more ado but slew, and sent their
heads, when they were slain, unto Sapor, whose devoted vassale he was now
become. Upon this loss and misfortune, spread far abroad, all Armenia had
been quite lost, but that the Persians as the coming of Arintheus terrified,
made stay ere they invaded it the second time; contenting themselves with this
only, that they sent ambassadors unto the Emperor, craving, That (according
as it was agreed between them and Iovianus) the said nation might not be
protected. But they were rejected, and Sauromaces, who (as I said before) had
been displaced and expelled out of the kingdom of Hiberia, was sent back
again with twelve legions under the conduct of Terentius: and when he was now
very near unto the river Cyrus, Aspacuras requested at his hands, That since
they were cousin germans and sisters sons, they might reign jointly
together; alleging this for himself, That he could neither surrender nor
turn unto the Roman side, because his son Vltus was kept still among the
Persians as an hostage. Whereof the Emperor being informed, to the end he
might by policy and wisdom appease the troubles which were like to rise from
this affair also, condiscended to a division of Hiberia, namely, that Cyrus
the river, which ran through the midst thereof, might divice it: so that
Sauromaces should hold for his part that side which bordered upon the Armenians
and the Lazi, and Aspacuras the other, which bounded upon Chipiche. Castal.
Zuttia. Ruscello Zitracha, Incolic.
Albania and the Persians. Sapor sore aggrieved hereat, and crying out, That
indignity was offered unto the articles of agreement, in that, contrary to
the tenor of the said covenant, Armenia was succored, that the embassage which
he had sent, about the redress of this enormitie, came to nothing, and that
without his assent and privitie concluded it was, that the kingdom of Hiberia
should be divided (as if now the doors had been fast locked against all
friendship) laid for the aid of the neighbor nations about him, and put his
army in readiness, to the end that when the fair season of the year came
about, he might overthrow all that fabric which the Romans had framed for
their own behoof.

THE XXVIII. BOOK.
CHAP. I. The most miserable state of Rome city under Maximinus the Prefect,
whose parentage and rising is described.
WHiles this perfidious and disloyal dealing causes in Persia (as I have
beforesaid) unexpected troubles on the kings behalf, and wars revived in the
East parts begin again, sixteen years and upward after the death of
Nepotianus, Bellona provoked upon very small occasions to the working of woeful
calamities, raged throughout Rome, and set all in combustion: which I would to
God had been for ever buried in silence, least happily there be attempted
sometime the semblable, like to do more harm by general examples and
precedents, than by delinquencies. And albeit from the exquisite narration of
this bloody history, fear might justly pull me back (many and sundry
causes duly considered) yet presuming confidently upon the modesty of this
present age, I will summarily lay open every particular that is memorable.
Neither will I be loath and think much briefly to show, which of those
accidents that have befallen unto ancient writers it is, that I might fear. In
the first war of the Medes, when the Persians had spoiled Asia, besetting the
cities herein with huge and puissant forces, yea, and threatening the
defendants thereof with terrible torments and dolorous death, they brought the
people, thus shut up and besieged, to this extremity, that they all, sore
afflicted with great and grievous calamities, after they had killed their own
dear wives and children, and thrown their mooveable goods into the fire, cast
themselves also by heaps after them, striving a vie who might be for most in
that commune flame, that consumed them and their country together. This
argument soon after, Phrynicus digested and penned in a swelling tragical
style, and brought it upon the Stage in the Theater of Athens: and having for a
while good audience with contentment, when his high and lofty Tragoedie went
on still, and wrung forth many a tear, the people supposing that he had
insolently inserted these grievous afflictions also of theirs among
Stage Plays, not by way of consolation, but in reproachful manner, to put them
in mind of the miseries that their lovely city and country (supported with no
helps of protectors and defendors) had sustained, in heat of indignation
condemned and confined him to Miletus. For Miletus was a colonie of the
Athenians, transported and planted among other Ionians by Nileus the son of
that Codrus, who (by report) in the Dorique war devoted himself to death for
his country. But let us come to our purposed history. Maximinus, governor of
Rome in times past in place of vice-Praefect, was very obscurely borne at
Zeeblack. Simler. Soppan. Lazio.
Sopianae, a town of Styria. Lazio, a part of Pannonia.
Valeria, and his father of no better calling than a clerk, belonging to the
Presidents office, descended from the race of the Carpi, whom Diocletian
removed from out of their ancient habitations, and brought over into Pannonia.
This Maximinus after he had bestowed some mean study in the liberal
Sciences, and become a disnoble advocat and defendor of causes, when he had
also governed Corsica at this day.
Corsica and Sardegna.
Sardinia likewise, ruled Tuscane.
Thuscia. From whence being advaunced to the office and charge of Rome-cities a
purveyor for corn and victuals, by reason that his successor stayed long in
his journey, kept in his hands still the rule of that province also. And at the
first he demeaned himself very circumspectly and wisely in three respects:
first, for that the words were fresh and rife in his ears spoken by his father
(who was passing skillful in that which the flight of Augurall fowls or the
singing of birds fore-signified) implying thus much, That he should mount to
high regiments, but die in the end by the executioners hands. Secondly, because
having gotten a man of Sardinia, whom himself afterward by deceitful
treachery and crafty guile murdered (as commonly the rumor ran) one who was
very cunning in raising hurtful spirits, and soliciting the presages of such
ghosts and specter, fearing least so long as he remained alive, he should be
detected, he was more gentle and tractable. Lastly, because creeping as he did
a long time below, like a serpent lying under the ground, he could not as yet
raise any great matters of bloody and capital consequence.

CHAP. II. The beginning of Maximinus his cruelty. His Patron, and his
accomplices. Without any words of vulgar persons, mention is made of the
punishments inflicted upon Marinus, Cethegus, and Alypius.
NOw the very beginning, from whence he displayed and spread himself abroad,
arose upon such an occasion as this: Chilo late a deputy Prefect, and his
wife named Maxima, having complained unto Olybrius, Prefect of the city for
that time being, and avouching that their lives were assailed and endangered by
Witchcraft and Sercerie. Venenis.
poisons, obtained at his hands a commission, That the parties whom they
suspected should forthwith be apprehended and clapped up fast in prison, to wit,
Sericus an Organarius.
Organist, or maker of instruments, Asbolius a professor of wrestling, and
Campensis a b Soothsayer. But whiles this business waxed cool, by reason that
Olybrius was visited with long and grievous sickness, those aforesaid, who had
given information of these things, being impatient of delays, preferred a
petition, and craved, That the matter in controversy might be made over unto
the Maximinus.
Prefect of the victuals aforesaid, for to be examined accordingly. Which for
expedition sake was soon granted. Maximinus therefore having received matter
to work mischief upon, discharged and uttered his inbred rigor, that stuck
close unto his cruel heart: as oftentimes do these savage beasts, exhibited
in the Amphitheatres or Shew-places, when by breaking their back grates and
doors in pieces, they get at length to be at liberty. And when this matter was
many times handled and discussed, in flourishes (as it were) and shows, so
that some having their sides gashed and torn, nominated certain noble
persons, as if they had used workers of mischief by the means of their
dependants, and other base fellows, this divellish Inquisitor noting as well
the parties accused as the informers, and tracing them (as they say) by the
foot, roved further, and in a malicious relation advertised the prince, That
the wleked and leawd acts which many committed in Rome, could not possibly be
either searched out or punished, but by more sharp and quick justice. Who
upon the knowledge hereof being enraged (as he was an enemy to vices, rather
rigorous than severe) by virtue of one precept or warrant directed for such
causes, which he mingled with an arrogant intention of treason, decreed, That
all those, whom the justice of ancient laws, and the judgment of sacred
princes had exempted from bloody inquisitions, should, if the case so
required, be put to cruel examinations by torture. And to the end that a duple
authority, and the same strained to the height, might patch matters together,
to the utter undoing of persons in higher place, unto this Maximinus (appointed
to rule at Rome as deputy Prfect) he joined in commission for the knowing and
determining of these things (which were a framing to the danger of many) Leo, a
Notarie afterward, master of the Offices, a very swash-buckler at every
funeral, a known robber, and a Pannonian; one who breathed forth of his
savage mouth cruelty, and yet was nevertheless greedy still of man's blood.
Now the natural disposition of Maximinus bent to do mischief, was much
augmented by the coming to him of a like companion, as also by sweet letters
[from the Emperour] together with an honorable dignity. And therefore
flinging out his feet to and fro for joy as he went, he seemed to leap and
dance rather than to go, whiles he affected to imitate the Bracmans, who (as
some report) keep a sta^king and stately jetting among the altars. And now by
this time, when the trumpets of domestical miseries sounded, and all men were
amazed to see the horrible state of the world how it went, beside many cruel
and unmercifull examples (the variety and number whereof is incomprehensible)
most notable was the death of Marinus an advocate, whom upon a slight and
cursarie weighing of proofs and presumptions, he condemned to death, for
daring by Magic, Sorcerie, and Enchantments
indirect and wicked acts to seek the marriage of one Hispanilla. And because I
suppose that some men who happily shall read these reports, will be ready to
search exquisitly into particulars, and reproove me, keeping a stir and
saying, This was done first, and not that; or such things are overslipt which
themselves saw: thus far forth we are to give satisfaction unto them, namely,
That all things are not worthy to be put down in writing, which passed among
mean and base persons: neither, if that should have been needful, had we
sufficient instruction from the very records, considering how many public
miseries and misfortunes were so rife and hot, and that this new fury uncurbed
and unrestrained, made a general pudder and confusion, whiles it was evidently
known, there was not (a thing much feared) any lawful proceeding to
judgment, but a cessation of all law and justice. Then it was, that Cethegus a
Senator, accused for committing adultery, had his head chopped off; and Alypius
a noble young gentleman, for a small error was sent away and confined; yea and
other mean persons were executed and died a public death: in whose calamities
every man seeing, as it were, the image of his own peril, dreamed of nothing
but tormentors, chains, bonds, and lodging in balefull darkness.

CHAP. III. The narration of Hymetius his case. The cruelty of Maximinus
repressed for a time, is more hotly enkindled against Lollianus, Clarita,
Flaviana, Pafius, Cornelius, Sericus, Asbolius, Campensis, and Aginatius.
AT the same time was the business also in hand of Hymetius, a man of
excellent towardness and expectation: the order whereof we know was carried
in this wise. When he governed Affricke as Proconsull, he allowed corn unto
the Carthaginians (much distressed now for want of food) out of the garners
appointed for the people and State of Rome: and within a while after when the
earth had yielded plentiful store of grain, he made full restitution thereof
without any delay. But for as much as when he sold unto them that wanted, ten
modij after the rate of one c solidus, and himself had bought thirty at the
same price, the whole gain and advantage accrewing thereby, he sent into the
Princes Treasury. And therefore Valentinian supposing that by such return of
buying and selling there had been sent less than there ought to have bin,
fined him with loss of a good part of his substance. And to make his misery
the more, there fell out this occurrent also at the same time, no less
pernicious to him than the other. Amantius, a famous Soothsayer above the rest
in those days, being by secret information discovered and made known, that
for the performance and complement of some small matters, he was sent for by
the same Hymetius to sacrifice, and hereupon judicially convented, albeit he
stood stooping in manner double under the rack, stiffely and constantly denied
the same: Who whiles he still made denial, in certain private and secret
papers produced from his house, there was found a or Note.
Memorandum written with Hymetius his own hand, requesting him out of his art
and learning, by the rites and ceremonies of some solemn sacrifices, to pray
unto the divine power of the Emperor, and to procure the favor of his sacred
Majesty toward him: in the utmost part of which writing there was read a
certain invective against the said Emperor, as being a covetous and cruel
Prince. Valentinian advertised hereof, by relation of some informers, who made
construction of all things that were done in the worst sense, commanded there
should be inquisition made into this business in most rigorous manner. And for
that Frontinus a practiser with Amantius abovesaid, was charged to have been
Consutarius, a partner or Counselor.
the minister of that form of prayer which was made, when he had been well
tewed with rods, and compelled to confess, he was banished into Britain: but
Amantius condemned afterward for capital matters suffered death. After these
affairs in this order passed, Hymetius being brought to the town Ottegoli.
O criculum, to have his cause heard, by Ampelius Prefect of the city, and
Maximinus vice Prefect, and like (as it seemed) presently to be put away, when
he had liberty granted to speak, took the better course, and appealed for
succor to the Emperor, and so protected under the safeguard of his name, was
kept in ward safe. And the Princes pleasure being asked, What should be done
with him? he committed the managing of this cause unto the Senate. Who finding
by the equal balance of justice how the case stood, and thereupon confining
him to Boae, a place in Dalmatia, could hardly endure the Emperors wrath, who
chafed mightily when he understood, that a man destined (as himself intended)
to death, had his punishment by a milder sentence. For these and many such like
examples, the dangers seen in a few, men begun to fear would light upon
them. And least, if so many enormities being winked at, and creeping on still
by little and little, there might grow whole heaps of miseries, by virtue of a
decree passed by the the Senators.
Nobility, ambassadors were dispatched unto the Emperor, by name Pretextatus
who had been Prefect of the city, Venustus sometime deputie-Prefect, and
Minervius late a Consular Governor of a Province, with this supplication, That
there should not be inflicted punishment more grievous than the offenses
required; and that no Senator (after an unexampled and unlawful manner) might
be exposed unto tortures. Who being admitted into the Consistory, when they
made report of these particulars aforesaid; as Valentinian denied that ever he
ordained such a course, and cried out, that he was traduced and sustained
abuse, Eupraxius the Questor in modest terms reproved him for it. By whose
liberty of speech, that cruel proceeding thus begun, which exceeded all
precedents of rigor, was reformed. About this time Lollianus a young
gentleman, in the very prime of his youth, the son of Lampadius, who had
been Prefect, being by Maximinus, who looked narrowly into his cause,
convicted to have copied forth a book of as magic, witch. craft, charms etc.
divelish arts (when by reason of young years his head was not well stayed) and
upon the point to be sent into exile (as it was feared) at the motion and
instigation of his father appealed to the Emperor. And being commanded to be
led from thence unto his or Court, Comitatum.
Counsel, which was (as they say) out of the smoke in the flame, was delivered
over to Phalangius the governor of the province Audaluzia.
Baetica, and lost his life by the hangmans hand. Over and besides these,
Taratius Bassus, afterward Prefect of the city, and his brother Camenius,
likewise one Marcianus and Eusaphius, all Clarissimi.
noble persons, and of Senators degree, were brought into question, and had
their trial: for that as privy all to one and the same practice of sorcerie,
they were named to favor and make much of Auchenius the Who peradventure could
skill of Sorcerie, etc.
Chariotier: but for that the evidences and proofs were as then but doubtful,
they went away quit, by the means and help of Victorinus (as the running
rumor went) who was a most inward friend to Maximinus. Neither escaped women
free, but had their part also no less in the like calamities. For, even of
this very sex were many of high birth put to death, as guilty of the foul
crimes either of adultery or whoredom: among whom Claritas and Flaviana were
of greatest name; of which the altera, to wit, Flaviana.
one being led to execution, they stripped so near out of all her apparel
wherewith she was clad, that she was not permitted to keep about her, so much
as would suffice to cover her secret parts: And therefore the executioner
convicted to have committed a most lewd and shameful fact, was burnt quick.
Moreover Pafius and Cornelius Senators both, convinced to have polluted
themselves with the damnable sleights of poisoning and sorcerie, were by the
definitive sentence of the same Maximinus put to death. In like sort also the d
Procurator of the Mint lost his life. For, an Organ-maker or Organist.
Sericus and a professed wrestler.
Asbolius before named, because in exhorting them to appeach and name in any
place whom they thought good, he promised faithfully with an oath, That he
would command none of them to be punished either by fire or sword, he caused
to be killed with the mighty pelts of e plumbets: And after this he awarded
Campensis the Soothsayer to the flaming fire, for that in his affair he was
not tied to any such oath. And now convenient it is, as I suppose, to declare
the cause that drove headlong upon his own death and destruction Aginatius, a
man of noble ancestors descended, according as it has been constantly
reported: For, as touching this matter, there be no evident records extant.
Maximinus, whiles he was yet Prefect of the corn and victuals, puffing and
brawling still in a proud spirit of his own, and having gotten no mean
instigations and encouragement of boldness, proceeded so far as to the
contempt of Probus, in the rank of right honorable persons the greatest of
all other, and, by virtue of the Prefecture of the Pretorium, a governor of
provinces. Which, Aginatius taking to be a mighty indignity, and setting it
also to his heart, that in examining of causes Olybrius had preferred Maximinus
before him, considering himself had been deputie-Prefect of Rome, secretly in
familiar talk showed unto Probus, That the vain man spurning as he did
against persons of high desert might be overthrown and brought to confusion,
if he thought so good. These letters, as some affirmed, Probus sent (making no
body privy thereto but the bearer) unto Maximinus as standing in great fear
of him, grown now more cunning and expert in doing mischief, and besides in
grace and reputation with the Emperor. Which when he had read, the man fell
into such a heat of rage, that from thenceforth he bent all his engines, and
levelled his bolts at Aginatius, like to some serpent wounded and squized by a
known person. Beside this, there was another greater cause of practicing the
overthrow of Aginatius, the which brought him to utter destruction. For he
accused Victorinus, now dead, That whiles he lived he had sold the friendship
of Maximinus, and gained by his proceedings: by whose last will and testament
himself had received no small legacies. And in like malapert sauciness he
threatened his wife Anepsia, to go to law and by litigious suits to molest her:
Who fearing these troubles, to the end she might be protected also by the aid
of Maximinus, feined and devised, That her husband in his will which he lately
made, left unto him a legacy of three thousand pound weight in silver: Who
burning in excessive desire and covetousness (for he was not without this vice
also) claimed the one moitie of the inheritance. But not resting contented
herewith, as being but a small portion, and nothing sufficient, he devised
another feat, which, as he thought, was both honest and safe: and because he
would not forgo his hold of so good means offered unto him to gain a wealthy
patrimony, he sued to have the daughter in law of Victorinus (whom his wife
Anepsia bare unto a former husband) for to be his sons wife: the which with
the assent of the woman was soon obtained and concluded.

CHAP. IIII. The detestable sleights and practices of Maximinus, that he might
continue still in that butcherly execution of his, now being created Prefectus
Pretorio. Diverse successors after him in the Prefectship of the city; the last
of whom exceeds the cruelty of Maximinus.
BY these and other prankes with like sorrow to be lamented, which greatly
blemished and stained the beauty of Rome, that immortal city, this man not
to be named but with a groan, made outrageous spoil by the manifold overthrows
of men's estates, stretching and straining his power beyond the bounds of law
and justice. For, by report, he both had a small cord always hanging at a
certain remote window of the Pretorium, the Summitas, for this author uses it
indifferently
one end whereof should tie or bind together a certain Here am I gladly
Scepticus: whiles one takes it for a nonze, another a pulley, a third for a
hatchet and a fourth for, I woe not what, bloody substance etc. I suppose they
almisle the mark: and until we may meet with a more perfect copy I cannot
determine. The place I doubt is corrupt.
Tamusa (as it were) not grounded verily upon any proofs or presumptions, but
like to do mischief unto many guiltless persons: And also commanded sundry
times Mutianus and Barbatus, his daily officers and ministers, fellows most
apt and fit to deceive others, severally to be clapped up. These, as if they
bewailed their own woeful mishaps, whereby they made semblance that they were
wronged and oppressed, aggravating still the cruelty of the said judge, and
iterating the same speeches very often, pretended and affirmed, That for
persons standing then accused and in trouble, there was now no other means or
remedy remaining to save their own lives, unless they would seem to charge
and accuse some of the nobility of great crimes, who if they were once joined
with them in society of danger, then they warranted them they might be easily
quit and absolved. By reason whereof, considering that the vile impiety of
these courses proceeded further now than to abjects near at hand, it came to
pass that many a man had his hands straight manacled; and those of noble birth
were seen as unregarded, in poor plight and much distressed. Neither ought
any of them to be blamed, when in their simple salutations they crouched and
bowed their bodies so low, as that they welneere touched the very ground,
considering they heard this robber with the pestiferous breath of his mouth
come out oftentimes with this note, If he were so disposed, that no person
could possibly be found innocent. Which words turning quickly into deeds, had
been enough, I assure you, to have terrified as good men as ever Numa
Pompilius or Cato were. For in this wise altogether were matters carried, that
some men's eyes were never dry, but shed fresh tears in the beholding of other
folks miseries, a thing that commonly in this life happens to men, upon
sundry troubles and cross accidents of their own. Howbeit this hard hearted
judge how ever he went oftentimes from the course of right and justice, yet in
one special point tolerable he was. For, otherwhiles he would spare and
pardon some if he were requested and entreated: which, as we read in Tullie,
savoureth yet of some vice in this place of authority. For if wrath (quoth he)
be implacable, it is rigor and bitterness in the highest degree; but if it be
exorable, it is as great a lightness and vanity: which notwithstanding, as in
choice of bad things, is to be preferred before bitterness. After this, when
Leo went forward, and was admitted his successor, Maximinus being sent for to
the princes court, and advaunced to be Praetor Praetorio, became never a jot
milder, but did harm still even a far off, like to the serpents called
Basiliskes or Cocatrices. Against that time, or not much before, the very
beesomes wherewith the noblemens * Curia used to be swept, were seen to bloome
and bear blossoms: and this portended, that some persons of most contemptible
and base condition, were to be raised unto high degrees of rule and authority.
And although it be now high time to return unto the order of our History
begun, yet without hindering the process of times, we will tarry a while in
rehearsing some few particulars, that through the iniquity of those, who
governed as deputy Prfects in the city, were done otherwise than ought to
have been; which were carried all according to the will and pleasure of
Maximinus, by the same ministers, as his agents or apparitors. After him
comes Vrsicinus in place; a man more inclined to milder courses: who because
he would be wary and civil, gave information, and referred over to the
Emperor Esaias, with others kept in hold, for committing adultery with
Ruffina; and who had gone about to accuse and indict her husband Marcellus,
late a Pursivant or Intelligencer, of Treason: And therefore he, despised as a
lingering delayer, and nothing meet for the stout execution and quick dispatch
of these matters, was put out of his deputicship. After him succeeded
Simplicius Hemonensis; who of a professor in Grammar became counselor unto
Maximinus after the administration of his deputieship: a man neither stout nor
proud, but of a crooked and terrible aspect; who, seeming to frame his words to
a kind of modesty, studied and plotted the mischief of many. And first he put
to death Ruffina, together with all those that were either parties culpable in
the matter of adultery, or privy thereto: as touching whom, Vrsicinus (as I
said before) had given information: Then, many others, without any difference
of guilty or innocent. For in this bloody battle, contending with Maximinus
(marshalled as it were in the maine battle before him) he endeavored to
outgoe him in cutting the sinews (as one would say) of noble families:
imitating g Busiris in old time, as also Antaeus and Phalaris; so as there
seemed naught wanting but that Bull of Agrigentum.

CHAP. V. The horrible death of Hesychia a Matron. The tragical history of
Fausiana, the bloody Catastrophe whereof is acted by Aginatius and Anepsia,
married folk, put to death at the commandment of Maximinus. The just
judgment of the almighty powers in punishing Maximinus and other bloody
butchers.
THese and such like matters in this manner passed, a certain matrone named
Hesychia, fearing very much some hard dealing and cruel torture for the crime
wherewith she stood charged, in the house of an apparitor or sergeant, unto
whom she was committed to ward, cast her face grovelling upon a featherbed, and
so stopping the breath of her nosthrils, ended her life. And here take with you
another mischief as cruel as the rest. For Eumenius and Abienus both, of a
most honorable rank, having been slandered, under Maximinus, with Fausiana, a
worshipful gentlewomen, after the death of who was a very inward friend with
Maximinus.
Victorinus, by whose help they lived in more security, skared now with the
coming of Simplicius, a man no less minded to do great matters, and that
with menaces, betook themselves to live close and secret. But after that
Fausiana was condemned, their indictments being taken, and themselves
peremptorily called to their answers by virtue of edicts, hid themselves
farther out of the way: and as for Abienus, he shrouded himself privily a
long time in Anepsiaes house. But, as usually it falls out, that when folk
are once going down, some cross accidents or other unlooked for will be sure
to attend upon them, to aggravate their calamities, a servant of Anepsia, named
Apaudulus, taking it very grievously, that his wife had borne some stripes in
the house, went forth by night, and gave notice of all unto Simplicius: So
there were officers sent, who upon the said discovery made, had them away out
of their lurking place; and Abienus verily, upon the crime of adultery
strongly enforced against him, which he was said to have committed upon the
body of Anepsia, suffered death: but the woman, to the end that by deferring
her punishment, she might have assured hope to save her life, avouched, That
being by cursed and by enchantmem and sorcerie.
wicked arts assailed, she suffered that dishonor and violence in Aginatius
his house. These things as they happened, Simplicius rung out again into the
Emperors ears; and Maximinus, who abode there, upon a malicious mind that he
bare against Aginatius already for the cause above specified, now that his
privy grudge was together with his power and authority more incensed, made an
exceeding earnest suit, that there might be a letter sent back again, for to
have him executed. And verily this braine-sicke incitor, and mighty withal,
soon obtained so much: but fearing the heavy load of envy and hatred, in
case a man of noble birth should come to his death by sentence of judgment,
that Simplicius, both his own counselor and friend also, pronounced, kept
with himself for a while the Emperors precept; being at a stay, and doubting
whom he might find out especially to be a trusty and sure executor of this
horrible design. And at the last (as commonly like will easily sort with like)
he lighted upon one Doryphorianus, a Gaul, and a bold frantic person; on
whom, for promising shortly to accomplish this service, he took order, that a
deputieship should be conferred, and to him he delivered the precept, together
with the Emperors letters, instructing the man, cruel though he was, yet
unexpert and unskilful, with what expedition he might without all let or
impeachment dispatch Aginatius, who peradventure, upon finding out any means
of delay, would escape and be gone. Doryphorianus sped himself in all have,
and took long journeyes till he came to Rome: and at his first coming,
before all complements of salutation ended, he cast about, and with great
diligence sought, by what forcible device, with the help of some others, he
might take away the life of a Senator, so nobly descended: and having
intelligence, that but a while before he had been found in a farme-house or
manor of his own, himself with a stern countenance determined to have the
judicial hearing of Anepsia, as the chief of all the offenders; and that
during the ugly dark night, what time folks minds, possessed with horror and
terror, use to be dull and dead, as among an infinite number of examples, h
Ajax also in Homer shows, wishing to dye by daylight, rather than to abide
the terrors of the nightly fear. And for that this Judge, or rather a wicked
Brigand, intending only that which he promised, made every thing greater than
it was, when he had commanded Aginatius to be brought before him judicially,
he caused a number of hangmen and tormentors to enter in place, and whiles the
chains made an hideous noise with their jingling, he tortured to the very
point of death the poor slaves, pined with foul usage and evil keeping a
long time, to endanger by some evidence their lord and masters life: a thing
that most mild and merciful laws have forbidden to be done in the question
and matter of or adultery: stup^^. for this word is otherwhiles taken as large
for all incontinencie.
fornication. In the end, when some torments were so grievously inflicted, that
they had expressed from a silly maid servant, now ready to dye, certain
ambiguous or suspicious words, no sooner was the evidence by her given, fully
discussed and sifted, but without any more ado definitive sentence was
pronounced, That Aginatius should be led to execution. And thus without any
audience given him (notwithstanding with a loud voice he called upon the names
of Princes and Emperors) hoisted he was away on high, and put to death: and by
the like sentence Anepsia was also executed. As Maximinus himself played these
prankes both in his own person whiles he was present, and also by his
pragmaticall and busy agents, when he was far off, Rome city bewailed the
death of many. But the Furies made have to revenge those that were thus slain.
For (as it shall hereafter be showed in due season) not only the same
Maximinus, bearing himself intollerably proud under Gratianus, was condemned
and suffered death, but Simplicius also was killed and cut in pieces in
Illyricum; yea, and Doryphorianus, pronounced guilty of death, and thrust into
the deep dungeon i Tullianum, the prince by his mothers counsel fetched
forth from thence; and when he was returned to his own home in Gaul, with
dolorous torments made an end of him. But now return we from whence we turned
hither. Thus stood the state (as I may so say) of the city affairs.

CHAP. VI. Valentinian goes about to bridle the rodes and invasions of the
Alemans: and they having sued for peace, but not obtained it, set upon the
Romans at unawares, and kill two of their martial leaders.
But Valentinian conceiving great matters in his mind, and those of behoofefull
consequence, fortified the Rhene all along, from the beginning of Rhaetia, unto
the narrow sea or Frith of the Ocean, with mighty pyles and banks; raising up
castles, skonces, forts and turrets of a great height, one by another raunged
along in meet and convenient places along the coast of Gaul, as far as it
reaches in length, yea, and otherwhiles with houses and buildings planted
beyond the rivers, encroaching somewhat upon the limits of the Barbarians, and
winning ground. Finally, when he cast with himself and considered, how that
high built and strong fenced fortress, which himself at his first entrance
had founded out of the very ground, by reason that the river named Neckar.
Nicer running hard by, might by little and little with the violent beating of
the waves be undermined and subverted, he devised to turn the stream another
way: and having sought out and gotten together cunning workmen, skillful in
water-workes, and a number beside of stout soldiers, he entered upon this hard
piece of work: For certain maine pieces of timber, and those of Oak, for
many days together were framed and couched close, and the same cast into the
channel; notwithstanding huge posts forcibly pitched down hard by, and
eftsoons pitched again, at the rising of the mighty billows were shuffled
and huddled together, yea, and plucked up with the violence of the stream, and
broken in sunder. Yet for all this, the great and earnest care of the Emperor,
together with the painful labor of the dutiful soldiers (who oftentimes
when they were at work stood up to the chin plunged in water) overcame all
difficulties. And so at the last, not without danger of some, the garrison
forts were rid quite from the trouble wrought by the mighty wandering river,
and now stand strong and sure. Being glad therefore, and rejoicing at so good
speed, and gathering those together, who according to the time and season of
the year were slipped sundry ways, he had a care of the Commonwealth, as
beseemed the duty of a prince. And supposing this to be most fit and meet for
the effecting of that which he intended, he purposed in all have to build a
fort on the farther side of Rhene, upon the mountain where now is Speyr. Herald.
Pirus (which place is within the Barbarians ground) and to the end that quick
dispatch might work withal a sure effect of this business, he advertised
Arator the lord marcher, by Syagrius then or principal Secretary.
Notarie, afterward Prefect and Consul, that whiles all was still and silent
on every side, he should endeavor to take the vantage thereof. So the Marcher,
together with the said Notarie, went straightwayes over the water, as he was
commanded: and having begun by the help of the soldiers whom he led, to lay
the foundation, received Hermogenes to be his successor. And at the very same
instant certain nobles and lords of the Alemanes, the Emperors hostages,
came; those I mean, whom according to covenant, and as sufficient pledges of
peace long to continue, we had in keeping: who humbly upon their knees
besought, That the Romans (whose loyalty and faith at all times had extolled
up to heaven their fortune) without forecast of future security would not be
deceived with a false error, nor by treading their covenants underfoot, enter
upon an unworthie action. But delivering, as they did, these and such like
speeches in vain, when they could neither have hearing, nor perceive any mild
answer returned, lamenting the destruction of their children and posterity,
departed. And no sooner were they gone, but out of a secret nouke of an hill
hard by, there leapt forth a company of the Barbarians, waiting, as we were
given to understand, what answers should be given unto those nobles aforesaid;
and setting upon our soldiers, half naked, and even then busy in carrying of
mould, with their swords, lightly and nimbly appointed as they were, slew them
downright; among whom were also both the leaders slain: neither was there
one left to tell news of what was done but only Syagrius; who, after all the
rest were put to the sword, returned to the court, and by sentence of the
prince in his anger, cassed and discharged of his military oath and service,
went home to his own house, judged by rigorous censure to have deserved no
less, for that he escaped alone.

CHAP. VII. Gaul is infested by robbers, and Constantianus Tribune of the
stable slain. The Maratocupreni, other brigands, play their theevish parts in
Syria. The Saxons likewise in Britanie are repressed by Theodosius, who is
created General of the horsemen.
IN this mean while, a rabble of outrageous and cruel robbers swarmed all
over Gaul, to the mischief and utter undoing of many; besetting the
frequented high ways, and failing not to lay along and spoil what fruits of
the earth soever came in their way. To be short, besides a number of others,
who lost their lives by such wait-layers, Canstantianus, Tribune of the stable,
and near kinsman to Valentinian, a brother also to Cerealis and Iustina, was
by a privy rode intercepted, and soon after killed. But a far off, as if
the furies of hell haunted the like thieves and pricked them forward; the
Maratocupreni, most fierce brigands, the inhabitants of a Maratocuprenum.
town carrying that name in Syria, scituat near unto Apamia, raunged on
every side: and a wonder it was what a number they were, and how cunning and
crafty beside: In this regard also much dreaded, for that making show of
substantial merchants houses, villages and towns: neither could any man beware
of their sudden coming, setting as they did their journey not to any one
appointed place, but to sundry quarters, and those far removed, and in one
word, breaking in wheresoever the wind served to conduct them. For which very
cause, the Saxons are feared above other enemies, doing that they do all on a
sudden. And albeit many men's goods were given and dealt among these confederat
thieves, yet incontinent herewith, when they were once set a madding and entered
into any intended furious action, they committed woeful murders, as being no
less bloud-thirstie than greedy of prey. But least in reporting every
particular occurrent I should hinder the course and proceeding of my story, it
shall suffice to put down this one most mischievous practice of theirs. A
damned crew of these godless and ungracious folk being gathered in a plump
together, resembling in outward show the whole office of a Receivor or Auditor,
and the Judge himself, in a dark evening at the doleful sound of trumpet,
and voice of crier, entered a city, and with sword in hand beset the stately
and sumptuous built house of a certain noble and principal personage, as if
he had been outlawed, and by special commission to be slain: where, after
they had seized into their hands and carried away household stuff of much
worth, because they of the house being suddenly taken, and their wits
maskered, had not defended the master thereof, slew a number, and before return
of the daylight departed and went their ways a great pace. But when thus
furnished and laden with the spoil of many, for nothing went beside their
hands, that was not too hot or too heavy (such was the sweetness they found
in these cheits) intercepted they were by a power that the Emperor raised, and
being over-matched lost their lives to the very last man: yea and their issue
and progeny, then but young and small, for fear they should grow up, like
unto their parents, were in the same manner utterly destroyed, and their
dwelling houses subverted, which with the lamentable losses of many they had
bravely built. And thus verily went things according to the narration
aforesaid. But Theodosius, a noble and renowned captain, having gotten heart
and courageous vigor, taking his journey from Augusta, which in old time they
called London.
Lundinium, with a power of soldiers that in his politic industry he had
levied and trained to his hand, brought exceeding great succor unto the
troubled and confused state of the Britans, gaining before hand such places
every where, as gave advantage to annoy the barbarous enemies, and enjoining
the common soldiers no service, whereof himself took not the essay with a
cheerful heart. And in this kind as he performed the principal part of a
stout souldior, and fulfilled the careful function of an excellent leader, by
discomfiting and putting to flight sundry nations, whom insolent pride
nourished with security, had incensed and incited to set upon the Romans
territories, he restored wholly into the former state cities and castles which
had sustained many losses, yea established peace surely founded for a long
time. Now, there happened whiles he managed these affairs a foul matter, like
to break out to a dangerous mischief, if it had not been quenched in the
very beginning of the enterprise. One Valentinus in Stiria.
Pannonia Valeria, a man of a proud spirit, brother unto the wife of Maximinus
that cursed and mischievous deputy, afterward Prefect, being banished into
Britannie for an heinous act committed, as one impatient of rest, like some
noisome wild beast, upon a certain swelling humor of pride, rose up to work
mischief and innovation in the State against Theodosius, whom he perceived to
be the only man able to withstand his wicked designs. Howbeit, casting many
ways about both closely and openly, as the gale of his unmeasurable desire
rose higher, he solicited the exiled persons and the soldiers, promising (as
the time would afford) rewards for their attempts, thereby to draw them on to
his purpose. And now, when the time drew near, that their attempts should take
effect, the Theodosius.
warlike leader aforesaid, advertised hereof by such as were meet to give
information, and thereby ready to adventure, as also upon a resolute and
courageous heart, forward enough to be revenged of such as were detected,
committed Valentinus verily with some few of his most inward confederats, unto
captain Dulcitius for to be executed with death accordingly. But in his
military skill and policy, wherein he excelled all men living in those days,
guessing at future dangers, he inhibited all inquisitions to be made as
touching the rest of the conspirators with him, least if this fear proceeding
were once spread among many, the tempestuous troubles of the provinces, now well
allayed, should revive again. From hence, turning himself to the distress of
many matters, and those of needful consequence, now that all danger was quite
past (for that it was for certain known, that propitious fortune never failed
him in all his enterprises) he reedified and repaired cities, the garrison
castles also, as I have said, and the marches he defended with out-watches,
with guards and fore-fences. And thus having recovered the province again,
which had yielded subjection to the enemies, he reduced it unto the pristine
estate; so, as by his own relation and report made, it both had a lawful
governor, and also was from that time called k Valentia, at the pleasure of the
Prince. The Areans, a kind of people instituted by those in ancient time
(concerning whom I have said somewhat in the acts of Constans) who by little
and little were fallen into disorders and enormities, he removed from their
stations: as being manifestly convicted, that induced with the greatness of
rewards received, and more promised, they had otherwhiles revolted unto the
Barbarians, what was in hand and a doing among us. For, their office was this,
by running a great ground to be cursitours to and fro, and to intimate unto our
captains upon the marches, what sturres there were among the neighbor
nations. Thus having managed most excellently these matters abovesaid, and
others the like, being sent for to the Emperors Court, and leaving behind him
the provinces leaping and dancing for joy: like unto Furius Camillus, or
Papyrius Cursor, renowned he was for many victories, and those of good
importance. And so, accompanied with the favor of all men to the narrow seas,
having passed over with a gentle gale he came to the Princes camp. And being
received with joy and praises, he succeeded in the room of Valens Iovinus,
who had the conduct of the horsemen.

CHAP. VIII. A return to the city affairs. The Prefectship or government of
Olybrius and Ampelius. The most corrupt state of Rome in those days. The
errors and delinquencies of the Nobility.
HAving thus a long time and far digressed from the city businesses (such
was the heap of foreign affairs that forced me thereunto) I will return to
a brief declaration thereof, beginning at the Prefectship of Olybrius, which
was exceeding quiet and mild. Who leaving at no time the constant course of
gentleness and humanity, was solicitous and careful that no deed or word of
his savouring of rigor should pass in any place: a most bitter enemy and
inveyer against false accusations, abridging wheresoever he could the gain
accrewing to the Exchequer: an absolute discerner and judge of things that are
just, and very temperat toward those that were under his jurisdiction. But
there was a vice, and the same verily little hurtful to the Commonwealth
(howbeit a foul blot in a judge of high place) that darkened all these good
parts: for that he passed the whole course and carriage, in manner, of his
private life in clining to riot in stage plays and amorous delights, such as
were neither forbidden nor dishonest. After him Ampelius ruled the city, a man
given himself also to his pleasures, borne at Antioch, raised from being
Master of the Offices to a double Proconsulship, and from thence long after to
the high dignity of of the Pretorium.
Prefect: a man otherwise of merry disposition, and most meet to win the
peoples favor; but now and then rough and rigorous, and would God he had been
steadfast and constant in his purpose: for, in some part, though it were but
little, he might have reformed the instigations to gluttony and shut up
naughty houses of riot, had he not taken to loose and lascivious ways, and
thereby lost that glory which would long time have lived. For, once ordained
he had, That no wine Tavern should be opened before the ten of the clock.
fourth hour of the day, nor any of the vulgar sort 1 heat his water, or until
a certain time of the day any cooks or skullians set out to sale flesh boiled
or roasted: Neither would he have any man of honest calling be seen eating
abroad without his own doors. Which shameful abuses, and others greater than
these, neglected by continual dissimuling and counivencie, grew so rife and
common, without all stint and gage, that even m Epimenides himself of Candie.
Crete, if, after the fashion of fables acted on the stage, he should be raised
from the dead again, and return into our world, would not be sufficient alone
to cleanse Rome. So great was the corruption of incurable vices that possessed
the most part of the people. And first will we set down the disorders of the
Nobility, as diverse times we have done, as the opportunity of places has
required: then, afterward of the commons, by way of a brief digression
knitting up such matters as come into our minds. Some growing to be, as they
imagine, conspicuous by their glorious and goodly fore names extol themselves
above all measure: as for example, when they are called Ruburti, Plabunij,
Pagonij, Geriones and Dalij, together with Tarracij and Perrasij, and many
other such trim and brave sounding titles of their original descent. Some ye
have again, whom rufling in their silks and velvets, there follow in train
(as if they were to be led unto the place of execution, or, to speak without
any evil presaging offe, gathering their armor together, where an host is gone
before) a number of servants by troops, bustling and making a great noise as
they go. Such as these, when they are entered within the vaulted rooms of any
Stew or hothouse.
baine, attended with fifty serving-men apeece at their heels, crying out in
menacing manner, Where? Where be they? if happily they have intelligence given
them, that either some unknown courtisan has on a sudden appeared, or a
common strumpet that sometime has prostituted her self to the whole town, or
some old whore naught of her body, they run all at once striving a vie who
shall be foremost; and after some dalliance with this stranger or new commer,
they make love, and by way of much unseemly flattery, fall to praising and
extolling of her, as much as the Parthyans do n Semiramis, Egypt Cleopatra,
the Carians Artimisia, or the Palmyrenes Zenobia. And this bash not those to
do, in whose ancestors time a Senator was taxed and fined by the Censour,
that durst, whiles it was not decent and seemly, kiss his own wife, before
the daughter of them both. Of these there be some, who when they begin to be
saluted, or greeted breast to breast, turning their heads awry when they should
be kissed, and brideling it like unto cursed and fierce bulls, offering unto
their flattering favorites their knees or hands to kiss, supposing that
favor sufficient for them to live happily, and be made for ever; yea and that
a stranger unto whom happily they be obliged, has enough and enough again of
all manner of courteous usage, in case he be but asked by them, What baine or
water he frequenteth? or under whose roof he lodges? And being such grave
persons and lovers of virtue, as they take themselves to be, if they once but
understand of any man bringing word, there be either horses or chariotiers
coming to town, from what place soever, they throng about him, and ply him
with a number of questions, like as our forefathers with admiration beheld
their two brethren o Castor and Pollux, when upon the relation of those
victories in ancient times, they filled all the city with joy and mirth.
These men's houses, ye shall have certain idle talkative fellows ordinarily
to haunt, after sundry sorts and devised fashions of flattery, at every word
sounding their high fortunes, and praising them: affecting herein the
ridiculous conceits and pleasant jests of these smel-feast-parasites in
comedies. For, as they use to sooth up vain glorious soldiers in their proud
homor, ascribing unto them as to the demie-gods fellows, the besieging of
cities, fighting of battles, and slaying thousands of enemies: even so these
also, wondering at their columns built arch-wise with stately and lofty
fronts, their stone walls also trimly set out with beautiful and glorious
colors, extol noble men above the degree of mortal weights. Otherwhiles also
at their feasts, is the balance called for to weigh the fishes and fowls, yea
and p dormice to, that are set upon the board. The greatness of which
delicates oftentimes not without the irksome weariness of those that be in
place, they make no end of praising, as a strange thing that has not bin
heretofore seen. But most of all, when there stand by ready to number the
same, thirty notaries welneere, with their standishes with pen and ink, and
writing tables in their hands, so as a man would think there were wanting
only the master himself, to make a show of a Grammar school. Some there be,
who in detestation of learning no less than very poison, fall to reading with
very earnest study Iuvenall and an Historiographer.
Marius Maximus, handling no other books in the midst of their greatest
leisure than these: what the reason thereof should be, it passes my simple
skill and judgment to set down: whereas they ought to turn over many and
sundry volumes, according to the amplitude of their glory and parentage;
hearing, as they do, that Socrates committed to prison, and appointed to
suffer death, requested one who sung excellently in measures certain verses of
the Lyricke q Poet Stesichorus, to teach him whiles he had time the like
cunning: and when the Musician asked him, What good that could do unto him,
since he was to die the next day? he answered thus: Even that I may depart out
of this life, learning more than I knew before.

CHAP. IX. The reproaches of Senators and gowned men laid open.
MOreover, there be among them so few grave punishers of faults, that if a
servant be somewhat slow in bringing hot water unto him, commandment is given,
That he shall have three hundred stripes: but if wilfully he kill a man (though
many there be very urgent to have him condemned) yet his lord or master alone
thus far forth cries out, What should a mad man and a lewd knave do?
Furthermore, this is held a point of civilitie among them now adays, That it
is convenient for any one, and even by law in their power, to kill strangers
invited by them, if they make default, any excuse notwithstanding. For a
Senator thinks, that he sustaineth great damage in his very patrimony, in
case one be wanting whom he has invited once to a feast, after sundry serious
consultations with himself thereabout. There be some of them, who if they have
gone forth any thing far to see their lands and possessions, or a hunting by
other men's labors, suppose they have equalled the journeyes and expeditions of
Alexander the Great, or of Caesar; yea, or if from the lake Lago di Tripergola.
Avernus they go by water in their painted barges no farther than to Puzzole.
Puteoli or Gaietta.
Cajeta, especially if they adventure such a voyage in a hot season: where, if
it chance that among their gilded fannes there settle flies upon the silken
fringes, or in case any small Sun-beame pierce through an hole of or Bon-grace.
the tilt, hanging over their heads, they whine and complain, that they were
not borne among the r Cimmerij. Again, when they use to come from the baine of
s Sylvanus, or the medicinable waters of Mammaea, as any of them being forth of
the Bath, does wipe and dry himself with most fine linnens, there must be
diligent seeking into the usual presses for fair and dainty clothes, and
that by the help of light to choose them; which are carried at once together so
many as are sufficient to serve eleven persons. And at the last being enwrapped
or clad in some of them, picked out especially of purpose, he takes his rings
again which he had delivered unto his servants, because they should not take
hurt by the hot waters, and so when he has fitted them just by measure upon
his fingers, away he goes. Of these there be certain, though few, who decline
the name of Aleatores, i. Dice-players, and therefore are desirous to be called
Tesserarij, i. Tirlers of square bones; between whom there is as much
difference as between thieves and robbers. Yet thus much I must confess, that
whereas all sorts of friendship at Rome wax luke warm and begin to cool, this
only of Dice-players, as if it were gotten with glorious sweat and travail,
is full of good fellowship, and knit most fast and firm with exceeding love
and affection. Whence it is, that some there be found of these companies so
linked in amity, that one would take them to be very brethren. And therefore a
man shall see an ignoble and base fellow, so he be skillful in the secret feat
of cheators craft, like unto Cato Porcius for the repulse of a Praetorship
(which repulse was neither suspected before, nor feared) go with a set
gravitie very sad and melancholicke, because at a great feast or assembly some
Proconsular person was placed above him. Some there are that lie in wait for
weak and crasie persons, old or young, it skilleth not, such as have buried
their children, or live single, yea, and those also that have wives and
children both (for in this case there is no difference observed) enticing and
drawing them on by wonderful wyles and crafty devices to make their Wills: now
these folk no sooner have ordained their last Testaments, and left that which
they had to those whom they were ruled by in making their Wills, but immediately
they peake aside, and die. Another ye shall have, who after some dignity and
promotion obtained, walks portly with a big and bolne neck of his own, and
upon such as were of his familiar acquaintance before, he casts a crooked and
overthwart look, a man would think who sees him, that a new M. t Marcellus
were returned from the winning of Syracusa. Many there be among them, that
deny there is any high power above in heaven to govern us here; neither go
they forth of doors, nor take their dinner, nor think they can bath in
safety, before they have curiously looked into their u Ephemerides, where (for
example) is the Planet of Mercury, or what degree of the sign Cancer the
Moon holds, as she runs her course in the heaven. Another, if he perceive
once that his creditour calls hard upon him for debt, runs presently to a
chariotier that dares do any thing very audaciously, and takes order to have
the party charged as a Sorcerer: whereupon he goes not away, before he has
delivered up the obligation or specialtie, yea, and sustained great loss
therewith. Neither is this all. He fetches him in voluntarily to acknowledge
himself indebted unto him, and assoileth him not. On another side, the wife
beating night and day (as the old proverb says) upon the same anvill, urges
her husband to make his Will, and the husband as instantly importuneth his wife
to do the same. Then skillful Lawyers are retained on both parts for counsel;
the one in the bed chamber, the other his concurrent in the dining rowme, to
handle and debate their controversies. And to the same are brought in and
suborned interpretors of bowels and Soothsayers, to calculate their nativities,
promising largely on the one side Praefectships, dignities, and burials of rich
dames, on the other inviting the women (as it were) to the funerals and
obsequies of husbands, signifying covertly, that necessaries ought to be
provided for the same. Neither know they any thing in the world to be good, but
that which is commodious and gainefull. Thus love they their friends as they
love cattle; I mean, those best of all, from whom they hope to receive the
most profit. And when these folk come to borrow any thing, you shall see them
as humble and demisse as Mitio or x Laches in the Comoedie; but are they forced
once to make repayment, so lofty and big, as you would take them to be those
tragical (...).
y Heraclida, Ctesiphon and Themenus.

CHAP. X. The sloth, vanity, and base behavior of the common people.
THus much of the Senators degree. Now come we to the idle and base commons:
Among whom, you shall have some going even without shoes bare foot, yet fine
and goodly to be known by their trim and elegant names, to wit, Cimessores,
Statarij, Semicupae, and Serapini, with others beside, namely, Cicimbricus,
Gluturinus, and Trulla; likewise Lucanicus, Pordaca, Salsula, and an
innumerable sort of such. These spend all their life and living at the wine
tavern, and at dice-play, in brothel-houses also, in wanton pleasures, and
seeing of delightsome sights and games: the great Cirque or Shew-place is their
temple and habitation, the very Hall that they frequent, and all the hope they
rely upon. And a man may see every where in the market places, quarrifours,
streets, and meeting places, or assemblies, many companies of them gotten
together, frapling one against another pro and contra, whiles some hold this,
others that, as the manner is. Among whom these that have lived with greater
authority than others a long time, even to satietie of years, use oftentimes
to cry out along the Burses, Lombards and Pawnes, That the Commonwealth and
all were lost, if at the games and trials of masteries following, he that each
one takes part with, performs not his race foremost, and gains the goal
first. Now, when the wished-for day of the chariot-running begins to peep,
before the clear beams of the Sun appear, they all make have abroad, and
hye apace, that with their quick speed they may outgoe the very chariots that
are to strive for the prize: about the success and event whereof, a number of
them, whiles they side and wish favorably diverse ways, in great perplexity
sit up and watch whole nights. Come from thence, to the base sports of the
Theater, those actors upon the stage there, are sure to be hissed out, in case
they have not with some money bought the favor of the abject multitude. And if
it chance that one of them miss the shout and noise of the commons, by way of
approbation, then, in imitation of the barbarous people of z Taurica, out they
cry, That all strangers and forrainers ought to be expelled; even forrainers
(I say) by whose aid they have at all times been supported, and stood upright:
and this do they in foul and absurd terms, far different from the
affections and minds of those ancient commons; many of whose witty and
pleasant conceited speeches stand upon record. For now a days this device is
found out to serve in stead of studious resound of their praises who be worthy
thereof, that by certain persons framed and appointed to speak in every show
or spectacle exhibited, you shall have them (unto the Enterlude-rhymer, the
Baiter, the Chariotier, and Stage Player of every sort, likewise unto the
Judges and Magistrates as well the higher as the inferior, yea, and unto the
Dames) come out continually with this bald note, Let him learn by thee. But
what it is that should be learned, no man is able to declare. Among these,
there be a number given wholly to gourmandise and belly cheer, who like
smell-feasts tracing the steame and sent of meat, and listening to the shrill
voices of women, from the very cocke-crow, in manner of Peacockes crying for
hunger and emptiness, tripping a tiptoe lightly upon the ground, are at hand
in every great man's Hall, ready even to gnaw their own fingers ends, whiles
the dishes of meat be cooling: others again looking and prying over the pot
(enough to overturne ones stomach) of raw meat, waiting wistly until it be
through sodden: So as a man would think, that with other Anatomists,
Democritus were there, searching the intrayles of beasts cut up, to teach by
what means posterity might cure inward diseases. This may suffice for the
whole to have discoursed as touching the city matters: Let us return now to
the rest, that have occasioned many and sundry occurrences in the provinces.

CHAP. XI. The war against the Saxons, daunted with the very sight and
presence of the Roman soldiers, afterward by a wile enclosed, and bewed in
pieces every one.
WHiles the Emperors were now the third time Consuls, there brake out a
multitude of Saxons; and having passed through the dangers of the Ocean, kept
on their march, and bent their journey into the Roman limits; as who had
oftentimes been fed with the slaughter of our men. The brunt of which first
violent excursion of theirs Nannenus sustained, who was the Lieutenant
appointed for those regions: a man approoved a long time in the toylesome
service of wars. But as then having encountered with a multitude resolute to
die, when he saw that some of his soldiers were slain, and himself sore
wounded, not able to match those skirmishes redoubled upon him, after he had
instructed the Emperor what was to be done, thus much he obtained, That
Severus colonel of the footmen, should come to succor his distressed state:
Who having the conduct of a sufficient power, when he was come to the place,
and had marshalled men into sundry and several ranks, before the conflict
began, terrified and disordered the Barbarians so, that they opposed not their
hands to make resistance, but having their eyes dazeled with the brightness of
the ensigns and Eagles, craved pardon and peace. And upon long debating and
consultation, when this was thought in policy behoofefull for the Commonweal,
after a truce concluded, and many tall and serviceable young men for the wars
allowed (according to a capitulation and condition drawn in that behalf) the
Saxons were permitted to depart without let and hinderance, to repair unto the
place from whence they came. For whom, devoid now of all fear, and upon their
return, certain footmen of ours, sent out secretly, lay in ambush within a
valley, from whence they might with little ado assail as many as passed by.
But it fell out far otherwise with them than they hoped. For at the noise of
the Saxons coming, some of our men being raised, leapt forth in an
unseasonable time, and being suddenly discovered, whiles they make have to
strengthen themselves, were put to flight by the Barbarians, yelling in a
doleful and hideous manner. Howbeit, soon after they cast themselves in a
ring, and stood to it, and since extremity ministered strength unto them
(though the same was somewhat impaired) forced they were to fight: and after a
great slaughter of them made, they had died for it every one, and not left one
man alive, but that a cornet of our horsemen, armed at all pieces, placed in
like sort on another side near to the parting of the way, for to endanger the
Barbarians as they passed by, moved and stirred up with the fearful cry that
they heard, nimbly succored them. After this, the encounter was much more
eagre and sharp, and the Romans with resolute hearts giving the recharge,
enclosed them, and with their drawn swords killed them down right. Neither
could any of them return to see his native home again: for, not so much as
one of them was permitted to remain alive after the execution of his fellow
soldiers. And albeit some just and precise judge of matters, may blame this as
a perfidious and foul fact, yet if the case be well weighed and considered, he
will not take it indignly, that a mischievous company of robbers were in the
end upon an advantage and opportunity surprised and cut off.

CHAP. XII. Valentinian sets the Burgundians upon the Alemans, who being
gone forward as far as to the banks of Rhene, and finding no help of Roman
succors, return into their native country: But Theodosius setting upon the
Alemans dispersed in Rhetia, partly kills them, and partly sends them into
Italy for to dwell about the Po.
AFter these affairs so fortunately performed, Valentinian tossing sundry
thoughts in his mind, was very carefully perplexed, revolving full many ways
and casting about, by what means he might take down and quell the pride of
the Alemans, and their king Macrianus, who without all measure and end, with
restless stirs and broils troubled the Roman State. For, this fierce and
cruel nation ever since the first beginning and rising thereof, how ever they
were abated with the variety of accidents and chances, yet grow eftsoons so,
as that a man would think they had not for many ages been once touched. But
as the Emperor had the approoving of one counsel after another, at the length
he resolved upon this, That the Burguignians.
Burgundians, a warlike nation, puissant for their huge multitude, and
therefore dreadful to all their neighbors, should be raised up in arms for
the rooting of them out. And many times he wrote unto their kings by certain
trusty and secret messengers, That at a fore-appointed time they should
suddenly invade and surprise them, promising that himself also in person
passing over the Rhene with the Roman forces, would encounter them, being once
affrighted, and seeking to avoid this unlooked-for power of armed men. These
letters of the Prince were thankefully and gladly received in two respects:
First, for that the Burgundians knew themselves to be of ancient time an
offspring descended from the Romans: and again, because they contested
oftentimes with the Alemans about the salt pits, and about their bounds:
whereupon they sent most chosen and picked bands: which, before that our
soldiers were assembled together, being gone forward as far as to the banks
of Rhene, whiles the Emperor was busily occupied in raising of forts,
terrified our men exceeding much. Wherefore, after they had stayed a small
while, when as neither Valentinian came at the day appointed according to
promise, nor they could perceive any thing done that was undertaken, they
dispatched ambassadors to the Court, requiring they might have some aid sent
unto them: intending otherwise to return home into their own country, least
they should expose their back parts naked to the enemies. Which when they
perceived by circumstances to be denied, and that the Emperor trifled out the
time, they departed from thence with indignation. When their kings and princes
understood this, as if they had been deluded and mocked, they fell into a
rage, and after they had killed all the prisoners returned into their native
countries. Among these Burgundians the king by a general name is called
Hendinos, and according to an ancient rite and custom, is deposed from his
regal authority and removed, in case under his reign the wars speed not
well, or the earth yield not plenty of corn; like as the Egyptians are wont
to ascribe such chances unto their governors. For, the highest priest among
the Burgundians, is termed Sinistus, and continues for term of life, not
subject to any such dangers as their kings be. By this occasion falling out in
so fit and opportune a time, when the Alemans for fear of the foresaid nation
were dispersed, Theodosius at that time general of the horsemen, did set upon
them, and having slain a number of them, whomsoever he took prisoners, he
sent by the Princes commandment into Italy, where they had fertile lands
assigned unto them, and now are become tributaries, and dwell about The river
P^.
Padus.

CHAP. XIII. The mournful and heavy plight of Tripolis a Province in
Affricke, is here lively described.
FLitting from hence, as it were, into another world, let us come to the
trouble of Tripoli de Barbaria.
Tripolis, a Province in Africa, which even Justice also her self, as I
suppose, has bewailed: Whence these broils grew so to burn like flaming
fire, the text ensuing shall at full declare. The barbarous of Asturias.
Asturians bordering hard upon these parts, ready at all times and nimbly
appointed to make rodes, used also to live upon rapine and slaughter, having
for a little while been at peace, returned again to their natural
insurrections, pretending this as a serious cause of quarrel. One named
Stachao, a countreyman of theirs, in raunging over our Province at his
pleasure, committed certain acts forbidden by the laws; among which this was
notorious above the rest, that he went about by all subtle and deceitful
means to betray the Province, as was prooved by most true evidences: for
which, he suffered punishment accordingly, and was burnt to death. They then
alleging for their quarrel, the revenge of his death, as being their near
kinsman, and unjustly condemned, like unto wild beasts enraged, flung out of
their own habitation, even whiles Iovian was Emperor: and fearing to approach
Neapoli de Barbaria.
Leptis, a city strongly walled, and as well peopled, fat them down for three
days together in a plentiful place within the territory thereof. And having
either killed the rusticall people, whom this unlooked-for and sudden fear
had daunted, or else forced them to fly unto caves for refuge, and burned much
household goods that could not be carried away, enriched thus with much spoils
and booties, returned; leading away as prisoner Silva likewise, whom by chance
they found in the field, a principal man of his rank and degree. The men of
Neapoli de Barbaria.
Leptis, affrighted with this sudden calamity, before the troubles and
calamities should increase, which these Barbarians in their swelling pride
menaced, in lamentable manner craved the aid of Romanus newly advanced to be
the Comes or Lieutenant in Affricke. Who when he was come with military forces
under his conduct, and requested to succor their distressed state, assured
them, that he would dislodge and remove from thence, unless there might be
brought together great store of victuals, and four thousand camels provided
and put in readiness accordingly. At this answer, the pitiful citizens being
astonished, and avouching they were notable after such wastings and burnings to
provide any remedy of their exceeding great losses, by the means of such
enorme and huge a preparation; the said Lieutenant having spent there after a
dissembling sort forty days, without attempting any exployt departed. The
Tripolitanes disappointed of this their hope, and fearing extremity, when the
lawful and ordinary day was come of their parliament, which with them is
yearly holden, ordained Severus and Flaccianus ambassadors, to present unto
Valentinian by way of congratulation for his entrance into the Empire, golden
counterfaits, or images of a Victories; as also boldly to lay open the
lamentable ruins of the Province. Which when Romanus understood, he sent out
in post a most swift horseman unto Remigius Master of the offices, who was his
near kinsman, or partner rather with him in all his pillages, willing him
providently to take order, that by the will and appointment of the Emperor the
inquisition for the full knowledge of this affair might be committed unto him
as vicar or deputy. Well, the ambassadors aforesaid arrived at the court, and
having access unto the Prince, by word of mouth showed what calamities they
sustained: and withal exhibited the decrees containing the order and discourse
of the whole matter. Which being read, when as credit was given neither to the
reports and intelligences of the Master of the offices, who favored the lewd
acts of Romanus, nor to those that related the contrary, the full debate and
deciding of this business being promised, was deferred after the same manner as
the games of some high magistrate are wont to be, namely, when greater
employments and affairs be in hand. Meanewhile that some remedies were
expected from the Princes of Come.
camp, and the Tripolitanes stood long doubtful and in suspense, the bands
and companies of the Barbarians came upon them at unwares again (as bearing
themselves bold of that which was past) and when they had with fire and sword
overrun the territories of of Leptis and Oea, and laden themselves with
mighty heaps of booty and pillage, departed; having slain many b Decurions
of Senators degree.
, among whom g Rus^ticanus a Prelat or Clergy man, and Nicasius an d Aedile
were chief. And this outrode or invasion of theirs, could not be debarred;
for, that upon the request of the same ambassadors the whole charge of
military affairs conferred upon the President Ruricius, was soon after
transferred to Romanus: And now by this time the messenger of this new
inflicted calamity being dispatched into Gaul, stirred up the Prince more
earnestly to look into the thing. And therefore Palladius a Tribune and
Notarie both, was sent, as well to give unto the soldiers dispersed throughout
Affricke their due wages, as to search faithfully (as meet it was) into the
occurrences of Tripolis. Howbeit during the delays this of treaty, and the
expectation of answer, the Asturians grown insolent by reason of this twofold
success, like unto ravening fowls made more cruel and eagre with the taste of
blood that had so fleshed them, flew upon the inhabitants; and when they had
killed all save those who by running away escaped the danger, augmented the
booties which beforetime they had left behind them, by cutting up both trees
and vines. Then Michon, a certain noble citizen and a mighty, being taken
prisoner in a village near unto the city, and slipped away before he was
bound, because he was not able to escape quite, by reason he had the gout in
his feet, cast himself into a pit without water; whereby he brake a rib, and
being lifted out by the Barbarians and brought near unto the gates of the
city, for very commiseration of his wife, he was ransomed, and being drawn
up by a rope to the battlements of the wall, after two days dyed. Whereupon
these most cruel brigands and robbers grown obstinat in their purpose, gave
an assault upon the walls of Leptis, resounding with the woeful weeping and
wailing of women, who having never before been by enemies besieged, were with
this unwonted fear much amazed and dismayed. Now, after they had besieged the
city for eight days together, when certain of the assaylants were wounded,
without any matter effected, they returned to there own home very sad and ill
appaied.

CHAP. XIIII. The Court-like practices of Romanus, Prefect of the Province, of
Palladius and others, to work the destruction of the Tripolitanes.
FOr which accidents the citizens doubtful of their lives, and assaying the
utmost means they could devise, ere that the ambassadors dispatched before
were returned, send Iovinus and Pancratius, to give faithful intelligence unto
the Emperor, of what they had seen, and what themselves had endured: who
meeting with Severus and Flaccianus, those former ambassadors, at Carthage,
understood by them (after question made how they had sped) that by
commandment the hearing of their case was committed to the said Deputy and
the Lieutenant. Of those twain Severus who was fallen exceeding grievously
sick, straight ways died thereof. Nevertheless, these other ambassadors
aforesaid made great journeyes and sped them in all have to the Court. After
this, when the said Palladius was entered into Affricke, Romanus advertised
beforehand for what cause he was come, to the end he might provide for his own
security and safety, gave order to the or Captains.
Principals of the bands, by certain that were privy to his secrets, that
unto him, as to a mighty man, and next unto the chief personages of the
Palace, they Prastarent, or given unto him.
should acknowledge received the greatest part of the wages which he had
brought over with him to pay. And this was done accordingly. He then hereby
enriched forthwith set forward to Leptis; and that he might the better search
out the truth, he led forth with him unto the places which lay wasted,
Erechthius and Aristomenes, two eloquent Bourgesses, and men of good note, who
frankly ripped up the miseries of themselves, the citizens and the neighbor
inhabitants. Now when they had plainly declared and showed all, he having only
seen the lamentable ruins and ashes of the Province, returned: and greatly
rebuking Romanus as an idle and slothful governor, he threatened that he
would most truly relate unto the Prince whatsoever he had seen. And the
Romanus.
other again in a great chafe and grief hereat, promised, That he also
shortly would give information, that Palladius being sent as an upright and
incorrupt Notarie, had interverted and conveyed all the soldiers donative to
his own proper gain. In which regard, having his own conscience to condemn
him for his lewd dealings, he afterward grew to an atonement with Romanus. So
being returned unto the Court, by the impious art of lying he deceived
Valentinian, and reported, That the Tripolitanes complained without cause. And
therefore sent back he was again with Iovinus the last of all the ambassadors
(for Pa^cr atius was departed this life at Triers) to the end that himself
with the or Deputit.
Vicarius should see into the reason and cause of this second embassage.
Besides all this, the Emperor commanded, That the tongues of Erechthius and
Aristomenes, whom the same Palladius had intimated to have spoken certain
words against Romanus.
upon spite and envy, should be cut out of their heads. The Notarie, as it
was appointed, followed after the deputy, and came to Tripolis: which when
Romanus knew, he sent with speed a domestical servant of his thither, and
Caecilius his counselor, one borne in that province; by whose means all the
burgeffes being circumvented (with money or crafty sleights I wot not) laid
great blame upon Iovinus, affirming constantly, That they had given him
information of no such matters as he had delivered unto the prince: and thus
far proceeded iniquity and indirect dealing, that Iovinus also himself, to
the endangering of his own life, confessed he had told the Emperor a lie.
Which being made known by Palladius when he was come back, Valentinian (a
prince very prone to ire and cruelty) commanded, That Iovinus verily, as the
author and principal, but Coelestius, Concordius, and Lucius, as privy and
parteners with him in that false information, should loose their heads: as for
Ruricius the President, he awarded him also to suffer death: and this moreover
made much against him, for that in his certificate given up, there were read
certain over-big words of his, as it was thought: and Ruricius verily was
executed at Sitifis; but the rest at Vtica had their judgment by the sentence
of Crescens, the deputy there. Howbeit, Flaccianus being heard judicially by
the said deputy and lieutenant before the death of those ambassadors, as he
stoutly pleaded in defense of his life, with the shouts and outcries of the
angry soldiers in their violent heat, and with taunting terms was well
near stabbed to death; who objected, That the Tripolitanes could not therefore
be defended, because themselves refused to find and allow necessary means for
the maintenance of an expedition: and hereupon being cast into prison, whiles
the Emperor (being asked his advice, What was meet to be done?) was in
determining some course, by soliciting (as might well be thought) his keepers,
brake prison, and fled to the city of Rome; where lying close, by the course
of nature he ended his days.

CHAP. XV. The justice of God calls for due revenge of these most wicked and
ungracious men.
WIth this memorable end ensuing, Tripolis after it had been fore plagued as
well with foreign as home-calamities, was appeased, and not left without
defense; because the eternal eye or Justice and the Furies revenging the death
of those ambassadors and the President aforesaid, watched over them. For long
after, such an event as this brake out and came to light. Palladius cassed and
discharged from his military oath, and deprived of that place which made him
swell with pride, went to lead a private life; and when Theodosius, that noble
General and grand Commander, came into Afric for to suppress Firmus, who
attempted mischievous matters, and according to his commission rifled the
moveable goods of Romanus aforenamed, among his papers and writings there was
found a letter also of one Meterius, containing in it these words: Domino
Patrono Romano Meterius, i. Meterius to his Lord and Patron Romanus greeting:
and in the end, after many impertinent words; Palladius the outcast or
commends him unto you.
saluteth you, who says, That for none other cause he was cast out of favor,
but for that in the matter of the Tripolit anes he made a lie in the Emperors
sacred ear. This letter being sent unto the Court, and there read, Meterius by
the commandment of Valentinian being apprehended, confessed, That the Epistle
was his: and therefore Palladius, commanded to be brought forth and showed in
place, thinking with himself, what a deal of criminal matters he had brewed,
in a certain or baiting town.
station at the beginning of night observing the absence of the keepers (who
upon a feastivall day of the Christians lodged all night in the church) knit
his neck in an halter, and so throtled himself, and died. This overture of
more happy fortune being fully known, and the stirrer up of these woeful
broils dispatched out of the way, Erechthius and Aristomenes leapt out of
their lurking holes: who when they were advertised, That commandment was
given to have their tongues (as overlong and lavish) to be cut out of their
heads, voided aside to far remote and hidden corners. And when Gratian the
Emperor was frankely informed of this lewd and wicked machination (for now by
this time was Valentinian departed this life) they were sent unto Hesperius the
Proconsull and Flavianus the deputy, to have the hearing of their cause; whose
equity, supported with most just and due authority (after that Caecilius was
examined upon the rack) found thus much by his open confession, That himself
had given counsel and persuaded the citizens to burden the ambassadors with
a lie. After these acts, there followed a certificat, which opened to the full
the whole truth of all; unto which there was no answer made. And that this
tragical narration should leave out no part unhandled of so terrible an
argument, thus much also came upon the stage, even after the hangings were
drawn and taken down. Romanus being gone to the court, brought with him
Caecilius, to accuse the Commissioners aforesaid, as inclined overmuch to the
side of the province: and he, received with the favor of Merobaudes, required,
That there should be many necessaries.
of their friends and kinsfolks presented and brought in place: Who, when they
were come to Millaine, and had showed by probable proofs and arguments,
without dissimulation, That for no cause they were drawn thither, were
discharged, and so returned home. Yet while Valentinian was alive, after the
former occurrences which we have told, Remigius also being departed from the
court to a private life, strangled himself with an halter, and so ended his
days, as we will show in place convenient.

THE XXIX. BOOK.
CHAP. I. After some light skirmishes, there was a truce agreed upon with
Sapor. The court of Valens is disquieted with new troubles, by occasion of
intelligence given by Palladius. Whiles Valens was alive, inquisition was made
in certain praesages as touching a successor in the Empire.
WHen Winter was past, Sapor king of the Persians, exceeding arrogant upon the
confidence that he had gotten by his former battles, having supplied the
number of his own forces, and furnished them very strongly, sent his men of
Cataphractos, or soldiers in complete harneis.
arms, archers and mercenarie common soldiors to break out and invade our
territories. Against these forces, Traianus a lieutenant and Vadomarius late
king of the Alemans, went forth with right puissant bands, appointed by
commandment from the prince to observe thus much, rather to keep off, than
to assail the Persians first. Who being come to Vagabanta, a place renowned
for the legions that lodged there, they received the violent charge and brunt
of the enemies troops, rushing and running fiercely upon them full against
their wills, and of purpose giving ground and reculing back, because they would
not first wound any of their enemies, nor be deemed culpable in breaking of the
league; until such time as being forced upon extreme necessity, they joined
battle, and having slain a number of them, departed with victory. Yet
between whiles, after some trial of light skirmishes on both sides, and the
same performed with sundry events, when truce by common consent was concluded,
and the Summer spent, the leaders of both parts departed asunder, as yet not
well accorded. And verily the Parthian king returned into his own kingdom,
minding to Winter in Ctesiphon, and the Roman Valeus.
Emperor entered into Antioch: who, whiles he makes his abode there, secured
in the mean time from foreign enemies, had like to have lost his life by
intestine practices and conspiracies, as the process of this story shall
declare at large. There was one Procopius a busy fellow and of a turbulent
spirit, given always to the desire of stirs and troubles, that had accused
Anatolius and Spudasius, two Palatines (who were commanded, That what monyes
they had intercepted from the common treasure, should be demanded) for laying
wait and practicing against lieutenant Fortunatianus, that eagre and
importunate collector: who presently growing from extreme rigor to plain rage
and madness, by virtue of the place and high authority which he held, caused
judicially to be convented before the Praefectus Prtorio, one Palladius, of
most obscure and base parentage, hired as a Sorcerer by the said parties, and
Heliodorus a teller of fortunes by calculation of nativities, there to be
forced for to utter and reveal what they knew. Now, when it came to this
point, that the question either of fact or attempt was hotely followed,
Palladius confidently brake out into this manner of exclamation, That these
were but light toys now in hand, and fit to be passed over: as for me (quoth
he) if I may be allowed to speak, I will tell of greater matters, and such as
are to be feared indeed, and which being already plotted and well set forward,
unless better heed be taken, will bring all to confusion. And being commanded
boldly to show what he knew, he unfolded and immension ruden^ tem explicuit, as
we say, he opened a pack of knaverie.
laid forth, as one would say, a huge long cable of villainies, avouching, That
Fidustius, one toward the office of the President, and Pergamius, together with
Irenaeus, had secretly learned by detestable magic the name of him that was
to reign after Valens. Fidustius straightwaies attached (for his hap was then
to be present) and closely brought in to be examined, when he saw the party
that had appeached him, never went about by way of denial to shadow or hide
things already divulged, but discloseth the dangerous and hurtful train of
the whole matter, absolutely confessing, That himself, together with Hilarious
and Patricius (of which persons, Hilarious served as a souldior about the
palace) had sought unto Wizards skillful in prophesies, as touching the
Emperor that should be: also, that the Oracle-rolls being by secret arts
stirred and set aworke, foretold both the proper name of an excellent prince,
and also to themselves that were actors in this business, lamentable and
woeful ends. And when they were all at a stand, who he should be in those days
that so excelled all in vigor of mind and courage, it was thought, that
Theodorus, now advaunced to the second place among the or Secretaties.
Notaries, surpassed the rest. And verily he was no less indeed than the world
took him for. Forbeing of a noble and ancient house descended in Gaul, and
liberally brought up from the very first rudiments of his childhood, in regard
of his modesty, wisdom, courtesy, credit, favor and learning right
honorable, seemed always better than the office and place that he held:
accepted and beloved indifferently both of high and low: and the only man he
was (in manner) of all others, whose tongue not running at randon, but well
advised what it spoke, no fear of danger could ever stop. Over and above all
this, the same Fidustius being now grievously tormented and mangled to the
point of death, went on and said, That upon his report Theodorus had learned
all which he foretold by Euserius, a man of singular skill and learning, and
besides a very honorable personage: for why? it was not long before that he had
governed Asia as deputy Prefect. When he was once laid up fast in prison, and
the scrow containing these matters read, as the manner is, before the Emperor,
his monstrous cruelty brake out farther like a most flaming fire, and the same
fed still with the foul and shameful flattery of many, but principally of
Modestus, then Prefect of the Praetorium: who, whiles he was daily disquieted
with fear of a successor in his rowme, daily playing the jeaster, under the
shadow of pleasant and merry conceits, diverse ways won unto himself Valeus:
a man somewhat rude and rough hewn, tearming his unpleasant and rusticall
words the fine phrases and flowers of Tullie: and to increase his vanity and
vainglory the more, bearing him in hand, that the very stars, if he did
but say the word, might be brought there in place out of the sky.

CHAP. II. An infinite number of men apprehended for the said crime: First
Theodorus as the head of all. What was done in this business throughout by
Valens and his ministers, and with what affection of mind.
WHereupon commandment was given, That Theodorus also should with all speed
be fetched from Constantinople, whither he was gone about some household
business of his own. Mean while that he was brought back, by sundry
fore-judgements which were holden night and day there were drawn from most
diffite regions, persons of good mark, for their dignities and nobility. And
when as neither the common goales being already pestered full, nor private men's
houses could now hold the number of them that were committed to ward, as being
thronged and thrust close together with an hot steame among them, because the
most part of them were kept in bonds, every man sore feared his own and his
neighbors case. At length comes Theodorus himself also, half dead in
manner already, and clad Atratus. or in fullied weed, the same that Sordidatus.
in mourning black: and whiles he was bestowed and hidden in a blind corner of
the territory out of the way, and all those implements were put in readiness,
which the future examinations did require, the trumpets of inward and
domestical calamities sounded. And because he seems no less deceitful,
who wittingly passes over what he knows was done, than he that feyneth
things never done, we deny not (for no man makes doubt thereof) that the life
of Valens, both oftentimes before by privy conspiracies and then also, was
plunged into most extreme dangers: and the swords blade by military men of
his own train set close to his very throat, was by the opposition of
Destinies put back, as whom the said Destinies had preordained to lamentable
perils in Thracia. For, not only in a certain woodie place between Antioch
and Seleucia, whiles he lay sweetly asleep afternoon in the shade, he was
laid at by Sallustius, then one of the Seutarij, and oftentimes else forelayd
by others: yet escaped he, for that the limits of his life set down unto him
from his very nativitie, bridled those horrible attempts. Like as it happened
otherwhiles under he Emperors Commodus and Severus, whose life was most
forcibly often assailed, insomuch as after many and sundry intestine dangers,
the one within the lists of the Amphitheatre, as he should enter in to behold
the sights and games, with a spud or dagger was wounded almost to death, by
Quintianus a Senator, and a man of unlawful and unhonest life: the other in
his very later days, as he lay in his bedchamber, through the counsel of
Plautianus the Prefect, had been unwares surprised and stabbed by the hands of
Saturninus a Centurion, but that his own son, a young gentleman, came in to
help and rescue him. And therefore, Valens also might well be bome withal and
excused, in case with all wary circumspection that might be, he sought to
defend his life, which perfidious traitors hastenod to take away from him. But
this was in him a fault inexpiable, that in the proud humor of an absolute
king, with one and the very same course of law, as if there were no difference
of deserts, he by way of malicious pursuit proceeded in all have against
offenders and innocent persons indifferently: So that, whiles the crime
remained still doubtful, yet the Emperor made no doubt of the punishment, in
so much as some heard they were condemned, before they understood that they
were suspected. Now, this inflexible purpose of his grew the more confirmed
through the covetousness both of himself, and of those also who conversed
then in the Court, gaping still for more, and never laying their chawes
together, which did set him on and prick him ever forward: who if there were
any mention made (and that was very seldom) of humanity and courtesy,
termed it timorous dullness: who also with their bloody flatteries corrupting
the mind and intent of the man (that carried death in the tip of his tongue)
and turning it to the worst ways, with boisterous blasts of unseasonable
whirlewinds violently blew upon all, hastening to overturne from the very
foundations, most wealthy houses and families. For, exposed he was and lay open
to the access of as many as sought the undoing of others, as being
daungerously attached with two vices: First, for that he was intollerably
angry, and then most, when he should have bashed to be angry: Again, look
what he had heard by secret whisperings and suggestions, through the advantage
and opportunity of private admittance, in the swelling pride of a Prince,
forbearing to examine whether the same were true or no, he entertained the same
for undoubted truths. Hence it came to pass, that under a pretense of
clemency many innocent persons were thrust out of doors, and driven headlong
into exile: whose goods being gotten together and sequestered into the common
treasury, himself also reduced to his own proper gains: in so much as
condemned folk were feign to beg their bread and live of alms, sore crushed
with the miserable straits of dreadful poverty: for fear whereof a Theognis
an ancient Poet and a wise, gives us counsel to fling our selves with the
head forward even into the sea. Which proceedings of his, say that some man
would grant to have been lawful, yet the very excessive rigor thereof was
hateful. Whereby this is found to be a sentence well and truly set down,
That there is no doom more cruel than that, which whiles it seems to spare,
is indeed more rough and rigorous. When as therefore the principal men of
place together with the Prefect of the Protorium were assembled together, unto
whom the hearing and determining of these matters aforesaid were by commission
granted, then were the rackes b stretched and bent, the leaden weights or
plumbets brought forth, the string-torments also and the whips put in
readiness: then rung every prison among the jengling sound of chains with
horrible and cruel notes, whiles the ministers and executioners of sorrowful
offices did nothing but cry, Hold, shut, strain and hide. And for as much as
we have seen many after dolorous and grievous punishment condemned to dye,
summarily and briefly we will show what we are able to call to mind, because
such was the confuse handling of all matters (as it were) in horror of
darkness, that the record of such things as were done most secretly within,
has passed by our knowledge.

CHAP. III. Pergamius is put to death. Salia suddenly perishes. Patricius and
Hilarious reveal the whole order of the presages and cursed Divination.
AT the first calling in, Pergamius after some slight and small questions,
being detected by Palladius (as has been said before) to have foreknown some
matters by the means of art-Magicke and wicked impretations; (as he was a man
passing eloquent, and desperately given to cast out perilous words) whiles the
judges were in doubt what should be examined first, and what afterward? he
boldly began to speak: and keeping a great noise appeached still without any end
many thousands as privies and accessories, calling and requiring to have some
presented there in place, even from as far welneere as the utmost mountain
Cabo d'Alguer. Maercat. A promontorie in Affricke.
Atlas, to be charged with grievous crimes. When he was put to death, as one
who packed together such matters as were over hard to be tried, and others
after him by whole companies executed, they came to the cause of Theodorus
himself, as it were, to the spacious field of some c Olympicke Game. The same
day among many other accidents, there fell out this fearful chance also,
namely, that Salia, Treasurer not long before in Thracia, as he was led forth
of prison and bonds to have his cause heard, in putting foot into his shoo,
suddenly stricken with the object of some terrible affright, yielded up his
vital breath in the very arms of those that had hold of him. When as the
court therefore was set, and the Lawyers showed the prescript words of the law,
howbeit ready to handle every point and tittle of causes according to the
will of their sovereign Lord, all that were in the place assembled, fell into
a fit of fearful quaking. For, the Emperor Valens swerving wholly from the
rule of equity, and now better instructed how to do mischief, like unto one
of these wild beasts of the Show place, if one brought hard to the cage,
chanced to run away and escape, fared as if he had been horn mad, Patricius
therefore and Hilanius being presented before them, commanded also to unfold
the order and manner of every thing as it was done, when as at the first they
began to falter and vary in their words, after their sides were thoroughly
furrowed, and the three footed table which they used brought into the Court,
driven at length to extreme straits, open the whole truth of the matter,
ripped up even from the very beginning. And Hilarious first: We framed (quoth
he) my Lords and right honorable Judges, after the pattern of that or Delphick
three-footed pan. Cortinae Delphica.
Oracle table of Apollo at Delphos, in a cursed and unlucky hour, this
unfortunat little table made of bay twigges, which ye here do see, and when
with many an imprecation and exercisme, by way of secret charms, as also with
a number of long complements we had ceremoniously consecrated it, we stirred
and set it a work at length. Now the order of stirring or moving the same, so
often as we sought for answer about secret and doubtful matters, was in this
wise. Placed it was in the mids of an or room.
house purged clean, and perfumed with the sweet odours and spices of Arabia,
and thereupon a charger round on every side neatly set, and the same made of
diverse metals: In the utmost ring or compass whereof the characters or forms
of the twenty four letters in the Alphabet, being drawn out and engraven
cunningly, stood one from another with certain spaces between them precisely
set out. Then one arrayed i white linen vestments, and shod likewise with
linen pumpes, who also had a little wreath compassing his head round, and
carried in his hand the or branche^.
leaves of some fruitful tree, having by certain formal charms obtained the
favor of that divine power which is the author and president of Divination and
Prescience of future things, according to the ceremonial skill thereto
belonging, stands above the said table, peising a pendant little ring platted
or woven close and fast of the fine d Carpathian thread, and the same
consecrated with mystical disciplines: which ring lighting by iumpes and
leapes with distinct pauses between on certain letters one after another,
seeming to stay and hold the same, makes e heroicke verses answerable to the
questions demanded, and those fully composed according the Rhythmicall numbers
and measures: like unto those f Pythicke verses which we read, or such as are
delivered by the Oracles of the g Branchida. There then, as we asked who was to
succeed in this present Empire, for that it was said he should he one
everieway accomplished, the ring as it hopped here and there quickly made up
two sillables, with the addition of the last letter of all in the end: Then one
there present cried out that it was Theodorus, who by the prescript oppointment
of fatal necessity was meant and afore-signified: neither was there any
farther inquiry made into this business; for, we were sufficiently resolved,
that this was the very man whom we sought and called for. Now when he had so
expressly laid open the full knowledge of the whole matter to the eye of the
Judges, he added moreover and gently said, That Theodorus was utterly
unacquainted therewith. Being after this demanded, Whether by the faithful
answer of these Oracles which they practiced, they had any foreknowledge of
such torments as they had sustained? they uttered those most notable verses,
which plainly showed that this their labor and pains which they took in
searching after these high secrets above their reach, should shortly cost them
their lives: yea and that the Furies threatened nevertheless both the Prince
himself and his agents also, calling for vengeance by bloodshed and fire upon
their heads: Of which verses it suffices to put down only these three last.

(...)
(...)
(...)
Nor unrevenged shall thy blood long remain:
For why? that fell and angry Fury she,
Tisiphone, will work them deadly pain
In Mimant fields, where they shall burned be.
Which when they were read, after they had been sore tormented with claws,
they were parted one from another by this time in manner breathless and dead.

CHAP. IIII. When Theodorus, Eusebius, and Pasiphilus were diligently examined,
Simonides the Philosopher, after execution of an infinite number, was burnt to
ashes. After whom, follow Maximus and Diogenes, when Alypius and Hierocles his
son were sundry ways mangled and tormented.
AFter this, to the end that the fabric and worke-house of this designed
wickedness might be evidently set open, there was brought in a company of
honorable Senators, among whom were the heads and very principal persons of
the State. And when every man seeing none but himself, was ready to shove
his own imminent mischief upon another, at length by leave and permission of
the Inquisitors, Theodorus beginning to speak, at the first lay prostrate
before them, and craved pardon; then afterward, urged more forcibly to make
his answer, declared, That he had knowledge indeed of all this by Euserius;
but that he should not give intelligence thereof to the Emperor, as diverse
times he went about to do, he was debarred by him, who avowed, That by no
unlawful desire of aspiring unto regal dignity, but by a certain course of
inevitable destiny, that which was hoped for, would of the own accord come to
pass. Then, as Euserius being under the hand of bloody tormentors, confessed
the very same, Theodorus was by his own letters convinced, which he had
written by way of oblique circumlocutions unto Hilarious, implying thus much,
That since he had already conceived assured hopes from the Divinors and
Prophets, he stood not now upon the substance of the thing, as doubting it, but
was earnest to know the circumstance of the time, when his desire should be
effected. After these points known, when they were had away and sequestered
apart, Eutropius, who at that time governed Asia as Proconsull, was drawn
within danger, and judicially indicted as privy and party to this faction:
but he went away without harm as unguiltie; for that Pasiphilus the
Philosopher acquitted and cleared him: who notwithstanding he was cruelly
tortured to this end, that by fastening some lie upon him, he might defame and
subvert him quite, could not be removed from the state of a constant and stout
mind. After these comes in the Philosopher Simonides, who verily in regard of
his years was but a young man, howbeit for his carriage the gravest and
precisest person within our remembrance: who being informed against, for that
he had taken knowledge of this business by the means of Fidustius, and
perceiving, that the matter was weighed, not according to truth, but the will
and direction of Talladius the accuser, or the Emperor himself.
one, pleaded for himself, and said, That he had heard indeed of these things
aforesaid; but when they were imparted unto him, in a constant resolution
concealed the same. All which matters being thoroughly from point to point
examined, the Emperor in a correspondencie to the counsel of the
Commissioners, under one sentence and warrant commands they should all be
put to death: and so, in the sight of an infinite number of people, who
scarcely could behold so abominable a spectacle without horror of mind, but
filled the heavens again with mones and complaints (for the misery of each
one seemed to be the common case of them all) brought they were forth together,
and in pitiful manner had their throats cut, all save Simonides, whom only
that cruel Valens the Emperor.
doome-giver (grown enraged at him for his grave constancy) caused to be
consumed with fire: who running from this life as from a furious mistress, and
scorning the sudden falls of worldly things, endured the flames, and never
quetched: following the example of that famous Philosopher Peregrinus, surnamed
Proteus; who being fully determined to leave this world, at the h Quinquennall
solemnity of the Olympicke games, in the sight of all Greece leapt up to that
funeral fire which himself had made, and there was burnt to ashes. And after
him, for certain days following, a multitude almost of all sorts and degrees,
whom by name to reckon were a difficult piece of work, driven within the
dangerous toil and snares of false imputations, made work for the hangmen and
executioners until they wearied them out, after they had been maimed and lamed
before with stretching upon the rack, with the weighty pelts of plumbets, and
the smart lashes of the whip. And some there were that suffered death without
any breathing time or respite granted, even whiles it was in question, Whether
they should be executed, or no? So there was nothing but carnage and slaughter
scene in every place of the city, as if so many beasts had been slain by the
butchers knife. After this, to allay the envy and displeasure of the people
for such a bloody massacre, an infinite number of books and many heaps of
volumes were gotten together, and before the Judges burnt: such as were fetched
out of sundry houses, as if (forsooth) they had been unlawful and
prohibited; whereas indeed the most part of them were Tables and Indexes of the
liberal Sciences and of the [civile] Law. And not long after, that noble
Philosopher Maximus (a man of great name and renown for his learning, out of
whose most plentiful discourses, Julian the Emperor became sufficiently
furnished for skill and knowledge) was charged to have heard those verses of
the Oracle abovesaid: and having granted indeed, that he knew thereof,
(howbeit, in consideration of his profession blabbed not forth such things as
were to be concealed, but voluntarily foretold, that the seekers of this Oracle
themselves should surely suffer and die for it) was led to Ephesus, the place
of his nativitie, and there cut shorter by the head: he found and learned by
this last experience at his death, That the iniquity of a Judge and
Commissioner is more heavy than any crime whatsoever. Diogenes also entangled
within the snares of impious falsitie (a man descended of a noble house for his
wit, eloquence at the bar, and sweet behavior, otherwise excellent, late
ruler of Bithynia) to the end that his rich livelode and patrimony might be
ransacked and taken from him, was put to death. And now behold, Alypius also,
late deputy of Britannie (a man of quiet carriage and pleasant demeanure, after
a private and retired life led in repose, because injustice thus far had
stretched forth her hand, being tossed and tumbled in most sorrowful plight)
was cited and indicted for the feat of Venefi^ij, or Sorcene.
poisoning, together with his son Hierocles, a young man of good towardness,
upon the evidence and testimony of one Diogenes, a base fellow, and but
himself alone: who after he had been tormented in all butcherly manner, that
he might utter words pleasing the prince, or rather his accusor, when his lims
would not serve to endure more painful punishments, being condemned to be burnt
quick, Alypius also himself, after the loss of his goods, commanded to go
into exile, by a certain good hap recovered his son again, as recalled from
death, notwithstanding he was in pitious wise led to execution.

CHAP. V. The most wicked and abominable practices of Palladius, the worker of
all these so many troubles and calamities, to put oil into the fire. The
witty wyles also and crafty fetches of Heliodorus, who together with
Palladius framed all these mischiefs, are described: whereupon ensue new
tragoedies.
DVring all this time, Palladius, that plotter and worker of all miseries, whom
we said at the first to have been attached by Fortunatianus, and one for his
very baseness of condition even in the lowest degree, ready to enter rashly
into any action, by heaping one calamity upon another, had filled the whole
State and Empire with tears and sorrowful lamentations. For having gotten
license to nominate whom he would, without respect of calling and degree, as
tainted with unlawful and forbidden arts, like to an hunter skillful in
marking the secret tracts and muces of wild beasts, enclosed many a man within
his lamentable net and toil: some, as stained with the skill of poisoning and
sorcerie; others, as privy and accessarie to those that plotted and practiced
treason. And to the end, that not so much as the very wives might be allowed
and have leisure to bewail their husbands miseries, straightwaies there were
certain suborned and sent out: who being come to some special houses of
mark, rifling the household stuff, and perusing the writings of any one
condemned to suffer, should privily foist in some old wives charms, or
ridiculous love-spels and enchantments, devised and forged to bring innocent
folk to mischief. Which being read in court before the Judges, where no law,
no religion, or conscience, no equity made difference between truth and lies,
without pleading in defense of themselves, they had their goods taken from
them, yea, and without touch and attaint of any fault, young men and others
indifferently, after they had been lamed in all their lims, were had away in
chaires to execution. Hence it came to pass throughout the East Provinces,
that all men for fear of the like, burnt their libraries and closets, such a
general terror possessed every one. For to speak more plainly to the
purpose, we all in those days crept as it were in Cimmerian darkness,
fearing and faring for all the world like to those guests of Denis the tyrant
of Sicilie, who whiles they crammed themselves full with viands, more irksome
and unpleasant than any hunger whatsoever, quaked to see from the embowed
roofes aloft of the rowmes wherein they sat at meat, swords fastened only to
horse hairs, and hanging just over the napes of their necks. Then it was
also, that Bassianus (by birth of a noble house, by calling a Notarie, and by
his place serving in the wars with the foremost, called into question, as if
he had gone about to foreknow high matters of State although himself
avouched, That he sought only whether his wife should be delivered of a boy or
girl? how ever he escaped death, through the great and earnest suit of his
friends that stuck close unto him) was stripped out of a rich livelode and
inheritance that he had. Among the crashing noises of so many ruins and
overthrowes of men's estates, Heliodorus that divellish deviser and framer
(together with Palladius) of all mischiefs, the Mathematician or Astrologer
(as the common people terms him) being wrought and made sure aforehand by
close conferences out of the Emperors house, put forth now his poysonfull and
deadly sting, egged on by all procurements and allurements of courtesy, to
utter what he either knew or could forgo: for both cherished he was right
charily with the finest food, and also money good store he got by way of
contribution, to bestow liberally upon his harlots and mistresses; yea, and
every where as he went, he carried up his head, I warrant you, with a surly and
stately look, dread of all men: but bearing himself more big upon this
affiance, that to the stews and brothel-house, which (as himself would) was
kept with much liberty, he used to come openly and continually, being Provost
over all the offices belonging to the bed chamber, bringing with him the writs
and writings of the public father of the country, like to breed sorrow and
grief enough to many. And by the means of him as an Orator and advocate at
the bar, Valens was taught and instructed before hand, what he should place
in the foremost parts of his Oration, that he might thereby proceed and profit
more easily, as also with what figurative devices he should give the attempt
upon brave and goodly places.

CHAP. VI. Eusebius and Hypatius, two brethren and Consuls, through the sly
devices of Heliodorus fall into diverse dangers, and are commanded with their
personal presence to countenance and honor the funerals of Heliodorus.
ANd because it would ask a long discourse, to tell what this mischievous
villain, worthy to be hanged, wrought and brought to pass, this one thing I
will for example deliver, although in his bold and headie confidence he shook
the very chief and principal pillars of the Senators.
Patrician degree: who taking exceeding much upon him, by reason (as has been
said before) that he had secret communication with those of the Emperors house,
and for his own beggarly baseness ready to entertain any action for money,
informed against that singular good couple of Consuls, Eusebius and Hypatius,
two brothers germane, and near allied unto the Emperor Constantius in times
past, namely, That upon an aspiring desire to higher estate, they had both
projected and also practiced somewhat as touching the Empire; adding moreover
unto this way, fainedly devised for the making up of a lie, That Eusebius had
imperial robes also made already for him. Which informations and suggestions
being gladly received, the prince in a great chafe fretting and menacing in
furious wise: he, I say, who ought indeed to have done nothing at all, because
he thought he might do all, were it never so unjust, made no more ado, but
when all those prisoners were brought in from the farthest part of far remote
countries, whom the accuser, exempt from all laws, in the height of retchlesse
audacitie had given order peremptorily to be sent for and fetched up,
commanded there should be holden a judicial inquisition and strict trial of
the case. Now, when as for all the difficult and strained enforcements,
grounded (forsooth) upon equity (which was a long time pretended) and the
wretched varlets standing stiffely still in vouching the thing, no grievous
torments were able to wring out any confession of the parties, but that the
truth it self cleared these honorable persons, and declared them far
remooved from all knowledge and privitie of any such matter; yet the false
accuser verily for his part was much made of, and honorably regarded, as
before time: but the other, punished with exile, and put to grievous fines,
within a while after were called home again, had their pecuniarie mulct repaid
them, and were restored to their dignities and places fully as before. Neither
yet after these foul and repentable acts, was any thing done by the Emperor
in more stayed manner, or in modest wise; whiles, mounted thus as he was to
that exceeding high pitch of power and authority, he never considered with
himself, that for such as be well minded and framed aright, it is not
beseeming to run so rashly into voluntary delinquencies, no not with the hurt
of very enemies: and that there is nothing so unreasonable, as when the high
spirit and pride of a sovereign prince, is accompanied also with the
bitterness of his own nature. But when Heliodorus, I wot not whether by
sickness or by some devised violence, was dead (loath I am to say so much,
would God the thing it self could not speak it) when his corpse was carried
forth to be buried by the biere-bearers, many honorable personages went before
it, as mourners in black: among whom were seen those Eusebius and Hypatius.
brethren also, who had been Consuls. And even there and then was the whole
corruption of his folly, who ruled an Empire, very openly detected and
published to the world: Who being earnestly requested to It seems thar Valens
himself purposed to grace the funerals with his personal presence.
forbear considering this adverse hap admitted no remedy or consolation,
stiffely continued inflexible, so as he seemed to have stopped his ears with
wax, as if he were to pass by the i Sirenes rocks. Howbeit, overcome at
length with importunat prayers, he yielded, and commanded, That many should
attend on foot bare headed, yea and some also with hand in hand, and fingers
clutched cross one within another, to go before the cursed coarse of this
bloody villain unto the grave. My heartyerneth and trembles to think how
many right honorable personages in this unseemly and disorderly manner were
debased and brought to vale bonet, such especially as had been Consuls, after
they had borne their ivorie staves and rich robes, ensigns of that high place,
yea and after the monuments of their inrolling upon record in the yearly
Calendar, to the view of the whole world. Among all whom this our Hipatius for
the grows and proof of his beautiful virtues right commendable excelled all
other, a man of a quiet and peaceable disposition, weighing (as it were) to the
plumbe line and level the honesty of mild behavior: who both was a glorious
ornament to his noble ancestors, and also honored his posterity by his
wonderful acts in two Prefectures that he bare.

CHAP. VII. The unrighteous clemency of Valens, faring cruelly as he did
against offenders and innocent persons alike, to Pollentianus an impious
wretch, and guilty of treason. The judgment and revenge of God in so many
massacres. Festinus Proconsull of Asia, following the steps of Maximinus (of
whom mention is made in the 28. book) cruelly proceeds against those in Asia.
THis also at the same time made up the roll of Valens his other Spoken (...),
or by the contrary.
virtues, That whereas toward others he was so infest and cruel, that he could
not well endure any lingering torments to end with death, yet one Pollentianus,
a certain Tribune, who for wickedness exceeded, being convict at the same
time, and confessing how he had ripped up a woman's belly alive, taken forth the
untimely fruit before the birth, raised up infernal spirits, and presumed to
confer with them as touching the change of the Imperial government: in
regard of his familiarity (notwithstanding all states muttered at and repined
thereat) he commanded to go his way without any hurt sustained, keeping his
life still, his exceeding wealth and place in warfare entire as before. But o
thou lovely information and endument of learning, by the heavenly gift of God
granted unto blessed and happy weights, which have oftentimes reformed even
corrupt and vicious natures, how great enormities had thou in that my^ke mist
of those times redressed, if Valens might have had the grace by thee to have
known, That an Imperial dignity, as wise men define it, is nothing else, but
a care of other folks good and safety: That it is the part of a good
Governor to restrain and keep in his absolute power, to withstand covetous
desire of having all, and to bridle the passion of implacable wrath: yea and to
know (as Caesar the Julius Caesar.
Dictator said) That the remembrance of cruelty committed, is but a poor
help and comfort to old age: and therefore he that is to give sentence, as
touching the life and spirit of a man, who is a part of this universal world,
and accomplisheth the number of living creatures, ought much to deliber at and
pause a long time, and not to be driven with a rash and headie affection to
that, which being once done is irrevocable: according to that example so well
known unto antiquity. There was a certain dame of Smyrna, who before the
Proconfull of Asia, Dolabella confessed, That she had by poison made away her
son and husband, for that she knew by manifest proof, that they had murdered
a son of hers by a former husband: and her trial being adjourned for
certain days, when the Counsel and Court unto which, according to the
custom, she was put off, stood perplexed and doubtful what should be set down
and determined, in this case, being of a middle nature between a revenge and a
wicked act, sent she was unto the k Areopagites, those severe Athenian Judges,
whose equity, by report, had decided the debates of the gods. These having
duly heard and examined the cause, awarded, That the woman together with her
accuser, should make appearance an hundred years after: least they should
either acquit the woman of poisoning, or punish her for revenging the murder of
her dear son. So, That is never thought late, which of all things is the
last. After these parts aforesaid committed in sundry sorts of injustice, and
marks imprinted shamefully upon the bodies of free persons that survived, the
never-winking eye of Justice, that judges and punishes at all times injuries,
diligently watched. For, the Furies, revengers of those that were thus slain,
stirred up with most just recital of continual complaints one in the neck of
another, kindled the flames of Bellona, to the end that the truth of the Oracle
might be confirmed, which foretold, That none of these foul acts thus
perpetrated, should pass unpunished. Whiles these iniquities above related,
during the cessation of the Parthian wars, are by intestine calamities spread
abroad in Antioch, all the dreadful sort of infernal Furies, after manifold
misfortunes which they had displayed and sent abroad, departing from the same
city, settled upon the neck of all Asia throughout in this manner. One
Festinus of Tridentinus.
Trent, a man of base and obscure parentage, beloved of Maximinus as his
companion, and taken into the bond (as it were) of brotherhood, and by the
appointment and decree of the Destinies, went over into the East Empire: and
there having governed Syria, and gone through the Office of Master of the or
Records.
Rolls, left behind him good examples of mildness and honor: Whereupon,
after he had begun to rule Asia in place of a Proconsul, he set sail (as they
say) gently forward, and held on his course toward the port of glory. And
hearing that Maximinus wrought mischief, and sought the overthrow of the best
men, he reprooved otherwhiles his doings, as pernicious and detestable. But
when he understood again, that the man without any desert was come up to be
Prefect, and all by the means of their funerals whom he had wickedly done to
death, he also grew to have an hot desire for to do and hope the like: and so
all on a sudden, like unto a player changing his part, and conceived with an
ardent affection to do mischief, he went stately with staring and stern
eyes, supposing yer it were long that a Prefectship would fall to him, in case
he also had embrued himself with the blood of innocent persons. And albeit
there are many and sundry parts which he acted (that I may use a mild term)
most rigorously, yet it shall suffice to recount a few of them that are
notorious and commonly divulged, which were committed by him in imitation of
those examples that were showed at Rome. For, the very same reason there is of
things done well or ill, even there also, although happily for the greatness
thereof which is unlike, there be some defect in the comparison. A certain
Philosopher named Caeronius, a man of no small desert, he killed with excessive
and most cruel torments (whose death remains unrevenged) for that in a
familiar letter of his written unto his own wife, he put in the end this
postscript in Greek, (...), a proverbiall speech commonly taken up, that when
one hears it, he may take the deeper knowledge and impression, that some
great matter is to be done. A simple and silly old woman there was, who used
with a gentle charm to heal intermittant as tertians, quartans, quotidians,
and such like.
agues, coming by fits, her he put to death, after that she had cured a
daughter of his, notwithstanding she was sent for with his own privitie. Among
the papers of a certain worshipful or citizen.
Bourgesse, which by commandment were searched upon some business in
controversy, there was found the the figure of his nativitie.
Horoscope of one Valens. And when he was charged often thus far, namely, Why
he had calculated the constellation of the Prince? the party whom it
concerned, notwithstanding that, to refell such false slanders, he promised to
show by good and evident proofs, that it was his own brother Valens, and that
he was a good while since departed: yet without waiting for evidence of the
truth, all torn and mangled he was cruelly slain. There was a young man seen
within the baine to lay the fingers of both hands upon a marble stone, and his
breast, by turns one after another, and therewith to have numbered and recited
the seven 1 vowels, taking this to be a good remedy for the pain of the
stomach, hereupon he was judicially convented, and after torture had his head
smitten off by the sword.

CHAP. VIII. Ammianus Marcellinus turning his pen to the state of the West
Empire, rehearses certain cruel proceedings of Valentinian, made more fell
by Maximinus Prefect of the Pretorium.
BY reason hereof turning my pen toward Gaul, I also meet with the order and
course of the affairs there troubled and confused, finding among many and
fearful occurrents, Maximinus now become Praetorio.
Prefect, by reason of his large power and authority a perilous firebrand to
incense the Valentinian.
Emperor, who with the majesty of his high fortune intermingled his
licentious will. Whosoever therefore considers what is said, may ponder also
and weigh all the rest that is concealed, and in his wisdom pardon me, in
case I comprise not every particular which the naughtiness of Judges and
their assessours by aggravating crimes, and making them worse, has committed.
For, Valentinian naturally of himself fierce and fell, as rigor (enemy unto
all righteous proceedings) grew more and more, after the coming of the said
Maximinus, whiles there was none either to advise him better, or to hold him
back in a certain swelling current (as it were) of waves and storms, was
carried through a sea of rigorous acts; in so much as many times in his fits of
anger his very voice, his countenance, his gate and color would change.
Which, to be true, sundry evidences there be, and those most certain that do
testify, of which it shall suffice to set down a few. A well grown youth,
one of these whom they term Pages.
Pedagogianos, being appointed in a place, for the better marking of the
hunters game, to hold a Spartane hound, chanced to let him slip before the set
time, for that the dog whiles he strived to be gone had assailed and bitten
him: For which, he had by his commandment the bastinadoe, until he dyed
therewith, and was buried the same day. The master of a certain 1 forge or
worke-house, who had presented unto him a curace most workemanly polished, and
therefore looking for his reward, he commanded to be killed, for nothing else
but this, that the said piece of iron armor was somewhat less in weight than
the pattern which he had given him. Constantianus the horse-chooser, because
he was so bold as to exchange some of those horses of service, for the m
allowing of which he had been sent into Sardinia, by his commandment also
was stoned to death. Athanasius a chariotier, and favorite then of his, whom
he had in suspicion for some vulgar levitie, in so much as he gave
commandment he should be burnt quick, in case he attempted any such thing;
notwithstanding that not long after he had (by report) done him pleasurable
service, without any pardon at all vouchsafed to this artificial deviser of
his delights and sports, was by precept from him consumed to ashes. Africanus,
a well practiced Advocate and defender of men's causes in the city, after he
had governed a Province, aspired to the rule of another: unto whose friend and
mediator Theodosius captain of the horsemen, who sued in his behalf for the
said preferment, he returned this churlish and rude answer, Go thy ways
Lieutenant (quoth he) and change his head, who desires thus to have his
Province changed. And by this warrant-parol the eloquent man lost his life,
whiles he hastened to greater preferments, as many do. A certain fellow for
his very base condition contemptible, accused Claudius and Sallustius, who
from out of the band of the Ioviani were advaunced to the dignity of Tribunes:
for that when Procopius sought to be an Emperor, they had given out some good
words in his behalf. But when there could appear no matter of substance
against them, by any examinations upon the rack, the Prince never gave over to
give the captains of the horsemen, who had the hearing of their cause, in
charge, That they should banish Claudius, and pronounce sentence of death upon
Sallustius; promising therewith, That when he was had away, and haled to the
place of execution, he would recall him back again. Now when according to
appointment they ever looked and waited for this deliverie, neither Sallustius
escaped death, nor was Claudius freed from this heavy plight of banishment,
before the death of the said Valentinian....... when as they were very often
tortured. After many inquisitions therefore by torments holden one after
another, and some examinats through excessive and dolorous tortures killed,
there were not found so much as any presumptions of those crimes which were
laid against them. In this business, the Soldiers of the Guard.
Protectores, sent to exhibit and bring the persons in place, are said to have
(against all custom before time) given them the Bastinado. My heart quaketh,
and withal is afraid to reckon up all, least I should be thought of purpose to
have searched into the vices of him, who otherwise was a very good prince, and
studious of the Weal public. Howbeit this one thing it is not meet either to
be over-passed or concealed, namely, that having two cursed and cruel she
Bears, that used to feed of men and women's flesh, the one named Mi^a aurea.
Golden Mica, and the other Innocentia, he carefully took order to place their
cages near unto his own bedchamber, and to set trusty keepers diligently to
see that they wanted nothing, nor had naught that might offend them. As for
Innocentia, after he had seen many burials of dead bodies rent and dismembered
by her, he suffered her, as having well deserved liberty, to go her ways
without any harm done unto her, into the forests.

CHAP. IX. Valentinian raises war upon Macrianus king of the Alemans, and
without effect returns to Triers. After this he causes Hortarius a petty
king to be burned for treason.
ANd verily these are most true proofs of his bloody behavior and cruel
intent. But of his prudent purpose about the Commonwealth never digressing....
If any of the enemies was discovered from above out of the watch-towers or
barbicans once to stir, he was overwhelmed. Now among many and sundry cares,
this above all other he first and principally cast in his mind, how by open
violence or privy trains he might catch alive and carry away king Macrianus,
grown among so many changes of successions to be rich and mighty, and now by
reason of his puissant forces rising up in arms against our men: like as long
before Iulianus had intercepted Vadomarius. But this business required both
foresight and also time. When it was known therefore by that which the
fugitives told, where the foresaid king, who looked for no such thing, might be
taken; as closely as possibly he could (for fear that any should hinder the
framing and setting together of a bridge) he made a passage over the Rhene with
ships. And Severus, who had the conduct of the Infanterie, being gone before
just against Martpury, as some think.
Mattiacae Aquae, considering full well how few our soldiers were, was
affrighted and stood still, fearing least not able to make resistance, he
should be borne down with the mighty power of the enemies squadrons, rushing
violently upon him. And because he suspected, that they (who brought with them
certain buffons as slaves to be sold) who^ by chance they found there, would
by speedy riding out give intelligence of that which they saw, those he
spoiled of their commodities, and slew them all. By the coming therefore of
more forces, the captains being animated, and having pitched their tents for a
very short time, because no man had either packe-horse nor pavilion but the
prince, whose carpets of tapistrie served for his tabernacle, after they had
stayed a small while by reason of the dark night, no sooner was the Moon
risen, but in order of battle they marched on farther, having for their
guides such as were skillful in the ways...... with a great stir and noise
of his own people he was hindered; whom for all that he charged continually to
forbear burning and spoiling, yet could he not prevail. For by reason of the
crackling that the fire made, and the dissonant cries beside, the Pentioners
and Squires of Macrianus.
his body were raised; who suspecting that which happened indeed, mounted the
king up into a most speedy chariot, and in a narrow or nouke.
entry within the hills which were round about broken, bestowed him. Thus
Valentinian, defrauded and disappointed of this glorious exploit, through the
default neither of himself nor of his captains, but through the unruly
intemperance of the soldiers, which oftentimes has cost the Roman state
grievous losses, after he had fired the enemies land fifty miles forward,
returned to Treviros.
Triers with heavy cheer: where fretting and grinding his empty jaws, like
unto a Lion, for the loss of a Stag or Roe-bucke, whiles the scattered ranks
of the enemies were affrighted, he ordained Fraomarius in stead of Macrianus to
reign over the Weisbaden. Heroldo.
Bucinobantes, an Aleman nation just against Mogunce.
Mogontiacum: Fraomarius (I say) whom shortly after, because in a late rode the
same territory had bin quite wasted, he sent over into Britannie, and made
Tribune and Colonel over a regiment of the Alemans, which for number and
valor in those days was renowned. But Bitheridus and Hortarius, principal
men likewise of that nation, he commanded to have the charge of soldiers
under them. Of which two, Hortarius detected by the means of Florentius, duke
of Mogontiacum, to have written somewhat against the State unto Macrianus and
other nobles of the Barbarians, after the truth was by torture expressed and
fetched out, were burnt for it.

CHAP. X. Firmus a prince of Mauritania raises troubles and commotions, which
Theodosius General of the Horsemen endeavors to appease.
FRom hence, among.... these occurrences that followed next, I thought good
should be delivered in one continued narration, least while in businesses and
places far distant other matters be inserted, there ensue of necessity a
confused knowledge of many things. Nubel a petie king, as it were, through all
the nations of Mauritania right puissant, departing this life, left behind him
sons, both legitimate, and also base begotten of his concubines: One of these
named Zamma, well accepted and in favor with the lieutenant named Romanus,
being secretly by his brother Firmus murdered, gave the occasion of much
discord and war. For the said lieutenant making have with all earnest desire
to revenge his death, wrought many means, and those very dangerous, to the
utter overthrow of the foresaid privy murderer. And as it was by sundry
rumors reported, great diligence and labor hereabout was employed in the
Emperors palace. And verily, the relations made by Romanus, which cast many
and grievous imputations upon Firmus, were willingly entertained of the prince,
and read before him, whiles there wanted not many besides favorably to second
the same. But on the contrary side, look what Firmus impleaded, and
oftentimes by his friends alleged in defense of himself and of his life, the
same, how ever it was received, did remain a long time smothered, by reason
that Remigius, master at that time of the Offices, allied by marriage, and a
friend unto Romanus, constantly always affirmed, That among many weighty and
important affairs of the Emperor, these so frivolous and superfluous matters
ought not be read unto him, but at some convenient and seasonable time. Which
when the Moore perceived to be a practice for to overthrow his defense,
trembling now for fear of extremity, least happily when those allegations which
he pretended and pleaded were cast aside, he might be condemned as one
pernicious and contumacious, and so put to death, renounced his allegiance unto
the Empire, and rebelled: and such helps... for fear least by increase of his
power he might grow to be an implacable enemy, to the suppressing of him, with
the help of some few soldiers attendant about the court, was Theodosius,
General of the Horsemen, sent: whose virtues in those days, as of great
efficacy, above the rest shone forth, being like for all the world to those
ancient knights Domitius Corbulo and Lusius, whereof the former under Nero,
the other under Traiane, Emperors of Rome, were renowned for many valiant
acts. Being departed therefore from Arelate.
Arles with most luckie and fortunat Auspices, and having passed the sea with
that fleet whereof he had the conduct, without any rumor going before, he
arrived at the shore of Mauritania Sitifensis, which the inhabitants call
Gigell.
Igilgitanum: and there finding by chance Romanus, and speaking gently to him,
he sent him to set in order the sentinels and fore-guards, with little or no
rebuke at all for those things that he feared. Who being gone away to
[Mauritania] Caesariensis, he sent Gildo the brother of Firmus, as also
Maximus, to reform Vincentius; who whiles he was lieutenant of Romanus, became
partaker of his uncivile behavior and his thefts. When he had therefore
received his soldiers, late though it were, who made the longer stay by reason
of the maine and wide sea, hastening to Sitifis, he gave order, That Romanus
with his domestical attendants should be committed unto the safe custody of
the Guard. soldiers.
Protectores. And whiles he abode within the town, distracted he was with
doubtful thoughts and cares, casting and tossing in his mind, by what way or
by what device he might either through hot and scorched countries lead his
soldiers, accustomed to frosts; or take the enemy prisoner, that used to make
sudden rodes, and trusted more upon secret ambushes than any set battles.
Which when it was known unto Firmus, first by running rumors, and afterward
by plain and open intelligences given, sore affrighted at the coming of a
most approoved and expert captain, he confessed his error, and craved pardon
of all that was past, both by Orators whom he sent, and also by letters which
he wrote; showing and declaring, That he brake not forth of his own accord to
that fact which he knew to be wicked, but by reason of unjust dealing, which
grew to licentious outrage, as he promised by demonstration to prove. Which
missives being read, and pardon promised upon the receipt of hostages, the
captain Theodosius.
aforesaid went forward to take a review of the Legions which defended Afric,
unto a station named Panchariana, whither as to the Rendez-vous by
commandment they were to repair. There having with honorable and wise
speeches confirmed all their hopes, he returned to Sitifis, and assembled the
soldiers there inhabiting, together with those whom he brought with him; and
impatient of farther delays, he made have to exploit some warlike service.
Moreover, among many and notable parts of his beside this one thing mightily
increased the love of the country unto him, in that he expressly forbad, That
the provincial inhabitants should find the army any victuals, giving out, and
that with a brave and confident spirit, That the harvests and hoords of the
enemies were the garners of our valorous men.

CHAP. XI. Through the treacherous and deceitful dealing of Firmus, it came to
pass, that upon a battle fought, wherein the Barbarians were discomfited,
Firmus in the end was glad to crave peace and pardon: which being obtained,
Theodosius repaireth Caesarea.
THese things thus ordered with joy of the Tenants, Farmers, or Lords
themselves. Possesson^m.
Land-holders, he marched forth to Tubusuptus, a town adjoining to the
mountain Ferratus, where he rejected the second embassage of Firmus, which had
not brought according to appointment the hostages with them. From whence, when
he had warily viewed and searched all, as the time and place would give leave,
he sped himself apace toward the nations of the Tyndenses and Masinissenes,
furnished and well appointed with light armor, whom Mascizel and... dius,
brethren of Firmus, had the leading of. Now, when these enemies, nimble and
deliver of lim, were within view, after discharge of shot and casting-weapons
on both sides, there was stricken a most sharp and cruel battle; and among
the groans, deaths, and wounds, was heard lamentable yelling and weeping of the
barbarous people, taken prisoners and slain: And when the fight was finished,
many of the territories were forrayed and fired: Among which the miseries of
the or Borough.
Burgade Petrensis exceeded, as being utterly rased and destroyed: which place
the lord thereof Salmaces, brother to Firmus, had built in manner of a city.
The conqueror lifted up with this good success, with wonderful celeritie
possessed himself of the town Lamforctense, situate among the nations
abovesaid: where he caused great abundance of victuals to be laid up, to the
end, that if as he went more inward into the country, he should find scarcity
of food, he might give order to have it fetched near at hand. In these train
of affairs, Mascizel having repaired his forces, with the aid-souldiors of the
nations bordering upon him, joined battle with our men, wherein after many of
his part defeated, himself through the swiftness of his horse with much ado
escaped the danger of death. Firmus wearied with the adverse fortune of two
battles, and chafing at the very heart root, because he would not omit the
utmost means that were, sent certain Christian bishops with hostages, to
treat for peace. Who, because they were courteously entertained, and upon
promise of victuals sufficient for the soldiers, according as they had in
charge, brought back a joyful answer, the Moore himself sending his
presents before him, very confidently went forth toward the Roman General,
mounted upon a courser, meet for any doubtful chances that might betide him.
And when he drew near, being stricken amazed at the glittering ensigns, and
the terrible countenance of Theodosius, he alighted from his horse, and bowing
down his head, stouped almost to the very ground, and so with tears blamed
his own rashness, craving pardon and peace: who being received with a kiss
(for it was thought behoofefull to the Commonwealth) and now full of good
hopes, furnished us with sufficient food: and so leaving some of his own
kinsfolks behind in lieu of the hostages, departed, with a purpose to
redeliver the captives, as he promised, whom in the very beginning of the
troubles he had caught up and carried away: and within two days after, without
any longer delay, he rendered back, according to commandment, the town Orano.
Nigr. Acor. Castald. called Icosium, of the 20. founders thereof. Solin.
I cosium (the founders whereof I have before related) the military ensigns
also, and the Sacerdotall crown, with all the rest that he had intercepted.
From hence, when our General after speedy and great journeyes entered into
Taves, Market.
Tipasa, unto the ambassadors of the Mazices, who had combined themselves with
Firmus, and now in humble manner besought pardon, he answered thus with an high
spirit, That forthwith he would war upon them, as perfidious rebels. Whom
being dismayed and cast down with fear of imminent danger, he commanded to
return home into their own country; and so he marched toward Cabo Figalo,
Pinot.
Caesarea, a wealthy and noble city in times past, the original whereof
likewise we have fully showed in the description of Affricke. Being entered into
it, when he saw it in manner all burnt and consumed with the fires that spread
all abroad, and the flint stones of the streets covered and gray all over with
ashes, he determined to bestow there for a time the first and second legions,
that whiles they were casting up at one side the heaps of dead embers, they
might keep a garrison there, least by a second assault of the Barbarians it
should be wasted again. Which news being carried diverse ways abroad by true
rumors, the rulers of the Province and Vincentius the Tribune came forth of
their lurking holes wherein they had bestowed themselves, and at length without
fear repaired with speed unto the General.

CHAP. XII. Firmus starting from his promised allegiance, forces Theodosius to
take arms. Certain horsemen of the Romans, who had revolted to the rebels,
are thrust down to the lowest degree of warre-service. Afterward Theodosius
executes others with loss of their heads. And then, by occasion that the
enemies were with many overthrowes brought upon their knees, and weakened, he
politikely delivers out of danger a small company of his own men.
WHom when Theodosius had seen and received with joy, making his abode still
at Caesarea, upon very diligent search made for the truth of every thing, he
understood for certain, that Firmus under color of a well-willer and
suppliant, in a covert policy reached at this, to come in manner of a sudden
tempest upon our army fearing no hostility, and to put it in disray. The
General therefore turning from hence came to a free borough town named
Sugabarritanum, seated upon the rising of the mountain Transcellensis: where
he found the horsemen of the fourth cohort of archers, which had revolted unto
the rebel: and to show that he was content with some mild punishment, he
thrust them all down to the lowest degree of war service: and both them and
also part of the Constantian footmen, he commanded to come to Tigaviae with
their Tribunes; one of whom had done upon the head of Firmus a chain for a
diadem. Whiles these things are a doing, Gildo and Maximus returned, leading
with them Belles a Prince of the Mazices, and Ferinus Prefect of that nation,
who had aided the faction of him that had troubled the the common peace.... to
produce them bound. Which being performed according to appointment, himself
went forth at break of day, and finding them in the army enclosed round
about, What think ye (quoth he) my devoted fellow soldiers, ought to be
done with these wicked traitors? and when they cried all with one voice and
required, That they who served among the 1 Constantiani, should loose their
life-bloud for it; he following their desire delivered them, after the old
manner, unto the soldiers to be massacred. As for the principal of the
archers aforesaid, he cut off their hands, the rest he beheaded after the
example of Curio, that most fierce and valiant captain, who by this kind of
punishment made an end of the Dardanians stoutnesse, which after the manner of
the m Lernaean serpent otherwhiles sprung up new again. But malicious
backebiters, as they commend that ancient fact, so they condemn this, as
cursed and over rigorous; saying, That the Dardanians were mortal enemies and
justly deserved those punishments that they sustained, whereas the soldiers
serving under their colors, when they all happened to fall into one error,
should have been dealt with in a milder kind of correction: Whom, I knowing
that I do, answer and give to understand, That this cohort both by fact and
example were rebellious. As touching Belles and Fericius aforesaid, whom Gildo
brought, as also Curandius, Tribune of the archers, he commanded them to be
killed in this regard, for that neither himself in person would ever encounter
with the enemies, nor exhort his soldiers under him to fight. And in this wise
proceeded Theodosius, considering this sentence of Tully, That wholesome rigor
and severitie surpasses the vain show of clemency. After this he went forth,
and came before a fort named Gaionatis, having a strong wall round about it,
which was the most safe and sure place of refuge for the Moors: with violent
push of the Ram this he cast down, and when he had slain all the inhabitants
therein, and laid the walls even with the ground, he went forward to the castle
Tingitanum, and by the hill Ancorarius set upon the Mazices assembled there
together, who now also discharged darts back again, that flew as thick as
hail: and when as on both sides they had skirmished, the Mazices not able to
abide our hot charging so violently with men and munition (a warlike nation
though they were and fierce) thus beaten down in sundry slaughters, in a foul
fright brake their arraies: and as they fled amain, were killed, all save
those who making shift to escape, by humble suit afterward obtained pardon and
peace, which the time so requiring was granted. Suggena their leader...... who
succeeded Romanus, appointed to go into Mauritania Sitifensis, there to take
order for the placing of garrisons, himself lifted up still with these
accidents past, marches against the nation of the Musones, whom their own
privitie and guiltiness of robberies and murders had gathered together to
join in action with Firmus, who as it was hoped would shortly attain unto
greater matters. And when he was entered well forward on his way, near unto the
burrough-towne Addense, he had certain intelligence that a number of nations,
how different soever they were in fashions and language, yet in one accord of
heart agreed to raise and begin cruel war: whereto they were incited and
encouraged with very great hope of rewards from a sister of Firmus, named
Cyria; who abounding in wealth, and in a wilful resolution of a woman,
purposed with all her power and endeavor to help her brother. Theodosius
therefore fearing to adventure himself upon an unequal match, and least if
encountering an huge multitude with a few (for he was but three thousand and
five hundred strong) he might loose them all, keeping a mean between
shameful flight and eagre fight, gave ground and retired softly, by reason
that the multitude pressed sore upon him, and so gat away. Upon which event the
barbarous people taking an exceeding good heart.... and lost he had them all
to the last man, but that those nations seeing the ayds of the Mazices, before
whom marched certain Roman corporals, were mightily troubled and affrighted:
and supposing they had been many battailons, ready with violence to charge
upon them, took them to their heels, and so opened the passages and ways for
our men to get out, which before were quite stopped up.

CHAP. XIII. Theodosius by a wise policy and military holding off assailing
his enemies, forces Firmus by flight to shift for himself, abandoning his
camp that was ransacked: followloweth him in chase: and when he had vanquished
the Isaflenses, who received and harbored him, and put certain of the
principal enemies to death, bestows his own people in safety.
WHen Theodosius afterward leading his soldiers safe, was come to a or Burgh.
Burgade named Mazucanum, after he had burnt up some few revolters, dismembered
and maimed others after the example of those archeis who had lost their hands,
he came in the month of February to Tipata: Where making his abode a long
time, like unto that ancient and wary Q. Fabius Maximus.
temporizer, he consulted as the business did require, intending if he might
happily spy his advantage and opportunity to vanquish the warlike enemy, by
dint of dart and weapon invincible, rather by stratagems and policy, than by
dangerous encounters in plain field. Howbeit, he sent continually certain
persons skillful in persuading, unto the nations round about, namely, the
Baiurae, the Cantorians, Avastomates, Cafaves, Devares, and other borderers,
one while by fear, otherwhiles by fair promises inducing them to an
association, yea and sometime by promising them pardon for their malapert
folly, purposing so to vanquish the enemy who much abated his violent forces,
by such fair fetches and delays, like as Pompey in times past overcame
Mithridates. For which cause, Firmus declining a mischief so near at hand,
although he was well strengthened with great guards about him, leaving the
common multitude of soldiers whom he had levied and assembled with great
wages, taking opportunity of the still night to be unseene, reached as far
as to the mountains Caprarienses, which were far off, and by reason of
broken and craggie rocks inaccessable. Upon whose secret departure the
multitude being scattered, slipping and dropping away one after another, now
that they were without a leader, ministered unto our men good and ready means
to enter upon his camp. Which being ransacked, and those slain that made
resistance, or else upon their yielding taken to mercy, when he had wasted the
greatest part of those countries, like a most prudent and politic captain,
he set over those nations which he passed through, Prefects and rulers, men of
approved trust and fidelity. The enemy terrified with this unlooked-for
pursuit of Theodosius, accompanied with some few servants, minding by quick
departure to save himself, to the end he might not be hindered by any let or
encumbrance, threw away the packs of precious wares and commodities which he
had brought away with him. For, his wife, wearied out with continual and very
dangerous labor.... Theodosius sparing none, when the soldiers were refreshed
with finer food, and cheered with wages, after that the Caprarienses the and
Abbannae their neighbors, were in a light battle defeated, made have to the
Borough town.... ense: and being by true messengers advertised, that the
Barbarians were already possessed of the hills, which on every side with
winding in and our mounted up aloft, and were passable for none but the inborne
inhabitants that knew the ways very well, in his return back gave the
enemies good means, during a truce (though it lasted but a while) to make
themselves stronger, with passing great ayds of the Aethiopians near
adjoining. Who with a menacing noise rushing in by whole plumpes, without any
regard of themselves to fight, forced him to turn back as affrighted with a
terrible sight of inestimable troops: but straightwayes taking heart again,
he returned, bringing with him plentiful store of victuals: and with his men
cast round into a ring, and shaking their shields after a terrible kind of
gesture, made head against them. Albeit therefore that the bands of furious
enemies with their Barbarian armor clattering one against another, and making
an hideous and fearful kind of noise, were at the point to give the charge,
yea and themselves also knocked their bucklers against their knees, yet like
unto that Fabius Maximus Cunctator.
wary warrior and politic souldior aforesaid, distrusting his small forces,
boldly marching with a square battailon, flee turned his way without any fear
to a city named Contensis, where Firmus for fear of our men had, as in a
remote and high fort bestowed his folk. And so after he had recovered all his
own soldiers, he sharply punished (as his woonted manner was) the traitors and
the guard of Firmus aforesaid. As he most happily was in atchieving this
exploit through the help of his great name, advertised he was by a true
discoverer, that Firmus was fled into the country of the Isaflenses. For the
demanding of whom together with his brother Mazuca, and other near kinsfolk
and dear friends he entered thither; but seeing he could not have the^
delivered, he proclaimed open war against the whole nation. And upon the
joining of a cruel battle against the Barbarians, who beyond al measure
braved and behaved themselves most fiercely, he opposed his battle shaped
after a round fashion: And with the forcible violence of mighty troops and
squadrons, the Isaflenses were so driven to the worst, that many of them lost
their lives: and Firmus himself as hardy as he was, and running oftentimes
headlong upon his own mischief, was with his horse carried quite back out of
the field, as having been used nimbly to run over rocks and cragges: but
Mazuca his brother deadly wounded, was taken prisoner; who being by order
appointed to be sent to Caesarea, where he had left cruel and durable
memorials of most wicked deeds, in the opening of his wound dyed: howbeit his
head severed from the rest of his body, with great joy of as many as came to
see it was brought into the city aforesaid. After this, the noble General
having vanquished the nation of the Isaflenses that withstood him, plagued them
(as justice required) with many losses and calamities. And there he caused to
be burnt Evasius a mighty Bourgesse, with his son Florus, and some other
openly convicted, by their secret conferences to have assisted the breaker of
peace. And then marching there within the land, in a brave mind and powerful
courage, having invaded the country Iubalena, where he heard say that Nubel
the father of Firmus was borne, being put back with high mountains and
winding crooked straits, he stayed his journey. And although by setting upon
the enemies and killing many of them he made himself way to pass forward, yet
fearing the lofty hill tops most meet for ambushments, leading his soldiers
in safety he returned to the fortress Audiense: Where the Isaflenses, a
savage people, yielded themselves, promising voluntarily to furnish him with
aid-souldiors and victuals.

CHAP. XIIII. When Firmus was returned to the Isaflenses, Theodosius goes to
meet him, and with a small power sets upon the enemies: and in the end,
after a doubtful battle, discomfiteth and foileth them. Which done, he so
courseth the Isaflenses, that Firmus in despair of himself, ends his life
with an halter: whereby the Province recovered quietness.
FOr these and the like glorious achievements, this most noble captain taking
great joy and contentment, with a puissant power sought to be meet with the
principal troubler himself of peace: and therefore making his abode a long
time near to a fort named Medianum, after many and politic debatements of
means projected, good hope he had that he might be betrayed unto him. But
whiles with perplexed thoughts and deep care he did forecast how to compass
this, he understood for truth, That the enemy was returned again to the
Isaflenses, whom without any farther delay, as before, he marched against with
speed. Unto whom, their king named Igmazen, a prince in those tracts of high
reputation, and famous for his wealth, advancing forth and boldly affronting
him: Whence art thou (quoth he) and what business have thou, that thou art
hither come? Answer me. Upon whom Theodosius in a resolute mind looking wistly
with a stern countenance: A Lieutenant I am (says he) unto Valentinian, Lord
of the whole earth, sent to subdue a bloody and cruel robber: and unless
thou render him out of hand, according as the invincible Emperor has
determined, thou and the whole nation which thou rulest shall utterly perish.
Which when Igmazen heard, after many reviling taunts that he let fly against
the General, much troubled with anger and grief together, he went his way.
And the next morning betimes the armies on both sides advanced forth in most
menacing wise, ready to encounter and join battle. On the Barbarians side
there were 20000 very near, marshalled in the very front of the vantguard;
behind whose backs were bestowed secretly the squadrons of auxiliaries for
supply; who rising up by little and little, might show themselves, and with
their multitude enclose our men ere they were aware. Besides these, there came
in many of the Iesalenes as aid-souldiors, who (as I showed before) had
promised our men help and provision of victuals. On the other side, the
Romans, although they were very few, yet bearing valiant hearts, and lifted up
with precedent victories, having set their flanks thick thrust together, and
fitted their shields close one to another in manner of a fence-roufe, stood
their ground and resisted. And when from the Sun rising unto the end of the
day the fight had continued, Firmus a little before the evening was seen
mounted upon a tall courser, and displaying forth a good way from him his red
coat armor, with loud cries to move and exhort our soldiers for to deliver up
Theodosius betimes (tearming him cruel, detestable, and a bloody deviser of
torments and executions) in case they were desirous to be rid from the
extremities which they endured. These words of his unlooked for, incited some
of them more eagerly to fight, but enticed others to forsake the field. And
therefore, so soon as the still time of night was come, whiles both sides were
enwrapped within wandering darkness, the Roman General returned to the
fortress Duodiense, and taking a review and muster of his soldiers, look how
many of them cowardly fear and the words beside of Firmus had turned from
their purpose of fighting, he punished sundry ways with death; some by cutting
off their right hands, others by burning alive. And most carefully keeping
watch and ward, some of the Barbarians who adventured after the Moon was
down, when they could not be seen, to set upon our camp, he either
discomfited, or else if they rushed in very audaciously, took the^ prisoners.
After this, departing from thence a great pace, he coursed the Iesalenes (as a
people hardly to be trusted) through crooked lanes, where he was little looked
for, and afflicted them so, as he brought them to extreme penury: and being
returned by the towns of Mauritania Caesariensis to Sitifis, after he had
racked and tortured even to death Castor and Martinianus, partakers with
Romanus in all robberies and foul facts, he burnt them. After this, the war
began afresh with the Isaflenses: and in the first conflict, when many of the
Barbarians were beaten back and slain, Igmazen their king (who heretofore was
wont ever to be a winner) distracted and terrified with this present distress,
and supposing that if he should bear himself obstinately still, when commerce
and traffic were once prohibited, there remained for him no hope at all to
live, as warily and closely as possibly could be out of the battle he brake
forth alone, and espying Theodosius, humbly besought him to command Masilla,
a chief Peer of the Mazices, to come unto him. By whom, being sent at his
request, in secret conferences he advised the General, who of his own
disposition was no starter, but constant and resolute, That to give him means
whereby he might bring more easily his purpose about, he would preasse hotly
upon those of his own nation, and by continuance of fight turn them to fear,
who verily were ready enough to affect and favor the Rebel, but wearied out
with many losses. Theodosius gave ear and condiscended to his words, and with
often skirmishing foiled the Isaflenses so, that whiles they fell down like so
many beasts, Firmus privily slipped aside, and when he had bin confined a long
time within starting holes out of the way, whiles he consulted there how to
fly and escape, was stayed and kept in ward by Igmazen. And for as much as he
was informed, what had bin underhand and secretly practiced by Masilla, seeing
now in this extremity and despair of his estate, there was no remedy left
but one, he determined by a voluntary death to tread under foot all desire of
life: and being for the nonce full of wine, till his skin strutted again,
himself lay awake for terror of the misery hanging over his head, whiles the
warders having their load likewise of headie wine, lay sound asleep in the
dead time of the night. Then leaving his bed, and creeping on all four without
making any noise, he severed himself apart far off, and having found a cord,
which to end his life happened to be ready for his hand, he hung it upon a
nail or spike that stuck in the wall, and so knitting his neck within it,
without any lingering torments ended his life. Which accident Igmazen taking
grievously, and groaning again, that he was disappointed of his glory, in that
it was not his good hap to lead this rebellious enemy in bonds to the Roman
camp, after assurance made of safe conduct by the means of Masilla, himself
carrying the dead body of him thus murdered, upon a Camel, when he approached
the tents of the army, pitched under the sort Subicarense, he shifted it upon
a packe-horse, and presented it unto Theodosius, who joyed and triumphed
thereat. And calling together as well the armed soldiers as the common people,
he asked, Whether they knew that visage? and when without any delay or
circumstance made, he understood certainly it was his face, after he had
remained there a little while, he returned to Sitifis in triumphant manner, and
was received solemnly with the favor of all sorts of age and degree.

CHAP. XV. Valentinian warreth upon the Quadi: whose king Gabinius is by the
wicked plots of Maximinus murdered.
WHiles the Theodosius.
General aforesaid is thus painefully employed within Mauritania and Afric
in the wars, the Markfelders. Aventin.
Quadi rose up in arms upon a sudden, a nation now little to be feared, but
wonderful it is, how warlike and puissant they were before time, as their
speedy exploits do show; for that by them and the the people of M^thern.
Dubra^io.
Marcomanni, Aquileia was on a sudden besieged a long time, Od^iso. Leandro.
Opitergium raced, and many bloody exploits performed with quick dispatch,
whiles or Mauricus.
Maricus the principal (of whom I have spoken before) by breaking through the
Alps Iuliae was hardly able to withstand them: and in truth (as Barbarians)
just cause they had to quarrel and complain. For Valentinian burning in a
desire (glorious I must needs say and generous, but excessive and immoderat)
and that from the beginning of his Empire, to fortify the limits, commanded
garrison castles to be built beyond the river Hister, upon the verylands of the
Quadi, as if the same had bin already under the Roman jurisdiction: whereat the
inhabitants much discontented, and wisely looking to the main chance, so far
forth as they might, partly by embassage, and partly by secret murmurings
hindered the same for a time. But Maximinus greedily set upon all mischief,
and not able to mitigate his inbred humor of pride, which was puffed the more
by his Praefectship, blamed and rebuked Equitius, Magistrum armorum, or
Con^stabile as Remigius Florentius takes it.
General of the Forces at the same time throughout Illyricum, as one
obstinate, headie and slothful, for that the said work was not yet finished,
which was appointed to go forward with all expedition: and he said moreover,
as one tendering the common good, That if his parvo suo.
little [son] Marcellianus were once made Ducis, or Lord Marcher.
General of the Forces in Valeria, the fort would be erected without more ado,
or any allegation to the contrary. Both which soon after came to pass
accordingly. For he being promoted to that place of command, was no sooner
gone forth and arrived in those parts, but swelling with pride unreasonably as
ut filius.
his own son right, without winning of them by any talk and conference, who^
the fained furmises of that desire and design which was never attempted,
caused to avoid their own countries, sets in hand again with that work,
which a little before was begun, and by means of some entreatie granted, had
been forelet for a time. And at the last, when king Gabinius in modest terms
required there might not be any new alteration, Marcellianus under semblance of
courtesy, as if he would condescend unto him, invited him, with others, to a
feast; whom in his departure, after his good cheer, whiles he feared no harm,
with breaking most wickedly the religious bond of hospitality, he caused to be
murdered. The rumor of whose horrible fact being incontinently spread abroad
diverse ways, set both the Quadi and the nations seated round about them all in
a rage; and bewailing the kings death, they assembled themselves into one
place, and sent out companies in arms to raise booties and spoil all before
them: which being passed over Danubius, what time as no manner of hostility
was looked for, assailed the country people, busied in their harvest: and when
they had killed the greater part of them, whatsoever remained, they had away
and carried home, with numbers of cattle of sundry sorts. And verily, at the
same time there had like to have happened an inexpiable mischief, to be
reckoned among the dishonorable losses of the Roman State. For it went within
a little, that the daughter of Constantius taking her repast in a certain
manor, which they call Vis^rici^. Lazio.
Pistrensis, what time as she was brought to be wedded unto Gratianus, had
been taken prisoner, but that by the fair grace of God, Messala governor of
the Province being present, mounted her into a swift post-chariot, and with a
maine pace rode away, and brought her back to Sirmium; which was six and
twenty miles from thence. By this good and fortunate hap, the royal virgin
and damsel being delivered from the danger of miserable servitude (whose
captivity, unless she might be ransomed, would surely have brought much
misery upon the Commonwealth) the Quadi, together with the Sarmatians, ranging
and spreading themselves farther abroad (as nations most meet to spoil and
rob) drove before them booties of folk, both men and women, of cattle also;
rejoicing in triumphant wise to see the ashes of villages burnt, and the woeful
miseries of inhabitants lying slain, whom they took on a sudden, and killed
without pity and mercy.

CHAP. XVI. Probus, Prefect of the Praetorium, a base minded man, is not able
to abide the violence of the Quadi. Two Legions are put to the sword.
Theodosius the younger, Emperor afterward, a young gentleman of most approved
valor, valiantly represseth the Sarmatians, making a tumultuous broile. The
inundation of Tiberis, resembling so many deluges.
THe fear therefore of the like calamities being dispersed over all parts,
Probus the Praefectus Praetorio abiding then at Syrmium, a man not acquainted
with any terrors of wars, but astonished with the woeful sight of such strange
and new occurrents, and scarce able to lift up his eyes, was doubtful a long
time, and to seek what to do: and when as he had prepared swift steeds, and
purposed the next night to fly, being advised by better counsel, stayed still
and stirred not. For advertised he was, that straightwaies upon his flight, all
they (who were enclosed within walls) would follow after, to shroud and hide
themselves in commodious lurking places: which if it had happened, the city
undefended would have fallen into the enemies hands. Wherefore his fear being
somewhat allayed, he took a good heart and courageously set in hand with such
matters as were urgent and needful; he scoured the ditches that were choked
up and filled with rammell; and, as he was inured in an humor of building, he
quickly brought up the greatest part of the walls (which through long peace lay
neglected and subverted) as far as to the battlements of high towers. And by
this means the work was quickly finished; for that he found sufficient money
to effect that which he hastened forward, laid up erewhile to defray the
charges of building a Theater. And to this approved policy he adjoined another
of right good consequence, in that he sent for the cohort of the on horseback.
Archers from the next station and standing ground, ready to be assistant, in
case there had happened a siege. By these bars, as it were, the barbarous
enemies, put back from assayling the city, as who were little acquainted with
these stratagemes of war, and besides encumbred with bag and baggage which
they had gotten by pillage, betake themselves wholly to hunt after Equitius.
And when they had learned by intelligence given them from those whom they took
prisoners, that he was gone aside into the far removed parts of a part of
Pannonia.
Valeria, thither they hyed them apace, fretting and fuming; for this very
reason fully bent to cut his throat, because they thought the innocent king
aforesaid was by his means circumvented and made away. Against whom running on
end forward with a bloody mind, there advanced in the very way two legions or
squadrons.
m Pannonica and * n Moesiaca, a warlike and puissant army: which if they
could have jointly agreed, no doubt had gone clear away with victory. But
whiles they in all have severally set upon the said robbers, the devil cast a
bone among them, so that they fell at variance, and (which sore hindered their
service) strove for honor and dignity: Which when the Sarmatians (as they
were passing witty) perceived, not expecting any solemn signal of battle,
charge upon the Moesiack legion first. And while our soldiers were some what
slack in this tumult, to arm and make ready their weapons, they slew the
most of them: and herewith more emboldened, they brake through the Pannonian
legion, and having broken the ranks with mere might and maine, they had
redoubled the charge, and put them in manner all to the sword, but that some of
them made so quick shift that they escaped the danger of death. During this
disasterous danger and heavy loss, the marquess of Moesia, Theodosius the
younger, a young gentleman (whose beard began but then to bud forth, and who
afterward prooved a most politic and experienced Emperor) diverse times drove
out and sore annoyed, yea and with many skirmishes one in the tail of another
crushed the free Sarmatians (so called for difference from the rebellious
bondmen) that from another side invaded our confines, and so defeated whole
multitudes of them conflowing together, and resisting right manfully, that the
most part of them most justly slain, satisfied the bloody fowls and ravenous
wild beasts. Whereupon the rest, now that their swelling pride was fallen and
well abated, fearing least the same captain a warrior of expedite prowess,
as it appeared, and quick dispatch, would either beat down or put to rout the
troops that made rodes, even in the first entry of the borders, or else
bestow ambushments secretly along the woods; after many offers and attempts of
breaking through, made from time to time in vain, casting aside all trust in
fighting, craved a tolleration and pardon for all that was past. And thus being
overcome, for a time entered into no action contrary to the covenants of peace
granted unto them: as being most of all curbed and kept down with this fear,
for that there was come a strong power of the that served in Gaul.
Gallicane soldiers to the defense of Illyricum. Whiles these occurrents so
many and of such sort, by way of continual troubles do pass, in the time that
Claudius governed Rome city, the river Tiberis which running through the mids
thereof, together with many sinkes, sewers and riverets abundant intermingleth
himself with the Mar Tosco, Leandr. Mar de Mar eille, Vincent. Lupar.
Tyrrhene sea, swelling big and overflowing with outrageous fall of rain,
and pouring shewers, and spreading now beyond the terms of a river, welneere
surrounded all. And for as much as all parts of the city besides, seated upon
an even and level place, were all a standing poole, the hills only and what
great houses built apart by themselves were mounted upon the higher ground,
saved themselves from the present fearful danger. And least a number of the
people should pine and perish for want of food (considering the water was so
great, that it suffered no man to go forth any whither) with boats and wherries
there was plentiful store of meat brought unto them. But when as the
tempestuous weather was appeased, and the river by breaking those bars that
held it in, returned to his woonted course, all fear was done away, and no
more trouble afterward expected. This very Prefect carried himself in his
place very quietly, as having endured and tasted of no sedition upon any just
cause of quarrel and complaint: and besides, he reedified many buildings: among
which he reared a mighty gallerie or walking place hard by the o baine of
Agrippa, which he named, The Baine of p good event, by reason that there is
seen near unto it a temple bearing this name.

THE XXX. BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Para King of Armenia taken by a wile, and wrongfully detained by
Valens, wittily makes means to escape.
AMong these dangerous troubles which General Perrha raised after the King of
the Quadi was treacherously slain, there chanced an execrable fact to be
committed in the East, by the murdering of Para King of Armenia, by villainous
and secret trains: of which matter upon an impious intent conceived, this we
know to have been the original cause. Certain persons there were, having
shrewd and unhappie wits of their own, fed and maintained many times with the
losses of commonweal, who before Valens complotted and packed against Para,
being as yet but a young Prince, diverse imputations, aggravating the same in
the worst manner: Among whom was Terentius Lord Warden of the Marches, one that
walked lowly, and always somewhat heavy and sad, but so long as he lived a
perilous sower and stirrer up of dissentions. Who having taken into his
society some few people, such as for their lewd and heinous offenses stood in
doubtful terms of fear, by writing to the Emperors Court and Counsel,
ceased not to reiterate the death of Cylaces and Artabanes: adding moreover,
That the said young Prince, reaching and aiming at proud deeds, became
exceeding hard and cruel to his subjects. Whereupon the said Para, under a
color, as if he should be made partaker of a treaty then to be holden, as the
instant affairs required, called after a roial sort, and under a pretense of
serviceable courtesy attended at Tarsus in Cilicia, when as he neither could
be admitted into the Emperors camp, nor yet know the cause of this urgent
appearance of his, for that every man held his tongue, at the length by a
secret inkling given unto him, he found, that Terentius by his letters advised
the Roman Emperor, to send straightwayes another to be king of Armenia, least
in hatred of Para, and for fear that he should return, the whole nation, of
such importance to us, should revolt and become subject unto the Persians, who
were hot upon the getting of it either by force, or fear, or flattery. Which
when he the said king revolved in his mind, he presaged that some grievous
mischief hung over his head. And being now ware of this deceitful plot, and
finding no other means to save himself but by a speedy departure, at the
persuasion of such as he had affiance in, he having gathered about him three
hundred of his train, who had followed him forth of his Armenia.
country, upon most swift horses, when the greatest part of the day was spent,
more adventurous than advised (as commonly it is seen in great and dangerous
frights) he went forth in manner of a pointed battailon, and hastened away
fearelesse. And when an officer belonging to a the Corrector, or Governor.
Moderator of the Province, who warded the gate, much troubled to see him make
such have, found him in the suburbs and quarters near unto the city, he
besought him very earnestly to stay; and seeing he could not prevail, turned
back for fear of being killed. In like manner a little after, the legion also
that pursued, and now approached near unto him, himself together with the
forwardest of his company galloping back, and shooting arrows that flew as
thick as sparks of fire, but missing them for the nonce, put to flight, so
that all our soldiers togegether with their Tribune terrified, retired back
again to the walls more lustily than they came forward. Then freed from all
fear, after he had for two days and two nights together endured the painful
labor of journeyes, when he was come to Euphrates, and for want of ships could
not at any foord pass over the river, full of gulfes and whirlepite, as a
number of them not skillful in swimming were afraid, so himself most of them
all held off and adventured not. And verily remained he had behind, but that
(as every man cast about sundry shifts) he was able to find out this means
of evasion, which at the very point of necessity was most safe. Such little
beds as they found in the villages, they supported with two leather bottles or
budgets apeece, whereof there was good store near at hand in the fields where
wine was made. Upon every one of which, a chief peer and the Prince himself
sitting severally, to wing and haling after them their horses, by winding
passages that they made, declined the high waves and billows of the water,
surging full against them. And by this device, at length after extreme perils,
came to the bank on the farther side. All the rest riding upon their horses
that swum, and oftentimes by reason of the stream dashing round about them,
dowsed under the water, and tossed to and fro, after they had been weakened
with this dangerous wet that they took, were cast upon the banks against
them: where after they had refreshed themselves a little while, they marched
more speedily lightly appointed than they did the days past. When the Emperor
heard news hereof, much troubled at the flight and escape of the foresaid
Para, who he thought now being out of the snare, and at liberty, would break
his allegiance, he sent out Danieles and Barzimeres with a thousand light and
nimble Carbines, for to fetch him back, the one a Lieutenant, and the other a
Tribune of the Scutarij. These trusting upon their own perfect knowledge of
the ways, for that he hastening away as he did, like a stranger and one
unacquainted with the country, made many winding turns and fetched a
compass, prevented his journeyes, going the next way through the vallyes: and
having parted between them their forces, beset the two next passages, which
were three miles a sunder, that as he should pass by either of them, he might
be intercepted yer he was aware. But this device and project of theirs came to
nothing, by such an accident as this. A certain wayfaring man making have on
his journey, to a place on this side, espying the hill full of armed men, for
to avoid them, going aside by a cross back lane in the middle, chanced upon
the Armenians all wearied: and being brought unto the king, informs him in
secret talk alone what he had seen, and so without any harm done unto him
was there detained. And soon after, without any semblance or show made of
fear, there was sent out an horseman secretly to the right side of the way, to
provide lodging and victuals: When he was gone a little forward, another
likewise had commandment to go most speedily to the left tract for to do
the like, who knew not that the other was sent another way. These things thus
ordered to a good purpose, the king himself with his followers returning back
again with the wayfaring person himself that showed him the way through the
bushes by a rough beaten path, and little enough for an horse laden to pass,
gat away and left our soldiers behind his back: who having caught his
ministers sent out to cast a mist (as it were) before their minds that waited
for him, looked in manner with hands reached forth to catch an hunters prey.
And whiles they look still for him when he would come, he having in safety
recovered his kingdom, and with exceeding joy of his people being received,
continued firm and fast in the same true and assured loyalty, putting up with
silence all the wrongs that he had sustained.

CHAP. II. The same king is by a new plat of deceitful treachery set upon at
a feast, and by the commandment of Valens murdered.
DAnicles after this, and Barzimeres, when thus deluded they were returned [to
the Court,] being with reproachful terms reviled as dastards and cowards,
faring like unto venomous serpents, which with the first blow are astonished,
plucked up their spirits and whetted their deadly chawes, purposing as soon as
possibly they could if it lay in their power to be meet with him that thus
escaped their hands, and to do him mischief: and so partly to extenuate this
their own offense, and partly to excuse themselves that they were over-raught
in subtle policy, they charged Para with false slanders and imputations in
the ears of the Emperor, most apt to entertain all rumors: devising, That
he could skill of the witchcrafts and enchantments of Circe, to transform and
enfeeble folks bodies wonderously: saying thus much moreover, That by such
juggling tricks, a mist being cast before their eyes, he was changed in the
shape of diverse other things, and passed by them invisible; and would (no
doubt) work much woe and teene, in case he should remain alive after this
scornful illusion. Hereupon an inexplicable hatred of the Emperor was
increased against him, and crafty means were wrought from day to day, to take
his life away, either by open violence or secret practice. Which design by
writing closely under hand was committed unto Traianus, abiding then in
Armenia, and having the charge of the martial forces and affairs there. Who
going about to compass the king by alluring sleights; one while delivering
unto him the letters of Valens, showing his gracious favor and affection
toward him; another while bidding himself to his feasts, at length upon a
mischievous plot he invited him also in modest and reverent sort to a dinner:
who fearing no evil toward, came and sat him down at the table in the most
honorable place allowed for him. Now, when there were exquisite and dainty
viands served up to the bourd, and the house rung again with the sound of
stringed and wynd instruments, fingered right artificially, when the wine also
went merrily about, whiles the master himself of the feast was gone forth of
the room under a color of some urgent business of nature, one steps stoutly
into the place, with a stern and grim look, a barbarous and rough hewn
fellow, one of those whom they term Suprae, shaking a drawn sword in his
hand, in menacing wise ready to run the young prince through, who was now so
pent in, that he could not leap forth from him. Whom, when the said prince
saw, sitting forward, as it fell out, on the farther side of the dining or
table.
pallet, and upon this discovery of treason rising up to defend himself by
all the means he could, was stabbed through the breast, and so lay a long like
a beastly sacrifice, fowlely and shamefully mangled with many a bloody stroke.
And thus his credulity being villanously deceived, by this fraudulent device,
in the midst of a feast, which with reverence is regarded even in the Euxine
sea, in the very sight of the b Hospital God, the blood of a stranger spurting
upon the rich table-clothes and carpets, and foming again, gave all the guests
their fill, who by this time, in exceeding horror, were dispersed. Now would
that noble Fabricius c Luscinus groan and weep (if folk departed have any
sense of grief in them) at this arrogant and desperate act, knowing, as he
did, with what courage and magnanimity he rejected Demochares, or (as some
write) Nicias the kings minister, promising by way of a secret parley, That he
would in a cup of wine poison king Pyrrhus, who then plagued and wasted Italy
with most cruel wars, and wrote withal to the said king, That he should
take heed of his inward servitours and attendants near about him: such a
reverent regard in that time of ancient justice carried the Genialitie, even
of an enemies table. But this late unexampled and shameful fact was excused
(forsooth) by the like precedent of d Sertorius his death; and that by
flatterers (ywis) who happily never knew, as Demosthenes (that everlasting
ornament and honor of Greece) affirms: That whatsoever is argued and
objected, as done otherwise than rightfully, can never be answered and assoyled
by the like precedent or impunitie of another crime. And thus much of the
memorable occurrents that passed in Armenia.

CHAP. III. The Embassages of Sapor and Valens that took no effect. The
horrible death of Remigius, who had acted not the least part in the Tragoedie
of Tripolis, described in the 29. book.
But Sapor, after the former overthrow and slaughter of his men, having
certain intelligence of Para his death, whom he earnestly endeavored to
combine with, was stricken with grievous sorrow; and, as the cheerful courage
of our army still increased his fear, he projecting greater designs unto
himself, sent Arsaces in Embassage unto the Valens.
Emperor, and gave advice, To have Armenia (the continual cause of all
troubles) to be utterly destroyed: And in case that motion were misliked, he
required another thing, namely, That the division of Hiberia being annulled,
and the garrisons of the Romans side from thence remooved, Aspacures might be
permitted to reign alone, whom himself had made Governor over that nation.
Whereunto Valens returned answer to this effect: That he could not foredoe
ought of the capitulations and articles by consent confirmed, but was right
willing and careful to maintain the same. To cross this glorious purpose and
resolution of his, when as the Winter now was at an end, the kings letters were
brought, alleging vain and arrogant reasons. For he constantly avouched, That
the occasion of discord might not possibly be stocked up by the roots,
without the presence of those that were privy to the peace covenanted with
Iovianus, some of whom he understood were departed this life. After this, the
Emperor, as his care grew greater, and took deeper impression, being better
able to choose, than to devise good counsels, and supposing this to be expedient
for his affairs, commanded Victor, General of the Horse, and Vrbicius,
Marquess or Warden of the marches of Mesopotamia, to go with all speed,
carrying with them an absolute and uniforme answer, That it little became a
just Prince, contenting himself with his own (as the king usually gave out of
himself) thus wickedly to covet Armenia, considering the inhabitants thereof,
by his own agreement, were permitted to live at their own will: and unless
the garrison soldiers, imparted unto Sauromaces, returned without fail and
let in the beginning of the year following (as it was ordered) he should
against his will accomplish those articles, which of his own accord to do, he
omitted. Which verily was a plain and francke Embassage, had it not swerved in
this one point, That without any direction or commission in that behalf, these
Ambassadors accepted of those small countries in Armenia that were offered.
Which Embassage being returned, there arrived Surena, chief in authority
under the king, offering the very same parcels unto the Emperor, which our
Ambassadors had boldly taken. Who being liberally and honorably entertained,
but sent back again without obtaining that for which he came, great
preparation there was and furniture for the wars, considering that the
Emperor, so soon as the rigor of Winter was abated, minded with three armies
to invade Persis, and therefore with all expedition levied and waged aid
soldiers of the Scythians. Sapor therefore missing of those matters, which in
a vain hope he had conceived, and chafed more than he used to be, for that he
had intelligence, That our great Commander and Ruler prepared for an
expedition, yet biting in his anger, gave Surena in charge, to claim and
recover by force of arms, those pieces which Lieutenant Victor and Vrbicius
had received: and in case any man made resistance, that the soldiers also,
which were appointed for the garrison and defense of Sauromaces, should be
plagued with extremity of miseries. And for these designs quickly put in
execution, as he had ordained, there was no remedy nor means to cry
quittance, because the Romans were beset with another fear of all Gothia,
which in licentious manner had violently broke into Thracia: The doleful and
lamentable events ensuing whereupon, may then be summarily set down, when we
shall come to handle those affairs also. These were the proceedings that
passed along the East tracts, within the train whereof, the powerful vigor
of eternal justice (which though it be diverse times slow, yet is a curious and
precise Commissioner, to enquire into things well done, or otherwise) took
revenge of those miseries of Afric and the Ambassadors of Tripolis, whose
manes and ghosts as yet were unrevenged, and wandered without rest: which fell
out in this sort. Remigius, who (as I said before) had favored and
countenanced Romanus in spoiling of the Provinces, after that Leo in his rowme
was entered into the mastership of the Offices, giving over now the affairs of
State, betook himself to country businesses, near unto Mogontiacum, in his
own native country. Whom, making his abode there in great security,
Maximinus the Prefect Praetorio despising, as one returned to a private and
quiet life, studied and sought how by all means possibly he might hurt; as he
was one, that like unto some contagious and pernicious plague, used to infect
and work mischief still, where ever he came: and to the end that he might
search out more matters still that lay hidden, he attached and by way of
bloody torture examined Caesar (before time one of his domestical guard, and
afterward the Princes Notarie) to know of him, What Remigius had done? or how
much he had received, to help and further Romanus in his wicked acts? Which
when Remigius understood, whiles he remained yet (as has been said) in a
retired place, either for that he was pricked in conscience for his lewd parts
committed, or that the fear (occasioned by slanderous accusations) overcame
his reason, he made no more ado, but knit his neck fast in an halter, and so
strangled himself to death.

CHAP. IIII. Valentinian making have at an unseasonable time against the
Illyrians, is drawn back. An amity is concluded and established with
Macrianus king of the Alemans: and then returns the Emperor to Triers.
IN the year next following, when Gratianus was Consul, and had taken unto
him for companion in office, Equitius; as Valentinian after the wasting of
certain territories in Alemaine, was building a fort near unto Basile, which
the neighbor inhabitants call Au^sburg. Vrstitio. Ro^thauss. S^ingero.
Robur, there was presented unto him the certificat of the Prefect Probus,
giving intelligence of the losses and calamities of Illyricum. Which when he
had with good advisement read, as became a captain, that made no great have in
his affairs, but loved to take good leisure, being astonished with careful
thoughts, he sent out his or Secretary.
Notarie Paternianus, and by him sought precisely into the business. And soon
after, when as by his means he had received the true report of what was done,
he hastened forthwith to take the field, ready in person with the first stir
and noise of arms (as he had before intended) to suppress the Barbarians, who
dared to rob and spoil our limits. And because now in the latter end of
Autumn there were many difficulties to hinder this project, all the nobles and
principal officers of State about the palace endeavored hard to persuade him
for to hold off until the beginning of the Spring, alleging first, That the
ways hardened with frosts (where could be found neither grass well grown for
pasturage, nor other things meet for use) were not passable: then, pretending
the cruelty of princes, near neighbors unto Gaul, and above all others, of
Macrianus, as one in those days much dread; who as it was for certain known,
if he were left behind unreconciled, would attempt the very siege and assault
of the walled cities: By these allegations and other motives put thereto,
tending to his good and profit, they reduced him to a better mind, and
presently (as it made for the good of the Commonwealth) the said king was sent
for courteously to come near unto Moguntiacum; who also was of himself
forward enough (as it appeared) to entertain a league. And wonderful it was,
with what and how great pride puffed up he came, as one that should be the
superior Judge of peace: and at the day before appointed for the parley and
conference, he stood bearing his head aloft on the very bank of the Rhene,
with a clattering noise of his country shields resounding on either hand. On
the other part, the Emperor embarked in certain river-barges, being guarded
also himself with a multitude of warlike companies for his more safety,
approached the banks, all goodly to be seen, with a brave show of glittering
ensigns. Now when the unseemely gestures and rude noise of the barbarous
people were at length allayed, after words passed to and fro on both sides,
there was peace and amity concluded, and the same ratified with an oath. These
things thus finished, the king, who made all these troubles, departed well
pacified, and became our associate from thenceforth, and afterward, unto his
dying day, gave by his noble exploits good proof of his constant mind,
embracing concord. But after this, his hap was to die in France.
Francia; which whiles he greedily invaded, and with fire and sword wasted,
beset he was by a train of the warlike king Mellobaudes, and so slain.
Howbeit, after this league, with solemn rites and complements concluded,
Valentinian departed to Triers, there to Winter. These were the affairs in
Gaul and the North quarters.

CHAP. V. The lament able plight of the East Provinces under Valens deceived by
his Courtiers, and making much of these frapling Lawyers and petie-foggers.
Whereunto is set in opposition the felicity of former ages.
But in the East parts (whiles all was hushed and quiet abroad) an inward
mischief increased, by means of the friends and favorites of Valens, with
whom profit was of more reckoning than honesty. For, great care and diligence
was employed, that the man of a rigorous disposition, and desirous to hear
causes and controversies pleaded, should be reclaimed from all desire of
deciding and judging them, least as in Iulians days, while innocence gat a
breathing time by lawful defense, the swelling pride of mighty persons should
be abated, which by taking of liberty was wont to break out and raunge at
will abroad. For these and such like respects, when as with one consent and
accord many dehorted him, and especially Modestus Prefect of the Pretorium (a
man wholly made and squared to the pleasure of the Princes Eunuchs, and one
with a forced countenance deceiving his rude and rusticall nature not polished
with reading of any antiquity) bearing him also in hand, that these small and
trifling private causes were far inferior to his Imperial dignity, he
supposing (as he said) that the examination and hearing of causes was a device
to take down and humble the highness of his Majesty, forbear wholly to sit
in judgment, and so did set open the doors of pilling and extortion, which
grew strong every day more than other, through the wickedness of Judges and
Advocates both, agreeing together, and drawing in one line: who setting to sale
the suits and causes of meaner persons unto military men and managers of
martial affairs, or to such as were mighty in Court, gained thereby either
much wealth or great honors. This profession of Orators and pleading
Barresters, that noble Plato defines to be (...), i. the image or shadow of
some part of civilitie, or more truly, the fourth part of flattery: But
Epicurus naming it (...), reckons it among bad arts: Ctesias and with him
Leontinus Gorgias, says, it is the worke-mistresse of persuasion. Which being
thus by old writers defined, the subtle craft of some Easterlings has brought
it, to be hated and detested of good men: whereby also it is bridled and
restrained by the reins of a set and prefixed time. After therefore that I
shall deliver some few words, as touching the indignity thereof, which I found
by experience conversing in those parts, I will return to the intended course
of those matters which I have begun. Then, and never else, flourished the
Tribunes with pleading patrons of ancient elegancie, when as Orators of
quick and pregnant eloquence, seriously given to the studies of learning, for
wit, faithfulness, copious words, and many ornaments of oratorie excelled, as
for example Demosthenes; who, whenever he was to make an oration, there was
wont to be a great concourse of people out of all parts of Greece, to hear
him, as we find in the Atticke records: also Callistratus, whom at the time
that he pleaded that noble cause as touching Oropus, a place in Euboea, the
same Demosthenes followed, leaving the ^ Academie together with Plato. Likewise
Hyperides, Aeschines, Andocides, Dinarchus, and that famous Antiphon of
Rhamnus, who was the first of all others, as ancient hystories make report,
that took a fee for the defense of a cause. Semblably among the Romans also,
the Rutilius, Galb^, and (...), etc. a kind of Hellenisme, whereof this author
favors not a little, though he wrote in La^i^e.
Rutilij, Galbae, and Scauri, men for their life, behavior, and frugalitie
approved: and after them for sundry years together of the age ensuing, many
that were Censors and Consuls in their time, yea and had triumphed, to wit, the
The like Hellenisme and Synecdoche.
Crassi, Antonij, the Philippi, and the Scaevolae, with a number more beside,
after most fortunat conduct of armies, after victories achieved and trophies
erected, flourished in the performance of civil offices between citizen and
citizen, even for their stipends: and gaining by their goodly prizes played, the
laurel garlands of the Bar and Common place, enjoyed glorious honors in the
highest degree. After whom Cicero, the most excellent of all, who oftentimes
with the thunderbolts of his commanding speech, delivering some that were
oppressed and cast down out of dangerous flames of judgment, affirmed, That
men happily might be undefended altogether without blame and reproof; but
negligently defended without a sinful act they could not possibly be.

CHAP. VI. A little table representing to the life these ravenous Harpyes, and
a sorting or division of them into certain forms or ranks.
But now adays, you may see throughout all those tracts diverse in that kind
very violent and most ravenous men, such as go swouping and flinging over all
the Courts and Halls of justice, yea and closely do beset rich men's houses, who
like unto hounds of Misithra, Sop^iano.
Sparta or Candie.
Crete, by following with a quick sent every cause, as it were by the tract
and footing, come at length to the very dens thereof. The first company of
these are they, who by sowing sundry controversies and quarrels, have their
hands in a thousand actions and bonds for appearance at the Law-day; haunting
the doors of widows, and entries of childlesse parents. These desirous to
entertain privy grudges between friends, kinsfolks and allies that are at
variance, for some as boxes of writings etc. Scr^^ij recept acula.
small matters of no moment and importance, go about to make them hate and
detest one another. And in these their vices they wax not more calm and mild
(as others do) by process of time, but get greater head, and grow stronger:
who also among the unsatiable extortions of the poor, for to enveagle and
deceive by their subtle orations the integrity of Judges (whose name sprung
of Justice) draw forth the keen blade of their wits. In this their obstinat
course of dealing, their rashness seems to resemble liberty, their headie
boldness constancy, and a certain vain flowing tongue of thiers, eloquence:
through the violent force of which arts, as Tully affirms, a foul shame it
is that the upright conscience of a Judge should be deceived. For thus he
says: And whereas there ought nothing to be in a Commonwealth so pure and
sincere, as the giving of vayce, or the sentence of a Judge, I cannot see how
he that has corrupted the same with a piece of money, should deserve
punishment, and he that does the like with eloquence go away with praise: And
verily in my conceit, he seems of the twain to do more harm, who
corrupts a Judge by his eloquent speech, than he that does it by plain
^riherie; for that no m^^ is able to corrupt a wise man with money, but with
eloquence he may full well. The second sort of these men are they, who
professing skill of right and law, which the difference of statutes and
ordinances opposite one unto another has quite fored one, atri^ their mouths
were muzzeled and made up, with their continual silence, are like their own
shadows. These resembling them that calculat and foretell folks destinies by
their nativities and horoscopes; or wisards that expound Sibyls Oracles,
composing their grave countenance to a sad and solemn habit, make even their
drowsy yawning and supine negligence saleable. And these fellows, because
they would be thought to have a deep insight into the laws, have altogether
in their mouths f Trebatius, Caesellius, and Alfenus, and their whole talk is
of the laws of the Aurunci and Sicani, such as long since are grown out of
knowledge, and many hundred years ago, even with Evanders mother buried. And
if thou should devise and say, That wilfully thou had murdered thine own
mother, they are ready to bear thee in hand, and promise, that they have read
many hidden booke-cases and presidents, that afford means to acquit thee:
provided always, that they perceive thee to be well moneyed. A third crew
there is of those, who to the end that in this turbulent profession they may
get a name, whetting their mercenarie tongues to the beating down of truth, by
their shameless foreheads and base bawling make open way for themselves to
pass whither they list: who taking the opportunity of the Judges cares, in
many matters distracted, linking and entangling causes with insoluble quirkes
and quilits, endeavor by long demurres to have controversies depending still,
and by their intricat questions that of purpose they foist in, hold off, and
delay judgments: which when they proceed well and fall out aright, they are
the very shrines and Oraclos.
temples of equity: but if they be wrong and unjust, they are both deceitful
and blind pits; whereinto if any man fall and be caught, he shall not be able
in many Iustra.
five years together, to to get forth, sucked dry in the mean while even to
the very marrow.

CHAP. VII. The last sort of them that uphold this profession of Lawyers,
impudent, froward, wilful, and unlearned, is here in lively colors depainted.
THe fourth and last rank is impudent, overthwart, stubborn, and withal
unlearned, those I mean, who having broken loose over-soone from the Grammar
school, run to and fro in all corners of cities studying for scoffs, and
frumping flours, not for meet pleas to help any cause: who also haunting rich
men's houses, lay for to get part of exquisit dainties at their suppers and
meals. Who when they have once betaken themselves to secret and private gains,
and given their minds to get money every way, it skills not how, set any
innocent and harmless persons together by the ears, and make them for
nothing go to law: and being admitted into the court (and that seldom
happens) for the defense of a cause, at the very instant time when they
should come to plead at bar, they are feign to be instructed from the very
mouth of the client that is defendant, what is the name and nature of the cause
that he has taken in hand: And these are so full of their confused
circumlocutions, that a man would think he heard g Therfites with a frapling
and bawling clamor to come out with a mishmash and hotchpotch of most
distasteful and unsavorie stuff. But when they are once driven to a nonplus,
and want matter to maintain their allegations, then turn they all their
speech to an unbridled liberty of railing and foul speaking: in which
respect, for their reproachful and reviling terms, which continually they
would give even to honorable personages, they have diverse times been
condemned, And of these there be some so rude, that they cannot remember they
were ever masters of any law books. And if at any assembly or meeting of
learned men, there happen to be mention made of some ancient author, they
suppose it to be some foreign name of a fish or dish of meat. And, in case any
stranger chance for example sake to ask for Marcianus, an Orator, whose name
they were not before acquainted with, straightwayes they imagine themselves all
to be named Marciani. Neither do they set any right now before their eyes, but
as men sold unto covetousness and possessed wholly with it, they know nothing
at all but an engraffed licentious liberty of craving and getting. And look
whom they once catch within their toil, they ensnare him with a thousand nets,
under pretense of sickness forsooth, lingering for the nonce, and making
delays with this and that, one after another by turns: and for the proceeding
of one reading of a vulgar and common law, they prepare seven vendible
entrances and returns, plotting and platting as long examinations as possibly
they can to protract the time. Now, when as there have so many days, months,
and years gone over the parties heads that are in suit, that they become
stripped bare of their money, at length when as the matter in controversy is
grown stale and thoroughly worn in continuance of time, then are the very
principal heads and great doctors admitted and let in: who being entered bring
in with them other dumb shows of Advocates. And when they are come within the
enclosure of the bar or rail, and the whole estate or life of some man
begins to come in question and trial, what time as all endeavor should be used
to keep either the edge of the sword from an innocent, or put by loss from a
poor and miserable person, with frowning foreheads on both sides, and arms
composed after the gesture of actors on a stage (so that there seems naught
wanting but Gracchus his h pipe behind their backs, by which he was wont in
his orations to temper his voice) they stand still along time on either hand:
And at last, out of some premeditate flourish, there comes forth by him who is
the bolder of the twain and more confident of speech, some pleasant and
delightsome exordium or beginning of speech, promising as it were the
Rhetorical ornaments, resembling those of the famous orations pronounced
either for Cluentius or Ctesiphon: and when all that hear it are desirous to
have an end made, the matter grows to this conclusion at length, that the
patrons (for sooth) after a show made of a three years suit depending in the
court, allege for excuse, that they be not yet sufficiently instructed and
prepared: and so when they have obtained a longer time still of adjournment, as
if they had already wrestled hard with that old Antaeus, they cease not to
call earnestly for their fees, in regard of this their dangerous conflict and
doubtful combat performed. Howbeit, things being so, these Advocates are not
without many inconveniences, which a man of worth that would live in good
fashion could not well endure. For, being fleshed with the baits of idle gains
coming in with sitting still, and doing little or naught, they are at daggers
drawing among themselves; and breaking forth into a malapert humor of railing,
as has been said, they offend and displease many: Which bitter humor of theirs
then do they discharge and rashly disgorge, when as they are not able with all
their stout speeches and orations to cover and protect the weakness of their
causes. And otherwhiles they have for their Judges such as have learned
Philistions or Aesops frumping scoffs or fables, rather than those that have
come forth of the school either of that just Aristides, or of grave Cato, who
having purchased with round sums of money public offices of state, like unto
busy and troublous creditors, prying and searching straightly into the wealth
and estate of all sorts of men, whatsoever they be, fetch booties perforce out
of other men's bosoms. To conclude, the profession and practice of these
lawyers has among many other things this one mischief grievous and fearful,
for that as many almost as go to law, are of this nature, that whereas
controversies and suits by a thousand chances do miscarrie, look whatsoever
falls out otherwise than well, they suppose the same lay in the power of
their patrons and advocats; and what issue ensues upon any variance and
contention, they are wont to impute and ascribe the same even to them, and in
no wise are they angry either with the defect of their matters, or the
iniquity otherwhiles of the Judges, but only with the defendors of their
causes. But now return we whence we hither digressed.

CHAP. VIII. Valentinian going to the Sarmatians and Illyrians, neglects
those things that belong to his charge, gives no audience to the complaints of
the Provincial inhabitants, neither duly chastises the Praefects and
Governors, who a long while abuse their public authority.
WHen as now the prime of the Spring was come, Valentinian remooving from
Triers, marched apace through the known ways wherewith he was acquainted: and
as he approached the countries that he went unto, there was presented unto him
an embassage of the Sarmatians: who lying prostrate at his feet, besought him
by way of peaceable prayers, to come among them with a propitious and gracious
mind, as who should find their countrymen neither party nor privy to any
wicked and cruel act. Unto whom, as they still iterated the same petition,
thus far forth upon good advisement and considerat deliberation he made this
answer, That these matters were to be enquired into upon most true and
certain evidences, yea, and to be punished accordingly, in the very places
where it was said they were committed. And when after this, he entered into
(...).
Carnuntu^, a town of the Illyrians (forlorn now (God wot) and in woeful
plight, yet of great importance to the leader of an army, whenever either
good fortune or politic reason ministered any advantage and opportunity) from
out of the next station he repressed the attempts and invasions of the
barbarous enemies. And albeit he struck a terror into all men, whiles it was
looked for and feared, that (as he was quick and sharp) he would shortly give
commandment, That the judges and rulers should be condemned, through whose
treachery or departure from their charge, one side of Pannonia was laid naked;
yet when he was thither come, he became so calm and cool, that he neither
made inquiry into the death of king Gabinius, nor searched narrowly to know,
by whose permission, connivencie, or slack dealing those wounds and losses
came which had bin deeply settled in the commonweal: just according to his
wonted manner, which was, to be sharp and severe in correcting those of the
common sort, but over remiss in rebuking such as were in high place, so much
as by way of rough and bitter words. Howbeit Probus was the only man whom he
coursed and pursued with an hateful and malicious mind, never from the time
that he first saw him giving over to menace him, or growing to be any whit
appeased with him; whereof the causes were neither small nor unknown. This
Probus being then newly entered upon his Praefecture of the Praetorium, and very
desirous to continue the same a long time by many means (and would God they
had bin direct and reasonable) far otherwise than the nobility of his
descent and parentage taught him, regarded glosing flattery more than modest
honesty. For observing well the purpose of the prince, who sought all the
ways every where to get money by hook or crook, without any difference or
respect made of right and wrong, reduced him not, thus wandering out of the
right way, unto the path of equity, as oftentimes sober and peaceable
Governors have done, but himself also followed him, winding atoe side and
going cross: Whereupon ensued the heavy haps and grievous chances of the
provincial subjects, and the mischievous names and articles of entitled
causes provided aforehand, enfeebled and cut in twain the sinews of men's
estates, as well rich as poor, and that by means stronger every one than
others before, according as the long practice of doing hurt could devise. In
the end, such were the grievous burdens of tributes and the exactions of
customs and imposts so much enhanced and multiplied, that some of the peers
and nobles disquieted with the fear of extremity, were forced to change their
habitations and void the country: yea, and certain persons there were, so
overlayed with the rigorous and bitter dealing of under officers and ministers,
calling still for more, that when they had not for to give them, they became
perpetual tenants of prisons: of whom there were some, who being now weary of
their lives, and not desirous to see the light of this world any longer, ended
their days by the wished for remedies of hanging themselves. And thus verily
went matters without all regard of giving content or of humanity, as the
constant rumor blazed it all abroad. But Valentinian, as if his ears had bin
daubed up with wax, as one greedy to get and gain indifferently, he passed
not how, even out of the least things that were, was ignorant hereof, thinking
of nothing else but that which was offered and presented to his hand: yet
peradvenventure he would have spared Pannonia, if he had known before, these
woeful and lamentable means of gain, who too too late learned then by such a
chance as this. According to the example of the rest of the provincials, the
Epirots also compelled by the Prfect to send ambassadors for to give him
thanks, forced one Iphicles a Philosopher, a man of approved courage and
resolution, against his own will and accord to go forward to the performance of
this office: who when he had seen the Emperor, after knowledge taken who he
was, being demanded the cause of his coming, answered in Greek: and as the
Emperor very diligently inquired of him, Whether they that sent him
ambassador, thought from their hearts well of the Prefect? like a Philosopher
and professor of the truth; Groaning (quoth he) and against their wills. With
which word of his he being stricken as it were with a dart, curiously searched
like some quick senting beast into his acts and doings, questioning with him
in his natural language about that which he knew not, namely, where was such
an one (for examples sake) that in honor and name excelled his neighbors? or
where was such a rich man? or another, the principal and chief of his rank?
And when he understood, that one perished with an halter, another was fled
beyond sea, and another killed himself, or lost his life with plumbets of
lead, he grew into an exceeding passion of indignation: and evermore his wroth
was fed by Leo, then master of the offices (o shameful villainy) who himself
also, in case the other, now aloft, should once fall down from the rock, was
ready to step into his Praefectship: which if he had gotten and managed,
surely the government of Probus had bin extolled up into heaven, in comparison
of those parts which he would have played.

CHAP. IX. Valentinian invadeth and warreth upon the Quadi. He is terrified
with many strange sights, denouncing his end: He receives the Quades
ambassadors, and at a speech of theirs is so forcibly stricken, that with the
loss of his voice, having a dead sweat coming all over him, he died within a
while after.
NOw, whiles the Emperor abode at Carnuntum, for three Summer months
together, he provided himself of armor and victuals, ready (if fortune were
any thing favorable unto him) with the first opportunity to invade and
overrun the Quadi, authors of an horrible tumult and commotion. In which
Carnuntum.
town, Faustinus the sisters son of Viventius Prefect of the Praetorium,
serving in quality of a Notarie in the wars, was after torture executed by
the hangmans hand under Probus, who had the hearing and determining of his
cause: called into question and indicted he was, for that he had slain an
ass, thereby to practice secret arts, as some averred, who laid that to his
charge: but as he vouched himself, for to stay the falling and shedding of the
hair off his head, another matter also was mischievously framed against him,
namely, That when one Nigrinus desired him by way of mirth to make him Notarie,
he laughing at the fellow, cried out and said: Make me Emperor, if thou
would have that at my hands. And this mere jest being untowardly and in a
wrong sense expounded, cost both Faustinus himself and Nigrinus also, with
others, their lives. But to proceed, after that Merobaudes was sent out before
with a warlike power of footmen, whereof he had the conduct, for to wast and
burn the Barbarian territories, with whom was joined in commission Lieutenant
Sebastian, Valentinian removed his camp forward near to Petro Varadin. Nigr.
Acincum; and when he had set his ships together, against what sudden chance
might befall, and with all the quick speed that might be planked them over in
manner of a bridge, he passed over another way into the country of the Quadi,
who lay verily in espiall waiting for his coming from the high craggie
mountains, whither most part of the country, uncertain and doubtful what
accidents would happen, together with their wives and children, liefe and dear
unto them, were retired; but altogether amazed and astonished, when contrary to
their expectation they saw the Emperors ensigns displayed within their
country. Having therefore advaunced forward with a forced pace, as occasion
served, after he had killed up the people of all ages indifferently one with
another (whom as they stragled then abroad this sudden rode surprised) as
also burnt their houses, he returned with the safety of all them whom he led
forth with him: And in like sort, when he had made his abode in Aciencum in the
latter end of Autumn he sought convenient Wintering harbors along those
tracts, which were wont to be frozen all over with the coldness of the
weather: neither could he meet with any convenient seat but Stain, or Stainam
Angern.
Sabaria, although it was a place at that time of no strength, and with
continual calamities from time to time sore afflicted. Whereupon aboundoning
the town for a while, although it was of great importance, he thence removed
lustily, and coasted along the rivers bank: and when he had fortified the
castles and forts with a competent garrison, he came to Bregnir^, or (...).
Bregitio, and there fatal destiny, framed long ago for the princes rest,
denounced unto him his last end, with many a prodigy betokening the same. For
very few days before, the blazing stars burned forth, which commonly are
forerunners of the fall of princes, the original cause whereof I have
declared already: and at Sirmium, the lightening, with a sudden clap of
thunder shot out of the clouds, set on fire part of their C^ris.
Counsell-house and Palace. Likewise at Sabaria, whiles himself as yet there
remained, an Owl sitting upon the top of the kings Baines, and singing out in
a doleful note, could by no expert hand of those that shot arrows and flung
stones, be made to fall, albeit they laid hard at her, striving a vie, who
should do the feat. Semblably, when from the city before side he marched to
give battle, he would needs go forth at the same gate by which he entered in,
to the end that he might gather some good prsage of his speedy return back
again into Gaul: also, when the place that lay forelet and neglected with
heaps of rammell therein, was scoured and made clean, an iron door happened
to fall down, which made up fast the passage out of it; and a multitude of
people laying all their power and strength thereto, was not able to remove it:
and so while he spent a day thereabout in vain, upon constraint he was feign to
go out at another gate. And that very night which went next before the day
that should bereave him of his life, he saw (as men commonly do in their
sleep) his wife, being absent, sitting with her hair loose about her ears,
and clad in poor and mournful array: which was imagined and esteemed to be
his own fortune, now ready to depart from him in foul attire and habit. As
he was setting forward from thence in the morning betimes, somewhat sad and
with a frowning countenance, when the horse which was brought unto him, would
not suffer him to get on his back, but contrary to his manner rose up with
his forefeet aloft, his inbred cruelty was soon up, and (as he was by nature
fell) he commanded the right hand of the souldior, that was yeoman of the
Stirrup, to be cut off which had put him beside, as he was ready to mount his
accustomed beast; and died for it in dolorous manner had the innocent young
man, but that Cerealis, Tribune of the Stable, with the danger of himself, put
off and deserred so cursed an act. After this came the ambassadors of the
Quadi, in humble wise requesting pardon, with the final abolishing of all that
was past: which that they might obtain without any bar or impeachment, they
promised both their young trained soldiers, and some behoofefull things also
for the Roman State. Whom, because it was thought good to receive and
entertain, yea, and to suffer for to return, with grant of truce which they
required (for, any longer to trouble and molest them, neither want of victuals,
nor the adverse time of the year would permit) they were conducted by
Equitius, and admitted into the Consistory. And when enfeebled for fear and
daunted, they stood with their bodies bowing and stouping forward, after they
were commanded to deliver their errand, they averred constantly those usual
and ordinary shows of excuses, and bound the same also with an oath,
protesting. That no trespass had been committed against our part by common
consent or counsel of the nobles of the land, but look what had been rudely
and uncivilely done, the same happened by the means of certain out-lying
robbers in the borders, and confining upon the river. This moreover they added,
avowing the same to be a sufficient reason to assoyle them of all that was
done, in that the fort which was begun and going up neither justly nor
conveniently, did set the hearts of the rusticall and wild peasants on fire,
and made them so fierce and stout as they were. Hereat the Emperor in a
mighty passion of anger, and as he began to make answer thereto, pussing and
swelling very much, all to rated and in a high strain of chiding reprooved the
whole nanation as unmindfull of benefits received, and unthankful: but being
by little and little pacified and inclined to milder terms, behold, as if he
had been shot into his vital parts with a dart, and bereft at once of his
speech, he was seen all on a light fire: and suddenly the blood being pent
and restrained, as he stood all in a cold and deadly sweat, for fear he should
sink down and fall in the sight of exiled persons, the servants of his privy
chamber came running together about him, and so he was led into an inward
parlor. Where being laid upon a bed drawing yet some small remains of vital
breath, without any empairing at all of his intellectual faculty and power,
he knew all that stood by him, such as his chamberlaines had with great
celeritie gotten together about him, least any man might suspect that he had
been secretly murdered. And for as much as by reason of the excessive heat of
the midriffe that knit his bowels together, there was of necessity a vein to
be opened, there was not a Physician or Chirurgian to be had, upon this
occasion, that he had sent them all sundry ways scattering abroad to cure the
soldiers which lay sick of the pestilence: yet was there one found, who
notwithstanding that he had pricked his vein once or twice, yea and oftener
too, could not draw forth so much as one drop of blood, so scorched were his
inward parts with excessive heat: or as some thought, for that his body was
dried up, by reason that certain passages therein, which now we term i
Haemorrhoides, were closed up and grown to a very hard crust, they were so
bound up with cold. Well, such was the violent and infinite rage of his disease,
that he perceived the prescript hour of his death was now come, and as he
assaied to speak somewhat, and give something in charge, as the yex that often
shook his flanks and small guts, the gnashing of his teeth, and the moving of
his arms, laying about him as if they had been fighting at hurlebats,
plainly showed, being now overcome and speckled here and there with k wan and
blew spots, he yielded up his ghost, after it had long strugled for life, in
the five and fiftieth year of his age, and when he had reigned 12 years
lacking 100 days.

CHAP. X. The birth and rising of Valentinian: His growth and progress: His
acts and whole course of life briefly run over.
NOw is it time to unfold, as diverse times we have done, and from the nativitie
of this Princes father, by way of a brief collection to discourse of his acts
even to the death of himself: not leaving out the distinct difference of his
vices or good parts, which his high place and dignity showed, that is always
wont to lay naked the inward dispositions of the mind. Gratianus the elder was
borne at Palma. Lazio.
Cibalae a town in Pannonia, of ignoble and base parentage, surnamed from his
very childhood Funarius, because that he, as yet but a stripling, as he
carried a rope about with him to sell, shrunk not five soldiers, that with
great endevor were in hand to snatch the same violently from him: following
herein Milo l Crotoniates, from whom as he held many times and clasped close
either in his right hand or his left any apples, no man was ever able with
might and maine to wrest them away. For the clean strength therefore of his
mighty body, and the skill he had in wrestling, as the manner is of
soldiers, being very well known unto many, after the dignity borne of a
Protector and a Tribune, he managed in Africa the office of m Comes
reicastrensi: whereupon being touched with the suspicion of theft, and departed
thence, long after in the like place he had the rule of the Britains army;
and at the last discharged honestly of his military oath, returned home to his
private house: and notwithstanding that he lived far remote from all stir
and noise of the world, yet was he fined by Constantius with the loss of his
goods, for this cause, that in the heat and broyle of civil war, he was said
to have entertained and lodged Magnentius, as his guest, what time as by his
lands and possessions he made have to his intended designs. In regard of
whose deserts, Valentinian [his sonne] from the very prime of his youth
commendable, with the help also of a long train of his own virtues, being
adorned at Nicea with the investure of Imperial Majesty, took his brother
Valens unto him as fellow Emperor: who in respect of brotherhood in the whole
blood, sorted and accorded most jointly with him; a Valens.
man that carried himself in a mean between reproachful and prayse-worthie
acts, which I will in convenient place declare. Valentinian therefore after
many dangerous troubles past, whiles he led a private life, was no sooner entered
upon his Empire, but he visited the castles scituat near unto great rivers and
violent streams, as also Gaul, that lay exposed to the Alemans rodes and
invasions, who began the more boldly to revive and stir again, upon
knowledge of the Emperor Iulians death, whom only of all the men in the world
they stood in awe of. And for this good cause also was Valentinian much dread,
because he both reenforced his armies with strong supplies, and also fortified
Rhene on either side with high castles and fortresses, that the enemy making
rodes and breaking out upon our province, might no where be undiscovered. And
to let many-particulars pass which he did by the authority of a stayed and
well grounded governor, as also what abuses he reformed either by himself or
his industrious captains, after he had assumed his son Gratian into the
society of his power and high place, he privily stabbed (because openly he
could not) Vithigabius, a king of the Alemans, the son of Vadomarius, a young
prince in his very flower and first down of his cheeks, for stirring up the
people to insurrections and wars. Also in a battle against the Alemans
near unto Solms, Herold^^.
Solicinium, a place where he was forelaid and like to have lost his life, he
might have put then to the sword every man of them, but that by vantage taken
of the dark night some few of them made quick speed and escaped. And yet
among these politic and wary exploits, by a treacherous stratageme (I must
needs say) but advantageous to him, he slew the Saxons, that now were grown to
fearful outrage; a nation at all times making sudden rodes and invasions,
and then arrived at the Maritime tracts, with the spoils whereof they were
returned almost laden: these robbers, I say, and brigands then by force
defeated, he stripped of all their booty and pillage. And in like manner the
Britains, who were not able to endure such troops of enemies overrunning
them, he restored to their liberty and quiet peace, with hope of better days,
suffering not one in manner, of the foresaid brigands to return home into
their country. With semblable valor, and fortunat success whereas one
Valentinus, a banished person in Pannonia, went about in these provinces to
trouble the common peace, he suppressed him, before his plotted design grew to
any strong head. After this he delivered Affricke out of great dangers, being
much troubled with a sudden mischief, what time as Firmus not able to abide
the greediness and pride of the military men, raised the nations of
Mauritania, who upon every small gale are forward enough to entertain all
commotions and discords. And with like fortitude he had revenged the lamentable
losses and calamities of Illyricum, but that prevented by death he left that
serious business unfinished. And albeit these achievements which we have
related, were performed by the service of his excellent captains, yet full
well it is known, that himself also, as he was of a quick and nimble
conceit, yea and thoroughly grounded with long experience of warfare, achieved
many acts beside, among which this might have more notably appeared, in case he
could have taken alive king Marcianus, who in those days was very terrible,
according as with great industry he had assayed, after he understood with
sorrow and grief that he was escaped to the Burgundians, whom himself had
annexed unto the Alemans. Thus much may serve for a brief discourse as
touching the acts of this prince.

CHAP. XI. His vices are at large described.
Upon assured confidence now, that posterity enthralled neither to fear nor
foul flattery, is wont with an incorrupt and single eye to behold things
past, we will summarily reckon up his vices, and afterward show also his good
deserts. He pretended sometime an outward show of clemency, whereas by heat of
nature he was much inclined to cruelty: forgetting, I assure you, this lesson,
That a King and Emperor ought to avoid all excessive courses, no less than so
many steep and craggie rocks. For, never do we find that he took up with
any mild correction and punishment, but commanded otherwhiles bloody
examinations to be multiplied one upon another; when as some after cruel
interrogatories were tormented even to the danger of their lives. And so much
given he was to do mischief, that he was never known by a merciful note of
his subscribing to have saved any one person from death, were he once condemned
to dye; whereas otherwhiles even most cruel princes have done so much: And yet
might he have beheld as in a myrrour, many precedents of his ancestors and
forefathers, yea and imitated as well foreign as home examples both of
humanity and of piety (which virtues wise Philosophers define to be cousin
germans) whereof it shall be sufficient to set down these following.
Artaxerxes that most puissant Monarch of the Persians, who for the length of
one joint was called Long-hand, or Long-arme.
n Macrocheir, by a natural lenity of his own correcting and abridging those
sundry sorts of punishments which that cruel nation always practiced, in
stead of certain malefactors heads did chop off their tuffes or turbants
only: and for that he would not crop off men's ears, as kings used to do for
some trespasses, he did cut away the strings or cordons only that hung down
from their hats. Which temperat behavior of his, caused him to be so well
beloved and reverenced withal, that with the help and assistance of all his
subjects he achieved many wonderful acts, renowned by the Greek writers. The
Praetor upon a time of Praenest, who in a certain war of the Samnites, being
commanded to make have unto the garrison, came late, to wipe away this offense
was presented and brought in place: Papyrius, o surnamed Curfor, for the time
being Dictator, caused the the officer, or Sergeant.
Lictor to make ready the axe, and when the man casting aside all hope and
confidence to purge himself, stood all astonished, Papyrius chanced to epsy a
shrub hard by, and caused it to be grubbed up, and so having by this kind of
pleasant conceit chastised the party, set him free: neither was he therefore
despised, but esteemed sufficient to make his part good with Alexander p the
Great, in case he had come upon Italian ground in his days. Valentinian
perhaps ignorant hereof, and nothing at all considering, That the merciful
mildness of Princes yeeldes always solace to an afflicted State, by fire and
sword made executions more grievous: which the piety of our forefathers
devised as the utmost remedy in adverse fortune, according to that excellent
Orator Isocrates, who used always to teach and say, That otherwhiles a Ruler
and General vanquished in battle ought to be pardoned, not knowing how just
a thing is: Whence I suppose Tully was moved to pronounce this notable
sentence, what time as he defended Oppius: For, to be able (quoth he) to do
much for the saving of another, has been honorable to many: to have been of
small ability to bring another to mischief, has been dishonorable to none.
A covetous desire to have more and more still, without respect of right or
wrong, as also to hunt after diverse gains by the wrecke and overthrow of other
men's lives, exceeded in this Prince, and grew hoter every day than other: which
some assayed to excuse and make good, pretending the example of the Emperor
Aurelianus, pretending thus much in his behalf, that like as he, when the
Treasury was emptied after Gallienus, and the lamentable calamities of the
Commonweal, came violently in manner of a swelling stream upon the rich men;
even so this Emperor also after the overthrowes and losses sustained by the
Parthicke war, wanting money to defray his great charges, that the broken
bands of the soldiers with fresh supplies might be made up, and contented with
pay, joined with cruelty a greedy desire to heap up an excessive mass of
money, making semblance that he knew not thus much, namely, That there be some
things which although they may, yet they ought not to be done. Far unlike
unto that Themistocles, who after the battle fought with the Persians, and
their forces defeated, when as he walked up and down at his pleasure, he
espied a pair of bracelets and a collar all of gold, lying on the ground, Take
up these things (quoth he, speaking to one of his company that stood near
unto him) thou that art not Themistocles: as one that allowed not all manner of
lucre in a noble minded captain. Of like examples in this kind of continency
there is plentiful store among the Roman captains: but to leave them, because
they are not the signs of perfect virtue (for, not to take other men's goods
away, is not ywis such a commendable part) I will set down out of many one
only sure and constant proof of innocence in this behalf, even of the
common people in the old world. What time as Marius and Cinna gave unto the
commons of Rome those wealthy and rich stored houses of them that were
proscribed for to be ransacked, those rude minded commons, and such as were
wont to regard worldly pelf, forbear to rif^le the labors of other men: so
as there could not be found any so needy, or of so low condition, who found in
his heart to lay hand upon that commodity and booty granted unto them,
arising from the woeful fall of any citizens. Moreover, this our Emperor
aforesaid, was inwardly tainted and scorched with envy, and knowing as he did,
that the most part of vices are wont to carry a resemblance of virtues, he
used evermore to say, That spite was the companion of vertnes, and envy the
associat of absolute power. And, as commonly those that are placed in high
places of honor, are of this mind, That they may do all things, and be over
forward to traduce their oppositer, and to thrust out their betters and
superiors, he hated all such as were well clad, were learned, were rich or
nobly descended. Those that were valiant he depraved and detracted, that he
alone might seem to excel in all good parts: of which disease we read, that
the Emperor Hadrian was sore sick. This selfsame prince found fault many
times with those that were timorous, calling such, stained and spotted persons,
foul and filthy, yea, and to be made no reckoning of, but to be thrust down
under the base sort of people; whereas himself used otherwhiles in abject
manner to change color, and wax pale at vain fears, and inconsiderately to be
affrighted where nothing was to be seen: which Remigius, master of the
Offices, knowing well enough, when he perceived him upon some occurrents in his
heats of anger, among other matters would buzze into his ears, that there were
some insurrections and commotions among the Barbarians: Which no sooner he
heard (for quickly he was daunted with fear) but he became as meek and calm
as Antoninus Pius. He never of purpose chose any bad and wicked judges, but
after they were promoted once to the place, if he understood that their
proceedings were rigorous and extreme, he would make his boast, and say, He
had met with Lycurgi and Cassij, those principal heads of justice in old time:
and in his letters he exhorted them from time to time sharply to punish even
light offenses. Neither had poor distressed persons any refuge or succor in
the princes gracious goodness, which always had been a desired harbor and
haven open to receive those that were tossed in the surging and troubled seas:
For the end of a just and lawful rule (as wise men teach us) is thought to be
the profit and safety of the subjects.

CHAP. XII. His virtues. The personal presence and feature of his body, and
his funeral. His son Valentinian a child four years old, is admitted to
the Empire, and in the absence of Gratian his brother, who afterward loved and
brought him up, styled Augustus.
Requisite it is after all this to come unto his deeds, which to men of a right
judgment are to be followed and approved; wherewith if he could have tempered
the rest of his doings, he had lived like unto Traianus and Marcus. Very
respective he was in sparing the provincial tributaries, mitigating in all
places the heavy burdens of their tributes: a founder in good and convenient
time of towns and limits: a singular Censor of military discipline; erring
only in this point, That whereas he punished the light escapes and
delinquencies of the common soldiers, he suffered the foul faults of great
captains and leaders to grow to a mighty head; diverse times giving no ear,
but thick of hearing, when complaints were made against them: whence it was,
that the troubles in Britannie, the losses in Afric, and the wasting of
Illyricum, arose. His body he kept clean and chaste every way both at home and
abroad, distained and defiled with the contagion or privitie of no foul and
filthy demeanor; no wantonness or unclean behavior was he acquainted with:
and for this cause, as it were, with reins and bitts he bridled the loose
wantonness of the court, for that he could easily keep himself chaste.
Nothing passed he by grant unto his near friends or dear kinsfolk, whom he
either kept under in private estate, or else meanly advaunced to honors,
unless it were his own brother, whom he took to him (compelled thereto by
the straight necessity of the time) as partener of his imperial greatness.
Very precise and scrupulous he was in bestowing of high offices and dignities:
neither during his reign was there any banker that had the rule of a province,
nor any office sold under him, but at the first entry into his Empire; as
commonly some lewd parts are wont to be committed, in hope of being unknown
through the business of the time, or else of escaping with impunitie. In
making of wars both offensive or defensive, most politic and wary he was,
hardened with the laborious practice of martial toil: a passing wise adviser
to goodness, and as prudent a dissuader from badnesse: most curious and
exquisite in marshalling and embattailing his army: he wrote a fair hand: he
painted and cast counterfeits right properly and with a fine grace: he devised
also new kinds of armor and weapons: a good memory he had: and for his
speech, ready he was enough in quick deliverance; but sildome came his
utterance near unto pleasant eloquence. He loved to have all things neat and
trim; taking delight not so much in sumptuous and lavish fare, as in fine and
dainty diet. Finally, for this moderate carriage of himself during his Empire
he was much renowned; and namely, in that among sundry sorts of religion he
stood as one indifferent: neither troubled he any man for his conscience, nor
commended either this or that to be observed and kept: ne yet with menacing
edicts and injunctions forced he his subjects to bow neck and stoop unto that
which himself worshipped, but left these points as clear and untouched as he
found them. His body was well brawned, musculous and strong, the hair of his
head shining bright, the color of his complexion clear and fair: he had
with his gray eyes a skew cast at all times, and looked stern. The goodly
presence of his stature, together with a due knitting and proportionable making
of his bodily lineaments, accomplished the full beauty of a royal majesty.
Well, after the complements and last obsequies performed of this Emperor, and
his corpse bestowed in a coffin ready for sepulture, that being sent unto
Constantinople, it might be enterred among the relics of other Emperors of
sacred memory, by reason of the instant war depending, feared it was, what
doubtful and dangerous event thereof would be, by reason of the cohorts
serving in Gaul: which being not always devoted to yield allegiance unto
lawful princes, as if they were to make and choose Emperors at their pleasure,
were feared, least they would when time served attempt some innovation: and
this was no small help to such as aimed at an alteration, that Gratianus as
yet ignorant of that which happened, abode then at Triers, where his father,
when he went forth in his expedition, appointed him to remain. Things
standing thus upon these ticklish and straight terms, and when all those who
being, as it were, embarked in one ship, were like to take part of the same
dangers, if aught should happen, and feared the same troubles, by counsel of
the principal officers of State thought good it was and resolved upon, That
having plucked the bridge in pieces, which upon necessity had been framed and
set together before, when invasion was made into the enemies land, Merobaudes
by warrant from Valentinian, as then living, should immediately be sent for:
and he (as he was a man of quick note and conceit) supposing that indeed which
happened, or instructed peradventure by him who was sent to call him, and
suspecting that the soldiers in Gaul would break the laws of concord and
unity, fained, that there was a warning word and privy token sent, to return
with him, for guarding and looking to the banks of Rhene, as if the furious
rage of the barbarous enemies were broken out afresh: And as he had with
advice secretly given him in charge, he sent far out of the way Sebastian,
who as yet knew not of the Emperors decease; who verily was a quiet and
peaceable man, howbeit borne up aloft with the favor of the soldiers; in
which regard at that time especially to be dread. When Merobaudes therefore was
returned, with deep forecast and providence propounded it was in counsel,
That young Valentinian, the son of the Emperor late departed, a child then
of four years old, should be sent for and called to assume the imperial
diadem, who then was an hundred miles of, and remained with his mother Iustina
in a certain village called Muets. Ortel. who calls it a city.
Murocincta. Which being by a general accord of all that were in place
ratified, Cerealis his uncle by the mothers side was sent with all speed, and
brought the said child in a litter into the camp. Thus the sixth day after his
fathers death he was lawfully proclaimed Emperor, and in solemn manner styled
Augustus. And albeit whiles these things were thus in contriving, men thought
that Gratianus would take it to the heart, That without his permission there
should be set up another Emperor, yet afterward, when the fear and care was
past, they lived in more security: for that he, a prince both kind and
politic also, loved his half brother, to wit, by the fathers side.
brother exceeding well, and brought him up in all tender affection.

THE XXXI. BOOK.
CHAP. I. Praesaging signs and prodigious sights in the East, portending hurt
unto Valens. The original cause of his destruction, and of diverse calamities.
The nation of the Hunnes exactly described.
Mean while the swift wheel of Fortune making at all times an alternative
change of prosperity and adversity, armed Bellona, together with the Furies,
her (...)
associats continually, and brought over sorrowful events into the East;
against the coming whereof, evident praesages and strange signs gave true
warning. For after many other accidents, which by way of Soothsaying the
Prophets and Augures foretold, dogs leaped and frisked when the wolves
howled, the night-birds also in groaning wise sounded forth a monefull and
lamentable note; and the mournful rising of the Sun dimmed the clear light
of the morning. Likewise at Antioch, in every brawle and tumultuous fray among
the common sort, a byword was usually taken up, that as any thought himself to
suffer violence or abuse, he would in licentious manner cry out, Vivus ardeat
Valens, i. A light fire catch Valens quick. Besides, the Cryers were heard
continually to call and charge, That there should be wood gotten together, for
to set on fire the Baine a Valentinum, which the prince himself with great
desire and diligence had built: all which put together, spoke out in manner and
plainly showed, That this kind of death was toward him. Over and above, the
pale and dreadful spectre representing the king of Armenia, as also the woeful
ghosts of those, who a little before in the matter of Theodorus were put to
death, appearing by visions in the night time, and skreaking out certain
horrible and dreadful verses, disquieted many folk in their sleep, and put
them into terrible frights. A Tragula: or understand something left out in the
text, and take [Tragula] for a weapon, to this sense, That some woman or living
creature of the female sex having the throat thrust through with a
casting-dart called Tragula, was seen etc. And this is the conceit of Marcell.
Donatus.
little Goat was seen after the throat thrust through to lie along dead, the
death whereof showed very great and notorious calamities of public funerals.
To conclude, as the old walls of Chalcedon were in pulling down, for to build
up a Baine in Constantinople, when the raunge and course of the stone-worke was
loosened, upon a four square stone which lay couched in the middle of the
work, these Greek verses following were found engraven, opening fully the
future events.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) poti^s,
(...) fort. (...).
(...).
That is, But when new wives and damsels fresh, in daunces that delight,
Shall raunge along the citie-streets, with guirlands gayly dight,
And when the wall with many a groan shall down, to mound a Baine,
Then shall the Hunnes by multitudes break forth with might and maine:
By force of arms the winding stream of Ister they shall cross,
To Scythicke ground and Mysian land working much teene and loss,
They shall both I suppose by Paeons in this place, are meant Pannonians, who^
we now term Hungarians, who are thought to have taken this name of the Huns.
As for Paeonia, which is part of Macedonie, it was far out of their walk,
and not near the river Domw or ^ster. And I find in Authors. Paeonia and
Pannonia confusedly put, one for the other.
Paeons horsemen brave, and furious Gaulois stay,
Nor but with loss of life and breath, their fight shall ever stay.


Now the seednesse of all mischief, and the original of sundry calamities,
which the fury of Mars, by making a confusion and combustion of all, after his
wonted manner, first raised, we find for certain to have risen upon this
cause. The nation of the Hunnes, little or nothing known by any ancient
records, seated along the frozen sea, beyond the marshes of Maeotis, exceeds
in felnesse and cruelty beyond all measure: where (for that their infants
cheeks from their very nativitie are deeply gashed with a knife, that by
reason of the rivelled and wrinckled skarres, the young hair, when it should
bud forth in due season, might be checked and kept down) they grow until they
be old all of them beardlesse, without any favor or beauty at all, like unto
guelded Eunuchs. Generally, their lims be well knit and strong, and by reason
of their fat chuffe-necks they are monstrously deformed and hog-backs.
bending in the back, that a man would take them for two footed brute beasts;
or else resembling those image-like posts, which in the borders and sides of
bridges, are ill favouredly hewed and shaped in form of men. Semblably, in
their manner of life, they seem to be so rude and rough, that they need
neither fire nor savourie and seasoned meats, but feed upon the roots of
weeds, and the flesh of any cattle half raw, which being thrust between
their own thighs and their horses backs, they keep warm, and give a short
heat unto. Never come they under any roof, but all houses they no less
decline than if they were sepulchers standing out of the way and apart from any
common use; for there cannot be found among them so much as a cottage thatched
over head with reed. But raunging here and there over the mountains and the
woods, they are enured from their very cradle to endure both hunger and
thirst. When they travel abroad into other countries they come into no house
but upon exceeding great necessity: For they do not think themselves secured
and safe under any roof. They are clad all over in garments made of linen, or
else patched up of wild b mice skins: neither wear they one kind of apparel
at home, and another abroad; but come there once over their head a coat of some
over-worne color, it never goes off nor is changed, before that with long
wearing it be over-rotten and run to rags and tatters. They cover their heads
with hats shooting out and bending forward; and goats skins serve for
stockings and hose to cover their hairie legs: And their shoes not made fit
by any last, hinder them for setting their feet forward at liberty, and going
at ease. For which cause they are not well appointed for service on foot in the
wars: but being locked fast (as it were) to their horsebackes, which are
tough and hard (I must needs say) but yet mishaped and ill favored; and
otherwhiles sitting upon them sidelong as women do, they follow and perform
their ordinary businesses. The fashion is throughout this nation, for every
one sitting still on horseback, all night and all day long to buy and sell, to
eat and drink, yea and leaning forward and couching himself upon the narrow
neck of his horse, to fall sound asleep until he have had a sort of sundry
dreams. And in this manner also sit they all in counsel together, consulting
deliberatly upon serious affairs proposed. Now, directed they are by no regal
authority, but contenting themselves with the tumultuarie conduct and leading
of their principal Potentates, break through they do whatsoever stands in
their way. Sometime also they maintain defensive war, and fight when they be
provoked, but they begin battle by plumps and companies one after another,
setting up diverse noyses, sounding after an hideous manner. And as they are for
quick dispatch of service very light, and doing all of a sudden, so also as
suddenly for the nonce they disperse themselves and fall a wailing; and then
when the battle charge full upon them, they ride all abroad, with committing
much slaughter: and so neither entering upon the rampire and trench, nor rifling
their enemies tents, for the most part they decide the quarrel. And in this
respect a man may well say, they fight like most sharp and eagre warriors:
for that a far off with casting weapons, with sharp poynted bones in stead
of heads, and those fastened and fitted with wonderful cunning, but near at
hand laid here and there with iron........ and whiles their enemies ward and
observe the mischievous venues of their pointed weapons, they entangle and bind
them fast within cords that they fling from them, to the end that when their
limbs as they make resistance be thus ensnared, they might bereave them of all
power either to ride or go. There is not one among them that eareth the
ground, or at any time lays hand to the plough tail: For all of them,
without any set habitation, without house or home, without law or settled order
wander here and there, like always to those that are in flight, together with
their wagons in which they dwell. Wherein also the wives wear garments of
hairie wool, and lie with their husbands. Ask any among them, Where he was
borne, there is not one of them can directly answer, as being in one place or
conceived.
begotten, borne in another far off, and brought up yet farther. In
truce-time treacherous and unfaithful, inconstant, upon every gale of rumor
ready to rise, and upon new hopes passing mutable; in one word, putting all
upon the issue of most violent fury: Like unto inconsiderat and unreasonable
creatures, utterly ignorant of what is honest or unhonest: doubtful, double,
and dark in their speeches. Awed at no time with reverent regard either of
religion or superstition: burning exceedingly in greedy desire of gold. So
variable and prone to anger, that in one and the same day, at several hours
they will many times revolt from their allies, without any quarrel and
provocation; and in like sort be pleased, reconciled, and become friends again
without the mediation of any to mitigate their mood. This kind of men so quick
and nimble, so untamed and unreclaimable, burning in monstrous desire to rob
and spoil forrainers, after they had by spoil and slaughter of the neighbor
inhabitants made foul work and havoc, went on as far as to Achaia.

CHAP. II. The Massagets, Neuri, Vidini, Geloni, Agathyrsi, Melanchlaenae,
Anthropophagi, and Alani, who they were, and their manners.
NOw remain the Chata^dae, Leoni. Ahinadal. Thevet.
Massagetae, who whence they are descended, or what lands they do inhabit
(because the course of our story is devolved upon them) meet it is to declare.
The ambiguous Geographicall description being showed, which a long time.......
many and sundry..... found out at length the inward secrets of the truth.....
Ister flowing with a big stream of strange waters running into him, passes
by the Russians and Tartarians, Ortel.
Sauromatae, reaching as far as to the river Tanais, which boundeth Asia from
Europe. When you have crossed over it, there inhabit the desert wilds of
Cathay and Ta^taria, Ortel.
Scythia (stretched out an infinite way) the Those of Lico^^o, VVillich.
Alani (so called after the name of the mountains) and having by little and
little in many victories vanquished the nations bordering upon them, brought
them at length to be endenized and naturalized in their own name, like as the
Persians also did. Among these the Neuri possess the mid-land places, dwelling
near unto those high topped hills, which being steep up-right, and frozen all
over, are subject to the nipping Aqui lones, or Northern.
North-east wind. Beyond them are the Vidini and Geloni, very fierce and
savage nations: these use to flea off the skins of those enemies whom they
have slain, and thereof make for themselves garments, and for their horses
caparisons: a warlike people I assure you. Confining with the Geloni are the
Agathyrsi, the skin of whose bodies, also their hair, is speckled all over
with blew colored spots. And verily the meaner sort have marks of that kind,
small and standing here and there thin: but the noble men and gentry, broader,
with a color set upon them, and thicker one by another. Next beyond these, we
have heard that the Melanchlaenae and Anthropophagi dwell scattering in diverse
places: these use to live by eating the flesh of men and women's bodies, whom
all the borderers forsook for this abominable feeding, and went far from
them into the remote parts of the land. And therefore the whole tract that
lies North-east until you come unto the Seres, is become inhabitable. In
another quarter near unto the place where the Amazons are seated, dwell the
Alani mounting Eastward, and those be spread into mighty and great nations,
bending and bearing toward the tracts of Asia: which people (as I have heard)
stretch out in breadth as far as to Ganga, Castald. Cantan, Mereat. Gualgas,
Thovet.
Ganges, a river that cutteth the Indian land through the mids, and carries
his stream into the South sea. And there the Alani being divided into both
parts of the world (the sundry nations of which people it skilleth not now to
reckon up) albeit they keep a great way asunder, and wander like unto the
Nomades, in those eno^me and huge cantons, yet in process of time they grew
into one name, and generally they be all termed Alani. In their manners,
custom and means of savage living they be in manner all one. For they have no
cottages at all, nor any care to handle the plough, but live of flesh and
plenty of milk, sitting upon or carts.
waines, which being made of the bended covers of barks they carry with them
along the desert wilderness, that holds on still without end. And when they
are come to any places of green grass, placing their carres in a round form,
they fall to their victuals, and feed as wild beasts do: Now when their food
and forage is spent, they carry (as one would say) whole cities upon those
carts: and above in them their males and females engender together: in these
are borne their infants, in these they have their breeding and education. These
and no other have they for their habitations continually, and whither soever
they go, there they take to be their native dwelling and homestall. As they
drive their herds and flocks before them, they let them have their pasturage;
but especially of their horses they have an extraordinary care. The fields
there be evermore green and full of grass, with places here and there
between set thick with trees bearing apples and other fruit: and therefore
what way soever they go, they are at no default either for food or fodder: the
reason hereof is the moist ground, and the courses of many rivers running hard
by. All those therefore that for age or sex be not serviceable in the wars,
keep about the very wagons or carts aforesaid, and are busied in easy kind
of work: but the lusty youth, that have grown up from their very childhood
in the practice of riding, think it a base thing to go on foot: and they be
all for military knowledge expert and politic warriors. Whereupon the
Persians also, who by their first original are Scythians, be most skillful
soldiers. Now the Alani in manner all be tall of stature, and fair of
complexion, their hair meetly yellow, with the cast of their eyes, that yield
a temperat sternenesse, terrible, and by reason of their light armor swift and
nimble. Equal and suitable to the Hunnes in all respects, save that in their
feeding and apparel more civil they be than they....... in swimming and
hunting, raunging over the countries as far as to the meeres of Maeotis, the
Cimmerian Bosphorus, Armenia likewise and Media. And like as quiet and
peaceable men take pleasure in rest and ease, so delight they in dangers and
wars. Happy is that man reputed there, who in battle has lost his life:
For such as dye by age and other accidental death, they revile and reproach
with bitter taunts, as base and cowardly. Neither is there any thing that they
glory and vaunt more of, than the killing of some man or other. And instead of
glorious spoils, when they have slain any, off go their heads: the skins
they flea and use them instead of trappings for their great horses of service.
There is not a temple or chapel to be seen among them, nor a shrine; nay, a
man shall not see there so much as a cottage thatched over head with straw. But
after a barbarous rite and ceremony, there is a naked sword sticking fast in
the ground, and the same in lieu of Mars the President and Prelate of those
countries which they raunge about, they adore with much devotion. A wonderful
device they have to presage and foreknow things by: For the women gathering the
streightest wands and rods they can get, and looking wistly upon them, at a
fore-set time (and with certain secret charms and enchauntments) know
evidently what is imported. All of them, as descended of gentle blood, in times
past knew not what servitude meant. And even at this day, they choose those for
their Judges and Rulers, who for their long practice and experience in the
wars, be of approoved worth. But now return we to that which remains of
our intended history.

CHAP. III. Sundry nations of the Goths, through the puissance of the Hunnes
partly vanquished and driven out of their native habitations, and partly
smitten withfeare, having seized the banks of Danubius, crave aid of Valens,
and quiet habitation.
WEll then, the Hunnes after they had overrun the countries of the Alani (who
confining upon the Geuthungi, are by custom called Tanaitae) and both slain
and spoiled many, upon a faithful covenant of concord and unity, joined in
league and confederacy with the rest: and thus presuming more confidently upon
their association, they boldly and with sudden violence brake into the goodly
large and plenteous territories of Ermenrichus, a most warlike king, and for
his many and sundry valiant exploits dread unto the neighboring inhabitants.
Who being stricken with the force of this unexpected storm, although he held
out a long time, as one resolved and able to abide, yet considering there went
a brute commonly abroad, that made the terror of imminent calamities more and
more still, the fear of so great dangers he quieted and ended with voluntary
death: after whose decease Vithimiris created king, withstood for a while the
Alani, as trusting upon the aid of other Hunnes whom for money he had waged to
side with him. But after many overthrowes and losses which he sustained, his
fortune was by fine force to be vanquished in the field, and there to end his
life. The charge of whose little son named Viderichus, Alatheus and Saphrax,
experienced captains, and for their valiant and trusty hearts well known,
undertook as guardians and protectors. Who being prevented by the straitness
of time, when they had cast from them all hope and confidence of resistance,
departed and came to the river Danastus, which runs a great way along the
champian fields, between Ister and Broysthenes. Then Athanaricus the Judge and
Ruler of the Theruingi (against whom, as has been said before, Valens a good
while since had bent his forces, for sending aid unto Procopius) advertised how
these occurrents fell out otherwise than it was hoped and looked for, assayed
to make good his ground and to stand upon his guard, ready to rise up in
arms, in case he also as the rest were put to it and provoked. In conclusion,
when he had commodiously encamped his forces within a rampire near unto the
banks of the river Danastus (and the same extended along the vale Vngorius) he
sent Munderichus, Lord Warden of the Marches afterward in Arabia, together with
Lagarimanus, and other noble personages, twenty miles off, to lie in espiall,
and to discover the enemies coming, whiles himself in the mean time, without
the molestation of any man, raunged his army in battle ray. But it fell out
far otherwise than he thought it would. For the Hunni (as they are a people
in their conjectures quick and witty) suspecting there was some great
multitude of enemies lying farther off, letting them alone whom they saw, and
who, because no man stood in their way, betook themselves to their quiet rest,
so soon as the Moon showed her self, and dispatched the darkness of the
night, passed over the river at a fourd, and chose that piece of service which
made most for their behoof. But fearing least some fore-running discoverer
might skare those that kept aloof, they made what speed they could, and
directly advaunced against Athanaricus himself. Who being amazed at the first
brunt and impression, after he had lost some of his men, was constrained by the
enemies to make all the have he could, for his succor, to the high mountains.
Upon this strange accident, and for fear of some greater mischief to ensue,
he was put to his trumpes: And so from the edge of the mountain Pruth.
Mercator. Pruthes. Gortechto
Gerazus unto Danubius, passing along the territories of the Taifali, he
erected walls higher than ordinary; and with speedy diligence having furnished
the battlements and cope thereof, he thought thereby to provide the better for
his security and safety. And whiles the work went up with effectual
diligence, the Hunnes made quick speed after him: and now had they at their
sudden coming surprised him, but that laden with the heavy burden of
their booties, they gave over their pursuit. But when the fame was spread all
abroad over the rest of the Gothicke nations, That a strange and unknown kind
of people before time, now rushing in violently as a whirlewind from the high
mountains, but risen from out of a secret nouke, was ready to ruinate and
destroy all before them, the greater part of the multitude, which for want of
necessaries had forsaken Athanaricus, sought to plant themselves in some place
far remote from the knowledge of the Barbarians. And deliberating a long time
with themselves, What seat to choose, they thought that Thracia was a meet
country to receive and entertain them, and that for two reasons, both for
that it is a most fruitful soil, and also because by the large streams of
the river Ister it is severed from the lands that now lie open to the
thunderclaps and flashes of foreign war. This self same course also the
rest, as it were, in one common consent, thought upon. And therefore under the
conduct of Alavivus their leader they possessed themselves of the banks of
Donaw: and sending their Orators unto Valens, craved in humble manner to be
received, promising to live peaceably, and to send aid, if he would require it.

CHAP. IIII. Parts of Thracia are granted unto infinite troops of the Goths
to be inhabited.
WHiles things go thus in the foreign parts, fearful rumors ran all abroad
over the country, as far as lies along from the Marcomanni and the Quadi
unto Pontus, That the Northern people raised new tumults and made greater
troubles than ordinary, and namely, That a barbarous multitude of obscure and
hidden nations, disseised by sudden violence of their own seats and
habitations, wandered together with their wives and children about the river
Ister. Which news at the very first were by our men carelessely received as a
matter of no importance, for this cause, That in those tracts the nations being
so far off, were not wont to hear of any wars, before they were either
finished or appeased. But when the true relation of these tidings became now
rife, whereunto was added a rumor of the coming of those Gentile ambassadors,
who by prayer and humble entreatie made petition, That a people flitting from
out of their native country, should be entertained about the river, it was
thought a matter rather of mirth and joy than fear; whiles cunning and
skillful flatterers extolling the Emperors fortune very high, gave out, That
from the farthest lands of the earth the Thracians offered unto him, before he
looked for so much, so many young trained soldiers, that when his own power
and foreign forces were gathered all together, he might have an invincible
army, and for the supply of soldiers which was yearly levied and sent, what
from one province, and what from another, there might accrue unto his coffers a
great mass and heap of gold. And upon this persuasion diverse were sent out,
to convey over by wagons this fell and cruel nation: and great diligence was
used, that of them (who should another day overthrow the Roman Emperor) there
might not be left behind so much as one, though he were deadly sick. And so by
the Emperors permission having leave granted unto them to pass over Donaw,
and to inhabit the parts of Thracia, night and day they were ferried and
transported over, embarked by companies in ships, in floats and hollowed
trunkes of trees. And whiles some of them, in that river of all others most
dangerous, and as then grown bigger and higher by reason of much rain which
had fallen, because they were so thick pent and thrust together, strived
against the current and stream of the water, and endeavored to swim, a number
of them were drowned. Thus in a turbulent and tumultuous heat of such as were
very urgent to have the thing done, was the very bane and mischief of the
Roman world brought over. And as for this one thing, it is neither unknown
nor doubtful, that the unfortunate ministers which help to transport this
barbarous people, when they assayed many times to cast with counters, and
comprise the full number of them, missed of their purpose, and were feign to
give over. Which number just who feign would know,
He may desire as well,
The sands, while Western wind does blow,
In Libye sea to tell.
As says that most lofty and excellent Virgil.
Poet.

Now may the ancient Records and Histories at length savor of truth, reporting
how the army of the Medes was led into Greece: which long ago taking up all
Hellespont, and by a certain artificial through the mountain Athos.
partition made by man's hand for the sea to pass between, where at the hill
foot the said army was set a land; as also the survey and review of the said
host by troops and squadrons, taken at Doriscus, by the general consent of
all posterity has been read as fabulons. For seeing that infinite multitudes
of people spread throughout the provinces, and displaying themselves all over
the large plains and champian countries, replenished whole regions and all the
mountain tops and ridges, by so fresh a proof and argument as this, the truth
also and credit of antiquity is confirmed and averred. Well, the first that
had entertainment, were Fritigernus and Alavivus together, for whom the
Emperor appointed victuals for the present, and grant of lands to be tilled
and husbanded hereafter.

CHAP. V. The avarice and most cruel pride of some Praefects or Rulers of
Thracia. Also the wicked treachery and bloody butcherie of Lupicinus, drive
the Goths to take arms, for to war upon the Romans.
AT the same time, when our limits lying now common and open without bars
(whiles a barbarous nation displayed whole troops and hoasts of armed men as
thick as the hot sparks that fly from the mountain Aetna) required in
these hard points and extremities of necessity to have for the managing and
direction of military affairs some such persons, as for their brave and noble
exploits were most renowned, there were sought out and gotten together (as if
some adverse and unluckie deity made the choice) noted men, and distained with
infamy, to have the chief rule in camp, and manage warfare: among whom,
Lupicinus and Maximus bare the greatest stroke; the one of them Lieutenant in
Thracia, the other a most mischievous Warden of the Marches, but both of them
striving who should go beyond the other in headie rashness: whose greedy
covetousness lying ever in the wind for cheats, was the very matter and cause
of all evils and miseries. For (to let all other particulars pass, wherein
these said rulers themselves, or at leastwise others with their permission, by
naughty and wicked means trespassed against these strangers at their first
coming in, who as yet were harmless and innocent) this one odious and
unexampled fact of theirs I will not fail to tell: which if it were to be
heard even before Judges in their own case, could not by any means pass
clear and be pardoned. When this barbarous people thus brought over, was sore
distressed for want of victuals, these two most hateful Governors devised a
foul and dishonest kind of commerce and merchandise. For, look what number
and store of dogs their unsatiable greediness could get together from all
parts, they exchanged for so many slaves, that their chief persons and nobles
brought. In this mean while also, Victhericus king of the Greuthingi,
accompanied with Alatheus and Aphraces, by whose direction and will he was
wholly ruled, as also with Farnabius, approaching the banks of Ister, sent his
ambassadors with all speed, and besought the Emperor, That he might be received
with like courtesy. Which ambassadors, according as it was thought expedient
for the Commonwealth, being rejected, and standing doubtful what course to
take, Athanaricus beginning somewhat to fear, departed; remembering well, how a
good while since, at a treaty of concord upon covenants to be concluded, he
had despised Valens, and avouched, That he was obliged in conscience, never to
tread upon Roman ground, and for this cause compelled the said Emperor to
make that peace in the midst of the river: which notwithstanding he fearing
withal, as standing yet in force, he declined aside with all his people to
Caucalandensis, a place by reason of high woods and woulds inaccessible, out of
which the Sarmatians had been thrust. But the Theruingi, permitted long before
to pass over, wandered even then near unto the banks, impeached with a
twofold encumbrance, for that through the wicked dissimulation of the said
rulers, they were not succored with necessaries meet for their living, and of
set purpose tied to an intercourse of commerce and traffic, which was
horrible and wicked. Which being well and deeply considered, they dissimuled
their turning to treachery, which was the help of their urgent miseries near
at hand: and Lupicinus fearing also very much, least shortly they would revolt
and rebel, advanced close unto them with his forces, and constrained them
quickly to take their journey and be gone. The Greuthungi having gotten this
good opportunity, when they perceived, that whiles our soldiers were
elsewhere employed, the ships which used for the hinderance of their passage to
skud up and down the river, were quiet and at rest, by the means of certain
flotes and punts ill favouredly made and set together, made shift to be
transported, and encamped themselves a great way from Fritigernus. But he in a
witty forecast, which naturally he had, preventing what future chances might
betide, to the end that he might both obey the sovereign commandments, and
also combine with puissant kings, marching very slowly, came by easy journeyes
at length (late though it was) to Martianopolis: where, to help the matter,
there was practiced another more horrible designment, which kindled and set on
a light fire the torches of the Furies, ready to burn out, even to the
mischief and destruction of the State. Lupicinus having entreated Alavivus and
Fritigernus unto a feast, upon intelligence given by a secret messenger, with a
regiment of soldiers repelled far from the town walls the barbarous
multitude, who as subjects to our dominion, and continuing in peace and unity
with us, by way of request continually from time to time desired to enter in,
for to provide themselves of victuals and other necessaries. Now, after greater
broils and quarrels risen between the inhabitants within, and those that were
thus debarred, they grew at length to this, that of necessity they must make a
fray and fight. The Barbarians perceiving their friends and kinsfolk in
hostile manner to be spoiled, grew more enraged herewith, fell upon the said
soldiers, slew and rifled them. Which occurrents the said Lupicinus by a
privy messenger being advertised of, whiles sitting long at a riotous table,
amid many sports and pastimes, wherewith the room resounded, with much
drinking wine, he grew heavy headed and drowsy, and guessing what the future
issue would be, slew all them of the guard, who before the Praetorium or
Palace-gate, as well for honor as safety, waited and attended upon their
leaders. Which the people without, who now besieged the walls, taking
grievously, growing by little and little to a greater head, in revenge of their
princes, whom they supposed to be detained, threatened to do I wot not how
many shrewd displeasures. And Fritigernus, as he was a prince politic and of
quick conceit, fearing least he with the rest should be kept still as
hostages, cried out, That there would be another conflict with greater
mischief and slaughter, unless himself together with his associats might be
suffered to go forth, for to appease the common sort, which imagining that
under a pretense of courtesy their leaders were slain, grew very fierce and
ready to make a tumult. This being granted, they all went out, and being
received with applause and great joy, mounted on horseback and galloped away,
minding to set on foot many and sundry instigations to war.

CHAP. VI. Lupicinus in arash braid encountering the Goths, after the loss of
his Tribunes and many soldiers, flies. An hystoricall narration of
Marcellinus, as touching these foreign and new upstart nations, which in
former ages grievously afflicted sundry parts of the world.
WHen Fame the shrewd nource of rumors, had dispersed these news abroad, the
whole nation of the Thuringi was enflamed with an hot desire to fight; and so
among many fearful overtures and fore-running presumptions of the greater
dangers, when the baners after their manner were set up on high, and the
doleful sound of trumpets heard, out went in rodes streightwayes whole troops
of robbers and brigands, spoiling and firing villages, wasting also and making
havocke of whatsoever they could meet. Against whom Lupicinus, having in
tumultuarie have assembled his soldiers, more rashly than advisedly, went
forth, and nine miles from the city stood ready to try it out by battle.
The Barbarians also when they perceived so much, brake violently upon the
companies of our men at unwares, and with their targuets before their bodies,
pressing hard upon them, as many as stood in their way with their spears and
swords they ran through. And in this bloody rage both Tribunes and the most
part also of the armed soldiers were slain and lost their ensigns: only the
unfortunat General, who minding nothing else but this, that whiles others were
fighting, he might save himself by flying, hyed as fast as he could to the
city. After this, the enemies clad in the Romans armor, made foul work in
sundry places, and no man gave them the check. And for as much, as after
manifold and diverse acts, we are come to these parts, our hearty desire is to
those (if ever there will be any) who shall read this story, that none of them
would precisely require at our hands every thing in particular that was done,
nor the just number of such as were slain, which indeed could in no sort be
comprised. For it shall be sufficient, without masking the truth under any lie,
to digest and set in order the very principal points only of all occurrents,
considering that to the unfolding and laying abroad the records of each thing,
requisite it is there should be in every place a faithful and sincere
relation. Those that be ignorant in ancient records deny, that the
Commonwealth was ever at any time overcast with so great mists of calamities:
but astonished as they be now with the beholding of late and fresh miseries, they
are deceived. For, if they revolve either the former, or these late foregoing
ages, they plainly show, that the like and as woeful troubles of the State
have oftentimes happened. The Osterlings, or Dutchmen.
Teutons together with the Iuitlanders.
Cimbri suddenly from out of the hidden parts of the Ocean overflowed Italy.
But after exceeding and infinite mischiefs inflicted upon the Roman State, in
the last battle vanquished by our most noble and renowned captains, and
quite rooted out, they learned with their uttermost perils, what martial
valor proceeding from the habit of wisdom and policy is able to do.
Semblably in the days of Marcus the Emperor, a raging rabble of sundry and
different nations banding themselves together, after exceeding great frights of
horrible wars, after many a city won, sacked and rased down to the
ground........... had like to have left but small parcels of them untouched and
whole. But within a while, after these woeful losses and calamities, the State
was set upright again, by reason only of this, that the sober ancient world
in those days, not yet infected with loose riot and wantonness, gaped neither
after sumptuous and costly fare, nor wicked and detestable gains, but in an
uniforme and joint affection, the highest and lowest agreeing together in
defense of Commonweal, hastened as it were, unto some calm haven and quiet
harbor, to dye a glorious and honorable death. With a fleet of two thousand
sail the Scythian nations in great numbers, having with breaking through
Bosphorus and the coasts of Propontus passed over, made great havocke, and
wrought much mischief, I must needs say, both by sea and land: but yet when
they had lost the greatest part of their people, returned back. There dyed in
fight with the Barbarians, the Emperors Decij, both the father and the son.
The cities of Pamphylia were besieged, many islands harried and wasted,
Macedonia set on a flaming fire, and the whole multitude of them beleagured a
long time Salonichi.
Thessalonica, and Cyzicum likewise. Anchialo, Sophia. Kenkis, Mereat.
Anchialos was won, and at the same time Nicopoli, or Nigeboli.
Nicopolis, which the Emperor Traian in token of victory against the Daci,
built. After many and cruel overthrowes given and taken riciprocally,
Philippopoli.
Philippopolis was destroyed, and (unless the Annals doelye) an hundred
thousand men were put to the sword within the walls thereof. Also foreign
enemies raunged at their pleasure throughout Albania, Leandr.
Epirus, Thessalie, and all Rumelia, or Rom^chi.
Greece. But after that a Claudius, that noble and renowned leader, was assumed
to be Emperor, and the self same Prince untimely taken away by an honorable
death, discomfited and expelled they were by Aurelianus a valiant man, and a
most severe revenger of harms and damages done: whereby they became quiet and
stirred not for a long time, unless it were, that afterward certain routs of
robbing brigands made hot incursions (but to their own destruction) into the
territories near adjoining. But now go forward I will in that train of
history from which I have digressed.

CHAP. VII. Other petie Princes and nations of the Goths, commanded to pass
over into Hellespontus, and wrongfully misused, join with others that were
already armed, and afterward west and spoil Thracia.
THe whole course of these acts being carried all abroad and divulged, by
messengers coming thick one after another, Sueridus and Colias, Princes of
the Goths, who with their people long before were entertained and set to look
unto the wintering harbors at Hadrianopoli^.
Hadrianopolis, regarding their own lives and safety above all things in the
world, beheld all with quiet and peaceable minds. But upon the Emperors
letters which suddenly were brought unto them, whereby they were commanded to
pass over into Hellespontus, they required without any swelling humor of
pride, to have their warfare money, meat, and two days respite allowed them
[of the city.] Which the head magistrate of the city, taking not well, and
picking a quarrel thereat (for displeased he was and angry with them about
some spoil and wast made in a country house of his not far from the city)
made no more ado, but brought forth all the commons together with the artizans
and craftsmen, of whom there is a mighty multitude there, and them he armed to
their utter confusion: and so commanding the trumpets to sound the battle,
unless they went their ways the sooner (as it was decreed) he threatened them
all with the utmost peril of death. The Goths sore troubled with this
unexpected adversity, and affrighted with the citizens, more hasty ywis than
considerat) pressing upon them, stood still and moved not. But at length when
they had been rayled at, reviled and cursed at their hands, yea and assailed
otherwhiles with some few casting darts launced at them, they brake forth into
open defiance, and professed rebellion. And thus, when they had slain a great
number of the citizens, whom their over-malapert violence had deceived, and put
the rest to rout, and wounded them with sundry kinds of weapons, after they
had difarmed and spoiled the dead bodies, and put themselves into Roman armor,
they espied Fritigernus near at hand, and joined themselves unto him, as
duetiful and obeisant allies, and so distressed the city, now shut up, with
those troubles and miseries that follow siege. In which difficulty of
dangerous service, being a long time employed, they ran on head every where,
and without all respect. Some of them, who were more bold and adventurous than
their fellows, perished without revenge, yea and many with shot of arrows and
discharging of stones out of slings, lost their lives. Then Fritigernus,
considering that men unskilful in sieges and assaults, wrestled in vain with
so many misfortunes and losses, leaving there a sufficient power, advised them
to depart and leave their business undone, saying, That he was at peace with
bare walls, and persuading them that they would set in hand without endangering
their lives, to spoil the rich and plentiful countries, as wherein as yet
there were no garrisons to empeach them. Then they commending highly the kings
counsel, whom they knew would be an effectual partaker with them in these
projects and designs, dispersing themselves into every quarter and coast of
Thracia, marched warily, having those that either yielded or were taken
prisoners, to show them plenteous towns, and such especially, wherein, by
their saying, might be found great store of victuals: and beside an inbred
courage and boldness of their own, which set them on, this principal help
they had to put them forward, in that there conflowed daily unto them a
multitude out of the same nation, such as of late had been sold by merchants,
with a number of others flocking still unto them, whom at their first coming
over, those that were pined and starved for hunger, had exchaunged for some
course or small wine, and pieces of broken bread. There came also unto them for
to increase their company, many that were expert in following after the veins
of gold in mines, not able any longer to endure the heavy burdens and
taxations laid upon them of impost and customs. And being with the willing
consent of all gladly received, they stood them in very good stead as they
passed through unknown places, showing unto them where were the hidden garners
of corn, the privy lurking places and secret receipts of the people, and by
the guidance and direction of the same men there remained not untouched and
unassailed any thing, unless it were inaccessable and unpassable. For without
difference made of age or sex, with fire and sword all went to wrack: the young
babes sucking at the breast, were pulled away and killed; their mothers were
ravished, and wives likewise made widows, and bereft of their husbands, slain
before their faces: the striplings and well grown boys were haled and trailed
along the dead carcasses of their parents: in sum, many old folk crying out
that they had lived their fill, after loss of their goods, together with
beautiful women, with their hands writhed and pinioned behind their backs,
when they had bewailed the embers and ashes of their native habitations, were
led away perforce out of their own country.

CHAP. VIII. Valens distracted with manifold cares, sends an army into
Thracia. The Goths and the Romans strike a battle. The victory not without
sweat, blood, and tears, falls to the Romans.
THese news out of Thracia, Valens the Emperor hearing with much grief and
sorrow of heart was distracted into diverse and sundry cares. And immediately
sending Victor General of the Cavallerie into Persia, there to compound and
conclude as touching the state of Armenia, according as these imminent
occasions and troubles did require, himself ready forthwith to depart out of
Antioch, that he might in the mean time go to Constantinople, sent Profuturus
and Traianus before. Both of them were great Rulers and Cammaunders, who verily
reached at brave and noble exploits, but were unskilful in feats of arms. Who
when they were come to the places where this multitude of enemies should have
been cut off and diminished by peecemele, by way of stealth and robbery
rather than otherwise, wholly before it was full time, bending themselves to
that course which was dangerous and pernicious, oppose against the Barbarians
whiles they were yet in their hot blood and furious mood, the legion brought
out of Armenia, which verily in martial services had oftentimes been well
tried and approoved; but not able to match so infinite a number of people that
overspread both high hills and deep dales. These companies and bands, I say,
having not as yet experience what untamed rage, joined with desperatnesse, is
able to do, when they had driven the enemy beyond the cloven and broken
cliffes of the mountain Hemus, bestowed themselves in the steep passages and
gullets, partly that the Barbarians enclosed within those places without end,
might with long famine be consumed; and partly that themselves might attend
Frigeridus Warden of the Marches, who with the aids of the Pannonian and
Transalpine soldiers was coming: and whom at the request of Valens, Gratianus
appointed to go into the field for to succor and help those that were sore
distressed and driven to extremities. After whom, Richomeres then captain of
the b Domestici, by commandment of the said Gratian removing out of Gaul,
hastened into Thracia, having in name only the conduct of certain cohorts: of
whom the most part forsook their colors and went from him (as some gave it
out) through the persuasion of Merchandes, who feared least Gaul being left
destitute of the means of defense, should be wasted, now that the enemies at
their pleasure had broken through the bar of Rhene. But by occasion that
Frigeridus was stayed with the gout, or else (as some malicious backbiters
falsely devised) fained himself sick, because he would not be at any hot
service and dangerous skirmishes, Rhicomeres by a general consent having the
regiment of all the forces, joined with Profuturus and Traianus as they were
marching along near unto the town Salices. From whence not far off, an
inestimable number of the Barbarians having orderly placed a multitude of
waines and carts round in manner of a circle, enclosed apart, as it were,
within a circuit of walls, took their ease and solaced themselves with the rich
booties they had taken. The Roman captains then by the good guidance of better
hopes (in case fortune affoorded the^ opportunity) meaning to adventure upon
some glorious exploit, wittily observed, what the Goths intended to do,
forecasting this especially, That if they dislodged and removed their camp to
another place (which they used very often) they might with confidence set upon
the backs of the hinmost, gore a number of the^ through, and turn away a great
part of their spoils. The enemies perceiving this, or else having intelligence
given thereof by the fugitives (by whose means nothing was so secretly done,
but they knew of it) abode in the same place a long time. But strucke^ with
fear of the army that was abroad, and of other forces which they feared were
at hand to join with them, by virtue of a watchword given after their country
manner, they sent for their wast-making companies, which were spread in diverse
parts near by, and of every great captain and commander among them well
accepted: and so forthwith having made light fires at the Carrago c (for so
they term it themselves) returning with passing great celeritie, they
incensed and incited still their countrymen to attempt greater matters. After
this, there was no intermission between both sides, more than short truce. For
when those were returned, whom upon necessity they had called forth, the whole
multitude thrust together still within the compass of the enclosure aforesaid,
keeping an horrible noise, and set upon a furious and mad mood, hastened in a
fell and cruel gare to try the utmost hazard of battle; neither were the
princes of their nation there present against it. And for that these matters
thus passed, when the Sun was going down, and the night so fast drawing on,
stayed them against their wills and with heavy hearts to go to rest, after they
had taken their meat as their leisure would serve, they remained without sleep.
On the other side, the Romans having intelligence hereof, continuing also
watchful themselves, feared the enemies and their brain sick leaders, as if
they had bin so many enraged wild beasts; howbeit, with undaunted hearts they
expected, that the event, although doubtful and dangerous (by reason they were
in number much inferior) would yet prove fortunat on their side, in regard of
their more just and righteous cause. So, at the very later end of the day, upon
the signal of the alarm sounded by the trumpets on both parts, the Barbarians
after they had, as their manner is, sworn one unto another, assayed to gain
the hilly places, to the end, that from thence down the hill they might with
greater violence like wheels over run and tumble down before them all that
were in their way. Our soldiers seeing this made have every man to his own
colors and companies, and so standing their ground neither raunged abroad, nor
leaving their ranks, ran out of the array for to skirmish. When as therefore
the armies thus embattailed on both sides, marched on warily, and came at
length to stand still, the warriors with grim looks and traverse cast of eye
beheld wistly one another. And the Romans verily setting up a martial note on
all sides, which uses to begin low, and so rise higher and higher, a noise
that by a peculiar term they call Barritus, plucked up their valiant hearts
and strength together: but the Barbarians with untunable cries and shouts
creaked forth the praises of their ancestors: and thus among sundry words
passing between of dissonant noise, began the lighter skirmishes. And now,
when they had aloof assailed one another on both sides with louped darts and
such like casting-weapons, they came together in menacing wise to close fight
and hand strokes, and couching their shields in form of a roufe over their
heads, they set foot to foot and maintained the medley. The Barbarians, as who
were always repaired with fresh supplies and nimble withal, hurling at our
men huge clubs, parched and hardened in the fire, and fiercely foining with
point of sword full upon the breasts of those that stood against them, brake
through the left wing; which being ready to recule and go down, a right strong
and hardy regiment which lay for supply, rising valiantly from a side hard by,
when as the of horsemen.
cohort now was hard at their necks, succored and supported again. When as
the fight therefore grew exceeding sharp and hot, with much slaughter and
bloodshed, every one who was more ready to rush upon the thickest of the
enemies, whiles on all sides swords swashed and darts flew as thick as hail,
lost his life: and the horsemen followed both on the one side and the other,
with strong arm slashing those that fled in the neck and back: likewise on
both parts the footmen hewed the houx or hamstrings of as many as slipped away
or lagged behind for fear. And whereas every place was full of slain bodies,
some there were that lay among them half dead and half alive, feeding
themselves with a vain hope of life. Some were shot with bullets thrown out
of slings, others with reeds or arrows headed with iron: the heads of some
cloven with the sword through the midst of the forehead and crown, hung down
with great horror on both shoulders. And both sides not wearied as yet with
tough fighting, plagued one another indifferently, and sped alike: neither was
there one that slacked one jot his own natural vigor of body, so long as his
courageous heart served him to stir up his strength. Howbeit, as bloody and
mortal as this conflict was, it ended with the day: and when as many as could
any ways make shift departed in disorder, the rest every one recovered their
tents again, heavily appayed. To conclude, when as some honorable personages
among the dead were enterred as place and time would give leave, the bodies of
the slain that remained, the cursed fowls of the air devoured, such as were
wont at that time to feed upon carcasses, as appears by the fields, all over
white with bones, at this day. Howbeit for certain it is known, That the
Romans, fewer far in number, having encountered with that huge multitude, and
abidden many deadly dangers, yet not without woeful and lamentable calamities
foiled the barbarous people. These chances of battle thus piteously ended,
our men went to the next retiring places of Martianopolis, and the Goths
thrust and pent of their own accord within the foresaid circuit and precinct
of their wagons, never durst for seven days together go forth or be seen: and
therefore our soldiers taking the advantage of this opportunity, enclosed an
infinite sort of other Barbarians within the straits of Haemimontum, barred with
high hills against them, building (as one would say) upon this hope, That this
mischievous multitude of enemies hemmed in between Ister and the deserts, and
finding no way out, would perish by famine, considering that all necessaries of
this life were carried into the strong cities; of which, they never went about
to besiege any one, as yet being altogether ignorant in these and such like
machinations. After this Richomeres returned into Gaul, minding to bring other
helps and means from thence, in regard of greater and more troublous wars
which were feared.

CHAP. IX. The Goths having taken in the Hunnes and Alanes to the society of
their booty, with horrible slaughter and spoil wast Thracia, and in vain lay
siege to the town Dibaltum. As they pursue Frigeridus, a most puissant
warrior and leader, they are terrified with a new overthrow: and Frigeridus
having taken many of them, confineth them about Mutina, Rhegium, and Parma,
there to till the grounds.
THese things were done in the year that Gratianus was the fourth time
Consul, together with Merobaudes, toward the Autumn season: in which time,
when Valens heard the doleful events of wars and spoils, after he had
committed the charge of the Cavallerie for the time unto Saturninus, he sent
out Traianus and Profuturus, bringing aid and help with them. And it fortuned
in those days, that when throughout the regions of Scythia and Moesia, all
things comestible were spent, the Barbarians, what upon a cruel fierceness of
their own, and what for mere want that set them forward, were exceeding hot
and eagre to work mighty matters. But having many a time given the attempt,
and seeing themselves overweighed with the vigorous valor of our men, manfully
resisting them, notwithstanding all rough and stony difficulties, driven at
length upon extreme necessity, they procured (upon hope of exceeding great
booties) to combine with them, certain of the Chuni and Alani. Which when
Saturninus knew (for by this time was he come and had placed the fore-fences
and out-standing guards abroad in the fields) gathering by little and little
his forces together, he prepared to depart (and that in good policy) least the
sudden multitude, like to a violent stream of water, breaking the banks and
gushing forth, should with little ado disranke and discomfit all those that
diligently watched the suspected places. Then, after the straits were laid
open, and our soldiers (in good time for the enemies) departed, those
aforesaid that were within the Car^ago.
enclosed, every one what way he could find, after a disorderly manner, bent
his whole power and set his mind (seeing no man to impeach him) for to set all
in a garboyle; and throughout Thracia, as wide as it is, spread themselves,
spoiling and wasting without controlment, beginning at those very coasts which
Ister runs by, and so going on as far as Rhodope and that tract which
severeth the maine and huge seas, making foul work and havocke of all in most
shameful manner, what with spoiling, robbing, and bloody murdering, and what
with firing and abusing the bodies of free borne persons. Then might a man have
beheld with groaning grief of heart, facts horrible to be said and seen: women
massacred and amazed with fear, coursed all about with scourges that rung
again, even great bellied wives with babes in them, yet unperfect and
untimely, before they came into the world enduring many impieties. Other little
infants also clinging to their mothers arms, you might have heard piteously
crying; as also the lamentable mones of young springals and damsels nobly
borne, with their hands strait bound, whiles themselves were haled into cruel
captivity. And after them, virgins of ripe years and chaste wedded wives,
with blubbered faces weeping and bewayling their extreme miseries, were led
away, wishing by death, though dolorous and painful, to prevent the abusing
and defiling of their bodies shortly after. Among which calamities, when a
gentleman, rich and free but a little before, was dragged and haled like a
beast, he complained of thee, o Fortune, as unmercifull and blind withal, that
did in the turning of an hand appoint and betake him, violently wrung out and
sequestered from his beloved wife, dear children, and sweet house and home,
which he saw before his face turned into ashes, and altogether ruinat, either
to be mangled and dismembered lim after lim, or under whips and torments to
serve as a slave the cruel and bloody conqueror. The Barbarians yet, like
unto so many savage beasts broken out of their cages, when they had overrun a
great way in that large country, went to a town named Develto. Soph.
Dibaltum, where finding Barzymeres, a Tribune of the Scutarij, with those
soldiers of his own, with the d Cornuti also and other companies of footmen
pitching their tents, him they set upon, being an approved and well experienced
warrior: who presently, as the necessity of so imminent a danger required,
commanded, That the trumpet should sound the battle; and after he had
strengthened the flanks, brake through before with as many as were ready
appointed, to battle, and by valiant resistance had made his part good, and
departed out of the field on even hand, but that a troop of horsemen running
violently upon him, when he was very much out of breath and weary, beset him
round about. And thus with the slaughter of many Barbarians, whose overthrow
was not seen in so great a multitude, he was slain. This exploit after this
manner performed, the Goths doubtful what they should do afterward, sought
for Frigeridus, intending where ever they could find him, to overthrow and beat
him down, as the only strong bar that stood in their way. And therefore,
after they had taken more liberal and finer food, as also slept a little, him
they followed like a sort of savage beasts, as being given to understand, That
by direction from Gratianus he was returned into Thracia, and encamped near
unto Beroea, where he lay in espiall to discover the doubtful events of
things. And verily the Goths for their parts rode up and down, and made have
to put their designs in execution. But Frigeridus, that knew well enough how
both to govern and also to preserve his soldiers, either suspecting what
their intent was, or plainly informed thereof by relation of those discoverers
whom he had sent out, returned through the high mountains and thick grown
woods into Illyricum, much emboldened by a passing good hand that Fortune,
unlooked for, presented unto him. For in his return, as he marched softly on
with his soldiers, marshalled in good array into squadrons, he prevented
Farnobius, a great lord of the Goths, as he with his troops of robbers and
spoyle-makers raunged up and down the country at his pleasure, and leading
with him the Taifali, drawn but lately into his society: who (if it be worth
the telling) whiles our soldiers were dispersed upon the fearful invasion of
strange and unknown nations, had passed over the river, with full purpose to
ransacke and spoil the places, void of defendants. Upon the sudden
discovery of their companies, this most politic captain prepared to join
battle with them: and so charging upon all the sort of those nations,
discomfited these bold brigands, who still stuck not to give out many threats:
and put them he had every mothers son to the sword, but that after Farnobius,
a terrible trouble-maker before time, was with many others slain, he was
importuned very much and entreated to spare as many as remained alive: and all
those he sent away with life to occupy and husband the lands about Modem.
Mutina, Rexxo,
Rhegium, and Parma, towns in Italy. This nation of the Taifali, I have heard
say, was filthily given, and so much abandoned to the horrible sins of
beastly living, that with them it was an usual matter to have boys and men
company together in that foul and abominable act of wantonness which is not
to be named, spending the prime and flower of their youth in such unclean and
unnatural abuse. Furthermore, if any one of them grown now to riper years,
could alone by himself, either take a wildboare, or kill a savage and cruel
bear, freed he was from this stinking puddle and sink of pollution.

CHAP. X. The Lentienses, a people of Alemaine, with a mighty army break into
the Roman Seigniories. In this battle Gratian has the upper hand, and few
remained alive, such as escaped by flight, who being coursed in the mountains,
make humble supplication and obtain peace, and are suffered without any harm
to go into their native countries.
THese were the calamities that in the later end of Autumn, when Winter drew
fast on, the cruel whirlewindes of troubles swouped and hudled together
throughout Thracia: Which rage of the time, as if the Furies were disposed to
raise tumults in all places, going on still to countries also far off, spread
it self all abroad. And now the Lintzgoewer.
Lentienses, a people of Alemaine, bordering upon the coasts of Rhetia, by way
of crafty and treacherous rodes having broken the league lately made, invaded
and assailed our marches. Which calamity began first upon such a mischievous
occasion as this: One of this nation serving under the Emperor in quality of a
Armiger, or Scutarius.
Squier of the body, by occasion of some weighty business, was rerurned home
into his own country; and, as he was over lavish and a blab of his tongue,
when many of his contrymen asked him, What news in Court? he tells them,
That Gratianus sent for by his uncle Valens, was shortly to make a warlike
expedition toward the East, to the end that they with their joint and double
forces, might repel the inhabitants upon the borders, conspired to destroy and
root out the Romans. Which intelligence when the Lentienses had with great
affection received, being also themselves (as it were) bordering neighbors,
and seeing how these matters went, as they are swift and quick of dispatch,
gathered themselve into thick plumpes for to rob and spoil: and so, as the
Companies serving under the Romans.
Celtae and Petulantes together, were marching near the Rhene in the month of
February, when by reason of hard frosts it was all of an ice and passable on
foot, after they had sore distressed them, not without some loss of their
own, with maine strength forced them to turn back. But these Germans being
constrained thus to retire, and knowing that the most part of our army was
gone into Illyricum before the Emperor, who shortly would be there, grew more
hotely incensed. And conceiving greater projects, assembled all the inhabitants
of their towns and villages together; and so having raised an army of forty
thousand armed men, or threescore and ten thousand (as some have given out, who
love to extol the Emperors praises) being grown to an exceeding height of
pride, brake more boldly into our territories. Which when Gratianus with great
fear had true intelligence of, he called back the cohorts which he had sent
before into Pannonia, as also assembled others, that in wise and circumspect
policy he had kept still in Gaul, and committed the managing of this service
unto Nannienus, a valiant and discreet captain. And to him he joined as
Colleague in equal commission and power, Mallobaudes Lieutenant or captain of
the band Domestici, and king of the Franks beside; a man expert in warfare, and
hardy withal. When as Nannienus therefore duly considered the variable
chances of fortune, and therefore thought it good to hold off and linger the
time, Mallobaudes carried away with desire of fight (as his manner was) and
impatient of delay, was much troubled thinking it long until he might advance
his standerd against the enemy. And therefore when on the adverse part they
came forward with an horrible noise to give a valiant charge, after the signal
given by blowing of the horn, they began first to encounter before Horburg,
Rhenano, Colmer, Lrenicho.
Argentuaria; and with shot as well of arrows as casting javelins, down they
went thick both on the one side and the other. But in the very heat of
battle, our men seeing an infinite number of the enemy to avoid open and
manifest danger dispersed themselves every man as he could among the narrow
lanes beset with trees, howbeit within a while after they stood their ground
more confidently: and carrying the like resplendant show, and glittering afar
off with their bright armor, did put the Barbarians in a mighty fear that
the Emperor was come. Who suddenly turning their backs, yet between whiles
making head again (because they would omit no means even in extremity
unattempted) they were so beaten down and hewed in pieces, that of the number
aforesaid there escaped, as it was esteemed, not above five thousand, and those
shrouded within the thick woods: and among many other bold and hardy knights,
Priarus also the king was slain, even he that was the inciter and setter of
all these mischievous and deadly troubles. Gratianus much encouraged with the
confidence of this fortunat success, and now marching toward the East parts,
and turning his way on the left hand, closely passed over the Rhene; and upon a
good hope that set him ward, determined (if fortune had favored his
enterprise) generally to root out the whole nation, so treacherous and desirous
of rebellion. Which purpose of his being known by messengers arriving thick
one after another, the Lentienses stricken into their dumps, what with the
miseries of their own nation consumed in manner all, and what with the sudden
coming of the Emperor, doubtful what way to take, considering they could not
find any breathing time (were it but short) to bethink themselves either to
make resistance, or what else to do or go about, with all the speed and force
they possibly could, made toward the hills beset on every side with unpassable
cliffes. And taking up their standing upon the craggie rocks and rags round
about, with all their might and maine defended their goods, together with their
wives and children which they had brought with them. Which difficulty when it
was weighed and considered, there were chosen through every legion five
hundred armed soldiers of approoved experience and politic skill in war,
to be opposed against them same, as if they had been so many walled fences:
Who the more emboldened and encouraged hereupon, for that the Emperor in
person was seen to bear himself manfully with the foremost in the vaward, they
assailed to climb the said hills, minding immediately without any fight at all,
if they might once get the higher ground under their feet, to carry them all
away as hunters preyes. So the skirmish beginning when it was well toward
noone, continued until dark night: for why, they fought with great slaughter
on both sides. Our men fell to kill and were killed themselves not a few, and
withal the armor of those in the Emperors train about him shining again
with gold and bright colors, were with the flinging thick of heavy and
massy [stones] all to bruised and broken. And then, upon consultation had a
good while between Gratian and the principal officers of the army, it seemed
evidently to be a most dangerous service, and to no effect, thus all in have to
strive without intermission against such rough banks and mounts bearing out
against them. And after much debating, and sundry opinions passed to and fro
(as in such a business) considering the barbarous enemies had for their
defenses such places as were disadvantageous unto us, concluded it was, That
they should by our soldiors sitting still, and doing nothing else, be round
about beleagured and wearied out with famine. But when the Germans strove
again for their parts with the like obstinat resolution, and knowing the
country very well, went unto other mountains higher tha^ those which before
they had kept, the Emperor with his army turning thither, with the like
fortitude as before sought for the paths and tracts that led up to those high
places. The Lentienses then perceiving him to be so fully bent to have their
lives, and never giving over his earnest pursuit, after they had yielded
themselves to his mercy (the thing that by their humble request they obtained)
upon the tendering of their lusty able young men (as they were commanded) to
be entermingled with our new trained soldiers, were suffered without any more
harm received, to go into their native countries.

CHAP. XI. The commendation of Gratian. Frigeridus a most excellent Captain,
and the terror of the Goths, is unseasonably called back by Valens, who
leads a strong army against the Goths, who near unto the river Hebrus were
grievously discomfited and defeated by Sebastian Colonel of the Infanterie.
THis victory of such importance and consequence, that it daunted the Western
nations, by the gracious pleasure of the eternal God, incredible it is with
how great vigor and effectual celeritie Gratian hastening another way,
dispatched. And in truth a young Prince he was of singular towardness, well
spoken, temperat, warlike and martial, yet mild and merciful: In which
virtues he had proceeded with emulation to excel the best Emperors, even when
as yet the lovely down began to grow upon his cheeks, but that his own
nature (inclined to toyish and ridiculous actions, especially when his
favorites and minions let him have the reins at liberty) turned him to the
vain delights and sports of Commodus Caesar; although this Prince was nothing
bloody and cruel. For, like as Commodus because he was wont in the peoples
sight to kill a number of wild beasts with darts, and when an hundred lions
were let out at once in the Shewplace of the Amphitheatre, slew them with
diverse kinds of shot, and never struck one of them twice: even so this Prince
also, among those empaled enclosures which they term Vivaria, i. Parkes,
whiles with the stroke of many an arrow he killed wild boares, made small
reckoning the while of many and those serious occurrents; at such a time
especially, when as if Marcus Antoninus himself had sitten at the helm of the
Commonweal, he could hardly have been able to remedy the lamentable
calamity of the State, without Colleagues like to himself, and much sage
counsel beside, when Gratianus therefore had disposed of his affairs according
to the time, and as the occasions in Gaul, and the nations there did require,
and punished withal that traitor, the Squier or Scutarius aforesaid, who had
told the Barbarians, that the Emperor made have into Illyricum, he departed
from thence by a castle bearing the name of A^bon, Rhenano. A^bor, Netit.
Foelix arbor, and by the way of Inaureatum sped him apace with stretched out
journeyes, to help the part that went down the wind. And about the same time,
to succeed Frigeridus (who most politikely devised many profitable means for
the common security, and made have to fortify the streits of Succi) for fear
least the enemies (nimble as they were and used to make rodes) breaking also
violently forth like unto some swelling streams, should raunge and overrun at
their pleasure the Northern Provinces, there was sent a Lieutenant named
Maurus, a man under a show of stout courage, altogether made for money, and at
all assayes mutable and uncertain. This is he, of whom in a former part of our
history we wrote thus much, That when Caesar Iulianus made some question about
the setting of a crown upon his head, whiles he served among his Squiers, and
attended upon the palace, took the collar that he wore about his own neck,
and presented it unto him for a diadem: and being a wary and diligent
captain, was remooved from his service at the very time when all things lay a
bleeding: whereas, though he had long before departed and betaken himself unto
a private life at home, he ought, considering the great affairs of state so
required, to have been brought again into the field. About this time it
happened, that Valens now at length roused out of Antiochia, after a long way
travailed, came to Constantinople, where when he had stayed very few days,
and been disquieted with a light mutiny of the people, and committed unto
Sebastian a vigilant leader known (who a little before was sent from Italy,
as himself desired) the conduct of the Infanterie, which Traianus had the
charge of before, himself went to Melitiat.
Melantias a village, belonging to the Caesar's, where he refreshed the
soldiers hearts with money, with food, and many fair and affable speeches.
From whence, when, upon a new journey by a solemn watchword proclaimed, he was
come to Nice, a station so named, he understood by the relation of the spies
and discoverers, that the Barbarians full of rich pillage, were returned from
the tracts of Rhodope near to Hadrianopolis. Who taking knowledge that the
Emperor with a great power of soldiers was in his march, make have to join
with their contrymen, having planted guards for the defense of the people
about Berora and Nicopolis: and streightwayes, as the present occasion of
necessity required, Sebastian with three hundred choice soldiers drawn out
of every band, was appointed to make speed, minding to do some service as he
promised for the good of the Commonwealth: Who upon great have in his journey
made, being discovered nigh unto Hadrianopolis had the gates shut and locked
against him and was prohibited to come nearer: for the Defensoribus.
e Magistrates of the city feared, that being taken prisoner by the enemy, he
was come as one suborned, and so might work somewhat to the cities undoing;
the like as had happened by another Lieutenant, whom the soldiers of
Magnentius by a wile had caught, by whose means the strong gates of the Julian
Alps were laid open. At length, though late, Sebastian being known what he
was, and permitted to enter into the city, after he had cherished with
victuals and sleep (according to the store that the place affoorded) those whom
he had under his conduct, the morrow following he secretly brake forth and
went his way. Now, by that time that the evening drew on, when he had upon a
sudden descried near unto the river Hebrus the companies of the Goths, well
appointed to wast and spoil, hiding himself for a while within the banks and
shrubs, in the dark night he marched softly for being heard, and set upon them
disordered as they were and out of array; and performing also this piece of
service, that beside some few, who by their good footmanship escaped death, all
the rest fell upon the edge of the sword: and so he fetched back again infinite
booties and spoils, which neither the city nor the wide plain fields were
able to receive. For which cause, Fritigernus being thoroughly rowsed, and
fearing greatly least he, a fortunat and victorious captain, as he had often
heard, should defeat and bring to naught the bands of his men, dispersed here
and there at their pleasure, and wholly minding their prey, by setting upon
them at unawares, after he had called them all back near unto the town
Cabyle, he quickly departed, to the end, that making their abode in the open
countries, they might neither be distressed with famine, nor endangered by
secret ambushments.

CHAP. XII. Valens who envied the virtues of Gratian, bringing with him many
bands of old experienced and select soldiers, without expecting any aid, but
in his own pride pricked forward by the foolish words of flatterers, and a
certain mischievous destiny, hasteneth to encounter the Goths: and when
their ambassadors treated about conditions of peace, sent them away without
effect.
WHiles these affairs went thus in Thracia, Gratianus having certified his
Val^us.
uncle by letters, with what industry he had overcome the Alemans, sent all
his cariages with bag and baggage before by land, and himself with those
forces, which were more lightly appointed, passing along the river Danubius,
arrived at Bo^monster. Simler.
Bononia, and entered Sirmium. And when he had remained there four days, by
the same river he went down to a town named Marotha. Lazius.
Martis Castra, troubled sore by the way with fits of an intermittent ague: in
which tract he was suddenly set upon by the Alanes, and lost some of his
followers. And at the very same time. Valens troubled sore in two respects,
both for that he understood for certain, that the Lentienses were vanquished,
and also because Sebastianus by letters, eftsoons with words amplified his own
deeds, dislodged from Melanthias in warlike manner, hastening by some doutie
and notable exploit to equal the young prince his brothers son, for whose
virtues he was vexed at the heart: and under his conduct he had a great army,
and the same right puissant and of courageous stomach: for unto it he had
joined also the strength of the old beaten soldiers: among whom there were
ready in the field likewise those of more honorable place, and by name
Traianus, late General of the horsemen. And for as much as by careful espiall
intelligence was given, That the enemies intended with strong guards to stop
the passages, by which necessary provision of victuals was conveyed; to meet
with this project and design of theirs in some competent manner, there were
sent betimes archers on foot and a troop of horsemen to keep the
opportunities of the straits, which were hard by. And when for three days next
ensuing the Barbarians marched gently, and for fear of a sallie keeping the
by-waies fifteen miles from the city, held on their journey to the station
called Nice, by reason that the fore-riders and discoverers (upon what error I
wot not) affirmed, That all the said parcel of the maine multitude which they
had seen were not past ten thousand, the Emperor in a certain gare and
violent heat made have to encounter them. And therefore marching in a four
square battle, he came to the very suburbs of Hadrianopolis: where having
encamped himself within a rampire, fenced with a pallisado and a ditch,
waiting impatiently for the coming of Gratianus, he received Richomeres the
lieutenant and captain of the Domestici, sent before from the Emperor with
letters importing thus much, That himself also would soon after be there.
According to the tenor and contents of which letters, being requested to
attend a little while for his coming, who should be partaker with him of al
perils, and not rashly to commit himself alone to the doubtful hazard of
darts, he called to counsel diverse great officers of the field, and consulted
what was needful to be done. And when some, moved and set on by Sebastian,
were very instant forthwith to give battle, the General of the horsemen
named Victor, a warrior, but yet a wary delayer of time for a vantage, gave
his opinion (and many more were of the same mind) That he should expect his
fellow Emperor, to the end that by augmenting his power with the forces out of
Gaul, the swelling pride of the Barbarians, now in the flaming heat, might
more easily be suppressed. Yet for all this the mischievous resolution of the
prince, together with the opinion of the courtiers, altogether set upon
flattery, who advised him to make all speed and have possible, for fear that
Gratian should have part of that victory, which (as they thought) was in
manner won already to his hand, took place and prevailed. Now, whiles
preparation was made of all things necessary for to strike a battle, a
Christian Elder or Presbyter (as themselves term him) sent in embassage with
other mean persons from Fritigernus, came unto the Emperors camp: and being
mildly received, in the end presented the said Fritigernus his letters,
requesting in plain terms, That unto him and his people (whom the violent
rodes of savage nations had driven as banished folk out of their native
habitations) there might be granted Thracia and no more to be inhabited,
together with all the cattle and corn, promising (if he might obtain so
much) perpetual peace and concord. Moreover, the said Christian, as being
privy unto his secrets, and a trusty counselor, tendered unto him other
private missives of credence from the same king, who, in craft and sundry
wily casts being exceeding politic, informed Valens, as one shortly to be a
friend and confederate, That otherwise it was not in his power to assuage the
cruel mood of his countrymen, or to draw them to any conditions for the good
of the Roman State, unless he otherwhiles would show unto them near at hand
his host in arms, and so by the dread of his imperial name reclaim them
from their pernicious desire to fight. And thus verily the ambassadors nothing
at all regarded, in doubtful terms what would be the issue of their
embassage, departed.

CHAP. XIII. Fritigernus the principal leader of the Goths, requires to have
host ages given on both sides, that with more safety there might be a treaty
of peace, but by the unreasonable and hurtful endeavor of some Romans they
betake themselves again to arms.
But betimes in the morning, on that day which in the yearly Calendar
appears to be the fifth of the 9. of August.
Ides of Augustus, the banners in great have were advaunced, and the carriages
with all bag and baggage bestowed near unto the walls of Hadrianopolis,
together with a sufficient defense of the legions. For all the treasure and
other princely ensigns and imperial ornaments, together with the or Profectus.
Prefect and the Counselors of State, or Courtiers.
Consistorians, were enclosed within the compass of the walls. At the length
therefore, upon the eight day after, the enemies carts and carriages having
dispatched a great way of rough and stony ground, what time as it drew on
apace to the parching heat of noone, were discovered, which by the relation
that he had of the discoverers, were couched and set in order round in form of
a circle. And while the barbarous people, as their manner is, kept an hideous,
cruel, and fearful howling, the Roman captains marshalled their soldiers
in order of battle: and when the right wing of the horsemen was placed
before, the greatest part of the footmen lay behind, and beset the ways. But
the left wing of the horsemen (considering a great number of them were yet
disparkled asunder) being with much difficulty brought together, marched a
main pace. And whiles the same wing was in displaying and stretching out, there
being none as yet to trouble the same, behold the Barbarians were terrified
with the horrible noise that the armor counterfeited, and the clattering which
in threatening wise the shields made; and for that part of them abiding far
off with Alatheus and Safrages, being sent for, were not yet come, they
dispatched ambassadors, to covenant and conclude peace. Whiles the Emperor
contemned the baseness and mean condition of these ambassadors, requiring,
That the better sort of them, as sufficient persons, should be sent to ratify
and confirm, what articles were to be agreed upon; they in the mean while of
purpose held off and trifled out the time, to the end, that during these
fraudulent cessations of arms their horsemen might return, who they hoped
would shortly become; and that our soldiers, enchafed with the heat of Summer,
with dry chawes might become faint and heartlesse; considering that the fields
all over, as wide and large as they were, shone again with fire, which the same
enemies set a burning with wood and other dry fuel put under for that very
purpose. And here was not all: for beside this, there fell out another
mischief also, namely, that both men and beasts were grievously distressed for
hunger. In this mean time, to help the matter well, Fritigernus, as one who
wisely could guess and cast what might be, and fearing the doubtful fortune
of war, sent upon his own head one of the common sort, as an herault, to
treat of peace, craving, That certain of the nobility and elect persons should
forthwith be sent unto him as hostages; being himself resolved without all
fear to abide the violence of the soldiers and the necessary consequents
thereof. This project and motion of so dread a prince and commander being
commended and approved, Equitius a Tribune, who then had the charge committed
unto him of the palace, and a kinsman of Valens, with the assent of every man
is appointed with all speed to go as a pledge. But when he denied to go,
because being once taken prisoner by the enemies, he had broken from them and
made an escape out of Dibaltum, in regard whereof he feared their unreasonable
passions, Richomeres of his own accord offered to go: who willingly had
promised as much, thinking this also to be a brave act and beseeming a valiant
man: and forward he went, minding to show good tokens of his dignity and noble
parentage. Now, as he was going toward the enemies fort, the archers and
targuetiers, whom one Baturius an Iberian then had in charge, together with
Cassio, in a violent heat adventured to engage themselves forward too far,
and being now to join skirmish with their adversaries, as they brake out over
soon before their time, so by their cowardly reculing dishonored the beginning
of the battle. And thus by this impeachment, occasioned by an unseasonable
attempt, both the cheerful and forward service of Richomeres was abated,
considering he was not permitted to go: and the Goths horsemen by this time
returned with Alatheus and Safrages, together with the power of the Alemans,
intermingled among them; who being sent out like a lightening or thunderbolt
shot from the high mountains, whomsoever they could with swift rodes meet
with, quickly discomfited and slew.

CHAP. XIIII. The armies of the Goths and Romans embattailed, and their most
sharp conflict: At length the Romans are put to flight. As touching the death
of Valens a twofold opinion: while some think he was killed with an arrow, and
never after seen: others, that he was consumed with fire.
NOw, when as on every side they fell to shake both armor and weapons, and
Bellona blew the doleful and lamentable blast of trumpets, our men, who began
to give ground at the crying out of many unto them, made head and resisted. And
verily the fight in manner of flashing flames affrighted even the stout hearts
of our soldiers, when they wistly beheld some thrust through with the whirling
shot of darts and arrows. And then the armies buckling and dashing one against
another, like unto ships pointed in the beakhead with pikes of brass, and
thrusting one at another by turns, were with reciprocal and alternative
motions as waves of the sea driven to and fro. And because the best wing of the
Romans horsemen was come as far as to the very wagons, ready to advance
farther if any had seconded and succored them, being forsaken of all the
Cavallerie beside (the enemies in such numbers pressed upon them) like as if
some great rampire or fortification had fallen, was borne down and disrayed.
The footmen then, wanting defense on their flanks, stood in plumps with their
companies so thrust and thronged together, that as if they had been clunged,
not one of them could either draw his sword or bring back his hand. And by
this time such a dust was raised, that no man was able to see the sky before
him, resounding as it did with horrible cries and shouts: which was the reason,
that the castingweapons discharged every way missed not, but where ever they
fell gave a deadly stroke, and did mischief, because their venues could
neither be foreseen nor avoided. But when as the Barbarians rushing on still
with huge multitudes, overthrew horse and man together, and considering the
ranks [of our men] stood so close together, that there could in no place be
room made for to retire, and the enemies likewise were so thick thrust
together, that there was no means to make way through them and escape: then
our soldiers also setting light by the utmost extremity of death, took
again their swords, and with full butt running upon them hewed them in pieces,
and withal such maine blows were dealt to and fro with axes, that both
head-peeces and habergeons were slat and dashed a pieces. There might a man
have seen the stout stomacked Barbarian, when his teeth gnashed and were set
in his head, for all his hamme-strings were cut, or his right hand smitten off
with a sword, or his side thrust through, even when he was ready to give his
last gasp, yet in menacing wise to look round about him with a stern and
terryble eye. Thus, by reason that the bodies on both sides as they fought pell
mell, were laid along on the ground, the fields were covered all over with the
slain, and with great horror were heard the grievous groans of men either
dying or else shot into the body with deep wounds. In this so great and so
confused a tumult, were the footmen with toil and dangers clean spent: but
afterward when their strength failed, and their wits would not serve to devise
some counsel, now that most of their javelins with continual thrusting and
knocking together, were broken asunder, contenting themselves with drawn
swords, they engaged themselves into the thickest troops of the enemies, as
men unmindfull any more of saving themselves, and seeing how all about them
there was no means left of escape and refuge; and because the ground standing
all over with lakes of blood, was so slipperie under-foot, that it overturned
them as they went, they endeavored all they could to sell their lives dear,
and not to dye unrevenged, with so great courage and stoutnesse opposing
themselves against those which preased hard upon them, that some of them dyed
even upon their own weapons: when as now at length all was over-spred with a
confused show of nothing but black blood, and what way soever one turned his
eyes, there lay heaps of men slain, then without any spare at all they
trampled over the dead carcasses. And withal, the heat of the Sun mounted a
great height, as having passed through Leo, and now in his course to the house
of the celestial sign Virgo, overcame the Romans: who besides that they were
more weakened with hunger, and undone for very thirst, had their heavy armor
also, to weigh them down. To conclude, the Barbarians charged them still with
so maine force, that our battailons being discomfited in great disorder, took
them to their heels (the only help they had in this desperate extremity) and
fled every man what way he could. Now, whiles they all thus dispersed in blind
lanes make shift to be gone, the Emperor beset, as one would say, round about
with horrible and fearful sights, by little and little mounting over the heaps
of dead bodies, betook himself to the f Lancearij and g Mattiarij; who all
this while that the violent numbers of the enemies were abidden, had stood
their ground still, with their bodies sound and unshaken. Whom when Traianus
saw, he cries out, That all hope was for ever past and gone, unless the
Emperor, thus forsaken of his own guard and Squires, might at length be
protected by the aid of strangers: Which when a captain named Victor heard,
hastening with all speed to assemble the h Batavi, who were bestowed not far
off, to succor and help at a pinch, for the defense and guard of the
Emperors person; when he could meet with none of them, he retired back and
departed. In like manner Richomeres and Saturninus made shift for themselves,
and escaped out of the danger. The Barbarians therefore in a furious rage,
which sparkled even out of their very eyes, followed hard in chase upon our
men, who now for very heat of their veins were ready to melt and faint
again. Some of them fell and knew not who smoat them, others again were
overwhelmed with the prease only of such as coursed them: and there were who
dyed upon their own fellows hands: For neither was there lightly any yielding
to those that strove again, nor any one spared those that yielded. Over and
besides all this, many lying half dead, not able to endure the smart and
torment of their wounds, stopped up the very ways; with whom also the corpse
slain and hudled on heaps together, filled the fields with carcasses. Well, of
these losses, that never amends can be made for, and which cost the Romans so
dear, the night without all moone-light made an end of: And when it began once
to be dark, the Emperor among the common soldiers, as it is probably to be
thought (for no man ever directly said, that he saw the thing or was by)
mortally wounded with an arrow, fell with it, and presently thereupon yielded
his vital breath, and departed: neither was he ever after found. For by
occasion that some few of the enemies took up their lodgings there about, for
love that they would spoil the dead, none either of our men that were put to
flight, or of the inhabitants hard by, durst go unto the place. The like
woeful case befell, as we have heard say, unto Decius Caesar, who manfully
fighting with the Barbarians, chanced to fall from his horse, whom being full
of spirit and courage, he could not hold in; and so being flung by him into a
bog or moore, could neither rise again, nor be ever found. Others say, that
Valens yielded up his ghost not presently, but with some few of his gallants
and guelded Eunuchs was brought back to a country cottage hard by, made
workmanly and strong, with two or lo^ts.
stories, where whiles he was dressed by unskilful hands, the enemies beset
him, not knowing who he was, and delivered him from the shame and dishonor of
captivity: For, when they that followed in chase, who went about to break
open the doors surely bolted, were evidently from the high built house
assailed with arrows, least by cumbersome delays they should loose their
opportunity of harrying and making spoil, they gathered together bundels of
stubble and faggots of wood, which they kindled with fire put under them, and
so burnt the house with all that were in it: From whence one of the foresaid
gallants, or followers of his, having gotten out at a window, and being taken
prisoner by the Barbarians, bewrayed and revealed the deed, and put them to
much grief and sorrow of mind, for that they were disappointed of great glory
and honor, in that they took not the Sovereign Ruler of the Roman Empire
alive. And even this young gentleman, when he was afterward returned unto our
companies, made relation unto them of this accident in manner and form
abovesaid. Such was the unfortunat hap of one of the k Scipioes, whom after he
had recovered Spain, we find to have been by the enemy consumed to ashes in
a tower which they set on fire and burnt, whereunto he was fled: And yet this
is for certain known, that neither Scipio nor Valens had the fortune to be
buried, which is the last honorable duty conferred after death. In this
manifold calamity and loss of brave men, the death of Traianus and Sebastian
was remarkable, with whom there lost their lives five and twenty Tribunes all
Vacantes, and having charge of regiments under them, together with Valerianus
and Equitius, the one great Master of the stable, the other Grand Seneschall of
the Palace. Among these, Potentius also Tribune of the Promoti was slain in
the very prime and flower of his youth; a knight of every good man beloved
and commended, as well in regard of the approved virtues of his father
Vrsicinas sometime General of the horsemen, as of his own good parts. And
most true it is, that hardly the third part of the army escaped. Neither read
we in our Annals and Chronicles, of any battle so fought out to the outrace,
unless it were the field at m Cann: albeit the Romans otherwhiles at the
turning back of fortunes wheel, being overtaken with deceitful sleights and
stratagemes, gave way for the time to disadvantageous battles: and the
Fabulous sonets of the Greeks so highly commended, have in lamentable manner
bewailed many conflicts......

CHAP. XV. The virtues and vices of Valens. The end of his life, and the place
where he perished fore-signified by the Oracle.
THis was the end of Valens, when he grew fast upon fifty years of his age,
having reigned Emperor fourtene years, or somewhat under: whose good parts
and vices, so far as we know, we will put down. A fast friend he was, and a
faithful or sharp punisher and revenger of all ambitious courses. A severe
reformer as well of military as civil discipline: Passing vigilant at all
times and careful, that no man under the pretense and color of kindred with
him should bear himself over high: A right just protector and defender of the
Provinces; every one of them he preserved no less than his own house from
hurt and damage: mitigating, with a singular regard and affection their heavy
tributes, and admitting no augmentation of tolls and imposts. In calling for
the debts and arrerages of the rest, nothing hasty and importunat: A sore
enemy and a bitter to thieves, and Judges detected for robbing the common
treasure. Neither can the East Empire remember, that they were in such
businesses better dealt with under any Emperor beside him. Over and above all
these parts, he carried with him a liberal mind, yet with moderation. Whereof
albeit there are many examples, yet it shall suffice to set down but one. If
any person, as diverse there be in Princes Courts, greedy of other men's goods,
had begged, as the usual manner is, a thing fallen in escheat, or ought else,
he would with great respect of justice and reservation of liberty for him that
could gainesay the suit, pass a grant unto him that had made the petition:
but joining diverse times three or four others that were absent to share with
him in those things by him obtained: to the end, that such busy and restless
suitors, seeing the gains where at they gaped, by this devise to prove so
much the less, might deal more sparily in this kind. As touching edifices,
which in sundry cities and towns he either repaired or built from the very
first foundation, for brevitie sake I say nothing, giving leave unto greater
persons themselves, to show that more at large. Well, these were virtues I
suppose, that all good men are to follow. Now let us as briefly run over his
vices. Most covetous he was and greedily set to gather great wealth: Impatient
of all travel and pains taking, and rather affecting exceeding great
hardness: given over much to cruelty: of nature somewhat rude and rusticall,
furnished neither with martial arts, nor liberal studies: Willingly hunting
after gains and commodities, though it were with the grievous groans of
others. And then was he most intolerable, when drawing such trespasses as
happened, either to a contempt of the Princes dignity, or to high treason, he
cruelly fought the blood and undoing of rich persons. Neither was this in him
tolerable, that whereas he would seem to commit the examination and inquiry
of all causes unto the laws, yea and give order that such businesses and
controversies should be tried and decided by certain Commissioners appointed,
as especial and chosen Judges, yet he suffered nothing to pass contrary to
his own will and pleasure. Otherwise also a doer of wrong he was and
wrathful, lying very open to entertain all promoters and accusers without
respect of truth or falsitie: a foul fault, and which even in these pivat and
daily dealings between man and man, is exceeding greatly to be feared. In one
word, an idle loyterer, and a slow-backe. For colout and complexion black: The
apple or sight of the one eye quite closed up, yet so, as a far off the
blemish appeared not. For feature of body, his limbs well made and trust
together, his stature neither over tall, nor yet too low: bow legged, and
carrying a good graund paunch before him. Thus much may serve the turn to have
spoken of Valens: and that all this is true, I report me to the full testimony
of the time wherein both he and I lived together. Moreover, this also would not
be passed over in silence, That whereas in the Oracle delivered from ^
three-footed table that Hilarious and Patricius, as I have showed, practiced
with, he found those three Prophetical verses, of which the last goes thus:

(...): That is, In Mimas fields, where their heads burnt shall be:

At the first as he was altogether unpolished and rude, he contemned the same;
but in the process of those most lamentable accidents that befell unto him, so
fearful he was, that upon the very calling to remembrance of the said Oracle,
he quaked and trembled at the name of Asia: where, over a town called
Erythraeum, he heard say, by the relation of learned men, that both Homer and
Tully wrote, there stood a mountain named Cabo Stillari, Nigr.
Mimas. But at the last, after he was dead, and the enemies departed out of the
country, near unto the very place wherein it is thought he caught his deadly
wound, there was found, by report, a tomb or monument of stone raised above
the ground: upon which one stone there was fast laid, which in Greek letters
engraven, showed, that one Mimas a noble man in old time was there enterred.
Well, after this mortal field fought, when as now the dark night had
over-spred the earth, of those that remained alive, some took the right hand,
others the left, and every one as fear carried him any way, went seeking for
his next fellows and friends: when as indeed never a one of them could see any
but themselves alone, supposing the enemies sword was hard at their heads
behind them: Yet, hear they might, though it were a great way off, the piteous
cries of those that were left behind, the doleful gaspes and yexes of such as
lay a dying, and the dolourous plaints and weeping of as many as lay wounded.

CHAP. XVI. The Goths after this victory besiege Hadrianopolis, but take the
repulse, and many of them in the assault were slain.
NOw, no sooner began it to be day light, but the Conquerours like savage
beasts, more fell and enraged with the taste of blood that fleshed them and
whetted their stomachs, moved with the alluring inducements of vain hope,
marched with their troops strongly embattailed toward Hadrianopolis, with a
full purpose to race and destroy it, though it were with much hazard and
danger: as having intelligence given them by traitorous fugitives, That the
greatest personages and officers of highest place, the regal ensigns also
belonging to the imperial dignity, together with all the treasure of Valens,
were there bestowed as in a strong place of defense. And least ^y long delays
and respite between, their heat should cool, at the ten of the clock.
fourth hour of the day, after they had encircled the walls, there began a
most cruel fight, whiles the assaylants of an inbred stoutnesse hastened
headlong to present peril, and the defendants on the other side were not
behind to show their vigor with might and maine: and for that a great number
of our soldiers and campe-drudges, together with their horses, not suffered to
enter, standing close unto the walls, and the dwelling houses joining thick,
fought valiantly (as they might for the low ground,) and their rage that
preassed upon them, gat the upper hand unto the three of the clock after noone.
ninth hour of the day, suddenly three hundred of our footmen, who stood
hard unto the very parapet of the walls, casting themselves into a thick
squadron, revolted unto the Barbarians, whom they greedily caught within their
clutches, and presently (upon what policy I know not) put them all to the
sword. But from that time forward observed it was, That not one of them (in
what danger and desperate estate soever they stood) ever so much as thought to
do the like again. In these so many calamities coming thus hotly and so
hudled upon the besieged, all on a sudden, with mighty crackes of thunder,
there poured out of black clouds such violent showers of rain, that they
scattered the companies of this raging multitude: and after they were returned
to their or camp.
hold, set out and cast into a round form of their carts and waines, breathing
out still more and more their cruel minds and stomachs, they fell to command
and summon our men by minatorie letters, and an ambassador sent unto them,
upon security received to have his life saved. But when as he durst not enter
in who was sent, by a certain Christian the letters were carried and read,
which being thoroughly (as he said) skanned upon, the rest of that day and the
whole night following, was spent in preparing of fortifications: For
within-forth the gates were immured and dammed up with mighty huge flints, the
weak and undefensible parts of the wall strengthened, and for the discharging
from all sides of casting weapons, darts, and stones, were engines planted in
meet and convenient places, yea and there was conveyed near at hand sufficient
store of water. For, the day before some of them that fought, for very thirst
were endaungered as much as their lives were worth. Contrariwise the Goths
casting with themselves how difficile and dangerous were the events of war,
and driven into their dumpes to see that the valianter sort of them were slain
and hurt, and how by peecemeale still their forces were decayed, devised a wily
and crafty stratageme, which the goddess Justice her self bewailed and
divulged abroad. For, certain Gallants of our side, who the day before had
revolted unto them they enticed, that under a color of running away, as if
they meant to return home to their own country, they should endeavor to be
received within the walls; and being entered in, closely set on fire some one
part of the city: to the end, that by a signal hereof secretly erected,
whiles the whole multitude of the besieged were busily occupied about quenching
the fire, the enemies might break violently into the city void of defendants
upon the walls. These gallant youths abovesaid went forward, as it was
appointed, and when they were come under the ditches, stretching forth their
hands they prayed and besought, That themselves being Romans might be let in.
And thus received (because there was no suspicion to the contrary) upon
interrogatories, as touching the designs and purposes of the enemies, they
varied and disagreed in their tales. Whereupon it came to pass, that after
they had been by bloody torture farther examined upon the point, and
confessed plainly, what they came for, they had their heads chopped off for
their labor. Now, when all warlike engines and fabrickes were in readiness,
toward the third midnight.
watch, the Barbarians forgetting quite all fear of wounds past, with many
ranks one seconding another, conflowed like so many billows and waves of the
sea, to the gates of the city, which were made fast against them, and that
with much greater resolution of their mighty men and rulers among them: but
together with the armed soldiers, both the Provincial and the Palatine bands
rose up and bestirred themselves very quick to overthrow and bear them down:
And such were their darts and casting-weapons, that being once discharged,
though at a very venture, yet among so great a multitude they could not light
without doing some harm. And then our men perceived, that the barbarous
enemies made use of the same weapons and darts which were flung or shot at
them: And therefore commandment was given, That the arrows, by guelding or
cutting the strings and sinews which knit the iron heads and the wooden
steiles together, before they were flung, they then should be shot out of the
bows; which all the whiles they flew in the air, kept still their strength
sound; yea, and if they stuck in the bodies, lost not their efficacy; or
verily if they fell to the ground, streightwaies knapped asunder and fell in
pieces. In this fervent heat of skirmishing one unexpected accident there was,
of great moment and importance. A Scorpion, which is a kind of Instrument or
Engine, that the common people term Onager, planted just over against a
thick battaillon of the enemies, discharged from it a mighty stone. Which
although it took no effect, but violently grazed upon the ground, yet upon the
sight thereof, the enemies were so daunted and amazed with fear, that
wondering as astonished men at this so new and strange a sight, they reculed out
of the way, and made an offer to be gone: But upon the fresh sound of the
trumpets, as the chief Officers and Captains gave order, the assault was
renewed again: And in like manner, the Romans for their part got the better
hand, as having flung, in manner, no other weapon, or shot, were it but out of
the slings-loupe, in vain. For the rest of the enemies behind, who followed
hard after the companies of those their Leaders that were inflamed with a
greedy desire, to have the rifling of that wealth which had been gotten
together by the bad endeavors and studies night and day of Valens, vaunted and
gave it out with open mouth, That they had endured as many dangers as their
betters and superiors. And thus some of them half dead, as being squashed with
huge weighty stones, or shot into the breast with darts and arrows, lay
tumbling upon the ground: others carrying ladders, and going about on every
side to skale and climb up the walls in an infinite number of places, were
under their very burdens overwhelmed with stones, fragments of pillars, and
with or Rollers.
n Cylinders, borne down the steep descent. Neither was there any one of
these furious enemies, whom the sight of so horrible carnage and bloodshed
could (until it was very late in the evening) turn away from their courageous
mind, to fight manfully, and do some noble service. Which courage of theirs
was so much the more quickened, for that seeing a far off a number also of
the defendants, with sundry sorts of shot overthrown and fallen down dead,
they joyed thereat. Thus without any rest or stint, fighting there was right
courageously both for and against the walls: And because now they fought not in
any order, but skirmished by starts and several companies, as they could
sallie one upon another (which was a sign they grew to the utmost point of
despair) at the shutting in of the evening they all withdrew themselves, and
returned to their tents evil appayed and heavy, blaming one another for their
inconsiderate folly, in that (as Fritigernus gave them counsel before) they
had not in all places declined the toils and sorrows that use to follow
sieges.

CHAP. XVII. Having left Hadrianopolis, they gave the attempt of Perinthus and
Constantinople: but by sundry calamities daunted, they invade the Northern
Provinces. They that seized upon Thracia, by the means of Julius, Colonel of
the Footmen, in one and the self same day, as if a signal haa been given,
were all murdered: and so the Provinces of the East are delivered from dangers.
AFter this, all the night, which was not long, as being in the midst of
Summer, they betook themselves to the care of their wounds, and to use the
means both to dress and heal them, after the manner of their own nation:
and upon the return of day light they fell to consultation, and were divided
into sundry opinions, doubting which way to take their journey. After much
debating and dispute pro and contra, they determine to take in Perinthus, and
from thence to seize all places stored with riches: as knowing which they were
by the relation of fugitives (who told them all the secrets, not of cities
only, but of every house also.) Following therefore this resolution, forward
they went (for none there was to withstand them) making havocke still, by
robbing spoiling, and fiering all the way. But after their departure, those
that were besieged within Hadrianopolis, when discoverers of approoved truth
and fidelity had reported unto them, That all the quarters next adjoining were
cleared from the enemy, went forth at midnight, avoiding the common high
ways, ran over the woods and wields beyond Philippopolis, and from thence to
Serdica, another city of Macedonia, together with all the goods which they had
yet whole and untouched, making all the speed and have they could devise to
find out Valens (forsooth) as if he had been in those countries, not knowing
one whit, that he was slain in the very tempestuous storms of the battle,
or at leastwise fled to a country cottage, where he was thought to have been
burnt to death and consumed. But the Goths intermingled with the Hunnes and
Alanes, nations exceeding warlike and valiant, yea, and hardened in many
adventurous and dangerous services, whom Fritigernus in his wit and policy had
by wonderful allurements of rewards associated unto himself, having encamped
hard by Perinthus, durst not in remembrance of their former foyles and
calamities either come unto or assault the city it self, but forrayed the
fertile fields and territories about it, that reached far and wide, even to
extreme penury killing or taking prisoners the inhabitants therein. From
whence they made great have, marching for fear of waitlaying and ambushments
in four square battailons to Constantinople, gaping after the exceeding wealth
and riches there, minding to make many attempts for to force and destroy the
said city: whom thus unmeasurably advauncing themselves, and at the point
almost to do violence upon the port-cluses of the gates, the heavenly power of
God repulsed by such an accident as this. A regiment of the Saracenes (as
touching whose original and manners I have in diverse places related much) a
people meet rather for the service of quick expeditions, than for any
encounter and conflict in battle, being newly sent for thither, no sooner
espied the troop of Barbarians, but with a mind to join battle, all on a
sudden boldly issued forth of the city, and after a stiff bickering
between them, maintained a long time, both parts left the field on even hand.
Howbeit, by a certain strange event, and never seen before, the foresaid
regiment of Easterlings got the upper hand. For out of it a certain
shag-haired fellow, naked in all parts save the groine and privy parts, making
a rustie, hoarse, and doleful noise, drawing out his skeine or short
cuttleaxe, thrust himself into the midst of the Goths: and after he had
slain an enemy, by cutting his throat, set it lips close unto the wound, and
sucked out the blood that gushed forth. At which monstrous and wonderful sight
the Barbarians affrighted, marched afterward not in any outrageous and proud
sort, when they went about any exploit, but paced their ground in wary and
doubtful manner. And so in process of time, when their boldness was well
abated and taken down, considering well the compass of the walls, which by
reason of huge and spacious or houses standing by themselves.
Islands lay out in length, beholding also the beautiful fortifications of the
city, how inaccessible they were, and withal, the infinite number of the
inhabitants, yea, and hard by it a Frith or narrow cut of the sea, which
divides Pontus from Aegeum: after the worke-houses of warlike engines were
cast down which they prepared, and more deadly blows taken than given,
departed thence in dissolute manner as fast as they could by the Northern
provinces, which they overran licentiously at their pleasure, even as far as
to the foot of the Julian Alps, which in old time they termed Venetian. In
these days remarkable above the rest was the profitable and expedite service
of Julius, colonel of the Footmen on the farther side of Taurus: for by the
direction and appointment of the Destinies he gave commandment, That all the
Goths entertained before time in Thracia, and now dispersed into many cities
and castles, by sending secret letters unto their generals and captains all
Romans (a thing at this time that seldom happens) should in one and the same
day, as if a banner had been erected for that purpose, be killed in a general
massacre, even when they feared no such thing, but in expectation of wages
promised unto them, were drawn forth into the villages near the city side:
By which prudent policy put in execution without any noise made thereof or
further delay, the East Provinces were delivered from great perils and dangers.

Thus have I, as a souldior sometime, and a Grecian borne, according to the
measure of my ability, drawn out an history, beginning at the reign of the
Emperor Nerva, and continuing it unto the death of Valens: A work professing
truth, and which I never wittingly (as Ithinke) durst corrupt either with
silence or leasing. Let other men, for age more sufficient, and for their
learning better known, write the rest: Whom, if it shall please them to enter
thereupon, I advise to frame their or penus.
tongues unto an higher style.

FINIS.
Annotations and Conjectures upon the 14. Book of Ammianus Marcellinus.
THe very entrance into this Book depending upon a former relation, bewrays
the loss and want of 13. books before, even from the beginning of Cocceius
Nerva his Empire unto the battle at or Murti^^^.
Mursa, in Constantius his reign, what time he had made Gallus his cousin
german Caesar with him, and defeated the forces of Magnentius, with loss also
of much blood on his own side: For in this battle were slain 54000 and
above. And whereas the army of Magnentius the Usurper consisted of 30000, and
that of Constantius, of 70000, there died in the field of Magnentius Pomton.
(...) Magnen^io.
his part 24000, and of Constantius, 30000. Howbeit Magnentius fled, and
afterward stabbed himself to death. Considering therefore this bloody
execution on both sides, no marvel it is, that our author says here, While
the hearts of both the sides were yet fainting and daunted, as being sore
crushed with such variety of toil some dangers.

(a) Comitem Orientis,] Lieutenant General in the East. Among many
significations of this word Comes (which I will distinctly show as they shall
occur) it imports here the Lieutenant, Deputy, or Pancirol. in Netitiam.
Vicarius, under the Praefectus Prae torio per Orientem. He is sometimes
termed Metapina ^.
Praefectus, and V^^^e. in Aurelian^.
Praeses Orientis: also, by a more proper denomination Constantin.
Vicarius Orientis. His government under See the note upon Prafectus Pratorio,
at the letter (a)
Prefect. Praetor. Orientis, extended Z^ mas.
throughout the East (taking it restrictively and divided from Illyricum, which
also was within the East Empire in a larger signification) evenover 15
Provinces and their Rulers; whether they were Consulares, i. governed by
Consulares, as Palaestina, Phoenicia, Syria, etc. or Praesidales, ruled by
Praesides, as Phoenicia Libani, Euphratensis, Mesopotamia, etc. or under
Iudices, who were See the note upon Prafectus Pr^torio.
Perfectissimi, as Arabia and Isauria. He was in the second rank of dignities,
not Illustris vir, but Spectabilis. As touching the Ensigns belonging to his
place, the ornaments of his investure, his officers and train about him, and
other particulars, to his jurisdiction and government appertaining, I refer
the reader to Notitia Imperij Orientalis, and the Commentary thereupon by
Guidus Pancirolus.

(b) Amphiaraus] was a renowned Prophet or Wisard among the Greeks, like as
Martius among the Romans. Amphiaraus, son of Oecleus, and husband to
Eriphyle, whom when Adrastus Ovid. de Ponto. Plutarch. Par^^el. Statius, lib.
i. (...).
king of the Argives would have had with him to make war against the
Thebanes, he knowing by his skill, That if he went he should never return, hid
himself for a time: but being discovered by his wife, and that for a rich ouch
or jewel of gold, and so forced to that journey, the very first day of his
coming to Thebes was swallowed up of the earth. As for Martius [Rutilius] he
prophesied of the famous battle at Cannae. See T. Livius. lib. 5. 3. Decad.

(c) So cruel was this Maximinus the father, that he was termed by some
Cyclops and Busyris, by others, Scyron, Phalaris, etc. Having murdered
Alexander Se^crus his liege prince, he usurped the Empire. He was above eight
foot high: he wore his wives bracelet upon his thumb for a ring. Of his
strength and cruelty answerable to his bigness, read morein Iul. Capitolinus.

(d) Praefectus Praetorio.] At the first a martial officer, and captain of the
guard, resembling Tribunus Celerum under Romulus, or Magister Equitum under the
Dictator: but afterward he grew so great in authority, as that he was next
unto the Emperor, and managed under him the whole state. Augustus instituted
two of them, that the one might impeach the other, if either of them went about
any alteration. Seianus under Tiberius being sole Praefectus Praetorio, became
so mighty, that he was by him suspected and put to death. Commodus following
his pleasures, committed the regiment of all unto his Prfect Perennius, even in
civil affairs. But Constantine the Great, when he altered the whole
government in manner of the Empire under him, purposing to clip the wings of
this so great an Officer, ordained four of them, two in the East, and two in
the West Empire. In the East, the one was called Prefect. Praetor. Orientis;
the other, Illyrici: in the West, the one went under the name of Prefect.
Praetor. Italiae and Africae; the other, Galliaru^, Hispaniarum, and
Britanniae: allowing them to be (as one would say) LL chief Justices in civil
jurisdiction, and abridging them of their authority in martial matters, which
he put into the hands Zosimus. lib. 2.
of Magistrimilitum, i. Generals over the Forces. Howbeit, as Cassiodorus
writes, their authority was very large, and their command reached even to
martial men also. Praefectus Praetorio was styled Illustris, which we find to
be the highest title of dignity under the Emperor: and in the rank of
Illustres he had the chief place; as under who^ were other governors of
provinces, as Comites, Consulares, Duces, Praesides, Praefecti, Rectores, or
Correctores etc. The manner of his creation and investure, with the port he
carried, see in Dion. and Herodian. Pancirolus knows notwell, what magistrate
in these days he should resemble, unless it be the two Belerbees under the
Turk; the one governor of Romania, the other of Anatolia. What if I compare him
to the L. deputy or Justice of Ireland, who, as we read, not only sits in
court judicially, but comes armed also into the field?

(e) Sciron] a notable Brigand or Robber, who kept certain rocks near to
Attica and Megara, and the narrow pass between, killing and spoiling the
passengers that way: whereupon those rocks were called Scironides p^trae, or
Scironia saxa. Strab. lib. 9.

(f) Comes Castritius.] Among other significations of Comes, it betokens here
a Captain, Lieutenant, or Colonel over certain Legions: the same that
Legatus Consulis in former times. Ioh. Rosinus de Romans Antiquitatibus.

(g) Magister Equitum.] Of those Magistrimilitum or Generals of the Forces,
whom Constantine the Great instituted, when he abridged Praefectos Praetorio of
their military command, he ordained, That the one of them should be General
of the horsemen, the other of the footme^: so called, for that their forces
consisted especially of horse or foot, according to their title. These had the
same power and jurisdiction in a manner over the soldiers even in civil and
criminal causes, that the Praefecti Praetorio had over the provincial
subjects, Hie^onym. in 23. ^z^chtel.
the very next immediately under the prince. In the East there grew to be five
in number of these Magistrimilitum, under Theodosius Magnus, but in the West
Empire they continued still to betwaine. Zosim. lib. ^.

(h) Ad Nili Cataractas.] Certain rocks bearing up within the channel of the
river Nylus, where between two hills he has a strait passage, down which his
stream seems to rush rather than to run; whereupon they have that name. Much
like (si magna licet componere parvis) to the Salmon leap within the river
Guil. Camdenus in ^^mitatu P^mbroch.
Tivy in Pembrochshire, to which when the Salmons come up, against the stream
(seeking for some quiet mere to shoot their spawn) they take tail in mouth,
and with a jerke spring up and mount aloft. Such falls of water there beat the
Salmon leapes within the Liffy by Dublin in Ireland; but more notable in the
Bann, a noble river of the same kingdom, in Vlster. Of either side toward the
land the stream runs even and admits easy passage, but in the midst it
has a mighty downfall; howbeit, expertwatermen with their barges adventure
to pass down the same, and exhibit sport to the beholders. The maine thereof
somewhat Strab. lib. 17.
resembles the shooting of London bridge at an ebb or low water.

(i) Blemmyes, or Blemmyae, Blemiae also and Blenae, or Bleptae.] All these
names seem to come of (...), to see: And yet Stephanus says, they were so
called of a captain named Blemes, who warred in those parts of Aethiopia: A
monstrous people without heads, having their eyes and mouth in their breast, if
we may believe Pliny, Pomponius Mela, and Solinus.

(k) Circenses Ludi] as one would say Circu-enses: For at first, before the
large lists and great Shew-places called Cirques were built, the plot of ground
wherein were performed these horserunning with chariots and other Masteries,
was flanked on the one side with the river Tiberis, on the other with swords.
Turneb. Advers. lib. 3. cap. 5. The Emperors used to celebrate these
solemnities at certain times, according to the vows, for 10. 20. or 30
years. Here it appears to be at the 30 year of his Empire. And hence it is,
that in old marbles and elsewhere are found these inscriptions, Votis x. Votis
xx. or Votis xxx.

(l) Gerontiu^ Magne^tianae comite^ partis.] Take Comes here forsome Prefect
or captain, that had a charge of soldiors under Magne^tius the usurper: for
this se^ce also does [Comes] bear in our author.

(m) Among sundry acceptions of this word Elogium] I take it in this place to
be a testimonial or certificat in the praise of the party condemned for some
good parts or service performed that might merit pardon: or a gracious
revocation of sentence pronounced, sent as a pardon from the prince.

(n) Notarius.] This Paulus, whether he were Primicerius, or Primus Notarioru^,
i. the Protonotarie (who together with his x. Tribu^i Notar^^, so called, for
that they were in dignity equal to Tribunes, had the keeping of the book
termed Laterculum Mai^s, or Commentari^ Principi^, which contained the names
of all those that by the Emperor were preferred to dignities, together with
their ensigns or badges of their office, their stipends, patents, and charters
whereby they held their places, together with the princes Mandats and directions
etc. as appears in the Novell:) in which place he may be compared (as
Pancirolus says) with the great Chancellor of the state of Venice, and was
ranged into Viros Spectabiles: or were of a second order and rank, one of the
Domestici Notar^^, to wit, Secretary to the Emperor: or one of the inferior
Tribuni Notar^^, i. Scribes, was no doubt in high place, and might do very much
in court. These Notaries, Not of so great dignity as now with us, as appea^eth
in Vopiscus: and therefore I sometime ^earme him Chancellor.
Chancellors, Secretaries, or Scribes (so called, because they commonly wrote
with abbreviations by way of cyphring) were girt with a military girdle as
knights, attended the Emperor at home and abroad. Gratian. Cass^odor. Suidas,
Cod. Theodosii. The ensigns belonging unto him are these: a smaller book shut,
with these letters indorsed, F. L. I. N. T. ALL. CO. M. ORD. PR. that is,
Foelix liber iniunctus Notar^^s Tribunis, a Laterculo, co^tinens mandata or
dine Principis vel Primicer^^, i. primi Notarioru^, which he exhibiteth to the
Comites, Duces, and other magistrates: also, a bundle of books or rols wrapped
up round; and the Laterculu^ Mai^s, co^taining all the imperial dignities etc.
as is abovesaid; so called, for that it is in form a long square like a brick,
called in Latin Later. See Pancirol. upon Notitia.

(o) Comitatus Imperatoris] is the Emperors privy counsel, consisting of
Comites, i. counselors of state, acco^panying him wheresoever he was: and
therefore commonly put for his court.

(p) Eculei, or Equulei,] Not instruments of burning plates, like unto an
horse, in which men were tormented (forsooth) as in Phalaris his Bull, like as
some Grammatists have imagined: but according as Carol. Sigonius has collected
out of ancient records, Eculeus was a frame or piece of wood going with vices
or skrewes, to stretch or let loose accordingly. To this, the tormentors with
cords or strings called fidiculae fastened the arms and feet of the poor
examinate or condemned person to be tortured: then with the skrewes they
stretched him on the said instrument as upon a teintor, and withal hoisted it
on high, that the woeful wretch might seem to hang as on a cross: which done,
with wresting still they disjointed his bones, applied red hot plates unto his
body, and with iron hooks raked into his sides and furrowed them, thereby to
increase his pains. And whatsoever Sigonius has gathered out of Sozomenus,
Prudentius, Eusebius, Nonius Marcellus, Isidorus, Cyprianus, Cicero and Seneca,
may be all found here and there in this one author of ours, Marcellinus.
Devised it was first to put slaves and servants to torture, for fetching out of
the truth, but used afterward to torture Christians and others condemned to
death.

(q) To the Caesar's.] By Caesar's are to be understood in this place as well the
Emperors or Augusti, as their colleagues in the imperial government, called in
a more special signification Caesar's, and chose^ by the Augusti. I am not
ignorant, that both in Suetonius and also in Aelius Spartianus certain princes
sons were termed Caesar's, as the heirs apparent of the Augustall or imperial
dignity.

(r) Of M. Acilius Glabrio] his worthy acts and triumph read T. Livius in his
36 and 37 books.

(s) Pabl. Valerius Publicola, or Poplico^a] so called, either for that he so
loved and affected the people of Rome, or because the people so much favored
and honored him. Of his poverty see T. Livius, 1. Decad. lib. 1. and Valerius
Max.

(t) Of Attilius Regulus] a Consul of Rome, his brave exploits in the first
Punick war, his promise faithfully performed to his enemies, and his death by
cruel torture, read Epist. Flor^ upon the 17 and 18 books of T. Livius, and
Tul. Cicero, lib. 3. Offic. As touching his poverty and the kindness of the
Senate to his wife and children, see more in Valerius Max. lib. ^. cap. ^.

(u) What Scipio] this should be appears not in our author. Pliny in the
third chapter of the 21 book of Not. Hist. reports, That Scip^o, surnamed
Serapio, was deemed worthy the noble lineage of the Africani, and so highly
esteemed of the people, but withal so poor, that he was at the charges of the
city by way of a contribution interred, and his funerals honorably adorned
with garlands of flowers. But Lib. ^. (...)
Valerius Maximus reports this of Cn. Scipio in the second Punicke war. Her
dowry was ^0000 asses.

(x) Nomenclatores] so called anomen calando, i. of calling by name: a certain
beadle or such like officer in Rome, who knew by heart the name of every
citizen; used in their Courts of justice to call men to make appearance, to
instruct such as stood for any office, to speak unto the people with much
affability, as also to invite guests. Apuleius. He was so perfect also in men's
names, that if any withdrew themselves, and appeared not at the general
cessing in the Subsidy book, he could by name call them forth.

(y) These [Lotophagi] took name of the tree Lotus or Lotos (growing
originally and naturally in Afric, and termed by our countreyman John
Gerard, Nettle tree) of the fruit whereof they feed and live: which is so
sweet, that if any strangers there arrived happen to eat thereof, they become
forgetful of their native country. And therefore, when the companions of
Ulysses landed there, and had tasted of the berries or fruit of this tree, they
could hardly be wained from thence: whereof, as also of the kind inviting and
entertainment that this people gave unto Ulysses his company, see Homer,
Odyss. 9. Pliny also writes, That this tree has given name unto a land and
nation, nimis hospitali advenarum oblivione patriae, i. that gives so kind
entertainment unto strangers, that for the contentment they there find, they
quite forget their own country. Not. Hist. lib. 13. cap. 17.

(z) Elogium] in this passage I take to be a brief, writ, warrant, or precept,
by virtue whereof this execution was to be done: or else a bare commandment by
word of mouth, which our writer expresses elsewhere by the word Proloquium, in
the very same sense. It seems also, that with this precept or commandment
there went some pretended reason of such proceeding; which is sometime called
Titulus, as in Sueton. and Elogium, as in Ael. Spartian. in Sept. Severo: who
being Lieutenant.
Legatus Proconsulis in Afric, when one of his old acquaintance met with him
going in state with his Fasces and Lictors before, and embraced him familiarly,
without due respect of his high place, caused him to be scourged, sub elogio
[praeconis] LEGATVM P. R. homo plebeius temere amplecti noli, i. Take heed
another time how you, a commoner, seem rudely to embrace a Lieutenant of the
people of Rome.

(a) Scholis Palatinis.] These Scholae Palatinae were companies or societies of
soldiers and other ministers, attending upon the princes palace or house for
defense, and keeping state, whereof they took that name: and these guards or
societies be also called Scholares. Every of these Scholae has their Comites,
called also Scholarum capita: under them there were Primicerij, who also be
termed Tribuni Scholarum, all Spectabiles: and in a rank under them ten
Decemprimi; the foremost whereof is named Secundocerius of such a Schola, and
those Clarissimi: under these were raunged Ducenarij, who had the charge of 200
soldiers, Centenarij of an hundred etc. Of these Scholae there were in number
nine, Armenians all by the first institution, in each ^00, or somewhat fewer,
amounting in all to 3500, to wit, of the Scutarij ^. of the Gentiles 2.
Armaturarum 1. Domesticorum Equitium 1. Domesticorum peditum 1. Besides these,
were other two Palatinae Cohortes, but unarmed, to wit, Agentium in Rebus, and
Silentiariorum. Pancirol in Notitiam.

(b) Protectores] were the guard of the Emperor, whether he were Caesar or
Augustus: as Squiers of the body protecting his person wheresoever he went.
Antoninus Caracallus was by his own Protectores murdered. Ael. Spartian. in
Caracall. These were called Domestici Protectores, and served not as soldiers
in the wars, but were in the highest place of the Palatini, advaunced for
their good service: and (as S. Hierome writes) soldiers wish for their
highest preferment to be Protectores. There were of them as well horsemen as
footmen: and yet both Suidas and Zonaras affirm, That properly Domestici were
horsemen, and Protectores footmen. Chosen these were out of the Scholae
abovesaid, even the flower of the Armenians. And of this band was Ammianus
Marcellinus himself, as appears in the 15. book, where he was sent with
Vrsicinus.

(c) Scutarij] were of the Scholae Palatinae, so called of their goodly shields
ll gilded, as may appear by the verses of Corippus Africanus, lib. 3. in
laudem Iustini Minoris, and were armed at all pieces: and some of them, to wit,
Clibanarij or Cataphractarij, had their horses likewise armed. They may be
termed Targuetiers.

(d) Gentiles] were Idolaters of the Gentiles or Heathens, not subdued under
the Romans, but their allies and associats; who out of sundry nations served
the Emperor among his Palatine bands: whereof were two Scholae or companies,
Seniorum and Iuniorum.

(e) Ex comite Largitionum.] I am not ignorant, that this great Officer under
the Emperor, and placed in the rank of Viri Illustres, according to the
notation of his name, gave the Emperors largess and his bountiful gifts
where it pleased him, in regard whereof I might (as some will think) have
given him a more proper name than Lord Treasurer: but for that I read, he not
only distributed the said gifts, but paid salaries to diverse officers, and
wages to captains and soldiers; because also I find that it belongs to his
office, to exact tributes, tols, and imposts, etc. and to keep the money
arising thereof; seeing likewise, that in diverse constitutions, he is termed
Curator, and Praefectus Thesaurorum, Imperialium pecuniarum Quaestor (as
Nicephorus and Theodoretus name Foelix) and S. Hierom calls him Praefectum
Canonicarij tituli; finally, for that with us there is no such officer to
convey the K. bounty and liberality where his Majesty thinks good, unless
it be the Lord Treasurer, (for the name of Almner, I cannot see how it can
express the nature of this office) I thought it not amiss, aiming (as I do)
to write populariter, and to the understanding of the vulgar sort, to translate
Comitem sacrarum Largitionum, and Comitem Largitionum, Lord Treasurer: Neither
see I, who may better either pay or give all, than he that receives and
keeps all. Concerning the robes that he wears by his office, and the
ensigns belonging thereto, read Pancirol. in cap. 73. Notitia dignitatum
Orientis Imperij, which make somewhat for my assertion. And here by the way
(not to pass by Grammatical minutias, which study sometimes I professed, and
yet do love) I observe a peculiar phrase in Ammianus Marcellinus, which comes
very often in my reading: That whereas other writers when they would express
significantly him that has been Consul, Praetor, Censor, etc. call him
Consularis, Praetorius, Censorius, etc. he uses the abstract with the
Preposition ex: as, for example, ex Agente in Rebus, i. one late Agens in
Rebus: ex Campiductore, ex Comite privatarum, ex Magistro memoriae, etc. i. who
had been Campiductor, Comes privatarum, etc. And in my conceit, this phrase
more properly expresses the thing, than Consularis, etc. For we find them to
be termed Consulares, that never were Consuls, as I have noted elsewhere. The
same manner of speaking uses In Maximi^^.
Iul. Capitolin, when he writes, That after the death of the two Gordians, the
Senate created Maximus Pupienus ex Praefecto urbi, Emperor. So that ex implies
a thing past, and not in esse. For in this place Domitian had been Comes
Largitionum, and was now Praefectus, sc. Praetorio, as Pomp. Laetus plainly
shows, to wit, advanced from the former place, to the highest dignity of all
under the Emperor. Neither is the Preposition (ex) in this manner of phrase
compounded with the abstract or Substantive following, and the same always
ending in (e) as ex rege, ex Consule, (as one Scholiast would seem to observe)
but divided and joined to words of both numbers, and of another termination, as
ex Primicerio, ex Notario, ex Agentibus in rebus. Sedmanum de tabula, ne ex
Grammatico, Criticus etiam esse videar.

(f) Praetorium] signifies the Lord Generals pavilion in the camp, the
Pretors house in Rome, or elsewhere: as also the Lord Deputies, or chief
Justice his habitation of estate in any City or Province, as it does in this
place. Likewise the house of Justice, where he sits judicially: Here, his
house of estate in the city.

(g) Consistorium.] The Roman Emperors or Caesar's Counsel and counsell-chamber:
much like unto the Cardinals Conclave now at Rome, assistant to the Pope.
Pancirol. in Notitiam. Whence, his Counselors and gowned officers about him be
termed Consistoriani, in opposition of Militares.

(h) Quaestor.] How ever before time Quaestores (especially Aerarij) were
Treasurers of the State, whether they went under the name of Vrbani,
Provinciales, or Castrenses; and in Justinians time and after, Quaestores were
ordained to enquire into the multitude that conflowed out of the country of
Constantinople, and to dispatch their causes with expedition, that they might
have no pretense of long abode there: Yet in Constantines days, and the age
ensuing, being called Questores sacri Palatij, they were of all gowned
Ministers most inward with the Emperor as their Secretaries: and of their
robes termed Candidati, like as those about kings Purpurati. And many times
diverse matters were by the Emperor put over unto the Praefectus Praetorio
together with the Questor, as it is to be thought even in this place. They
were always so learned in the laws, that nothing in civil jurisdiction
passed without their direction and allowance. They framed and penned the laws
that were by the Emperor to be promulged and published. They drew the Mandates
unto the Governors and Presidents of Provinces: Commissions to Delegates from
the Prince, by them were endited and penned, and without their Subscriptions
were of no force. And to the edicts that passed, the Questor subscribed in this
form, Subscripsi, Quaestor: much like as the great Chauncellors of France at
this day, and of Savoy; as also the Regents of the Kings Chauncerie in Naples
use to do. See more in Pancirolus upon Notitia. Which considered, together
with the ensigns belonging to their office, to wit, a Cabinet with these
capital letters upon it, LEGES SALVTARES, a bundle of Rolls, etc. Questor
has no resemblance of a Treasurer of State, as now adays the word is used.
Entitled they were Egregij, and sometime Perfectissimi. Cassiodor.


(i) Tribunis Fabricarum.] Sundry forges or worke-houses we read of for the
making of armor as well in the East as West Empire, called in Greek (...),
and the Smithes or Armourers Fabricenses. Of these in every city where they
kept there was a College or Society, and the chief or principal of that
fellowship was termed Primicerius Fabricae, whom Ammianus Marcell calls here
Tribunus: who after he had served two years in that place, was discharged, and
admitted into the band of the Protectores, or Squiers of the body to the
Emperor.

(k) Suspensus.] By this place and others in Am. Marcell. it appears, that
when an examinat or other was fastened to the rack called Eculeus, the
tormentors erected it up on high, either to be seen, ad terrorem populi, or to
increase the torture.

(l) This was Zeno Eleates,] (for other there were Stoic Philosophers also of
that name) an auditor or disciple of Parmenides, (as Suidas witnesses)
together with Perdiccas, and a governor of the State: The author and inventor
of the Art Logic, as Aristotle writes. Of whom it is reported, that when he
was by torture examined to discover and nominat the accomplices in a conspiracy
against Nearchus the tyrant, would name none of them, but appeached those only
that were the tyrants favorites and minions etc. howbeit, being forced still
by dolorous torments to detect the conspirators, he bit his own tongue and
spit it in the face of the tyrant, whereupon the people stoned the tyrant to
death.

(m) Protector domesticus.] See the note upon (o) in this book.

(n) Eusebius praepositus Cubiculi.] This is that Eusebius the L. Chamberlain,
with whom, as Marcellin. writes, Constantius the Emperor could do much: for
indeed, he ruled the Emperor at his pleasure: and the Ecclesiastical writers
term him the Euriuch. This great officer in Court, was at the first only
Spectabilis: but in Honorius his days, Macrobius the L. Chamberlain, for his
learning and wisdom was esteemed Illustris; which dignity his successors in
that place retained. He was chief and ruler over all the rest of the
Cubicularij, or Ministeriani, i. Gentlemen of the bedchamber: to whose office
it appertained to apparel and make the Emperor ready, to see unto the
bedchamber, the beds, etc. and the doors into it. This chief Chamberlain
enjoied by his office many privileges and immunities, and in the later
Emperors time he went richly arrayed in a kirtle embroidered of needle work,
and cloth of bawdkin, a purple mantle, surcoat of scarlet likewise of bawdkin
work, with the image of the Emperor before, standing, behind, sitting in a
chair; he bare also a mace or scepter, etc. Sophorat. Curopatat. in Offic.
Palate.

(o) Comes Domesticorum] was captain of the guard, termed Protectores
domestici, who were both footmen and horsemen within the palace, and had
immunitie of warfare, attendant only upon the Emperors or Caesar's person, and
were called Praesentales thereupon, quasi principi astantes. Under this Comes,
who was Illustris, are named Tribunus protectoru^, who was Spectabilis, and
Primicerius: then Secundocerius; and so through all the Decemprimi, who were
accounted Clarissimi. These Protectores or Domestici, every day ordinarily
saluted the Emperor, and were allowed to kiss the skirt of his purple robe,
kneeling upon their knees, which was a worship or adoration first devised by
Diocletian, and so appropriat to this place, that purpuru^ adorare, was as
much, as to be one of this guard. As touching the ensigns belonging to him,
and the coats of arms that these Protectores gave, as well horse as foot, read
Pancir. in Notit. ca. 89. Dignit. Orient.

(p) Comes Stabuli.] This officer was under Illustris comes privatarum, and had
the charge of the Princes horses out of Africa and other provinces, called by a
peculiar name Canonicarij, and Curiatij equi Some think from hence came
Conestabilis in France. He is called also Magister stabuli.

(q) Rectorem Scutariorum,] I take to be the same that Tribunus domesticoru^,
or Protectorum, next under Comes, of whom has been said before.

(r) Auspicijs] not only the Romans, as we may read in T. Livius, but
barbarous nations also, were in their affairs directed much by Auspicia, that
is the observing of birds, either in their singing and flying in the air, or
in their gesture and manner of feeding in the coupe. By which their Augurs and
Pullarij knew, and out of their learning pronounced the pleasure and will of
the gods, whether they favored their enterprises or no. More as touching
Oscines, Praepetes, Auspicia sinistra, Solistimum Tripudiu^, etc. you may find
in the Annotations or second Index to T. Livius in English.

(s) Prosper comes.] This Comes was in this place great Commander of forces,
howbeit inferior to Magister, and so, his Vicarius or Lieutenant only.

(t) Diocletiano and eius Collegae.] Diocletian and Maximian reigned together.
Diocletian was termed Iovius, and Maximian as his son (for he adopted him)
Herculius. The Caesar's by them created, were Constantius So called for ^i^
green or pale look.
Chlorus, the father of Constantine the Great, and Galerius Maximinus, who
behahaued themselves right dutifully unto their Sovereigns the Augusti, until
they both resigned up the Empire, and lived private.

(u) For that Galerius Maximinus, by some named Armamentarius, in a battle that
he struck in Syria went away with loss, Diocletian, whom he calls here
Augustus, was highly offended with him, and gave him leave (Caesar though he
was, and in his purple) to run on foot by his wagon side a whole mile together.
Pomp. Laetus.

(x) What were these Equestres ludi] see before in Circenses ludi, at the
letter (k) And note, that these solemn games were not exhibited but upon some
occasion of joy, as at the entrance of a new Emperor, or the prosperous
process of 10. years, 20. years, or 30. years reign, according to vows 10.
20. 30.

(y) These seem in Notitia to have had other names, as Flavia, Foelix, Tertia
Diocletiana, and Prima Maximiana, etc.

(a) Apodemio agente in Rebus.] A strange term, taken up in Constantines
time, and used afterward. Now, these Agent sin rebus were the princes
messengers, sent post into the provinces and other places about his Negotia, i.
his affairs, which by Constantine himself in a letter unto them, are termed
Curae and res agendae. The same in manner they were that Veredarij and
Frumentarij, before Constantine his time: like unto which Frumentarij, for all
the world, as Sext. Aurel. Victor says, were these Agentes in rebus. For as
Frumentarij purveied corn, and sought it out where it was to be had, but
withal came back with all the particulars and occurrents of a province; so
these hearkened after all things that were done abroad, and brought the same to
the Emperors ears: and as these carried the Emperors letters and mandates
forth, so they brought home all the news in the country. Busy fellows they
were, and very pragmaticall: and howsoever by their first institution they
seem to resemble our Pursuivants, Messengers, and Bailifes errant, yet in
practice they were very spies, intelligencers, and informers. Of these there
was a Schola or Fraternity: and after they had for a time executed this office
well, they grew up and became Principes or Primicerij in sundry offices
belonging to superior magistrates even in the princes court. Pancir. in Notit.

(b) These Armaturae] in this place were a certain company or fellowship of
soldiors heavy armed in complet harneis, whereof they had the name. There were
of them Iuniores that served in the East, and Seniores, which are here meant,
serving in the West Empire; both Palatines and attending upon the Court.

(c) Adrasteo Pallore,] whether it be a proverbiall speech arising from the
same head that Adrastea Nemesis does, to wit, from Adrastus the Phrygian, son
of Midas (who after he had killed his own brother, slew also the son of
Croesus, when he had bin kindly by him entertained and expiated, yea and made
guardian of the same son, who for grief of heart laid violent hand upon
himself. Herod. Cleio.) and betokens guilt of conscience, and a blanknesse
which a pale color will bewray: or be derived from Adrastia, that imagined
goddess of vengeance, whereof the author discourses a little after, which the
privitie and guiltiness of sin calls for and meets with one time or other,
I leave it in medio. And as touching Adrastia or Nemesis, which is said here to
be president over fata partilia, i. Natalia, that is, our Nativities, and
signifies Divine Justice and vengeance attending upon sinful and wicked
persons; how ever it may seem in this place (by that she is said omnia
despectare terrena, and in another passage is termed by Marcellinus,
Spectarix) to be derived of (...), i. to see, as if nothing of her were
unseene: albeit also that (...)
some fetch the etymology otherwise, (...), as one would say, (...), that is,
always operative, and leaving nothing undone; and Strabo reduces it unto
Adrastus the K. of the Argives, who first built a temple to Nemesis, and called
it Adrastia: yet I approve rather of Aristotle and Pausanias: of Erasmus also
and Natalis-comes, who derive it (...), i. effugere, to escape: for that no man
is able to escape vengeance and the justice of God waiting upon wickedness.

(d) This Andriscus, a base fellow (because Florus de g^st. Romans
being like unto king Philip, he gave it out confidently, That he was Philips
or Perseus his son, king of Macedonie, and so was termed Pseudo-Philippus)
drew many after him, usurped the crown, defeated M. Iuventius a Roman Praetor,
with his whole army; but afterward by Q. Cecilius Metellus Macedonius the
Praetor, was put to flight. Sigonius.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 15. Book.
(a) DOmitius Corbulo.] A brave warrior in the days of Nero: what acts he
achieved in particular, you man read in Tacit. Annal. 13. His virtues see in
Xiphitinus Epitom. Dion. He was killed by Nero, who before used to call him
Pater, and Beneficus. Xiphitin.

(b) They were of Cybira a town of Lycaonia, named Tlepolemus and Hiero, the
one a wax Image maker, the other a Painter, who for a sacrilege committed,
fled their country, and were entertained by Verres in Asia, whom he used as
his hounds to fetch in preyes and booties to his hand: For so terms them
Tully [Canes venaticos diceres.] in Verrem lib. 6.

(c) This Marinus] had been Campi-ductor, (...), Glossario, or as Vegetius by
a kind of Archaismus terms him Campi-doctor, i. he that traineth up
soldiers to feats of arms, Veget. lib. 1. ca. 13.
in that exercise which Vegetius calls Armatura. And whereas he is said here
[Vacans] I suppose there is to be understood Tribunus.

(d) These Armaturae,] of whom Arintheus was Vice-Tribune, were (as it
appears in Vegetius) certain lusty and tall soldiers trained up in that
exercise, called Armatura, and counted inter levis armaturae milites. But I
read in Notitia dignitatum utriusque Imperij, that there was a Schola or
company of these Armaturae, among the Palatine guards of the Emperor, and
those not lightly armed: [over whom there was a Tribune or Rector] for they
were so called, as Pancirolus says, because they wore, not Loricae, i. light
arms, as coats of male, habergeons, and brigantines, but Solida arma, good
corslets and complet harneis, which likewise are called Armaturae. Now for that
the Emperor himself, as Ammianus says, was here in procinctu, I conjecture,
That upon the foil that Arbetio with his forces had newly taken, the Emperor
sent out of the camp to rescue him and help at a pinch, his Palatine power,
the Scutarij Armaturae, etc. with their captains: together with Seniauchus,
qui equestrem curam Comitum tuebatur.

(e) And these Comites] I take to be elsewhere termed not as the Quaestores
were termed Candidats, who were gowned men.
Candidati, as namely, where the Emperor Valens was defeated by the Hunnes.
Which were gallant horsemen, keeping close unto the Emperors side and his
followers.

(f) As Comes Largitionum] was the great Treasurer of the Imperial revenewes,
tributes, etc. which came into the Aerarium, so Comes rei privatae, or
Privatarum, dealt in those revenewes that came into Fiscus, i. the Exchequer,
or Emperors private coffers. He is termed also Comes Aerarij privati, but
unproperly. He is likewise called Procurator Caesaris, Curator, Rationalis,
Procurator privatae rationis, Magister rei privatae, Comes rei Dominicae. He
may be named the Princes Treasurer: for he was Imperialium Thesaurorum or
Pecuniarum curator. See more in Pancirol. cap. 87. in Notit. dignit. Imp.
Orient. In some causes also he was a civil Judge.

(g) Magister Memoriae Annotationes omnes dictat and emittit, and precibus
respondet. Notit. ca. 9^. Imp. Orient. by which description this officer
seems to be of a mixed nature, of the Princes Remembrancer, the Master of
Requests, and of the Ro^ls.

(h) This seems by Notitia to have been Scutaria, wherein shields, targuets,
and bucklers were made.

(i) By Consistoriani] are meant the Emperors Counsel and gowned officers,
and are sometime called Comites Consistoriani. By Militares, the officers of
the Army.

(k) Magister Officiorum.] He was a great officer Palatine, or of the Emperors
house, next under Praepositus sacri Cubiculi, i. High Chamberlain. Zosimus
calls him (...), i. Dux ordinum Palatinorum, which Pomponius Laetus seems
to expound (although as I take it not very properly) Magister Copiarum,
although at his disposition were not only Scholae Palatinae, but also
Limitanei duces, and Comites etc. He was called Magister Officiorum, because he
had the charge of all the Ministeries or Ministers that gave attendance upon
the Emperor in Court. In some respect he resembles the Lord Controller of the
kings house. But his office reached farther, as you may read in Notitia Imp.
Orient. cap. 62. And for that in the Ensigns belonging to his Office, there
be expressly represented, spears, shields, and other arms, we are given to
understand, that he had government over the Fabricae, i. Forges where such
arms were made. He is termed by Cassiodorus, Magister Palatij, as one would
say, Mayor Domus Regiae, i. Grand Seneschall, or High Steward of the kings
house. He was for his dignity raunged among Illustres.

(l) Correctores] were Governors of Provinces in the East and West Empire, of
a middle nature between Consulares and Praesides, yet Clarissimi. They were
allowed to wear a purple cloak or mantle, and had the Emperors visage
carried before them. Pancirol. in Notit. Imper. Orient. cap. 156. And whereas
it follows a little after, that Thuscus was commanded Corrigere, reliquam
principis creduli militiam, I take it to be the ordinary allegory transferred
from warfare to the Court: For usual it is in this author, to term the Court
Castra, and Commilitium Principis, yea and diverse Offices Palatine, by martial
names used in the Camp.

(m) The militant ensigns or banners in the Roman legion, had the image of
dragons in purple represented: the original whereof some fetch from the dragon
or serpent Python, killed by Apollo. Every cohort in a legion had one of them,
and a Draconarius to bear it, and each legion had ten of them. Vegetius 2.
lib. cap. 13.

(n) Brachati and Cornuti.] Among the Auxiliarie soldiers Palatine, under
Magister Peditum Praesentalis, were Brachati Seniores in the West, so called of
Bracha a town in Spain; like as Iuniores in the East. Of their coat of arms,
see Pancirol. in Notit. Cornuti, were likewise such Auxiliarie or
aid-souldiors, so named of Cornutum a town in Illyricum or Sclavonia. Of their
arms, ibidem. There were Braccati also, who had their name of Bracata Gallia.

(o) Decentius] ordained Caesar by his brother Magnentius, when he usurped the
Empire of Rome; but he sped no better than he, for he strangled himself with
an halter at Sens. Pomponius Laetus.

(p) Proprium pignus.] Either take it for one whom they loved no less than
their own child, (for children be called Pignora) or whom they honored as
their only champion and defender: for Pignora reipub. signify pillars of the
Commonwealth. Also those whom here Marcellinus calls Apparitores, i. Officers
or attendant Ministers, he terms a little after Obsequentes.

(q) Manichees] were heretics in the Primitive church, so called of Manes, or
Manicheus, their first father, a mere frantic person, as his name imports:
Howbeit his disciples afterward called him Mannicheus, quasi, Manna fundens, i.
yielding heavenly food, and celestial doctrine. He was not so frantic
himself, as his opinions were fanaticall. August. Eusebius. also Centur. 3. cap.
5.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 16. Book.
(a) THis Erechtheus, or Ericthonius,] (for as Eusebius writes they were both
one) was fostered (as they say) by Minerva, and became king of Athens. His
parents, birth, and education is altogether fabulous. Pausan. in Atticis.

(b) (c) Of Scutarij and Gentiles see before.

(d) Many laws there were in Rome called Sumptuariae and Cibariae, to
restrain excess at the table, namely Fannia, Licinia, Aemilia, Iulia, etc.
Read Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. 2. cap. 2^. Macrob. Saturnat. lib. 3.

(e) Niceteriorum centurionem.] Niceteria were certain ornaments, as rings,
chains, bracelets, etc. bestowed upon wrestlers and soldiers, in token of
victory, according to that in Iuvenate: Et Ceromatico fert Nicerteria collo.
Feasts also and meriments kept in regard of such victories, as some think,
were so called. But whether in respect of these Niceteria, Dorus was termed
Nicetoriorum centurio, like as Mereurius (...). 15
another in this author they called Comitem Solenniorum: or whether there might
be a company of soldiers, which for good luck sake went under the name of
Niceterij, like as others were called Invicti, Victores, etc. of whom he was a
Centurion, I cannot determine: But I rather incline to this latter conjecture,
for that he speaks immediately before of Scutarij, who without question were
soldiers.

(f) I find, that as well the General of the Cavallerie, as of the Infanterie,
even in this author, was called Magister Armorum: and it was not only, as the
Logicians say, Praedicatum, to them both, but equivalent also to Magister
militiae. Here it is to be understood, of the General of the horsemen,
Marcellus.

(g) This Cyneas,] a wise Counselor, was sent from king Pyrrhus to Rome, for
to treat about peace and amity, but by the means of Appius Claudius the Blind,
was denied, and returned home without effect. Flor. Epitom. in. 13. lib. T.
Livij. Being demanded of the king his master, What he thought of the Senate of
Rome? he said, They sat in counsel as if they had been so many Kings, or Gods,
as some write.

(h) Odeum] was in Rome a certain Theater or Shew-place, for Poets and
Musicians to contend in for the prize and victory.

(i) (k) Whereas in the Roman legion there were Hastati, Principes, and
Pilani, who also are called Triarij: They were so marshalled in battle during
the free State, as that the Hastati stood in the vaward, Pilani in the
rereward; whereupon Antepilani in this place must of necessity be Principes,
i. the maine battle, according to the ancient manner of array. Live. Yet it
seems here that this manner of embattelling was altered in the emperors time,
and Principes were placed foremost.

(l) Primani] were soldiers Primae Legionis, i. of the first legion, like as
Secundani of the second, Vicesimani of the twentieth, etc. As for the Castra
praetoria, which he terms here Confirmatio, I take it to be that place of
strength or quarter within the camp, where were Principia and Praetorium: in
the battle also where the Primani and Principes serve or be marshalled
ordinarily.

(m) Mirmillones;] Sword-fencers in Rome, using to exhibit sport unto the
people. They were well armed, and thereupon called Hoptomachi, as also
Secutores, and commonly matched in opposition with Retiarij, otherwise termed
Threces, or Thraces, and Tunicati, for that they were lightly appointed; as you
may read in Ausonius:

Quis Mirmilloni componitur aequimanus? or Threx.
Thrax. See more of these in Sueton. Caligula.

(n) A Tribune here is called Vacans, namely, such an one as was enrolled
extraordinarily, and not promoted thereto by degrees of service. These also as
well as others placed in any dignity after that manner by other authors, are
expressly termed Ascripti, and Ascriptitij. For thus writes Ael. Lampridius in
Alexandro Severo, Nec qu^mqua passus est esse in Palatinis nisi necessarios
homines: iureiur ando deinde constrinxit, ne quem ascriptum, id est, vacantem
haberet, ne annonis rempub. gravaret. Also Terbellius Pollio in Balista; where
Valerianus the Emperor, in a letter unto Balista, seems to joy, that by his
counsel, nullum ascriptitium, i. vacantem haberet, and Tribunum nullum
stipatorem, qui non vere pugnaret. But take this for my conjecture only, as
touching Tribunus vacans. I will gladly yield to him that shall bring a more
probable reason of this term.

(o) Dion writes, That Augustus admitted certain Batavian horsemen to keep
residence in Rome within camp: How ever Tranquillus Suetonius affirms, that
he allowed no more than three cohorts to harbor within the city, and those,
sine castris. But it seems, that by occasion of many strangers conflowing to
Rome, who could not be received in the hostelries and ordinary Innes, there
was a certain place assigned by it self for their lodging, called thereupon
Castra peregrina, or Peregrinorum. And of this opinion is Guidus Pancirolus de
1^. Regionibus urb. Romans

Annotations and conjectures upon the seventeenth Book.
(a) BRasmatiae,] or (...), Arist. de mundo, are those earthquakes which shake
the earth upward and downward, ad angulos rectos, so called of the resemblance
of water boiling, (...), i. to sees or boil up.

(b Clinatiae.] (...), as I guess, because they bend sidelong: or Climatiae,
(...), i. pervertere vel diruere, as Marcellus Donatus thinks.

(c) Chasmatiae,] of Chasma in Greek, which signifies a gaping or wide
chinke, (...), to gape. Aristotle makes mention of them De mundo.

(d) Mycematiae,] or rather Mycetiae, as Aristotle terms them, (...), i. to
bellow, to loow, or roar.

(e) Donative] was a largess or liberality bestowed upon the soldiers by the
General: or upon the people by the Prince.

(f) Cicero in his second book de Divinatione, writes thus, It is reported,
that in the territories of the Tarquinienses, when an husbandman ploughed the
ground, and took one deeper stitch than the rest, there started up out of the
earth on a sudden this Tages, and spoke unto the said Plough-man: (now this
Tages, as is found written in the Tuscane books, seemed in personage and
countenance a very child, but for wisdom was equal to the aged:) who being
affrighted at this sudden sight, cried out, in so much as out of all Tuscane
the people flocked soon thither. And then Tages uttered many speeches in the
hearing of them all, which they noted and put in writing: and this his speech
contained the whole knowledge and learning of Soothsaying. Ovid also in his
Metamorphos writes of him. But it is like he was some base and obscure fellow,
who by his impostures deceived the world, professing as he did the art of
Divination.

Annotations and conjectures upon the eighteenth Book.
(a) LVstrum] was the space of four years, after which time complet there was
a solemn review and cessing holden at Rome; and the city, by a Sacrifice
purged with sundry other ceremonial complements, almost duly observed in
every revolution of such a term of years: whereunto peradventure our author
alludeth, it was so ordinary a thing in Constantius his Court (which he
terms Castra, by a word borrowed of warfare) to have these alterations and
chaunges: like as at every Lustrum new Magistats, as Censors, etc.

(b) Diribitores,] otherwise called Distributores, were certain persons
employed in tendering unto the Roman citizens certain little tablets as they
went to give their voices at their solemn elections of Magistrates, therein to
write their affirmative or negative. There were also of this denomination the
Paymasters of wages to soldiers in an army. Coelius Rhodigin.

(c) Homer in his ninth, tenth, and eleventh books of his Poem Odyssea,
faineth, how Ulysses held these Phaeaces, upon whose land he was cast by
tempest, with a long discourse and narration of his travels: In imitation of
whom Virgil brings in his Aeneas, making the like reports unto Queen Dido.
The silent audience of the Phaeaces, Homer expresses in this verse eftsoons
repeated:

(...). (d) Tricesimani] were soldiers picked out of the thirtieth legion.

(e) Fortenses,] A company of soldiers auxiliarie, so called of Fortia a
town in Sarmatia Asiatica.

(f) Superventores.] Companies of soldiers placed apart from the body of the
army or battle, ready to come upon the enemies forcibly on a sudden, whiles
they are otherwise employed or secure.

(g) Praeventores.] Companies of soldiers keeping likewise apart from the
maine army or battle, ready to prevent the enemies, or gain a place before
them.

(h) Iam Comite:] For having been one of the guard called Protectores before,
he now became a captain, and had the charge of a regiment, and was dignified
also with the name Com^s.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 19 Book.
(a) THese solemn holy days and feasts were kept for memorial of Adonis the
darling of Venus, slain by a wild boar in hunting, in the month of July, what
time Fruges sunt adultae, corn is ripe.

(i) Siccitas, i. drought.] I suppose he means heat, the active quality: for
dryness being a passive quality is not so powerful: And that he means
heat, it may appear by the Plague in the Greek camp and army before Troy,
occasioned by the arrows of Apollo, i. the Sun. Homer Ilia. a.

(k) By this stranger, or guest, is meant Paris, who took away Helena the
wife of Menelaus: for which indignity and wrong arose that war and siege
which continued ten years.

(l) Of this Pestilence ye may read more in Thucidides lib. 2. and in
Lucretius lib. 6. where it is described very pathetically, and to the life,
and in manner word for word out of Lucretius.

(m) Leviores.] I suppose he means acutiores, i. more quick and sharp.

(n) (o) (p) In putting down these names of maladies, we are to observe, that
Marcellinus, although he was a souldior, and out of his own element, yet
speaks not unproperly, nor does exorbitate from the doctrine of Hippocrates,
Galene, and the rest, who among these vulgar diseases called here (...), allow
some to be Epidemij simply, not pestilenciall; but such as kill for the most
part, to be (...) and pestilenciall.

(q) Rhesus] was King of Thracia, and came to aid the Trojanes against the
Greeks, who together with his horses were the first night they came surprised
by Diomedes and Ulysses, and slain before they had drunk of the river
Xanthus, which ran by Troy; and so Troy was lost: For the Oracle had delivered
this answer, In case he and his hor^es might once drink of that river, Troy
should never be won.

(r) Proletarij and Capite censi,] were the poorer sort of the people, not
ordinarily, but upon great extremity employed in warfare, but appointed to
keep at home, ad prol^m excitandam. Alexander ab Alexand. Genial. Dierum lib.
6. cap. 22.

(s) Libitina.] The Goddess of Funerals, supposed to be Venus Epitymbia, in
whose temple at Rome were all things to be sold necessary for burials. The
word is put for death and Funerals, at which Sword-Fencers were wont to
practice their feats, and gain well thereby: Whereupon they were termed
Bustuarij, as using to haunt funeral fires.

(t) Ludius.] The god likewise of Games and Plays; at which also were
employed, for more state and pomp, the same Sword-players, and reaped no small
commodity from thence. So that by Commercia Libitinae, and Ludij, are meant
Funerals and plays, and by consequence commodity growing unto such Fencers at
such solemnities.

(u) Claros.] A city in Ionia, renowned for the Oracle there of Apollo,
whereupon he was called Clarius.

(x) Dodona] a city of Chaonia within Epirus, near to which was a Wood
consecrated to Jupiter, and the same consisting all of Oak, wherein (by
report) there s^ood the temple of Jupiter, thereupon named Dodonaeus, and in it
an Oracle, the most ancient of all others in Greece. Some write, That the very
trees gave answer by way of Oracle.

(y) Delphi,] A city in Boeotia near to the mount Pernassus, where stood the
most famous temple of Apollo, and in which, he or the devil (whether ye will)
pronounced Oracles, foreshewing future events. Thence was he called Delphicus.

(z) C. Cornelius,] a Tribune of the Commons, proposed a law; likewise L.
Cornel. Sylla, Dictator; which were called Leges Maiestatis: very strong
against any person whatsoever that practiced against the State, and so by
consequence against the Sovereign authority. Carol. Sigon.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 20. Book.
(a) H Eruli,] A right valiant nation in Sarmatia, above the river Ister or
Danubius. Procop.

(b) Draconarius.] As every Centurie or Hundred in a Cohort had Vexilum, i. a
Banner: so in each Cohort of a Legion there was the Ensign called Draco, of
the portraiture of a Dragon; the bearer whereof was called Draconarius. Veget.
lib. 2. cap. 13. And he was allowed, for an ornament, to wear a collar or
chain. From this place he might be preferred to be Hastatus, and so forth a
Comes, i. a Captain or Leader of a band. For in this sense is Comes taken, as
it seems, in this passage: and Leo the Emperor in his third book De bellico
apparat. defines Comes to be unius Bandi sive Cohortis Praefectum.

(c) The Aureus] among the Romans was a piece of gold coin, current in the
Empire, and in round reckoning equivalent to our Spur-royall of 15. s. For an
hundred Sestertij made one Aureus, and those amount to 15. s. 7. ob. which is
the fourth part of Mina or Pondo in silver, or of one ounce of French-crowne
gold, or much thereabout with us in these days. And note here, that in
electing of an Emperor, as it was required on the soldiers part, beside the
salutation of him, by these terms, Salve Imperator, Salve Auguste, Dij te
servent, or sospitent etc. to do the purple Robe upon him and a Diadem: So
the Emperor thus saluted and invested, used on his behalf to promise a
largess among them by the poll.

(d) The Heathen were persuaded in their blind superstition, that as every man
had his several Genius or angel, so to each country and state likewise there
was appropriat a tutelar god or divine power for the protection thereof.

(e) Many Legions were called Flaviae] as Constantiana, Theodosiana, etc. This
seems here to be Constantiana, of Constantius then Emperor, and the son of
Constantine the Great, who assuming to him this fore-name Flavius, gave that
title to this Legion. Other Emperors also following, took up that name, and
derived it from them to sundry Legions of their enrolling.

(f) Parthica] so called, for that it consisted of Parthians. As for the
addition Prima, it was given in regard of auncientie or prioritie. This also is
confirmed by those Legions following.

(g) To wit, Secunda Flavia.

(h) Secunda Armeniaca] consisting of Armenians.

(i) And Parthica Secunda.

(k) Bitumen] is a certain clammie and slimie substance arising out of a lake
in Jury, and approaches near unto the nature of Brimstone, for that it
catches fire so soon. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 35. cap. 15. Being once afire, it
is inextinguible, unless it be by throwing dust upon it, as Ammianus
Marcellinus shows afterward. Some take Naphtha to be a kind of it.

(l) Magister Armorum] is a title of high place, and more than Comes,
ind^fferent as well for Infanterie as Cavallerie, and may properly be termed
General of the Forces; yet for the most part has respect unto horsemen. He
was in the same place under the Emperors, as Magister Equitum in the free state
under the Dictators.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 21. Book.
(a) I Vlian had been already five years Caesar, and therefore being now
Augustus, he performed his Quinquennall vows, as the manner was also, for
ten years, twenty, and more.

(b) Xystarcha,] the master professor of Wrestling, so called of Xystus, a
place where they used to wrestle and practice that and other exercises of
activitie, out of the Sun and rain.

(c) Auguria and Auspicia:] although they be commonly confounded, yet for as
much as they be here distinctly put down, you may understand, that properly
Auguria were the signs taken by birds flight, and their singing or voice, (and
some will have Augurium to be quasi avium garritus;) Auspicia by their manner of
feeding etc.

(d) Many Prophetesses there were and wise women under the name of [Sibyllae,]
which some Etymologize to be as much as (...), i. privy to the secret counsels
of Jupiter: I would rather say (...), for they were the very lims of the
devil, with their impostures deceiving the world. The chief of them was
Cumana, of Cumes, a city in Asia the less, called also Erythraea: who coming
into Italy, bewitched the Romans with her prophesies, and left among them
those famous books, whereof Livie and other Historians make so much mention:
unto which they had recourse in all their extremities.

(d) Epiphanie] is that feastivall holy day among Christians, which we call
Twelfe-day; upon occasion, that about that time our Savior Christ began to
appear unto the Gentiles; what time as the Magi came out of the East to adore
him. Yet Epiphanius in his book Advers. Hareses will have the Epiphanie to be
the very day of his nativitie, which we call Christmas; for then Christ
appeared unto us in flesh: and so says Suidas. Others take it for the
memorial day of Christ's Baptism, on which also the Catechumeni were baptized.
But by the circumstance of the month in this place I take it in the first
signification.

(e) Apud signa.] The strongest place in battle and camp both, was called
Principia, where stood the Praetorium; and there were the Standards, Ensigns,
and Banners bestowed: where also was the safest custody of any committed to
ward. And that the Signa were in the maine battle among the Principes or
Principia, it appears by this, That they who were marshalled in the vaward,
be usually called Antesignani, and those in the rereward, Postsignani.

(f) The goddess of War: she is also named Enyio.

(g) How ever Praefectus Praetorio was an high Magistrate, and secundus ab
Augusto, yet you must always except the [Consuls;] whose place and authority
was peculiarly called Amplissimus Magistratus. The Ensigns belonging to this
Magistrate, was especially the Purple or Scarlet Robe, called Trabea: insomuch
as by a Metonymie it is in this Author put for the Dignity it self; as namely
in the beginning of the 23. Book: Ascito in Collegio Trabeae Sallustio, i.
assuming Salustius to be fellow Consul with him. As touching the Ensigns
belonging to Prefect. Praetorio, see at the note upon Praefectus Vrbi.

(h) Largitiones curandas.] Have recourse to the note upon Comes Largitionum.
Domesticis.] See the Annotation upon Protectores.

(i) Legiones Constantiacae.] They took name of Constantius the Emperor, who
enrolled them.

(k) Iniectis Ponticulis.] The manner of putting forth these little bridges
out of towers and other fabrickes, to the walls of a city besieged, you may
see lively described and portrayed by Godescalcus Stenechius, at the
seventeenth Chapter of the fourth Book of Vegetius.

(l) Cum part validiori exercitus.] Understand it of the Legionarie footmen,
in whom the Romans reposed greatest confidence. The like phrase our Author
uses elsewhere, and namely in the 15. Book, cap. 3. Arbetio Magister Equitum,
cum validiore exercitus manu: where doubtless he speaks of the Infanterie.

(m) Lancearij] were soldiers of a Palatine Legion under the General of the
Forces, called Praesentalis; happily of the Lances or Spears that they served
with: Some had the addition Stobenses, of Stobium a town in Macedonie: others
Augustenses, of Augustus, as Vegetius thinks Lib. 2. Cap. 7. and diverse
denominations beside, as you may read in Notitia.

(n) Mattiarij, or Martiarij] were auxiliarie forces, so called of Mattium, a
town in Germany, the Metropolis of the Catti, where now Marpurgum stands.
Laeti also were soldiers levied out of a people in Gaul so named, and they
served in diverse nations, whereupon they have sundry additions. Notitia.
Zosimus. Howbeit, Donatus Marcellus says, they were so called of Mattia, i. a
Club, or Maza, a Mace; such as Clavatores were in Plautus.

(o) These Iambicke verses are called Senarij, because they consist of six
single feet; otherwise Trimetri, for that they stand of three measures or duple
feet; for distinction of other Iambickes, named Dimetri, Tetrametri, etc.

(p) Hermes] a noble Philosopher, Priest, and King of Egypt, whom our writer
calls Ter-Maximus, others Trismegistus, in the same sense, for that he was
Philosophus Max. Sacerdos Max. and Rex Maximus.

(q) Ecclesiastical Writers and other Historians agree not with Marcellinus,
either in the age of Constantius, or the years of his reign, or day of his
death. For some say, he lived ^^. and reigned 2^. as Pomp. Laetus: but evident
it is in the 1^. Book of this History and fourth chapter (unless there be
some notable fault in the copy) that he had then reigned 30. years. And
Socrates says plainly, he ruled 38. in all, and lived ^5. So does Sozomenus.
Howbeit, I mean not to reconcile Historiographers about this point. I
attribute much unto Marcellinus, for that he was (...).

(r) (s) For the better unfolding of this place, you shall understand, that
under the Romans Emperors there were devised five degrees or ranks of
dignities, following one another in this order, to wit, Illustris, Spectabilis,
Clarissimus, Perfectissimus, and Egregius, albeit Notitia makes no mention of
this last and lowest.

The principal of all the rest, as chief Senators, were termed Illustres,
and ten magistrates there were of this rank, Consuls, Praefectus Praetorio,
Praefectus Vrbi, Magistri Militum, Magister Officiorum, Quaestores, Praepositus
sacri cubiculi, Comes Largitionum, Com^s rerum privatarum, and Comes
Domesticorum.

The middle sort of Senators had the title of Spectabiles; among whom were
raunged ten other Magistrates or Rulers, namely, Primicerius sacri cubiculi,
Primic^rius Notariorum, Comes Castrensis, Magister Scriniorum, Proconsules,
Comes Orientis, Praefectus Augustatis, i. Aegypti, Vicarij, Comites, and Duces
rei militaris. Z^no also reckons, Tribunus Notariorum to be Spectabilis. And
these Spectabiles be sometime confounded with Clarissimi.

The rest of the Senators be styled Clarissimi, and their dignity
Clarissimatus: Such are Consulares, i. Governors of Provinces; so called, for
that they were adorned with Consular ornaments, although they had not been
Consuls: Correctores, otherwise called Modera^ores of Provinces, and
Presidents: Likewise the Comites of a second degree, such as had the government
of the Provincial Scholae: Also Silentiarij, otherwise called Amon. Marce^^.
lib. 10.
Decuriones Palatij, Officers in the Emperors Court, to see that all were
quiet, and no noisemade to trouble and disquiet the Prince etc. These
Clarissimi were otherwhiles termed Speciosi. See more of them in Notitia: as
also of the privileges and immunities granted unto them, and the other two
degrees above them.

Next under these were raunged by Constantine the Great Viri Perfectissimi, of
whom Marcellinus here speaks: and (to determine of them precisely) they were
in higher account than Equites Rom^ni, although sometimes they also be styled
Perfectissimi. Thus were entitled the Governors of smaller Provinces: as the
Presidents of Arabia, Dalmatia, and Isauria: The Procurators or Auditors under
the Emperor, called Rationales: The Principals of the Scrinia, of Comes
Largitionum, and his Comites in each Diocese, whom I take to be
under-Treasurers. And as there were three degrees of Comites, so were there
also of Viri Perfectissimi.

Egregij were such, as out of Equestris ordo attained place of government in
the State. Such were the Emperors Scriniarij, called also Tribuni Notarij,
whom I suppose to be under Secretaries: Also the rulers of some provinces.
Their dignity was called Egregiatus, but now it is grown out of use. Howbeit,
the modern interpreters reckon Prelates, Advocates of the Exchequer, Doctors,
Knights and Gentlemen, among Egregios. But for that the handling of this matter
of Precedencie is a ticklish point and offensive, Verbum non amplius addam:
only thus much of them and other titles it shall suffice, what The Praeceptor
of Crisp^^, Constantines son.
Lactantius writes: Nemo Egregius nisi qui bonus and innocens fuerit: nemo
Clarissimus, nisi qui opera misericordiae largiter fecerit: nemo Perfectissimus
nisi qui omnes gradus virtutis impleverit. What immunities as well Egregij as
Perfectissimi enjoyed, see Pancirol. in Notitiam. I am not ignorant, that there
was another title of Nobilis and Nobilissimus, which belonged properly to the
Caesar's, or heirs apparent of the Empire: like as Ethlius and Clito among our
ancestors the Saxons. But that title properly belongs not to this place.

(ss) As touching the Mastership of the Offices and Comitiva Largitionum, has
been written before.

(t) Is not the same reason hereof, as of other things, which the more pure and
perfect they be in their right nature and constitution, as blood, seed, milk,
etc. the more corrupt and noisome they are, if they be out of their temperature?

(u) Protector Domesticus,] One of the Emperors guard in ordinary.

(x) It seems that the Roman Princes as they rode in progress, or any
expedition, when they approached near any provincial city, for honor and
duty there was by way of state presented unto them the assayes of provision
for corn, as also the beasts, as Horses, Asses, Mules, Camels etc. for
carriage; and the Saddle, to serve for to ride post or draw wagons for the
State, that it might appear all things were in good order, and ready as they
ought to be: beside the complement of meeting upon the way etc.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 22. Book.
(a) (b) (c) OF the Ioviani and Herculiani,] how they took name of Diocletian,
who called himself Iovius, and of Maximianus his Colleague in the Empire, who
assumed unto him the name of Herculius, for that he was so dutiful unto
Diocletian, as Hercules might have been to his father Jupiter, I have said
somewhat before: As also of Principes and Principia, both in the army and in
the camp.

(d) Cura Palatij, and Curator Palatij,] the same may be taken for the grand
Seneschall or Steward of the Emperors house.

(e) Of Adrastia] see the note before in the 14. Book.

(f) These Rationales] were Procurators or under Treasurers in every Province,
to enquire into Escheats for the Emperor, and to receive the Canon, i. the due
tributes: unto whom other inferior Receivers in Cities, called Arcarij, i.
Chamberlaines, made account; and they unto Comes sacrarum Largitionum. These
went richly apparrelled, as it seems by this place.

(g) (h) Diurna Annona] was the allowance of one day for a man in victual or
money: so that this Barbar got the ordinary living of 20 men, beside as much
provender, or the worth thereof, as would find 20 horses.

(i) It seems by this place, that Julian at the very first was but an
hypocrite, and pretended Christian Religion in show only; for he was from his
youth inclinator ad numinum cultum, i. Deorum, as Ammianus expressly declares
afterward, to wit, plain Idolatry.

(k) Of the Games Circenses] see before.

(l) Per admissionum proximum.] Under the Master of the Offices were belonging
to the Privy chamber and chamber of Presence certain Vshers or Officers
called Admissionales, who brought suitors or others to the presence of the
Emperor. The head of them was called Admissionum Magister, as we read before
in the 15. Book; the next unto him, Proximus Admissionum.

(m) Lege agere, or Lege agi:] A form of words in diverse senses used: in T.
Livius, To execute the condemned according to the rigor of Law: in Cicer. 1.
de Oratore, To put in a claim or demand etc. in this place as much as ius
poscere, i. If any man had a matter depending in the Court, to call for the
hearing of it, at such and such an hour before appointed, upon the Criers
pronouncing, That the hour was come; and namely, nine of the clock in the
forenoone, which was most usual, what time the Judges and the Bench were set.
Hence it is, that Martial has this verse,

Exercet raucos tertia causidicos. (n) Praetextatus.] I guess that here
Praetextatus is the proper name of this Senator: neither am I ignorant, that
Senators of their embrodered garments were called Praetextati. But if any one
will have this Senator (whatsoever his name was) to be here present in his
said Robe, Susque deque habeo.

(o) Delos] the chief Isle of the Cyclades, wherein Latona was delivered to
Apollo and Diana.

(p) Diomedes] a bloody king of Thracia, who fed his horses with men's flesh,
and being vanquished by Hercules, was given unto his own horses to be eaten.

(q) This goddess among the Romans, brought unto Rome out of Phrygia, was
called Cybcle, Magna Matter, and Matter Deorum, Ops or Opis, Rhea, Vesta, etc.

(r) Amycus] a cruel king of the Bebrycians, a tyrant over his own people,
and bloudily minded unto strangers: but in that voyage of the Argonauts for the
golden fleece, he was by Castor and Pollux slain. Apollonius Poeta.

(s) Elice, or Helice] that conspicuous star in the North, about the Pole,
which otherwise is called the great Bear, and by us Charlemaignes waine.
Helice it is named, for the turning round about the Pole every 2^. hours.

(t) Although Orgia] at first was a general name of all ceremonial feasts and
holy days, as Servius writes, yet peculiarly those of Liber or Bacchus came
to be so called; (...), i. furious anger, in which the Priestresses Bacchae
were said to be, when they celebrated this feast. Some derive them, (...), i.
of Hills where they were celebrated: or, as the Scholiast upon Apollonius says,
(...), i. ab arcendo profanos: for that profane persons were thence debarred.

(u) This solemnity was kept every three years, and therefore called
Tri^t^rica: instituted first by Bacchus after his navigation and voyage into
India. Of this you may read more in Ovid. Metamorphos. lib. 6. and Fastor. lib.
1.

(x) This sea Euxinus] by Antiphrasis, or the contrary, is so called, whereas
indeed it is Axinus, i. inhospitalis.

(y) What a number of sirnames Diana had, and upon what reason and occasion,
see Natalis Comes. Mytholog. lib. 3. cap. 8.

(z) These sea birds are in Latin named Alcedones.] They do lay, sit, and hatch
in the midst of Winter, what time the sea also is calm. Hence come Halcionij
dies, proverbially spoken for time of tranquillity and rest; alluding whereto,
Plautus says:

Tranquillum est, Alcedonia sunt circa forum. (a) Among many names that Diana
had, she was called Trivia, quod Trivijs praeesset, because she was President
over the cross ways; whereupon she is said to have three faces, and to look
three ways. Virg. Tria Virginis or a Dianae.

(b) Cornucopiae, or Cornucopia.] Ovid writes, That when Hercules had
vanquished the river Achelous, transformed into a Bull, he plucked from him an
horn, which the nymphs called Naiades, -- Etpomis and flore repl^tum --
sacrarunt. Others as fabulously feign, That Jupiter was by his mother Ops put
to nurse unto Amalthea and Melissa, two nymphs, and that Amalthea succled him
with the milk of a she Goat, that had two Kids; which Goat chanced to break
a fair horn that ^t had, against a tree: the said nymph took it up,
garnished it with all manner of flowers, and filled it with apples and other
fruits, and presented it to the lips of the infant Jupiter: whereupon Cornu
Amalthaeae is proverbially put for plenty and abundance, and so commonly to be
called Cornu copiae.

(g) Adonia.] As touching these holy days, somewhat I have written already:
and ominous they were accounted, for the lamentation that women made all the
city over. At such a time the Athenians did set forth a fleet to the Sicilian
war, and foretold it was by the Wisards, That they should have an unfortunat
voyage of it. Coelius Rhodigin.

(d) The diversity of pointing, which I find both here and in the 25 book, as
touching this matter, according unto sundry impressions, yields a twofold
sense, namely, That he prohibited either Christian professors, such as were
Grammarians and Rhetoricians, to read and teach in public schools; or the
same professors, although they were Gentiles, to teach the Christians: for the
words will carry both constructions. And as it appears by the
Ecclesiastical writers, his purpose indeed was, That the Galilaeans children
(for so he termed Christians) might not be learned, least they should gall and
prick the Ethnicks with their own quils, and as we say, beat them at their
own weapon. His fear likewise was, that the Gentiles and Painims, by hearing
Christian professors in Grammar and Rhetoric, should be drawn away from the
worship of their gods, i. idols; as it appears in the said 25. Book, if you
read [ne transirent a numinum cultu.]

(e) Infulio natus, ut ferebatur, apud Epiphaniam etc.] I am here forced even
against my will to be after a sort Criticus: not of any desire that I have to
touch the credit of a learned man, who has taken pains to do good, but to
find out a truth. Ortelius in his Thesaurus says, That Infullio or Infulio was
the native country of this Georgius; but alleges this only place to prove
it, not citing any other Author that ever made mention of such a place so
called: To grant that it was so, there follows an absurdity and a mere
contradiction in the sentence, where it is said, That at Epiphania, a town of
Cilicia, he was borne: and more than that, a very Soloecisme and incongruitie
of Syntaxis. For, if Infulio be the proper name of a place, it can be no
construction in Grammar to say, Infulio natus, i. borne in or at Infulio, as
every Schoole-boy can tell. I must conjecture therefore, that in this word
Infulio we are to seek for Georgius his father, whether his proper name were
Infulius, or that he was by calling Infulius, i. a maker or seller of Infulae,
i. ornaments that Bishops and Prelates wore on their heads; or labels, pendant
on either side of a Mitre, or some such things: the rather, because he says,
[ut ferebatur] i. as the report goes; for that there may be more doubt made,
whose son one is, than where he was borne; which is here expressly said to
be, apud Epiphaniam: and two places surely there could not be of his birth.
But most of all makes for my conjecture, the comparing of this passage with
many other in this Author, where there can be no doubt made of the father and
native country both, namely, in the eight and twentieth book and first
chapter, Maximinus etc. apud Sopianas Valeniae oppidum obscurissime natus est
patre tabulario praesidalis offi^ij. Also in the five and twentieth book and
fifth chapter, Natus apud Constantinopolin. etc. And who can make exception
against this Latin, Telamone and Amyntore nati? Now, if any one will not
believe, that Infulius may be such a tradesman or artificer as I speak of,
for that the analogy of our Latin tongue will not very well bear it (and yet
that might be tolerable in our Author) and because (forsooth) he finds it
not in any Dictionarie, let him read this Book advisedly, and he shall meet
with not so few as an hundred words that are in no Dictionarie, and which our
great Lexicographers have either shly or ignorantly passed by and left behind
them: and say there were no such word at all in that sense, yet Infulius must
needs be the proper name of his father, and Infulio cannot possible be his
place of nativitie: (...).

(z) Thiodamas or Theodamas, Lindius or Lydius.] Hercules coming with his wife
Deianira and his son Hillus into the country of the Dryopes, being in great
distress for want of victuals, craved meat at Theodamas his hand; which he
rudely denied: whereupon Hercules killed one of his Oxen for food: Then
Theodamas raised the country upon him; but in the end was subdued. Apollon.
Argonaut. As for Pygmaei, Pliny says lib. 7. cap. ^. in his Natural
History, They are a people dwelling in the utmost mountains of India. Some
derive this name of (...), i. a Cubite, for that they be no higher; but without
the analogy of derivation: rather yet of (...), which, among other
significations, is the measure from the elbow to the fingers clutched, Pollux.
Yet S. Hi^rome upon Ezechiel says, they take the name of (...), signifying
fight or wrestling, at which they were most nimble, and very great warriors.

(*) Petulantes] were a company of soldiers serving in the East, together
with the Celtae. Some think they took that name of a place: but Pierius is of
opinion, they were so called of (...).
their malapart behavior; considering, that in a field Gules, they gave for
their arms a dog or etc. which is as he says, Symbolum petulantiae militum:
and well it may so be, if we consider how they demeaned themselves to Julian,
in casting forth a libell, lib. 20. cap. 3. And in this very place it is said,
That their Confidentia, [i. audaciousnesse] creverat ultra modum.

(*) Apollinis Daphnaei fanum.] He was so called of a most pleasant grove or
wood near unto Antioch, called Daphne, containing 89 stadia, where his Image,
answerable to that of Jupiter Olympiacus, was worshipped. Iul. Capitol.

(*) Deae Coelestis.] I read of Deus Coelestis, a god of Afric, Vlpian. Tit.
12. whom Lactantius, cap. 15. de falsa Religione, says, the Moors called
Vranus, and is the same that Coelus, the father of Saturn: Why therefore may
not Vesta be this goddess?

(k) Cercops] is a subtle and flattering beast like a dog, using to wag the
tail much and yet bite. Hesychius: whence (...) in Greek signifies to
flatter. Coelius Rhodiginus.

(l) He is compared to a brother of Otus and Ephialtes, the sons of Neptune,
who, as Homer writes, were at nine years of age nine cubits broad and nine
fathom long. His verses are in the 11 Book of Odyss.

(...)
(...).
Where note, that (...) signifies no^ iugerum, for then the length were
disproportionall to the breadth, but the measure of six foot, which we call a
fathom.

(m) These Etesiae] be Northeast winds and by North, which begin to blow about
the midst of July, 2 days after the rising of the dog star, and hold ^0 days.
Pli. li. 2. c. ^7. Not. Hist. Lucretius terms them -- Etesia flabra
Aquilonum: because they come yearly and kept their set time.

(*) The Prodromi] also be winds from the same quarter returning every year,
and rise eight days before the dog-daies begin, called Prodromi, as one would
say, Forerunners.

(*) Bucali, or rather Buculi,] a small kind of Oxen or Bullocks. Likewise
Bisturnicia, ill favored and misshapen Camels or Dromedaries, quasi male
tornati, or formati. So Vegetius lib. 2. de re Veterinaria, calls Equos
Bisturnicios, i. male conformatos. And such little and ill favored ones it
seems were bred in these dry countries. (*) This little bird some take to be
a Wren. The king of birds it is called in Italy. See more in Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 8. cap. 25.

(o) Hydrus] being here restrained to a kind of Ichneumon, i. a Rat of Indie,
and otherwise called Enhydrus, seems to be a four footed beast, like unto a
Weezill or Ferret. Otherwise, Hydrus is a most venomous serpent: See more in
Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 25. and Edw. Wottonus, Angl. de different.
Animal. lib. 6. cap. 113.

(p) Of Blemmyes o^ Blemmyae] see before.

(*) This Ibis] resembles a Storke: they fight with winged serpents: of two
sorts they be; white over all Egypt; save only about Pelusium; and black,
which be there only, and in no part of Egypt beside. Wottonus Anglus de
different. Animal. lib. 7. cap. 1^7. That Ibis which fights with serpents, is
very black, long legged like the Crane, having an hooked byll etc. Generally
they bring forth young at the byll.

(s) Basiliske, or Cocatrice,] A serpent, as Pliny says, of the length of 12
fingers breadth: Solinus says, he is half a foot long almost. Of his venomous
biting, hissing, breath, and aspect, wherewith he kills, see Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 8. cap. 21. also lib. 29. ca. ^. It seems to be called Ba^iliske of a
certain mark on the head representing a diadem; which Pliny calls Macul^
candida: I think rather with our countryman Edward. Wotton, it should be
[mitrula.] He creeps not along, winding as other serpents do, and putting his
body by parts forward, but bears his head and rest of the body upright from
the mids thereof, as Pliny writes.

(*) Amphisbaena.] Pliny says it is a serpent with two heads; one before, as
others have, another at the tail, and therefore named by some (...), i. headed
behind and before. Indeed it cannot be discerned what part of the body is the
lesser (as in other serpents that toward the tail grow smaller) but for
bigness is alike throughout, it creeps backward and forward; and thence is
the name Amphisbaena.

(n) Scytale] is much like unto Amphibaena, but bigger: The back thereof has
spots of so glistering a color, that therewith he ravisheth (as it were) those
that behold it, and astonieth them: Being of it self slow of creeping, hereby
it overtaketh those whom it would assail, whiles they stand gazing and amazed
at her beauty. Ed. Wottonus, Angl. de diff. animal. lib. 7. cap. 118.

(ph) There is a Serpent in Nicander called Acontias] reckoned among those that
be harmless: but this here seems to be venomous; which Pliny writes of
under the name of Iaculus, according as the Greek name Acontias imports.
There be of Serpents (says he) that from the boughs of trees shoot and lance
themselves: So that we are not only to take heed of Serpents as they glide
upon the ground, but also to look unto them that fly as a dart or arrow sent
out of an Engine. Of these means Lucan, when he says,

-- Iaculique volucres. This Serpent is named also Cenchrites, of green
colored spots all over the body, but about the belly especially, like unto
Millet, whereof it is so called, and is most hurtful and forcible when it
floureth.

(x) Dipsas] a kind of Viper (as some think) or at leastwise resembling a
small Viper. Upon the sting or bite of this Serpent follow these Symptoms, An
intolerable heat of the bowels and parts within (whereupon it is named also
Prester and Causos;) an unquenchable and deadly thirst (whereof it has the
name Dipsas) insomuch as no drink will allay it. A more ample description
thereof you shall find in Aetius.

(*) A Viper] is a kind of Adder, as some think: the male is in Greek called
Echis, the female Echidna: and whereas all other Serpents lay eggs, and those
come to life without their bodies, she only brings them forth alive, after
they have had their perfection in her womb. The description of the Viper, the
manner of their engendring etc. you shall find in Galen, de Theriaca ad
Pisonem, out of Nicander.

(o) Of these Aspides] there be three sorts: Chelidoniae, like unto Swallows,
whereof they have that name: Chersaeae, breeding and keeping in desert, rough,
and untilled lands, whence they are so named, whereas the former haunt river
sides and the banks of Nilus especially. Ptyades, the most venomous of all
other, which spitteth forth her poison, and therefore is so called. The sting
of Aspis, mortal though it be, and works speedily, yet it causes no pain,
not works any grievous Symptom of swelling etc. but only kills with a
deadly sleep men or beasts, all but the Ichneumon or Rat of Indie. Wottonus
lib. 6. cap. 11^. de different. Animal. No marvel therefore if Queen
Cleopatra chose to dispatch her self of life by this means.

(aa) Hieroglyphickes.] The word imports as much as sacred sculptures or
engravings. They were Monuments of the Egyptians, under the form of beasts
etc. in lieu of letters, expressing and signifying some hidden sense. See
Picrius his books, entitled Hieroglyphica.

(bb) Solstitium] i. Sunne-stead. It is in Summer and Winter, when the Sun
enters into the signs Cancer and Capricorn, and is run his utmost course
either North or South, seeming for a while to stand still, and to return back
again: whereupon those points be termed the Tropickes of Cancer and
Capricorn. And although this he does twice in a year, yet commonly Solstitium
is put for that only in the midst of Summer.

(cc) Of so great authority was Pythagoras,] that for the maintenance of any
Assertion, it was sufficient to say, (...), i. He said it. How beit, so modest
withal, that he would not be termed Sophus, that is, Learned and Wise, but
Philosophus, i. A lover, or one desirous of learning and knowledge.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 23. Book.
(a) THis Alypius] being deputy Prefect, was Vicarius Britanniae, which under
Praef. Praetor. Galliarum was his Dioecesis, and contained five Provinces,
Britannia prima, Britannia secunda, Maxima Caesariensis, Valentia, Flavia
Caesariensis.

(b) This accords well with that of Hector in Homer, Iliad. m.

(...). (c) This festival solemnity by the first institution was holden at
Rome the day before the T Liva^^. ^ de (...).
Ides, i. the twelfth day of April: Ovid says it was upon the Nones, i. the
fifth day of the said month. Therefore I suppose there is a defect in the
copy, and for ad diem sextum Calendas, should be read ad diem sextum Aprilis,
i. about the sixth day of April: unless you will say, that the Pomp here
imports not the great solemnity it self, called Megalesia, or Megalentia,
but some ceremonial complement going before it, and then it might be 6. called
[Aprilis,] i. the 27. day of March.

(d) Cicero cites this Oracle or Prophecy in the second book de Divinatione,
in this verse:

Croesus Halym penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim. (e) This Oracle we read in
Herodotus Polymnia:

(...)
(...).
For whereas the Oracle darkely employed, that they should build a wall of wood
and therewith defend themselves, by the counsel of Themistocles they built a
navy of ships, and at sea vanquished the Medes.

(f) Pyrrhus] King of the Epirots, who derived his pedigree from Achilles, and
so from Aeacus by the mothers side, and by the father from Hercules.

(g) Her sons name was Spargapises, general of an army against Cyrus the
great king and ^ounder of the Persian Empire; whose hap was to be defeated and
taken prisoner by Cyrus, after much bloodshed, and afterward slew himself:
in revenge of whose death his mother Tomyris gave Cyrus a great overthrow, cut
off his head, and put it into a paile of men's blood killed in that battle,
with certain words of indignation. Justin, Herodotus, Cleio. I find not that
any more sons than this one were slain, and therefore ye must admit here a
Synecdoche, the plural for the singular, a usual figure in Hellenisme.

(h) (i) Of Bitumen and Naphtha] somewhat has been said before, and more ye
may read in Plin. Not. Hyst. lib. 2. cap. 105.

(k) Brachmenes.] Certain Philosophers, or Gymnosophists of India, called at
this day Bramines. Strabo lib. 15. Hieronym contra Iovinianum lib. 2.

(l) Of these Abi^ and Galactophagi, who a little after are mentioned, Homer
writes Iliad. 13. where (...) is put for (...), by the figure Syncope for the
verse sake. But as touching the etymology of the Abij, the Greek Scholiast
upon Homer puts down diverse conjectures; either for that they use not
(...), that is, bows, where (...) is (...): or, if you take the said (...) to
be (...), that is, augmenting the signification, as the other is a privative
thereof, they are employed to be rich, for that (...) signifies riches: or else
long lived, of (...), that is life: or that they be peaceable, and use no
violence, of the word (...), that signifies violence: or lastly, because they
set not their mind on living daintily, in which sense it seems here to be
taken: for those that desire riches and full fare, are commonly unjust and
wrong doers, whereas these were most righteous.

(m) Of these Mirmillones] see before.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 2^. Book.
(a) THis is an island near to the mouth Canopicus of Nilus in Egypt, called
Pharus, and a town therein built upon an high rock, at the charges of
Ptolomaeus Philadelphias, named also Pharus, wherein there were lights burning
all night long, for the better direction of Sailers in their course on the sea:
whence all other the like towers are termed Phari, Perot-Sip (...). (...).

(b) These devises called Vin^ae and Plutei, whereof there is so much mention
in Livie and other Hystoriographers, were certain fences to protect soldiers
approaching the walls of a city to give aslault, or to undermine, in manner of
pent-houses, and roofes of houses fencing on both sides. Some think that
Plutei were the single pent-houses, and Vineae the double.

(c) Helepolis.] A word derived of the verb (...), to take, and (...), a
city, although it generally signifies any engine or fabric devised for the
forcing of cities, yet (...), this one which Demetrius invented in lieu of the
Ram, is so called. The description whereof is set down in the former book.
The mechanicke or workman thereof was Droclides of Abdera. Athenaeus lib. 5.

(c) Poliorcetes,] is as much as the besieger of cities. This Demetrius was the
son of Antigonus king of Macedonie. In Plutarchs Parallels he is matched with
M. Antonius.

(d) Tribunus] in this place and often beside seems to be the leader of one
cohort, or a colonel of five hundred men, and then he is Tribunus minor: for
every cohort, whereof were ten in a legion, had unum vexillum, i. a banner.
The leader of the whole legion or more, was in times past called Legatus; in
Ammianus he is known by the name of Comes, and Tribunus mayor, and therefore
may well be Englished Lieutenant to the General, for so was Legatus under the
Consul.

(e) These Silver pieces I take to be Sestertij, by excellency termed Numi;
valued at two asses and an half, whereupon by way of abbreviation they are
commonly noted thus H-S: it was the fourth part of a Roman Denarius, which was
much about the Atticke Drachme, and in our money 7. d. ob. an hundred of which
Sestertij in round reckoning amount to a Roman Aureus, that is, 15. s. or
thereabout: which was but a small donative in comparison of that which he had
given before at his inauguration.

(f) There was a device to make bridges upon leather bottles or budgets full of
wind, the description whereof ye may see in Vegetius, set out by Steroechius.
Such a bridge is called there Ascogefrus, as I take it, of (...) in Greek, i.
a leather bottle or budget, and (...), i. a bridge. Incertus author derebus
bellicis, at the end of Notitia.

(g) Titus Manlius, surnamed Torquatus, for dispoyling a Gaul his enemy (whom
he had in fight slain) of a golden collar or chain about his neck. Live. Dec.
I. li. 7. There was also one Valerius Torquatus, upon the like occasion, but I
suppose our author means Manlius.

(h) M. Valerius, surnamed Corvinus, by occasion of a raven that settled upon
the crest of his morrion, as he maintained combat with a Gaul. See Titus
Livius Decad. I. lib. 7.

(i) Disvessis.] What if we read discissis? both come to one sense.

(k) This was Caius Fabricius Luscinus,] of whom Cicero writes in his book
Laelius.

(l) These amount in precise reckonings to six and forty shillings ten
pence halfepenie.

(m) At nine of the clock at night began the second watch: For, the night
containing 12. hours, was divided into four watches, the first began at 6. of
the clock in the equinoxe, and continued three hours, and so the rest, But
these hours were not always equinoctial, but longer or shorter according to
the length of the night.

(n) Of Callimachus,] a brave warrior, and captain of the Athenians, ye may
read in Plutarches Parallels, how notwithstanding he was run through the body
with many a spear, yet stood upright and shrunk not. And of Cynaegirus an
Athenian captain, it is reported, That with his right hand he staid and held
the enemies ship, and when it was stricken off did the like with his left; and
when he had lost that also, took hold of the ship with his teeth. Trop. Herod.

(o) Naval Coronets,] are portraied with sternes, or beake-heads of ships round
about the hoope or circle of the crown. See Veget. lib. 2. cap. 7. Civicke
coronets were of Cuicke grass, called gramen, for saving of an army. Coronets
Castrenses, fashioned like to a pallaisado or rampire, with pales round about
the circlet, for entering the camp of the enemies first.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 25. Book.
(a) IT seems these Tertiaci] be the same that Tertiani in Notitia, to wit,
those of the third legion Italica.

(b) Eight stadia] or great forlongs are said commonly to make a mile, but in
true measure seven stadia and an half are a mile.

(c) Understand by Legio] in this place and diverse other, not a complet Roman
legion, but a company or band.

(d) These here termed Candidati] otherwise Comites, were a crew of gallants
and brave knights, that usually kept about the Emperors person: the same that
Purpurati among the Persians.

(e) Of this M. Marcellus] and his triumph, ye may read at large in Titus
Livius Decad. 3. lib. 6.

(f) For Siccius] read Sicinius Dentatus, out of Valerius Maximus lib. 3. cap.
2. He sought an hundred and twenty battles: gained the spoils by combat of
six and thirty enemies: saved fourteen Roman citizens at the point to be
killed in the field: carried the skarres of five and forty wounds in his
breast and forepart of his body, but not one on his back: followed hard
after the triumphant chariot nine times: And had carried before him in honor
of his chivalrie eight crowns of gold, fourteen Civick coronets, three
murall, one obsidionall, one hundred fourscore and three collers, one hundred
and threescore bracelets, eighteen spears, and five and twenty trappers or
caparisons. It is said that he took the surname Dentatus, because he had for
his row ofteeth one solid and entire bone; or for that the first of that house
was borne with a tooth. Alex. ab Alexand. Genial. Dierum lib. 1. cap. 9.

(g) This Sergius] it may seem was the first of that noble family Sergia, and
he took that name of Sergestus in Virgil. Idem.

(h) Anno aetatis altero and tricesimo,] That is, the 32. year of his age: as
it appears in the Chronology of Cassiodorus and others; according to that
phrase in Virgil, Alter ab undecimo, that is, the thirteenth, which I observe,
least any man should think he dyed in the 31. year of his age.

(i) What right he had to succeed his brother in the Empire, considering that
Constantine had three sons, I see not; unless by his testament he made him
one of his heirs: For Pomp. Laetus writes thus: Some say that Constantine the
great divided the whole Empire among his heirs by will: Others, that his
sons parted it by lot among them. Or happily he might be heir in remainder, if
he survivied his brothers sons, and they dyed without issue.

(k) It appears plainly by this place, that he debarred Christian professors
in Rhetoric and Grammar to teach in open school, for fear least [the
Gentiles] (for now himseife was turned a Pagan should leave numinum cultum, ^.
Idolatry.

(l) The Antiochians, as he writes before, among other scoffs, slouted him
for using to put forth his narrow shoulders: and here he says he had big and
broad shoulders. There must be admitted in the former place a kind of
Antiphrasis, or speech by the contrary: or else to cover his broad flat
shoulders, he used belike to thrust them forth to make them seem narrower.

(m) Ordo Domesticorum] here, is the same that Schola before, to wit, a
Society or company of guard soldiers about the Emperors person in
ordinary: and they be called Scholari^. Next unto the Comes, or captain of
these, was he that they called Primus, or Tribunus Domesticorum: Then
Primicerius, Secundocerius, and so through the ten, which were termed
Decemprimi, and had better wages than the rest. Pancirolus in (...) Orientis
cap. 89.

(n) Ioviani] took the name of Diocletian, who called himself Iovius, and
instituted this company.

(o) The Domestici aforesaid were called also Protectores, as appears by this
place.

(p) As the Iovian^ took name of Iovius, ^. Diocletian, so (...) of (...): for
so Maximian Emperor with Diocletian termed himself.

(q) These Iovij were certain people in Gaul, and a company of them was so
called. As for those that were instituted by Diocletian, surnamed Iovius, they
were rather termed Ioviani. Pancirol. in Notit. Victores likewise were a
company or band of soldiers, taking name either of Victoria a town of
Britannie, or else so called for good luck sake.

(r) These Palatini are elsewhere named Comites, and Candidati.

(s) A principal foregate in the camp was called Praetoria; near unto which
was Praetorium, i. the Generals pavilion, or the Princes, if he were in
procinctu, called here Principis Tabernaculum.

(t) About the mids of July, 15. days before the Kalends of August, what time
Nilus also in Egypt begins to rise.

(u) Armorum Magister,] is the General of the forces, horse or foot, here put
for the General of the Cavallerie in Gaul. In the time when Notitia was
written, which was in the days of Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius the
younger, there were not known any Ensigns belonging to his place of command:
Happily, because that Province was held by the Barbarians, Goths, Hunnes, and
Vandales, who not long after subverted the West Empire. But it may seem they
differed not much from those of the General in the East, to wit, a book
standing upright on a cupboord or table spread with a white cloth of tapestrie.
The cover of the book was of murrey color, with strings in the mids and at
both ends, of the same color. In the middle of the side there is a tablet of
gold, and in it the faces engraven of two Princes or Emperors, to signify, as
I think, both East and West Empires. Notit. Orient. cap. 31.

(x) Modius] seems to be a measure somewhat more than our pecke, containing
16. Sextarij. And if everi^ Sextarius receive 2^. ounces, it is a pecke and
half, if but 18. it is in proportion a fourth part less.

(y) Capita Scholarum] were the Captains and Tribunes of every Palatine
company.

(z) Of Domestici and Heruli] both, enough has been said already.

(a) Gallicani] were such sould^ors as served in Gaul, of what country soever.

(b) Sellacurulis.] A certain chair or seat of estate, one of the regal
ensigns at Rome belonging to the Kings, afterward to Consuls, etc. It was
made of Ivorie.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 26. Book.
(a) SIgna.] A place in the camp where the Aegle standerd and other military
ensigns stood, where the Tribunes and chief officers quartered, and soldiers
punished.

(b) The odd day which every fourth year arising out of the six excrescent
hours in each year, makes the leap year, is called Bissextus, which is
occasioned hereby: the 2^. of February, is the 6. day before the Kalends of
March: Now when this day comes unto it, and makes 29. days of that month,
the day following the said four and twentieth is the 6. day likewise before
the Kalends, and therefore they used to reckon that sixth day twice; and the
year thereupon is called Bissextilis; and Intercalaris of the odd day put
between.

(c) The imaginary circle in heaven, through which the Sun and other Planets
run their race in twelve signs, is called Zodiak, of Zodion in Greek, a
little living creature: because those twelve signs are represented by certain
creatures, as the Ram, Bull, etc.

(d) Intercalation,] is a putting between of a month, or days, thereby to
defer or delay.

(e) Martenses] were a company of soldiers serving under Dux Armoricani
tractus and N^rvicani. Notit. They served in the marches and limits.

(f) Patricij] were the Nobility of Rome, and the Senators degree.

(g) Divit^nses,] Soldiers so called of Divitum, or Divetum, a Mediterranean
or inland town in Sicilie. Tungritani, or Tungricani, of Tungri a town in
Secunda Germania.

(h) Pomponius Latus makes mention of Constantia, a daughter that Constantius
Chlorus the father of Constantine had by his wife Theodora. But I read not
elsewhere of this Anastasia.

(i) Heliogabolus assumed unto him the firname of Antoninus unworthily, as
degenerating from that line and name, which seven Emperors before him bare,
and himself was the last so styled. Ael. Lamprid.

(k) How Alexander Severus, with his mother Mam^^^ was killed, see Ae^^ilius
Lamprid.

(l) (...).] That is to say, a dart or javelin. It seems it was a long,
narrow, and strait passage.

(m) See a little before at the letter (g.)

(n) To wit, with iron hooks and beasts claws.

(o) Phalaris,] a most cruel tyrant of the Agrigentines, who devised a brazen
bull to torment condemned persons in, by making a fire under it, causing them
to frye within it, and bellow like a bull: But both the artisan Perillus, who
made this bull, was for proof of his handiworke, by the tyrants commandment
tortured therein; and Phalaris himself also in a commotion of the people
worthily put into it, and so ended his tyranny.

(p) It may be collected, that by [Defensores] are meant here certain officers
or Magistrates in Cities and great Provincial Towns, called Municipia, which
were Protectors of the Commons in them, like as Tribuni Plebis among the
Romans: for here is no mention made of besieging or assaulting this city. But
if the reader will understand it of the defendants upon the walls, and
generally of the citizens that withstood a siege which here may be employed, I
will not be against him.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 27. Book.
(a) WHat Soldiers these Divitenses and Tungricani were, has been showed
before.

(b) Armaturae] signifies a certain military exercise in Vegetius, whereto
young soldiers were trained by the Campiductores: also light armours: and the
soldiers so trained and so armed. But I suppose in this place are meant a
certain Palatine Schola, or company of soldiers about the Emperor, whereof
Notitia speaks, and I have written somewhat before.

(c) Hastarij and Hastati,] were Pyke-men, or Speare-men, who in libera Repub.
Romanorum, fought in the vaward, before the Principia: as is to be seen in
Titus Livius every where. Howbeit in the later times of the Emperors, and in
Vegetius days, Principes were marshalled in the vantguard and Hastati in the
battle and middle: and even so much Amm. Marcell. in one place seems to
show.

(d) That part of Tuscia, or Tuscane, which was more up-land into the country,
and therefore better for corn, was so called, for distinction from that which
was Maritime.

(e) A part of Rome was seated on the other side of the river Tiberis, and
thereupon called Transtiberina regio.

(f) This herb, because it delights to grow upon walls, we commonly call
Pellitarie of the wall, for Parietarie. The scoff will fit those well, that
love to write their names on every wall.

(g) (h) These were built by Constantine the Great: Where note, that howsoever
Malleolus be by Marcellinus described elsewhere as a fire-dart, or engine in
war, yet here Malleoli be certain bundles of tow, dry sticks, or such
light fuel ap^ to take fire, besmeared with pitch, bitumen, or such matter,
used to set houses on fire, as Cicero charge Catiline with provision of them
[ad incendium urbis,] or to throw down the walls upon enemies that are ready
to assault, or upon their engines and fabrickes. We may in these days call
them balls of wildfire. There is use of them also to kindle and make fire
without such intent, as we read how the Goths kindled them, ad Carraginem, i.
their camp or strength, ^enced with their carts and carriage. Am. Marcell.
lib. 31.

(i) Of Bellona.] She is taken to be the same that Minerva, according to that
of Virgil, Praeses Titonia belli. See before.

(^k) Of Magister Memoriae,] have recourse to the note before.

(l) As Comes was in dignity before Dux, so he is here set in the first place:
like as in the Notitia also he is called Comes Maritimi tractus, for that he
kept the coasts of the East side of the island, like as the Lord Warden of the
Cinque ports in these days. Afterward Comes limitis Saxonici per Britanniam,
was crected, against the invasion of the Saxons, who had then set foot on that
side of the island, and encroached farther.

(m) As Comes Maritimi tractus] had the charge of the sea coasts, so Dux
Britannioe of the Mediterrancan and inland parts: what forces and legions were
under the one and the other, ye may find in Notitia Occidentalis Imperis.

(n) Yet note, that Dux has a reference to the Marches of the Empire; for the
inland part of Britannie was nearer to the limits of the Empire than the sea
coast, whereof there was a Comes.

(o) Iovis] either are the same that Ioviani before, erected by Diocletian who
named himself Iovius: or else levied out of a nation in Gaul so called. As
for Victores, they were happily souldidiors of Victrix legio, that served in
Britannie, or termed of Victoria a place in Britannie, as we find in Notitia:
or else so called boni ominis causa.

(p) Diocmitoe] were light appointed horsemen and half armed, for better
expedition to pursue and follow in chase, whereof they had that name.

(q) Meniana] were buildings jutting forth into the street, partly to enlarge
the room, and partly to gain better prospect: devised by one Menius an
unthrift, who having spent all his land and living, reserved yet such a
gallerie the better to behold public sights and games, of whom such jutties
are named Meniana.

(r) There werein Rome 1^. regions.

(s) Magistrirei Castrensis,] I suppose are here the same that Magistri
militum, or martial captains.

(t) This Sicinius was before called Siccius Dentatus for Sicinius.

(n) Well suiting with this was that device of Archilochus, who depainted
fortune in the form of an old woman, carrying in her right hand flaming fire,
and in her left water. Natal. Comes Mytholog. lib. ^. cap. 9.

(x) Pontus Polemoniachus,] so called of Polemon or Polemo, a king that ruled
that province. Strab. 11. 12. for difference from the great country Pontus,
bordering upon the sea Pontus.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 28. Book.
(a) SIngular care was always had in the Roman State, that corn and other
victual should be very cheap: For which purpose in the free Commonweal
there were especial officers called Aediles, and after in the Emperors time
one ordained out of the degree of Knights or Gentlemen, named Proefectus
annonoe, and Curator annonoe. The policy of that Commonwealth was such, that
by good forecast there was always plenty rei annonarioe, and the price
thereof always low; yea and many times there was given away among the people a
mighty deal and dole of corn and bread: also, that which they called
Edulitas, which was a largess of flesh given by the Emperor, and distributed
among the common people in time of scarcity. Read hereof Aelius Lamprid. in
the life of Alex. Severus.

(a) Because there is so often mention made of Proefec^tus urbi, the Prefect of
the city, that is And note that Rome is often in this our author called Vrbs
aternoe, and so T. Livtus lib. 33. speaks of it to the same sense in these ^
earmes, Vrbem auspicato Dijs aucto ibus in aternurne conditam.
Rome, called ordinarily in this author Vrbs oeterna, it will not be impertinent
some what to write of that magistrate. In the free state he was Provost or
governor of the city deputed in the absence of the Consuls, whiles they
solemnized the festival sacrifices on the mount Albanus during the Latin
holy days, as appears in Livie. In the Emperors time he resembled somewhat
for civil jurisdiction and government within Rome and about it, the Proefectus
Proetorio: and they two were of chiefest authority, as appears by the same
or very like ensigns belonging to the office. And as it may be gathered out
of Notitia, they were these. A chariot-man on foot wearing upon a red, or (as
some books have) a green coat, a white loose mandilian, or a green, without
sleeves: his arms both he puts out, wearing upon his red stockings or blew
buskins up to the knees.
blew shoes: in his left or contra^ ^wise.
hand he bears a rod, with his left he holds the reins and guides them,
hanging from the head of the last or next horse of the four, whereas the other
three are unbridled, and be all of white color. The chariot is of Ivorie
guiltall over, and of that kind which they call Carrucha. Above the portraiture
hereof, there is a table covered with a blew carpet fringed, of tapestrie,
which carries a book standing upright with a leather cover silvered, bound in
the mids, and toward both ends, with golden strings, with the image in gold
likewise of the Prince in the mids of the back: and the same containing the
articles of his charge, putting him in mind, to have care of the city, and to
gather up the revenues thereof. These in a certain frame had the Emperors
images in gold carried before them, and under them the image of a woman,
carrying in her hand Cornucopia. There were represented also two tapers gilt,
burning on each side of the said book. And as to the Proefects Proetorio there
were besides women portraied with crowns on their heads, and chargers or boles
full of golden pieces of coin, according to the number of the Diocesses under
them: so it is probable, that this Prefect had among his ensigns the picture
also of Rome. More hereof you may read here and there in Notitia.

(b) Aruspex] properly is that Soothsayer that foretells future events, by
peering and prying into the inwards of beasts killed for sacrifice: so called a
speciendo victimas ad aram, and is the same that Extispex.

(c) The Solidus among the Romans, as Budeus says, was Aureus, i. a coined
piece of gold: whereof four went to an ounce, so that by this reckoning it was
about 15. s. Now if Modius were our pecke and half, and ten of these peckes
were sold in time of a great dearth for one Solidus or Aureus, that is, every
pecke for 18. d. of our money, then a measure with us called a strike, or
London bushel would have cost ^. s. which was counted dear among the
provincials, which no doubt would have been affoorded much cheaper unto the
citizens of Rome: For the Roman provision out of which this want was supplied,
cost but the third part of that price.

(d) Under Comes sacrararum largitionum] in the West Empire, were six
Procuratores monetoe, or Masters of the mint, which had their mint-houses in
several places: at Sciscia in Pannonia secunda, at Aquileia, at Lions, at
Areles, at Triers, and at Rome, in the temple of Juno Moneta. Triberis.
Here is meant the Mint-master at Rome.

(e) Among other devises to torment folk, were certain plummets or pellets of
lead, called Plumbatoe, different in form from those Plumbatoe in Vegetius,
which were a kind of casting weapons: and herewith poor prisoners and martyrs
were pelted to death. These Constantius the Emperor called Plumbatorum
verbera. And Prudentius expresses the manner of this torture lively in these
verses: Tudatur tergum crebrisictibus,
Plumboque cervix verberata extuberet.
Pulsatus ergo Martyr illa grandine
Postquam inter ictus dixit hymnum Plumbeos, etc.


(f) Although this word Summates may very well agree to all the Senators in
Rome, or Curiales in provincial cities and towns, yet properly it is meant of
those that had been superior magistrates, and borne office of estate.

(g) Busiris] the son of Neptune, a most cruel tyrant of Egypt, whose manner
was to sacrifice all strangers unto his Idol Jupiter. In the end, when he
would have dealt so by Hercules, he and his son, together with the bloody
ministers of such sacrifices, were by him slain. Of him so no torious a tyrant
Virgil writes thus:

Georgic. 3. Quis illaudati nescit Busiridis aras? Antoeus likewise the son
of Neptune and Tellus, a mighty Giant (as Poets feign) in Libya, 6^. cubits
high: He ufed to lie upon the bare ground, and overcame all others in
wrestling, until he met with Hercules, in wrestling with whom when he was
weary and laid upon the ground here covered eftsoons his strength thereby, and
became more vigorous than before: which Hercules perceiving, and how he gat
more strength by touching his mother the earth, overthrew him no more, but in
his arms held him between heaven and earth, so long and so fast, that he
crushed him to death. Natalis Comes of this fabulous narration does mythologize
in this manner, namely, that hereby is confirmed the great Axiom in Physic,
That contraries be cured by contraries: for that as Hercules signifies the
Sun, or heat, and the earth cold; so, hot diseases be cured by cold remedies.
Thus much by the way, and by the Paracelsians leave.

(h) He points at a place in the seventeenth book of Homers Iliads, where
the Greeks fought for the dead body of Patroclus, and were bemisted and
overcast with darkness. The words Ai^x uses are these:

(...),
(...),
(...).
Where note that (...) is put for caligo, and (...), i. a mist or darkness
that takes all sight away.

(l) Tullianum,] one part of the jail or prison at Rome added to the other
named Robur, by Serve. Tullius the king. Sallustius says, it was walled round
about with stone, and arched over head. And Carolus Sigonius collecteth, that
herein condemned persons were throtled and strangled with the halter. De Iudic.
lib. 3. cap. 16.

(k) Valentia] seems to be the North part of that province in Britannie,
which is called Maxima Caesariensis: and so called in honor of Valens the
Emperor, under whom Theodosius had recovered it out of the hands of the Picts
etc. Camd^n in Britan.


(l) Whether he means here hot artificial bathing, or drinking water hot, (a
device of Nero) I leave indifferently to the readers judgment.

(m) The son of Agiasarchus, and a Poet, who being by his father sent into
the field to keep cattle, slept in a certain cave 75. years: whence came
the proverb, Epimenidis somnum dormere. Suidas.

(n) Semiramis] Queen of the Assyrians, and wife of Ninus, who dissimuling the
death of her husband in his habit, governed until her son Prince Ninus was
come to his age. One day as she was dressing her head, word was brought, that
Babylon rebelled: and presently undressed as she was, with one half of her
hair loose about her ears, she ran forth to assault the city, and made not
an end of trimming her head, before she had brought the city to her devotion.
Whereupon the Babylonians erected her statue at Babylon in that manner and
habitas she hastened forth to that exploit. Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 3.

Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, wife of Ptolemeus Auletes, the sister and wife
both of the last Ptolomie, after whose death being wedded to M. Antonius, she
accompanied him in his wars. Of her you may read more in Pliny, Plutarch,
and others.

Artemisia the wife of Mausolus king of Caria, a Lady of incomparable
chastity, and withal right valiant. So affectionat to her husband, that when
he was dead, she spiced her wine with his ashes and drank it: She procured
Orators out of Greece to solemnize his funerals with eloquent Orations, and
erected for him a stately tomb, reputed a wonder of the world: whereupon all
goodly and costly monuments are called Mausolea.

Zenobia Queen of the Pasmyrenes, after the death of her husband Odenatus,
she usurped the Empire in Syria, and is reckoned one of the thirty tyrants or
usurpers in Galienus the Emperor his time: of her rare chastity (as who never
companied with her husband but for procreation) of her magnificent estate, her
martial strowesse, beauty, eloquence, skill in languages, writing of an
Epitomicall History, and training up of her children in learning, read
Trebell. Pollio. Iul. Capitolinus.

(o) Castor and Pollux,] the sons and twins of Laeda and their reputed
father Tyndarus, whereupon they were called Tyndaridae. They lived and ruled
together most lovingly, and were placed after death in heaven, by the name of
the sign Gemini. There is a certain Meteor or fiery impression appearing many
times to Mariners, called after their names, and the same apparition is
fortunat: for they are reckoned (...), i. Daemones averrunci, or depellentes:
and the Romans held the appearing of them to be luckie.

(p) Pliny in his eight book, and 57. chapt. Not. Hyst. reckons up Dor-mice
about delicate meats served up at the table. The manner of keeping and feeding
them for that purpose, you may find there, and in Wottonus de Animalibus.

(q) Stesichorus] a famous Lyricall Poet, so called, for that he was the first
that joined song and dancing with the sound of the harp: for his true name
was Tisias. The nightingale settled upon the lips of him, being a babe, and
sung, praesaging thereby, what a sweet Poet he would prove another day. Lyricke
verses were such at first, as the Chorus upon the stage between every Act in a
Tragoedie sung and acted with the Music.

(r) Cimmerij] were Northern people inhabiting about the lake Motis, where
there is a frith or strait of the sea called Bosphorus Cimmerius, for
difference of Bosphorus Thracius by Propontis and Constantinople. The place of
their habitation was dark, cold, and bleake; like unto that vale in Italy
between Cumae and Barae; environed about with high hills, so that the Sun is
neither morning nor evening seen; whereupon they also are called Cimmerij.
Strab.

(s) These be certain Bathes and wholesome waters, taking the name of Mammaea,
the mother of Alexander Severus.

(t) Of M. Marcellus] his behavior and triumph after the winning and sacking of
Syracus you may read in T. Livius, 26 book.

(u) Ephemeris] in this place, or Ephemerides, as we term it, is an
Astronomicall table, showing day by day the figure and position of the heavens,
and the divination thereby, in which sense Iuvenal takes it in this verse:

In cuius manibus, ceu pinguia succina, tritas
Cernis Ephemeridas --
(x) Mitio and Laches] were two actors in Terences Comaedies, representing good
plain and simple old men, speaking populariter in a civil and vulgar manner,
which is meant here by Socci, i. certain light shoes or startups that Players
in Comaedies used. He means a lowly and humble behavior.

(y) Contrariwise, Ctesphon and Themenus] acted parts in Tragoedies of Hercules
his sons, in an higher and loftier strain, and expressed here by Cothurnus, i.
a buskin, which tragical players used, and are here brought in, speaking big,
and faring as those that are in a proud and disdainefull humor. What these
Ctesphon and Themenus more particularly were, or in what Tragoedies they be
actors, I have not read: but well might they be some of the race of Hercules,
especially seeing, as Varro writes, There were known by the name of Hercules
43. and one of them had 50 wives and concubines, and left 70 children behind
him. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dierum, lib. 2. cap. 5.

(z) How infamous this nation was for sacrificing unto their idol Diana such
strangers as arrived at their costs, especially those that had suffered
shipwreck, or Greeks, Strabo and other Authors write: but Herodotus in
Melpomene says, That they sacrificed not unto Diana, but to Iphigenia, the
daughter of Agamemnon.

(a) The portraiture of Victorie] is to be seen in many old coins, in habit
of a woman, and with wings, holding forth a guirland in the right hand, and
bearing in her left an Olive branch.

(b) The cities, colonies, and towns called Municipia] within the Roman Empire
were much like unto Rome in their manner of Commonweal and government: And as
the Romans had a Senate House and Senators, so had they in resemblance thereof
a Curia and Curiales; who likewise were termed Decuriones, because at the first
erecting and planting of Colonies the tenth man was enrolled a Senator, or one
of the Patres of the place. They had to name likewise Possessores, Ordo,
Honorati, and in Greek Buleutae. As in the Roman Senate there was a President
called Princeps Senatus, so that Decurio or Curialis, who had borne all offices
of State, they called Primus Curiae. And like as in Rome the chief of the
Senators degree were styled Illustres, the rest Clarissimi, so in these
provincial corporations, in the first rank were Summales, Principales, and in
Greek Protestasiae. According to the greatness of the place there were more
or fewer of this order: in some 20 or 10, in others 7 or 5: so that when you
read in this Author of Decuriones in any city, or Curiales, or Honorati, or
simply Ordines or Ordo, understand this degree of chief burgesses: how ever
others expound Curiales, either courtiers, who^ we in Latin call Aulici, or
those that be officers of any judicial court, as Accursius does, and the
author of the law Vocabularia.

(g) As in Rome there was a College of Prelates called Pontifices, so in these
Municipia the chief Clergy men were called Sacerdotales.

(d) Likewise, Aediles] in these colonies and corporat towns resembled in many
points those of Rome: howbeit they had no jurisdiction, but were clerks of the
Market etc. As touching whose charge, you may read more in Papinian his
Astynomicus.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 29. Book.
(a) The verses in Theog^is that he alludeth unto are these in Greek.

sc. (...).
(...)
(...).
(b) By this you may know that these Ecule^] were rackes, to be wrested up or
let down; and Eusebius writes thus: (...): Whereby it is gathered, that the
utmost stretching was to the fifth hole.

(c) Famous were those Quinquennall Games] holden in Greece every fifth year at
the city Olympia, near unto the hill Olympus, whither assembled people from
all parts: whence grew Olympias, i. the space of four years complete and past,
by which they reckoned their times as the Romans by their Lustra, and we
Christians by the nativitie of our Savior, to wit, the first, second, or third
year etc. of such an Olympias.

(d) Carpathos.] An Island between Rhodes and Candie, from whence it came.

(e) Heroicke verses] so called, because in them most commonly were penned the
acts of demie gods and Worthies, such as they termed Heroes; as were the
Po^mes of Homers Iliad. and Odyssea; likewise Virgils Aeneid. This stately
verse is likewise called Hexametre, for that it consists of six feet.

(f) Pythici] were such verses as Oracles were delivered in, so called of
Pythius, one of the sirnames of Apollo, who rendered answers to them that
consulted with his Oracle, whereupon he also was so named (...), and his
Priestresses Pythiae, Strab. lib. 9.

(g) Branchidae] the Priests of Apollo Didymaeus, Strab. lib. 1^.

(h) Of these Olympicke Games] see a little before.

(i) Of these Syrenes or Meremaids] you may read in Homer. Odyss. lib. 12. how
Ulysses as he passed by them in the Sicilian sea, stopped the ears of his
companions with wax, and caused himself to be fast tied unto the mast of his
ship, because they should not be allured with their sweet melody.

(k) The Areopagites] Counsel and Court of justice in Athens was most severe
and upright, instituted by Cecrops first, as Eusebius thinks, and not by
Solon. The reason of that name is twofold, either for that there passed in that
court trial and judgment of bloodshed and murder, which is expressed under
the name of Mars, in Greek Ares: or because Mars, when he was judicially
accused by Neptune, for killing his son Halirrhotius, there stuck down his
spear. More hereof, and of the fabulous concertation at the bar of the gods,
you may read in Carol. Sigon de Rep. Atheniens. lib. 1. cap. 3.

(l) Seven vowels he means in Greek, (...).

Pliny writes, That the pain of the stomach, next unto the Strangurie,
occasioned by the Stone, is most intolerable. Now, whether he means that
which the Physicians term Cardialgiam, or Ileos, otherwise called Volvulus,
Iliaca passio, and [Domine] miserere mei: which although originally be seated
in the small and higher guts, yet for the vicinitie soon affects the
stomach, as appears by dolorous vomiting: or rather the disease or Symptom
Cholera, wherein the stomach is most painefully affected, and discharges it
self upward and downward, I cannot determine.

(kk) Whereas in the 29. book, cap. 8. Valentinian is said to have kept two
she Bears, the one named Innocentia, the other Mica aurea, i. golden Mica,
probable it is by the former name, that the other also alluded to Mica, the
name of some woman. I call to mind therefore, that in Plutarchs Morals, among
praise-worthie women, th^^e is a large narration of one damsel, the daughter
of Philodemus, an Elean, named Mica, or as some read, Micca, who under the
licentious reign of Aristotemus the tyrant, one Lucius was enamoured upon, and
after much courting and soliciting of her to forfeit the honor of her body,
but all in vain, killed her in the sight and bosom of her father, whose
gilded image was set up for a memorial in Rome. And this is the conjecture of
Pancirolus.

(l) Of these Masters of Forges] wherein armor was made, see before.

(m) There were certain officers belonging to the Emperors stable called
Stratores] who were to choose and allow horses meet for service.

(l) Constantiani] were a band of soldiers erected by Constantius the Emperor.

(m) Lerna or Lerne] a Mere in the territory of Argos, which the Serpent Hydra
haunted, and did much mischief to all the country about it, whereinto also
they used to cast all filth etc. Whence came the Proverb, Lerna malorum, i. a
sink of all sin and mischief, Strab. This serpent (as they say) had to one
body 50 heads, and as any one of them was cut off, there grew presently two in
the place, Palaeph. de Fabulis. It was one of Hercules his labors to destroy
this serpent.

(m) (n) These two Legions took the name of Pannonia and Maesia, out of which
provinces they were levied.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 30. Book.
(a) PRovinciae moderatoris apparitor.] Although Moderator strictly taken
signifies the Ruler of a small Province, who properly is termed Corrector, yet
here it is more generally put for the governor of Cilicia, who was Consularis;
and an officer of his had the charge to ward this gate of Tarsus, a city in
that Province.

(b) Among other Attributes given to Jupiter, one was Herod^^. i^ Cl.
Xenius, or Hospitalis, the Superintendent, as it were, of guests, and their
entertainment. So religious they were in old times, that a guest once received
should be inviolable, according to that verse in Virg. Aeneid. 1.

Jupiter, hospitibus nam te dare iura loquuntur.

(c) This is that Fabricius Luscinus, or Lucinus] who was so poor (because he
contemned riches) that his daughters (as is beforesaid) were married with
dowries out of the chamber of the city.

(d) Who was slain as he sat at supper by Perpenna his companion in the same
faction. Plutarch.

(e) Academia] a shadie and woodie place a mile from Athens, where Plato was
borne and did first teach; so called, as Eupolis says, of Academus a god,
according to the verse, (...): and Horace, Atque inter sylvas Academi quaerere
verum. Hence it is, that all famous Schools of Learning and Universities be
called Academies.

(f) Trebatius] a renowned Lawyer, and familiar friend of Tull. Cic. as
appears in his Epistles: the rest also were deep Lawyers in their time.

(g) Of his intemperat speech and railing upon Achilles, you may read Homer.
Iliad. b. That which Ammianus alludeth unto is this, (...): wherein he compares
his prating to the untunable chattering of Choughes and Dawes.

(h) This is that Caius Gracchus] of whom Tully writes in his third book de
Oratore, as also Fabius Quintilian, cap. 10. lib. 1. and Aulius Gell. lib. 1.
cap. 11. That when he was to plead, he had a man or Musician that stood closely
behind him with a little yvorie pipe, such as they call (...), thereby to put
him in mind of raising or letting fall his voice.

(i) Some writers go clear away with this opinion, That Valentinian died of an
Apoplexy: But if we confer the nature of an Apoplexy with the manner of
his disease, and some other circumstances here put down, namely, That
Physicians and Surgeons were employed then in the cure of his soldiers, sick
of the pestilence, the fiery heat that he was surprised and possessed with, his
deadly yexing, gnashing of his teeth, his laying about him with his arms, and
last of al, the blew spots appearing on his body, we may the rather be induced
to think he died of the plague.

(k) As for those passages which he calls here Haemorrhoids] they be certain
veins, in number five, descending from the master vein, called Cava or
Chilis, to the circle of the fundame^t or tiwill: which for that they do void
blood sometimes naturally, or by art are opened and caused to bleed, for
avoiding of melancholy diseases, be termed Haemorrhoids.

(l) Of this Milo] his strength, and his strange death (occasioned by the
confidence of his own strong arms, whiles he would assay to cleave the body
of a An Oak says Valerr^. Max. having wedges set in it.
tree, that had a rift or chinke in it) you may see more in Valor. Max. lib. 9.
cap. 12. of whom the Poet Iuvenal also writes thus: -- Viribus ille
Confisus perijt admirandi^ que lacertis. Satyr. x.



(m) Comes praefuit rei Castrensi.] He was General of the Forces, and not
Comes Castrensis, which was another officer in the time of the Emperors,
attending in court, otherwise called Tricliniarcha in the days of Alexander
Severus, under whom were the ministers and servitors of the Emperors house, all
save those of his Chamber, as butlers, carvers, yeomen of the cellar, wayters
at the table etc. going all under the name of Ministeriani and Castrensiani:
For the Emperors house is compared to Castra, i. the camp, and from thence
borrows many terms. Habent. n. Aulici (as says Tertullian) militiae
imaginem. Under him were the Paedagogiani, such as now we term Pages, and
used to wear purple shoes, etc. like unto whom Ammian. compares Procopius,
when he was newly invested in his imperial robes: He used to go before the
Emperor with a golden Verge or Warder: He was called in the later times
Curopalata, and as Pancirol, upon Notitia says, may be compared to the Major,
Steward, or grand Seneschall of the kings house. The Ensigns belonging to this
office import as much, as side Tables, Cupboord, Basin and Ewre, Flagons etc.
By way of agnomination Marcellinus nick-nameth one Hyperechius, apparitor
Gastrensis for Castrensis, ltb. 26. cap. 10.

(n) Artaxerxes] as some think, was a general name in times past of the kings
of Persia, as now Sophi is. This Artaxerxes, called here Macrocheir, is named
in Latin to the same sense Longimanus, for that one hand, to wit, the right,
was longer than the other, and is thought to be the same that Assuerus in
Hester, the son of Xerxes. See Justin. Coelius Rhodigin.

(o) (p) So called, for that in running he had not his peer. Of this argument
read the pleasant digression of T. Livius, Decad. 1. lib. 9.

Annotations and conjectures upon the 31. Book.
(a) This Baine took the name of Valens himself.

(a) By Trebellius Pollio he is named Divus Claudius, and reigned presently
after the 30 tyrants or usurpers, in sundry parts of the Empire.

(b) Of Domesticorum Comes] has been written before.

(c) Carrago] was a fortification in manner of a camp, that these Barbarians
made, fenced about with their carts, whereupon it took the name. Of the like
Trebellius Pollio makes mention in the Gallieni, and Divus Claudius, also
Zosimus.

(d) Of the Cornuti] somewhat has been written already.

(e) Take Defensores] here for the townsmen generally, and not those magistrates
of the people that be called Defensores.

(f) (g) (h) Of these Lancearij, Mattiaci and Batavi] see before.

(i) Pomponius Laetus writes, That he did this voluntary, according to the
example of the ancient Decij, surnamed Mures, who for their country exposed
themselves to death.

(k) Cn. Scipio] who with his brother Pub. died in Spain, and his hap was to be
burned within a tower. T. Live. 25. Florus. He is otherwise called Cura, or
Curator Palatij, Curopalata likewise, and Comes Castrensis.

(l) As for Promoti] they were a company of soldiers so called, for that they
had been by certain degrees for their good service promoted. Pancirol. in
Notitiam.

(m) Of this notable overthrow of the Romans at Cannae, wherein were slain of
Romans and Allies above 85000 men, T. Livius reports in the second book,
Decad. 3.

(n) These Cylindri] Vegetius calls Taleae.

FINIS.
* The Chronology to Ammianus Marcellinus, from the beginning of NERVA his
Empire, unto the death of VALENS.
Years of the world Years of our Lord Consuls. Acts. Years of their Empire.
Years since To. foundat. 4067 97 C Fulvius Valens.

C. Antistius.

IN this year, on the (18.) day of September was Domitian the Emperor slain,
in the year of his age 45.

15 849 After him succeeded NERVA COCCEIVS CAESAR. AVG. PONT. MAX. TR. PLEB.
PA. PATR. the xiij. Emperor, and reigned one year, four months, and ix.
days. Dion. From the beginning of his empire Ammianus Marcellinus began his
Hystories, drawn out to 31. books, whereof the former 13. be lost. 4068 98
Imperator Nerva, the third time.

Virginius Rufus the third time.

Traianus is by Nerva adopted and called Caesar. 1 850 S. John the Evangelist
returns from exile to Ephesus. 4069 99 Imperator Nerva 4. ^ time.

Traianus adopt son of Nerva August. Caesar, the third time.

Cornelius Tacitus was Consul in the rowme of NERVA deceased: who died the 27.
of January. 1 851 After whom succeeded Nerva Traianus, Opt. Aug. Germ. Dacic.
Parthicus, the xiiij. Emperor, and ruled years 19. months 6. days 15. Dion.
4070 100 C. Sosius Senecio the second time.

A. Cornelius Palma.

Traianus refused the third Consulship due unto him, as the new Emperor, Plin.
secund. in Panegyrico. The same did Augustus an hundred years before: Both of
them by the secret counsel of God, unwitting of so much themselves, giving
place to Christ the monarch of all Monarchs. 2 852 S. John the Evangelist
dies at Ephesus, in the ninetieth year of his age, or the 91. Eusebius. Hieron.
4071 101 Traianus the Emperor the third time.

M. Cornelius Fronto the third time.

In this time flourished Plutarch Cherrhonensis, who left behind him, as
monuments of his learning and wit, his Parallels and Morals: Also L. Florus,
who wrote a 3 853 Breviary of Livie: and Plinius the sisters son of
Plinsecund. who wrote the Natural history: whose Panegyric to Traianus and
Epistles be at this day extant. 4072 102 Traian the Emperor the fourth time.

Sex. Articuleius Paetus.

4 854 4073 103 C. Sosius Senecio the third time.

L. Licinius Sura the second time.

The third persecution of Christians under Traian: which exhibited unto us an
infinite number of most constant Martyrs. Ecclesiastical history. 5 855 4074
104 Traian Emperor the fifth time.

L. Appius Maximus the second time.

6 856 4075 105 Suranus the second time.

P. Neratius Marcellus.

The Church is troubled by certain Heretics, whose names are to be buried in
silence and oblivion. 7 857 4076 106 Ti. Julius Candidus the second time.

A. Julius Quadratus the second time.

8 858 4077 107 L. Ceronius son of L.

L. Tutius Cerealis.

9 859 4078 108 C. Sosius Senecio a third time.

L. Licinius Sura, the third time.

Plinius secundus governing the Province Bithynia, when during his government
he had put many Christians to death, much moved at their Multitudes and
Constancy, wrote unto Traian, to know his mind what was to be done with them:
certifying him, that beside their obstinate refusing to sacrifice, he could
find naught else in their religion, but that their congregations met before day
light, to sing certain Hymns to one Christ: that their Discipline forbad
manslaughter, theft, adultery, robbery, etc. and otherwise, that they led a
godly, temperate, and sober life. Unto whom Traian writes back again, that
there should be no inquisition made after Christians: but if they were
presented, they ought to suffer punishment. Eusebius. lib. 3. Tertullian. in
Apologet. Orosius, and others. Now Tertullian taxes this absurd Edict of the
Emperor in this wise: He prohibiteth inquiry after them as Innocents, yet
commands they should be punished as offenders: He spares, and cruel
fares: he dissimuleth, and yet chastises, etc. The name, says he, of
Christians is condemned and punished; but no wicked act of theirs: The name
only is hurtful, the men themselves harmless. 10 860 4079 109 Ap. Annius
Trebonius Gallus.

M. Atilius Metilius Bradua.

Evaristus Bishop of the Church of Rome, for professing Christ, suffers
death. 11 861 4080 110 A. Cornelius Palma the second time

C. Caluisus Tullus the second time

Ignatius Bishop of Antioch is condemned at Rome to be exposed unto savage
beasts. Eusebius. 12 862 4081 111 Clodius Crispinus.

Solenus Orphitus.

A mighty Earthquake, which Dio describes at large, shakes the city of
Antioch. 13 863 4082 112 C. Calpurnius Piso.

M. Vettius Rusticus Bolanus.

About this time Traian having expelled Cosroes, held for 3. years the kingdom
of the Parthians, reduced Dacia, Scythia, Syria, Armenia, Assyria, and
Mesopotamia, into the form of Provinces: He much enlarged the bounds of the
Roman Empire: brought under his dominion the Iberians nere unto Pontus Euxinus,
the Sauromatae, Agarens, Arabians, beside the cities of Seleucia, Ctesiphon,
and Babylon. Dion. He appointed the river Euphrates, or as others write,
Tigris to be the limite of the Roman Empire. Eutrop. He so prepared and rigged
a fleet in the Red Sea, that thereby he might invade and waste the borders of
India. Cassiodorus. 14 864 4083 113 Trajan the Emperor the sixth time.

C. Julius Africanus.

The Column of Trajane, which is to be seen in Rome at this day, was about
this time erected: bearing Date of the 17. Tribuneship of Trajane. 15 865 4084
114 L. Publius Celsus the second tune.

C. Clodius Crispinus.

16 866 4085 115 Q. Ninnius Hasta.

P. Manilius Vopiscus.

17 867 4086 116 M. Valerius Messala.

C. Popillius Carus Pedo.

The Jews in Libya, Egypt, and other Countries, made an Insurrection, and
began to rebel; but by the Gentiles were vanquished and repressed. And when
in Mesopotamia they warred afresh upon the Inhabitants, Trajan gave
commaudement unto Emilius, to root them out, or expel them that Province.
Against whom Quietus came with banner displaied, and put infinite thousands of
them to the sword: whereupon the Emperor ordained him to be Procurator of
Iudaea. Dion. Spartian. Eusebius. 18 863 4087 117 L. Antistius son of D.

L. Aemilius Aelianus.

Many in sundry places became Martyrs, and died for Christ his name. At Rome,
Alexander pastor of that Church, or Bishop: together with Eventins a Presbyter,
and Theodulus a Deacon was slain the third day of May. Alittle before Hermes
Prefect of the City together with his family; Zeno a noble man, and Eustathius
with his wife and sons were killed. Hist. Ecclesiast. 19 869 4088 118
Quinctius Niger.

T. Vipsanius Apromanus.

Trajanus the Emperor dies about the 11. day, or as Dio says, the 7. of
August, in the 64. year of his age. He was by the Senate styled by the title
of Princeps optimus. More of his praises you shall find in Dio. Among the rest
this is recorded, That in the Creating of Praefectus Praetorio, the highest
officer of Estate under him, when he invested him with the Sword, he said,
This Sword thou shall draw for me so long as I rule justly: but if I shall rule
unjustly, draw it hardly upon me. He was the first Stranger or Alien borne out
of Italy that was made Emperor. He used the familiarity of Plutarch. 20 870
In his Empire he demeaned himself so well, that unto any new created Emperor
after him the acclamation went in this note, More happy than Augustus, more
honest than Traianus. Among many other excellent sayings of his, Eutropius
records this unto his friends seeming to blame him for being over courteous
to all men, he answered thus: That he was such an Emperor to private persons,
as he would wish Emperors to be unto him self if he were private. Him
succeeded Imper. Caesar Traian. HADRIANVS Aug. P. Max. COS. III. the 15.
Emperor. He reigned years 20. months 10. days 29. Dion. Spartian. Here would
be observed the difference in Chronologers: whiles Ptolome, Gerhart, Merc. will
have the beginning of Adrians Empire to be in the year since Christ's Nativity
117. The Romans writers in the year 118. and this difference continues unto the
year 162. 4089 119 Hadrianus Augustus the 2. time.

Ti. Claudius Fuscus Salinator.

Hadrian envying the glory of Traian, calls home the armies out of Armenia
and Mesopotamia: and renders up those provinces again unto Cosroes the king
of the Parthians. Volater. 1 871 4090 120 Hadrianus Augustus the 3. time.

Q. Iunius Rusticus.

He brought colonies into Libya wasted with the tumultuous commotions of the
Jews. Eusebius. Dio. 2 872 4091 121 L. Catilius Severus.

T. Aurelius Fulvus. Who was afterward called, Antoninus Pius Augustus.

3 873 4092 122 M. Annius, son of M. Verus 2. Augur. 4 874 4093 123 M. Acilius
Attiola

C. Cornelius Pansa.

The Christian Church is much troubled with the Gnostici, most silthie
Heretics. 5 875 4094 124 Q. Artius Paetinus.

C. Veranius Apronianus.

Hadrian persecuteth the Christians, and purposes to punish the Jews that
made turnults in Jury especially. 6 876 4095 125 M. Acilius Glabrio

C. Bellicius Torquatus.

Learned men are raised up by God to withstand Heretics, and defend Christian
Religion: among whom were Agrippa Castor, Aristides a Philosopher of Athens,
and Quadratus bishop of Athens and disciple of the Apostles: and these two
having written books in defense of Christian Religion, exhibit them to Hadrian
the Emperor. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 3. This Quadratus in a book that he presented
unto the Emperor writes, that himself being very aged, had seen many who in
the days of our Savior, having been afflicted with maladies, were by him
healed in Judea, and who also had risen from the dead. Hyeronimus. 7 877 In
this age lived Papias bishop of Hierapolis, who heard the disciples of the
Apostles, and wrote that in his hearing the daughters of Philip reported, how
in their time one was raised from the dead: and that (which was no less
admirable) Iustus Barsabas, of whom mention is made in the first chapter of the
Acts of the apostles, by reason of the grace given unto him from our Lord, found
no trouble or harm by drinking a cup of deadly poison. Eusebius lib. 3.
Hadrianus built and erected in Athens an admirable Library. He disputes and
discourses there in manner of a Philosopher: he remoueth those from professing
and teaching schools who were insufficient. He contendeth with learned men, by
way of writing and disputation. Spartian. 4096 126 P. Cornelius Scipio
Asiaticus the 2. time.

Q Vettius Aquisinus.

8 878 4097 127 M. Lollius Pedius (by others Vespronius) Verus.

Q Iunius Lepidus Bibulus.

Sixtus Bishop of the Church at Rome for mainteining the Gospel, is put to
death. In whose place the next morrow after was Telesphorus the son of
Anachoreta elected. Onuph. 9 879 Serenus Granius, or, as some write him,
Serennius Granianus, a Lieutenant and of noble parentage descended, wrote a
letter unto Hadrian the Emperor, aduertising him that it was a most unjust
course, to yield unto the clamors of the common people, the shedding of
innocent Christians blood, and that without any crime committed, they should be
held guilty and condemned for their name and sect sake only: wherewith Hadrian
being moved, wrote unto Minutius Fundanus Proconsul of Asia, That no Christians
should be condemned without enditement of crimes and the same proved. The copy
of which letter remains extant to this day. Eusebius. lib. 4. 4098 128
Gallicanus.

D. Coelius Titianus.

Lampridius in the life of Seuerus writes, that Hadrian was once minded to
build a Temple unto Christ, and commanded that for the use of Christians their
should be Churches founded and erected in Cities without images: but was
prohibited and stayed by some, who said, if this were done, all men would
forsake the temples of their gods, and embrace Christian Religion. 10 880 4099
129 L. Nonius Asprerias (or Asprenas) Torquatus.

M Annius Libo.

About this time flourished Aquila Ponticus, who translated the Bible or Holy
Scriptures out of Hebrew into Greek. Suetonius the Historiographer, who was
secretary unto Hadrian. Phlegon the Chronographer. Also P. Iuuentius Celsus,
Nerasius Priscus, and Domitius Labeo, famous Lawyers. Likewise Lucianus
Samosatenus Atheus, who with much liberty of tongue and pen marketh and
revileth the gods of the Gentiles: He spares not Christ also, naming him
(...), i, The sophister hanged upon a Cross, Some set this down 2. years
after. 11 881 4100 130 P. Iuventius Celsus the 2. time.

Q. Julius Balbus.

Rufus the Procurator or Governor of Iudaea kills a great number of the
Jews. Iosip. Many Christian soldiors for the Christian faith suffer death at
Rome. Eus. 12 882 4101 131 Q. Fabius Catullinus.

M. Flavius Apet.

Barcozba, a Prince of the Jews and their counterfeit Messiah haleth to
execution such Christians as persevere in the faith. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 6. 13
883 The city Hadrianopolis was built. Niceph. lib. 3. ca. 24. 4102 132 Ser.
Octavius Lenas Pontianus.

M. Antonius Rufinus.

The furious tumults and outrages of the Jews increase in Syria and Palestina,
assembling themselves together by infinite numbers, and promising themselves
exceeding great victory, under the leading of Bar-cozba their Mock-Messias.
Dio, Eusebius. This Barcozba is otherwise named Barcochab, that is, the son of a
star, for so he termed himself, and deceived the credulous Jews, and
expounded that prophecy of himself, Out of Jacob shall arise a star. 14 884
4103 133 Serius Augurinus.

Arrius Severianus.

The last war of the Jews under Hadrianus. The Jews revolting openly from
the Romans, and taking arms, spoil and waste all Palestina. Unto Tinius Rufus
Governor of the Province Hadrian sends an Army to sub due the Rebels. This
was a dangerous and a long war, continuing three years: whiles the Jews
take it to the heart, that foreign Nations came to inhabit their City
Jerusalem. At first the Romans made small account of them, but after they
understood once that all Iewry was up, and all the Jews wheresoever dispersed,
Hadrian sent the most expert and valiant Captains that he had against them,
Dio. Eusebius. 15 885 4104 134 Heberus Julius Silanus Sesennius. Bar-cozba, or
Bar-cochab aforesaid, not only adjoined unto him the Jews, but went about
also to draw the Christians into society of war against the Romans: and
therefore as many of the Christians as refused this service, he put to sundry
torments and kinds of execution. 16 886 4105 135 C. Julius Servilius Vrsus
Servianus.

C. Vibius Iuve^tius verus.

But Julius Serverus sent into Iewrie, and not daring to fight with these most
audacious and desperate Brigands, drew out the war in length. Mean while the
Power and Forces of Bar-cochab were confirmed: so that for certain years, he
held within Iewrie 50. castles, 98. villages, and Bethoron a town right
strongly fenced: 17 887 4106 136 Pompeianus Lupercus.

L Julius Atticus Acilianus.

Out of whith town he sallied upon the Romans, and oftentimes put them to
flight. Whereupon Hadrianus returned into Syria, and besieged the Jews for
three years together, forced Bethoron at length, and slew Barcozba. 18 888
4107 137 L. Ceionius Commodus Verus, who was afterward called Caesar.

Sex Vetulenus Ciuita Pompeianus.

The number (by report) of the Jews slain in this war, was 50000. And as
for them that died of Pestilence and Famine, they were innumerable. [Here note
by the way, that when the Jews were thus defeated, and their Leader slain,
they knew him to be a very counterfeit, and their false Messiah, whereupon they
termed him Ben-cozban, that is, the son of Lying] Hadrian thus having ended
the Jews war, and subdewed them, debarred the Jews of entrance into
Jerusalem. He walled the City about, and called it Aelia after his own 19 889
name: and upon the gate that leads to Bethlehem he caused a Swine of Marble
to be engraven. And this was the last and utmost destruction of the Jews: who
being expelled, and utterly oppressed, he granted Jerusalem unto the
Christians. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 5. Dio. in Hadrian. Thus was the prophefie of
Daniel 670. years before fulfilled. And by this might the Jews see, that all
hope of their Messiah to come was quite cut off. And now upon their desolation,
and rooting out, began the Church of Christ to flourish, etc. Then, I say, was
Jerusalem inhabited by Christians, and other nations, according to the saying
of our Savior, Luke 21. Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot by the
Gentiles. And by Computation of the years this destruction falls out to be
an hundred years after the suffering of Christ upon the Cross, and the 63.
year after the former destruction by Titus. So that now was fulfilled their
cry, His blood be upon us and our children. Moreover, Hadrian made a Law, that
none of the Jewish nation should be so hardy as enter the territory of
Jerusalem. Then was the Prophecy of our Savior fulfilled: There shall not
remain one stone upon another, etc. The Jews taken prisoners in that war
Hadrian sent away into Spain, there to live in exile. From whence also in the
year of our Lord 1500. they were expelled by Ferdinandus King of Spain, and
Emanuell of Portugal. Vasaeus. 4108 138 L. Aelius the son of Hadrian August.

Verus Caesar the second time.

Yet for all this ceased not the persecution against Christians. Certain noble
women suffered Martyrdom at Rome: And in the beginning of this year
Telesphorus Bishop or Pastor of that Church was killed: whom seven days after
succeeded Higinius of Athens. 20 890 4109 139 Sulpitius Camerinus.

Quinctius Niger Magnus.

Hadrian the Emperor dies the eight day, or as some say, the tenth of Iulie,
when he had lived 62. years 5. months, and 19. days. Dio. Spartian. At his
death he pronounced these verses, which bewraied he was no good Christian. 1
891 Animula, vagula blandula, Hospes Comesque corporis, Quae nunc abibis in
loca? Pallidula, rigida, nudula, Nec ut soles dabis iocos. After whom succeeded
T. Aelius Hadrianus ANTO NINVS Aug. Pius. Par. Patr. the sixteenth Emperor:
He ruled years 22. or (as some say 23.) months 7. days 26. The Apophthegme
of Scipio Africanus was rife in his mouth, That he had leifer save one citizen
and subjects life, than kill a thousand enemies. Julius Captiolinus. 4110 140
Antoninus Pius Emperor the second time.

Brutius Praeses.

The people of Britannie affecting liberty, are in many battles vanquished by
Lollius Vrbicius, and brought to good order and allegiance. Capitolin. 2 892
Ptolemaeus the great Astrologer, and Galen that renowned Physician in these
days flourish. Likewise Salvius Iulianus the learned Lawyer, and Justin the
Historiographer, who drew the Books of Trogus Pompeius into a Breviarie. 4111
141 Antoninus Pius Emperor the third time.

M. Aurelius son of August. Pius, Caesar: who after was called Augustus.

Justinius the Philosopher compiled a Book in defense of Christian Religion,
and delivered it to ANTONIUS. Holy and godly Christians endure persecution,
and are much troubled by these Heretics, Valentine, Cerdon, and Marcus
Colarbassus. Eusebius, Irenaeus. 3 893 4112 142 M. Paeducaeus Sylogas Priscinus.

T. Hoenius Severus,

Hyginius Minister and Pastor of the Church of Rome, for Christ's Gospel
suffered Martyrdom. Him succeeded after three days Pius of Aquileia. 4 894
4113 143 L. Cuspius Rufinus.

L. Statius Quadratus.

Antoninus withdrew from many of his Ministers and servants in Court that lived
idly, their salaries, saying: There was not a thing more base, nay, more
cruel, than that they should consume the riches of the commonwealth, who with
their own labor brought no profit thereto. Iul. Capitolin, 5 895 4114 144 C.
Bellicius Torquatus.

Ti. Claudius Atticus Herodes.

Lucius and Ptolemaeus were at Alexandria killed for the testimony of Christ. 6
896 Now began the Question at Laodicea in Asia, about the day of the Pasche,
i. Easter. Onuphr. 4115 145 Lollianus Avitus.

C. Gavius Maximus.

7 897 4116 146 Antoninus Pius the Emperor the fourth time.

M. Aelius Aurelius son of Augustus Pius, Caesar, the second time.

Sundry Heretics, companions and disciples of the former, work much trouble
in the Churches of Christ, groaning under the Cross of persecution. Eusebius.
Irenaeus. 8 898 4117 147 Sex. Erucius the son. Clarus the second time.

Cn. Claudius Severus.

In this year Justinius wrote two Apologies for the Christians. Onuphrius.
Severus, afterward Emperor, was now borne. Spartian. 9 899 4118 148 M.
Valerius Largus.

M. Valerius Messalinus.

The learned men of this age were Arianus of Nicomedia, Maximus Tyrius,
Apollonius, and Basilides. 10 900 4119 149 C. Bellicius Torquatus the second
time.

M Salvius Iulianus the second time.

11 901 4120 150 Ser. Cornelius Scipio Orphitus.

Q. Nonius Priscus.

12 902 4121 151 Romulus Gallicanus.

Antistius Verus.

13 903 4122 152 Sextus Quinctilius Gordianus.

Sextus Quinctilius Maximus.

14 904 4123 153 Sextus Acilius Glabrio.

C. Valerius Omollius Verianus.

An Edict of Antoninus Pius the Emperor promulged at Ephesus in the behalf of
Christians, in the general Council of all Afia to this effect: If any man
proceed, to molest, or accuse any Christian (for his Profession) let him who is
thus troubled, although he be found a Christian, be absolved, and his accuser
suffer just and due punishment. 15 905 Eusebius. And there Antoninus alleges the
Edict of Hadrian in these words: In favor of which men, that is, Christians,
other Governors also of Provinces wrote before time unto my father of sacred
memory: To whom he wrote back again, That no man should trouble this kind
of men, unless they were convicted to have plotted and practiced aught against
the State. Eusebius. 4124 154 Bruttius Praesens.

M. Antonius Rufinus.

16 906 4125 155 Aelius Aurelius son of Pius Augustus, who afterward was
called Augustus, the second time.

Sextillus Lateranus.

17 907 4126 156 C. Julius Severus.

M. Rusinus Sabinianus.

18 908 4127 157 M. Ceionius Silvanus.

C. Serius Augurinus.

Marcio Ponticus and his disciples, heretics, trouble the Church. Onuphr. 19
909 4128 158 Barbatus. Regulus. 20 910 4129 159 Q. Flavius Tertullus.

Sacerdos.

Under Anicetus Bishop of Rome, Polycarpus a disciple of S. John the Apostle
came to Rome, and reduced many that had bin seduced by Heretics unto the true
faith. He sharply, and with great courage, repressed Marcion. Eusebius. lib. 4.
21 911 Irenaus affirms, that in his youth he had seen this Polycarpus, a
very aged man, and further faith: There be that have heard Polycarpus say, that
Saint John the disciple of our Lord going to Bath, when he saw Cerinthus
within, leapt forth of the Bain before he had bathed, saying withal, That he
feared left the house would have fallen, whiles Cerinthus an enemy to the
Truth, was within it. And Polycarpus himself meeting upon a time with
Cerinthus, when he said, Take knowledge and acquaintance of us, returned this
answer, I know thee indeed to be the first begotten son of Satan. Irenaeus
lib. 3. 4130 160 Plautius Quinctillus.

Statius Priscus.

Antoninus the Emperor having a wealthy estate of his own by inheritance,
gave away most liberally all his riches among his friends: but made the Common
Treasury exceeding rich. Eusebius. 22 912 4131 161 T. Vibius Barus.

Ap. Annius Bradua.

23 913 4132 162 M. Aclius Aurelius some of Augustus Pius Caesar the third time.

L. Aclius son of Augustus Pius Caesar the second time.

Antoninus Pius the Emperor died the 7. day of March, at Lorium, an house or
manor of his own, in the year of his age 75. 1 914 After whom succeeded in
the Empire the 17. and 18. Emperors, to wit, MARC. AURELIUS ANTONIUS,
surnamed Philosophus: and, Luc. AURELIUS VERVS. Eusebius. Iul. Capitolin.
ANTONIUS the Philosopher governed years 19. days 11. and VERVS, years 9.
Eutrop. This was the first time that Rome began to have two Augusti or
Emperors at once. Capitolin. Eusebius. 4133 163 Q. Iunius Rusticus

Vettius Aquilinus.

The Parthian war with King Vologesus, unto which Verus the Emperor went:
who lying at Antioch, and about Armenia, performed by his Captains many noble
exploits. Statius Priscus fought fortunately in Armenia, Avidius Cassius and
Nartius Verus, marched with a puislant army as far as to Babylonia, and
Armenia. Seleucia that most noble city of Assyria, with 500000. men he won:
He brought backewith him the Parthick Triumph, and together with Antoninus
Philosophus triumphed. Eutrop. An exceeding great famine and pestilence at
Rome. Most streit Laws as touching sepultures and burial of the dead are
enacted. 2 915 4134 164 L. Papirius Aelianus.

Iunius Pastor.

3 916 4135 165 C. Julius Macrinus.

L. Cornelius Celsus.

4 917 4136 166 L. Arrius Pudens.

M. Gavinus Orfitus.

Aufidius Victorinus is sent against the Catti, who had invaded Rhetia. Iul.
Capitolin. 5 918 The Church under the Cross has diverse Pastors and Doctors
excelling in Piety and Doctrine, To wit, Polycarpus, Dionysius of Corinth,
Melito, Justinius, and others. Eusebius. 4137 167 Q Servilius Pudens.

L. Fusidius Pollio.

Tatianus the father of the Heretics Encratitae disquieteth the Church.
Ecclesiast. writers. 6 919 The two Emperors triumph at Rome over the
Parthians. 4138 168 Antoninus Verus the Emperor the third time.

T Vinidius Quadtatus.

The fourth persecution against the Christians, wherein Polycarpus Bishop of
Smyrna 86. years old, Justinius the Philosopher, Maturus, Pothinus, Attalus,
Blandina, and an infinite number of others, as well in the East as the West,
are killed. Eusebius. lib. 4. and 5. Blandina in the mids of her tortures cried
ever and anon, I am a Christian: with which she refreshed her self to endure
all. 7 920 The war against the Marcomanni whereunto the Emperors addressed
themselves, was by reason of the Pestilence, stayed a good while. Capitolin. 8
921 4139 169 L. Vettitus Paulus.

T. Iunius Montanus.

The persecution of the Church continues. Eusebius. When in the expedition
against the Marcomans, the Emperors were come to Aquileia, certain of their
Princes entreated for pardon and peace. Capitolin. 9 922 4140 170 Sosius
Priscus.

Q Caelius Apollinaris.

Lucius Aurelius Verus, as he was in his journey from the city Concordia to
Altinum, sitting together with Antoninus Philosophus in his Chariot, died of an
Apoplexy. A man by nature nothing civil, howbeit in a reverent regard of his
Companion in the Empire, he never attempted any forcible act. Eutropius writes
that he died in the eleventh year of his Empire: but the Chronographers think
otherwise, whom we have followed: after his decease Antoninus Philosophus ruled
alone. Capit. 4141 171 M. Aurelius Severus ^ethegus.

L. Julius Clarus.

Avidius Cassius nominated, in the East, Emperor, was presently by the
soldiers beheaded. Spart. Vulcat. Gall. 10 923 4142 172 T. Titienus Serenus.

C. Scoedius Natta Pinari^^s.

Egesippus now lived, who is accounted a famous writer of the Ecclesiastical
history. 11 924 The Church still flourishes under the Cross. 4143 173
Claudius Maximus.

Cornelius Scipio Orfitus.

Dame Felicitas with her seven sons at Rome, and Concordius an Elder of the
Church at Spoletum, became martyrs. Asianus and Apollinaris present Apologies
unto Antoninus. 12 925 The whole world was afflicted with so great a
mortality, that the Roman armies were consumed therewith almost to the last
man. The Germans that made an insurrection were repressed. Eusebius. Niceph.
Capitolin. 4144 174 M. Aurelius Severus the 2. time.

Ti. Claudius Pompeianus.

The frantic Heresy of Montanus spread into the Churches. Eclesiast. histor.
13 926 The Marcomans war (none before it has bin recorded so great) by
singualr prowess and felicity both was by M. Antoninus Philosophus
dispatched, and brought to an end: whereof we may read in Oros. li. 7. ca. 15.
Iul. Capitol. Eutrop. Eus. lib. 5. Tertullian. cap. 5. Apologet. and in others.
4145 175 Ap. Annius Trebonius Gallus.

Flaccus.

A notable victory of M. Antoninus Philosophus the Emperor over the Quadi and
Marcomanni, obtained by the prayers of the Christian Soldiers. For when the
army of Antoninus was distressed five days together, for want of water, and
the Soldiers within the streights of certain mountains in Germany enclosed
round about with the Quadi, were in a manner killed with thirst; the Prefect of
the Praetorium came unto the Emperor being in a great agony and sore appauled,
saying, That the Christians by prayer could obtain any thing at the hands of
their God. Antoninus hearing that, requested of them to pray unto their God.
Which when they had done, kneeling on the bare ground, and pouring forth their
prayers to Christ, suddenly there powered down also from heaven abundance of
rain, wherewith the Romans, by receiving water, partly at their mouths, and
partly with their shields, were refreshed: but contrariwise the Quadi, and
other Nations of Germany were haunted with Lightnings. Oros. Capitolin. Eusebius.
Tertull. The Emperor amazed at so great a miracle, highly honored the
Christian Soldiers, mitigated the rigor of persecutions, and named that
Legion of the Christians for an ever lasting memorial thereof, in Greek (...)
i. Fulminatrix. Thus by the means of Christians were the Quadi vanquished. 14
927 Extant there be yet the Letters of Marcus the Emperor, wherein he lays
open all this matter to the Senate of Rome, and testifies, that this heavenly
benefit is to be ascribed unto the Prayers of Christians. Credible it is, says
he, that these Christians howsoever we account the^ impious, have God in their
breast for their defense: For, no sooner did they cast themselves down upon the
ground, and offered their prayers to a God unto me unknown, but presently there
fell from heaven a most cold rain to us, but on our enemies hail and
lightning. Unto their prayers was that God presently assistant, who cannot be
vanquished: therefore let us grant unto such persons, that they may be
Christians, lest they procure against us by their prayer such darts to confound
us. 4146 176 Calpurnius Piso

M. Salvius Iulianus.

After these enemies thus subdued M. Antoninus Philosophus, delivers Pannonia
out of servitude. Eutrop. 15 928 4147 177 T. Vitrasius Pollio the second time.

M. Flavius the second time.

ANTONIUS triumphs again at Rome with his son Commodus Antoninus, whom he
had made Caesar. Eutrop. Lamprid. Iul. Capitolin. 16 929 The Common Treasure in
this war was wasted. But Marcus for two months together sold by port sale in
the Forum or Hall of Traianus, all the furniture and stuff that belonged to
his own private estate: and after his Triumph, gave back the money again to
as many as would restore the said goods which they had so bought: neither
molested he any that chose rather to keep still with the^ what they had once
bought. With public feasting he cheered up the people; and likewise with shows
and public sights, and at once, by report he exhibited an hundred horse in the
Shew-place. Eutrop. 4148 178 Imp. Caesar L. Aurelius Commodus Augustus.

Plantius Quinctilius.

Severus Praetor elect, governs well in Spain. Spartianus. 17 930 Irenaeus
Bishop of Lions, wrote against Heretics, Books that are yet extant. Eusebius.
In the time also of Irenaeus, as himself witnesses in his second Book
against Heresies, the gift of casting out Devils, or evil spirits, and of
healing, continued still. Tertullian makes mention of this Irenaeus, and
names him to be a most curious and exact examiner and searcher of all kinds
of learning. 4149 179 Vettius Rufus. 18 931 Cornelius Scipio Orfitus. 4150 180
L. Aurelius Co^modus Augustus the second time.

Vespronius Candidus Verus.

Persecutors and Heretics both, are overcome with the patience of Christians,
and the godly erudition and learning of Bishops. Ecclesiast. hist. 19 932 4151
181 Bruttius Praesens the second time

Sex. Quinctilius Gordianus.

Marcus Antoninus Philosophus dies the 17. day of April, in the 59. year of
his age, as Tertullian notes, who lived in this age. Onuphr. He left unto the
world a great miss of him for the present, and to posterity a perpetual
memory of his virtue. Happy had he been, as Capitolinus writes, if he had
not left a son behind him: Yet took he order to have him excellently well
brought up and instructed. From hence the Roman Story proceeds from the
golden age to that of iron: such a sudden change there was, under Commodus, of
the Roman Empire. From this year begins Dio his Story, wherein he relates
for fifty years space, what himself was an eie-witnesse of. And from this
very year of Antoninus his death, begins Herodian his Story, which holds
on for 59. years, namely to the year of our Lord 239. Now whereas Herodian
says, that he wrote the acts of 70. years, happly he compriseth therein
some years of Antoninus Philosophus whereof he was no eie-witnesse. 1 933 Him
succeeded AURELIUS COMMODVS ANTONIUS, the nineteenth Emperor, at nineteen
years of age. He ruled twelve years, eight months, and fifteen days. In
nothing resembled he his father, but that in person he also fought fortunately
against the Germans. For rigor and cruelty he was even another Domitian: For
silthy and unbridled lust, another Nero: taking pleasure in the bloody
exercises of Sword-players: a very monster in the shape of a man. Dio. Lamprid.
Herodian. Dio writes, that Martia, a Concubine that Commodus kept, was well
affected to the Christians; and for that she might do much with Commodus,
conferred many benefits and favors upon them. 4152 182 Aurelius Commodus
August the third time.

Antistius Burrhus.

The Temple of Serapis in Alexandria was burnt. Eusebius. 2 934 A little before
Smyrna a city of Asia fell in an Earthquake. Eusebius. Commodus triumphs over
the Germans, who as yet were not fully subdued. Herodian. 4153 183 Petronius
Mamertinus,

M. Vettius Stlavius Albinus Trellius Rufus.

Among so many hindrances, occasioned by the Tyranny of Commodus, yet Pantaeus
erected and kept a famous School of Christians at Alexandria: out of which
came the Doctors of many Churches. The Scholar of Anteus, was Clemens
Alexandrinus, whose works entitled Stromaton, are read at this day. Eusebius. 3
935 4154 184 Imp Commodus the fourth time.

M. Aufidius Victorinus.

4 936 4155 185 M. Eggius Marcellus.

N. Papirius Aelianus.

The Baines of Commodus were built with exceeding great charges. 5 937 4156 186
Triarius Maternus.

M. Atilius Metilius Bradua.

Origin about this year was borne at Alexandria. Then flourished many famous
Doctors of the Church. Ecclesiast. hist. 6 938 4157 187 Imp Co^modus the fifth
time.

M. Acilius Glabrio.

Perennius the Prefect, a bloody Minister of as cruel a Lord, by wicked
devises entrappeth many of the Nobility, and kills them. Lamprid. Herodian.
7 939 4158 188 Clodius Crispinus.

Papirius Aelianus.

The Capitol of Rome was smitten with lightning, and a great sire occasioned
thereby. A most renowned Library, and all the houses near adjoining were
burnt. Lamprid. Herodian. 8 940 Diverse Synods are by the Bishops holden about
Easter day. Whiles the Church has but a little rest from persecution, the
Ministers thereof fell to jarres and brawles. Ecclesiast. hist. 4159 189 C
Allius Fuscianus.

Dullius Silanus.

Perennius is torn in pieces by the soldiers: after him succeeded Cleander a
notable sycophant of the Court: who by Domitian is put to death. A great famine
at Rome. Lamprid. Herodian. 9 941 Apollonius a Senator of Rome, when he had
read unto the Senate a Book which he had written, Of true Religion, for his
Christian faith lost his head. Eusebius. lib. 5. 4160 190 Iuuius Silanus.

Q. Servilius Silanus.

Commodus took away the head of a Colosse, and caused the head of his own
image to be set thereupon. He would needs be styled Hercules, and God.
Lamprid. Cassiodor. 10 942 4161 191 Imp. Commodus the sixth time.

Petronius Septimianus.

The Jews Thalmud was now written. Seder Olam. 11 943 4162 192 Cassius
Apronianus.

M. Atilius Mesilius Bradua the second time.

There happened in Rome a great scarre-fire: whereby the Palace and Temple of
Vesta, with most part of the City was laid even with the ground. 12 944 Among
so many calamities Victor Bishop of Rome busieth and troubles the East
Churches about Easter day. Ecclesiast. hist. 4163 193 Imper. Commodus the
seventh time.

Helvius Pertinax, the second time, who afterward was called Augustus.

Commodus, so incommodious to all men, was strangled in the night that went
before the Kalends of January, that is, New-yeeres day, when he had lived 31.
years, and 4. months. Lamprid. Dio. Herodian. 13 945 This Prince lived for
nothing but the mischief of his subjects, and his own shame. Lamprid. Here
Clemens Alexandrinus ends his supputation of times, who was an Elder or
Minister of the Church at Alexandria, and in profession of Catechizing, was
placed in the room of his Master Pantaenus. 4164 194 Q. Sosius Falco. C.
Julius Fructus Clarus.

After Commodus succeeded Helvius PERTINAX, the twentieth Emperor, who reigned
two months, and eight and twenty days. And was slain by his own soldiers,
in the 68. year of his age. Dio. Spartian. Herodian.

1 946 This Pertinax was at first a Professor of Grammar: and in that function
succeeded his master Sulpitius Apollinaris. The Greeks term him (...), for
that he was rather affable than beneficial. Pescennius Niger, was by the army
in Syria saluted Imperator. Spartian. After Pertinax ruled Didius Iulianus as
Emperor 66. days. Dio. Spartianus. Septimius SEVERUS, after that Didius
Iulianus was slain, obtained the Empire; dread both of the Senate and people
of Rome. He reigned seventeen years, eight months, and three days. Of this
Emperor this was the dome of the Senate, That either he should never have
been borne, or never died: because he seemed too too cruel, and exceeding
profitable to the commonweal. Dio. Spartian. Herodian. Clodius Albinus is by
the Army in Gaul saluted Emperor. Iul. Capitolin. 4165 195 Imp. Septimius
Severus Augustus the second time.

D. Clodius Ceionius Septimius Albinus Caesar the second time. (Sparrianus
names Apuleius Rufinus.)

Severus goes forth with an army against Niger, whom he vanquished in three
battles, and in the end, in a suburbian place near to Cizicum, others say
Antioch, commanded him to be beheaded. Spartian. Herodian. 2 947 4166 196 Q
Flavius Tertullus.

T. Flavius Clemens.

An end of the war against Pescennius Niger. Severus minds to make war
against Clodius Albinus. 3 948 During the noise of so many wars, the
Controversy is very hot about Easter day, between the Churches of Rome and
of Asia: for which Victor the Bishop of Rome, would needs excommunicate the
Bishops of Asia. Unto whom by Letter Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus, and
Irenaeus the Bishop of Lions do answer. And Irenaeus verily was of opinion,
That for the difference about Rites and Ceremonies, the concord of Doctrine and
of Faith ought not to be broken or dissolved. Eusebius lib. 5. Artemon the
Heretic raises trouble in the Church. 4167 197 C. Domitius Dexter the second
time.

L. Valerius Messala Thraseas Priscus.

4 949 4168 198 Ap. Claudius Lateranus.

M. Marius Titius Rufinus.

Severus overcommeth Clodius Albinus at Lions: sets the city on fire: and
sends the head of Albinus to Rome. Herodian. Spartian. and others. 5 950 4169
199 Ti. Alterius Saturninus

C. Annius Trebonius Gallus.

When Severus was returned to Rome he deals cruelly with the friends of
Albinus, and with the principal Nobles. Herodian. and others. 6 951 M.
AURELIUS ANTONIUS the son, being by his father saluted Emperor the 6. day of
May, reigned with him 13. years. Herodian. with others. 4170 200 P. Cornelius
Anullinus the second time.

Marcus Aufidius Fronto.

Severus turns the war into the East against Barsenius K. of the Atrenians.
Dio. Herodian. 7 952 4171 201 Ti Claudius Severus.

C. Aufidius Victorinus.

The king of Armenia makes a league with Severus. 8 953 Abgarus king of the
Osroens yielded himself, and gives his sons for Hostages. After this
Severus wastes Arabia the Happy. Herodian. Spartian. 4172 202 L. Annius
Fabianus.

M. Nonius Mucianus.

Severus vanquisheth the Adiabenes. He besieges Atras a city of Barsenius in
vain. Herodian. Spartian. 9 954 4173 203 Imp. Septimius Severus the third time.

Imp. M. Aurelius Antoninus.

Severus arriving by fortune rather than of purpose, upon the coasts of the
Parthians, disseiseth Artabanus of Ctesiphon, and wins the city, and so
becomes master of all the Treasure, and of a very great pillage. Herodian. 10
955 What was the discipline, rites and manners of the Christians in this age,
Tertullian who then flourished in the Church, describes in his Book Adversus
Gentes ca. 39. The fifth persecution of Christians is set on foot. Eusebius.
wherein Leonides the father of Origin by glorious martyrdom was translated out
of this life: and his very son, a child, exhorted his father by Letter
cheerfully to abide martyrdom. Eusebius. Origin says Hierom with six brethren,
and his mother, a widdowe, is left poor, about seventeene years of age. Being
eighteen years old in the dispersed Church of Alexandria labored in the
function of Catechizing: and afterward by Demetrius the Bishop of that city
was confirmed in the rowme of Clemens, and many years flourished. Severus in
his journey to Alexandria, made Laws unto the Palestines: under pain of
grievous punishment, forbade that any should be made Jews, and ordained the
same as touching Christians. 4174 204 P Septimius Geta.

L. Septimius Plautianus the second time.

11 956 4175 205 L. Fabius Cilo Septimius the second time.

M. Annius Libo.

For fear of persecution many Christians lie hidden in desert wildernesses.
Ecclesiast. hist. 12 957 4176 206 M. Aurelius Antoninus the second time.

P. Septimius Geta.

13 958 4177 207 M. Nummius Ceionius Annius Alb^us.

Fulvius Aemiliaous.

Severus translated the war into Britanny: and for to make the provinces
which he had recovered more secure of the Barbarians incursions he drew a
rampire or wall one hundred thirty and two miles in length, from sea to sea.
But Polydor Virgil in his second Book De Reb. Anglicis, and in the life of
Severus avoucheth, that this work was done almost 200. years after. 14 959
4178 208 M. Flavius Aper.

Q. Allius Maximus.

Tertullian, a most witty and sharp Disputer, and a famous Divine, wrote
against Marcion. This Tertullian in his Book to Scapula shows, that the
Presidents of Provinces, who persecuted the Christians, went not away clear
and unpunished: Also, that Severus himself favored Christians. Cyprian, as S.
Jerome witnesses in his Catalogue, attributed so much unto Tertullians
Writings, that whenever he called for the Book thereof, he usually said unto
his Clerk or Notarie, Give me hither my Master, meaning Tertullian. 15 960
4179 209 M. Aurelius Antoninus the third time.

P. Septimius Geta the second time.

16 961 4180 210 Ti. Claudius Pompeianus.

Lollianus Avitus.

17 962 4181 211 M. Acilius Faustinus.

C. Caeso^ius Macer Rufinianus.

18 963 4182 212 Q. Elpidius Rufus Lollianus Gentianus.

Pompo^^^s Bassus.

In this year, the fourth day of February, died the Emperor Septimius
Severus, when he had lived three score and five years, nine months, and
twenty five days: unto whom his sons were much deerer than his Subjects.
Upon his deathbed he said unto his sons: Agree together, enrich the
Soldiers, despise all others. Dio. This Prince, whom his good fortune from a
base condition, had by the offices of learning and warrefare 1 964 by many
degrees brought to the Imperial dignity, was wont, by report, to say; I have
bin all, but nothing booteth. Spart. After him succeeded M. Aurel. ANTONIUS
CARACALLA the 23. Emperor of Rome, who ruled, years 6. and months 2. and
together with him, his brother P. SEPTIMIVS GET A 1. year, and 22. days.
Herod. Spart. Dio. 4183 213 M. Pompeius Asper.

Asper.

Septimius Geta Emperor, was by his brother Antoninus Caracalla slain in the
very bosom of his mother about the end of February. Papinianus the Lawyer
being commanded to excuse that murder, refused, saying. That it was not so
easy to excuse a parricide, as to commit it. This man therefore, worthy of
immortal praise, was beheaded, because he would not defend so wicked and
abominable a cause. This Papinian was called the Sanctuary or Oracle of the
Law, out of whose School many skillful Lawyers have come. 2 965 4184 214 Imp.
Antonin. Caracalla the fourth time.

P. Caelius Baldinus the 2. time.

Caracalla gives order, that as well the friends, as enemies of Geta should be
killed. Herodian. 3 966 4185 215 Silius Messala.

Q. Aquil. Sabinus.

4 967 4186 216 Aemilius Laetus.

Anicius Cerealis.

Baines were built at Rome of most curious and admirable workmanship. The
Emperors Court is stained and become infamous, through many foul kinds of
licentious lusts and bloody cruelty. Dio. Spartianus. 5 968 4187 217 Q Aquilius
Sabinus he 2. time.

Sex Cornelius Aemillinus.

Antoninus Caracalla not able to bridlc and rule his fleshly lust, takes to
wife his stepmother. Spartianus. 6 969 As he takes a view of Alexandria, and
beholds it, he assembleth all the youth of the city together, and then, by
giving a watchword and signal to his soldiers, procures them all to be
cruelly massacred. Herodian In certain tumultuarie skirmishes he vanquisheth
the Goths in the East. Blondus. 4188 218 Bruttius Praesens.

Extri atus.

Antoninus colorably pretends to marry the daughter of Articanus King of the
Parthians. And so having passed over Euphrates, whiles the Parthians suspected
no harm, as who took him for a friend, and their kings son in Law, he put
a great number of the Parthians to the sword. Herodian. 7 970 Antoninus
Caracalla, when he had polluted himself with the blood of so many excellent
men, was slain the 8. day of April in the 29. year of his age. Dio.
Spartianus writes, that in the mid way between Carrae and Edessa, what time as
he went to war again upon the Parthians, he was stabbed with a dagger by a
servitor of his, who had mounted him on his horse back: and that by the means
of a train that Macrinus Prefect of the Praetorium had plotted against him,
who after him entered upon the Empire. Caracalla, says Dio. never thought to do
good, because, as himself confessed, he never knew any goodness. After
Caracalla succeeded OPILIVS MACRINVS the 24. Emperor, who reigned one year,
one month, and 28. days. Eutrop. Iul. Capitolin. 4189 219 M. Opelius
Antoninus Diadumenus Caesar the second time.

Adventus.

Artabanus King of the Parthians, for this notorious injury which he had
received at the hands of Antoninus Caracalla, with a puissant power invaded the
Roman limits: Whom Macrinus encountreth, and for three days fought
fortunately. But when news came of Antoninus his death, he makes a league
with the said king of the Parthians. Herodian. 1 671 The seventh day of June
Macrinus the Emperor, and Diadumenus Caesar were by the soldiers slain.
After them succeeded. M. AURELIUS ANTONIUS HELIOGABALVS the five and twentieth
Emperor, a very monster, made altogether of abominable lusts and excessive
cruelty. He ruled three years, nine months, and four days. Dio. Lampr.
Herodian. Eutrop. 4190 220 Imp. Antoninus Heliogabalus the second time.

Sacerdos.

Thus Heliogabalus a slave, enthralled to all lust and filthiness, demeaned
himself as a woman, and like a woman became wedded unto men. His Teachers and
Ministers of most lewd and wicked acts he advanced to honors, whiles in the
mean time he thrust down or murdered excellent persons: Insomuch as he left
nothing behind him but the infamous memorial of beastly filthiness and
cruelty. Herodian. Lamprid. Dio. 2 972 4191 221 Imp. Antoninus Heliogabalus the
third time.

M. Aurelius Eutychianus Camazo^ the second time.

This monster most cruelly persecuteth the Church. Ecclesiast. Histor. 3 973
4192 222 Annius Gratus. Claudius Seleucus. The Temple Heliogabaleum at Rome was
built. 4 974 Pammachius a noble personage of Consular degree, Simplicius a
Senator, and their families, Calepodius an Elder of the Church, Quirinus and
Martina a virgin, were crowned with Martyrdom. Ecclesiast. hist. Cyprian
Bish. of Carthage now florisheth, whose writings full of manifold learning and
piety, be extant: Likewise Julius Africanus a most renowned Chronographer.
Nicopolis a city in Palestina, called before Emmaus, is now built. Eusebius. 4193
223 Imp. Antoninus Heliogabalus the fourth time.

M. Aurelius Alexander Severus Caesar.

Heliogabalus in the eighteenth year of his age, upon the eight day of March,
as Onuphrius says, is killed by the soldiers, together with his mother,
Semiamira, a notorious wicked woman, and a worthy mother of such a son: His
carcass was trailed, tugged, haled throughout the city, and all to be mangled
even as far as to the draughts and sinckes thereof, and at length thrown
into Tyberis, with a weight fastened thereto, that it should not floate above
water, nor be buried. Thus a foul and filthy end attended upon the unclean
and beastly life of this Sardanapalus. Lamprid. Herodian. Dio.

5 975 Him succeeded ALEXANDER SEVERUS the 26. Emperor, who governed years
13. days 9. Lamprid. A right praiseworthie Prince he was, and most profitable
to the Commonwealth: he loved learned men, and was himself learned also: he
enacted many Laws, but passed no constitution without the advice of twenty
lawyers, and those most learned and wise men, the chief of whom was Vlpianus.
He made much of Christians (although some think otherwise, for that under his
Empire, Callistus and Vrbanus Bishops of the Roman church, Cecilie a Roman
Virgin, Tiburtius, Valerianus, Maximus, noble personages, and others in diverse
places, were killed for the profession of Christ) and especially he delighted
in this speech, which he caused to be written upon the walls, and proclaimed
by the Crier, What thou would not should be done to thy self, do not to
another. His mother was Mammea the daughter of Maesa, a christian woman: who
sent for Origin a man in those days famous for his excellent Doctrine, and of
him learned Religion. 4194 224 Maximus. Papyrius Aelianus. This Alexander
Severus drew those to bear offices of State and Dignity, who drew back and
refused, saying, That those went to be placed in authority who were unwilling
thereto, and not such as sued therefore. A certain Scribe or Notarie, who at
the Emperors Counsel Table recorded untrueths, he caused to have the sinews
of his fingers cut through that he might never be able to write again, and
then banished him. Unto his own wife, who complained and blamed him, for that
by his exceeding courtesy he made his power and authority more contemptible;
Yea, answered he, but yet more secure and durable. He was minded to build a
Temple in the honor of Christ, and to receive him in the rank of gods, whose
Image also he had in his closet. And when the Christians had possessed
themselves of a certain place, which had bin public or common, and the
company of Victuallers challenged it to be theirs, he wrote unto them, That it
was better God should be worshipped there, it skilled not how, than that the
place should be allowed for Victuallers. Vlpian the Lawyer, he protected and
defended, from the anger and violence of the soldiers, by putting his purple
robe between him and them. Lamprid. Herodian writes moreover, that he ruled
the Empire without blood: and that in his time there was no man killed without
condemnation. 2 976 4195 225 Claudius Iulianus.

Clodius Crispinus.

3 977 4196 226 L. Turpilius Dexter.

M. Maecius Rufus.

Vlpianus a most learned Lawyer, and the maker of many Laws, which are
contained in the Pandects, was killed by the Praetorian soldiers. Eusebius,
and others. 4 978 Thinking dome of the Parthians had now an end, by reason that
Artabanus their King was vanquished and slain by Artaxerxes King of the
Persians. Agath. lib. 4. 4197 227 Imp. Alexander Severus August the second time.

(...)

5 979 4198 228 D Clius Balbinus the second time, who was afterward called
Augustus.

^. Clodius Pupienus Maximus, who afterward was called Augustus.

Severus prepares an army against the Persians. 6 980 4199 229 Vettius
Modestus.

Probus.

Severus defeated Artaxerxes or Abgarus King of the Persians: and triumphed
over him. Herodian writes that this war was right dangerous unto the
Romans. 7 981 4200 230 Imp. Alexand. Severus Aug. the third time.

Cassius Apronianus son of Dio ^he second time.

Armies are sent into sundry parts of the Empire. Lamprid. 8 982 4201 231
Calpurnius. Agricola. About this time flourished Origin at Alexandria, where he
had succeeded Clemens his Master in the Catechizing chair. Among other works
he compiled also (...), that is, the whole volume of the Bible he digested and
divided into six columns, and as many languages or editions. In the defraying
of the charges, helped and furnished he was by one Ambrosius a rich man, whom
Origin had convicted of heresy, and reduced into the right way of truth. 9 983
In Mauritania Tingituna Furius Celsus made war and sped well: In Illyricum
Varus did likewise, and Iunius Palinatus in Armenia. Concerning which
victories, see Lamprid. and others. 4202 232 T. Claudius Pompeianus.

Fetctanus.

10 984 4203 233 Julius Lupus.

Maximus.

Alexander Severas instituteth certain Almes-boyes and Gerles, whom after his
mothers name he called Mammaei and Mammaeae. Lamprid. 11 985 4204 234 Maximus
Ovinius

Paternus.

12 986 4205 235 Maximus Vrbanus. 13 987 4206 236 L. Catisius Severus

L. Ragonius Vr^nanus Quinctianus.

The war in Germany wherein Ale xander Severus the eight day of March, in a
tumul (...) the Soldiers, was with his mother slain at Mogunce. Lamprid.
Herodian. Iul. Capitolin. He had then lived 29. years, 4. months, and 7.
days. Lamprid. Herodian.

1 988 After Alexander Severus succeeded MAXIMINVS the 27. Emperor, who ruled
about three years E^ ab. Capitolin. Ior^and. This Muximums was at first no
better then a Sheepherd, and kept sheep in the much times of Thracia: but for
his goodly tall and big body, he was enrolled a soldier, and by little and
little Fortune led him by the hand, and raised him from that low condition to
the imperial estate. Alexander Severus the Emperor cast a liking and favor
unto him for his military strength, yea he advanced and endowed him with many
benefits, but to his own destruction: and in truth, nourished, as they say, a
Viper in his bosom. For Maximinus was no sooner in a tumult of the soldiers
saluted Emperor, but he commanded Alexander and his mother Mammea to be
killed. This Maximinus was the very plague and baue of the Commonweal, as one
who went about to establish his Empire, not with justice, but with cruelty and
tyranny: whomsoever it pleased him, he killed, without audience given them to
plead for themselves, he thrust out of the Court, deprived of goods and
offices, at his pleasure. More rigorous and cruel to citizens and Subjects
then to his enemies: odious to all good men, acceptable to the wicked for his
cruelty, oppression, and exaction. Capitolin. Iornandes. Maximinus vanquished
the Germans. The friends of Severus he caused cruelly to be murdered.
Capitolin. Herodian. 4207 237 Maximinus Augustus

C. Iuliu Africa^us.

The sixth persecution against the Christians, and especially against the
Pastors of the Church, was by this Cyclops raised. Ecclesiast. hist. 2 989 Then
it was that Origin writ a Book of Martyrdom. 4208 238 P. Titius Perpetnus.

L. Ovinius Rust^cus Cornelianus.

Maximinus the Emperor, in the 65. year of his age, was together with his
son murdered by his own soldiers at Aquileia. Their dead bodies in
shameful and reproachful manner being cast out into the open streets, were
left to be devoured of dogs and fowls. Their heads were pitched upon poles,
and sent to Rome, where they yielded a pleasant spectacle unto all men: and at
last, by the people leaping for joy, burnt in Campus Martius. When the son of
Maximinus was killed, a cry was set up, That of so bad a kind, there ought
not to besaved so much as a whelpe. There was not (says Capitolinus) a more
cruel beast that lived upon the face of the earth: such a confidence he had
in his own strength, as that he thought he could not possibly be killed.
And when as for the goodly greatness of his body he believed in a manner that
he was immortal: there stepped up one in the Theater, even in his presence;
who pronounced certain Greek verses to this effect: 1 990 And he that cannot
be killed by one, is killed by many. An Elephant is big, and yet is killed. A
Lion is strong, and yet is killed. A Tigre is strong, but yet is killed. Take
heed of many together, if thou fear none severally. The two GORDIANS, father
and son, being by the Army in Affrike made Emperors, for 36. days, and no
more, retained both life and dignity: For vanquished they were and slain by
Capellianus Prefect of the Moors. When their death was known, the Senate of
Rome created PVPIENVS MAXIMUS, and BALBINVS, Emperors, and by a new name
styled them EATHERS OF THE SENATE. These reigned together one year. Herodian.
Capitolin. There happened so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that it was as
dark at noone day as at midnight, neither could any thing be done without
candle light. Capitolin. 4209 239 M. Vlpius Crinitus.

C. Nonius

Proculus

Pontianus.

Pupienus Maximus, and Balbinus, were at Rome, by the Praetorian soldiers
killed, in the time of the Capitoline Games. Herodian. 1 991 After them
succeeded M. ANTONIUS GORDIANVS the younger, who the year before was styled
CAESAR, and he reigned six years. It was a saying of his, Miserable is that
Emperor from whom true reports are kept. Capitolinus. 4210 240 Imp. M. Anton.
Gordianus.

M. Acilius Aviola.

Sabinianus in Afric raises sedition and rebellion against Gordianus: whom
Gordianus, by the Prefect of Mauritania forces to yield. Capitolin. 2 992
4211 241 Vettius Sabinus the second time.

Venustus.

3 993 4212 242 Imp. Marc. Anton. Gordianus the second time.

T. Claudius Pompeianus.

The Persian war. Gordianus espouseth the daughter of Misitheus a learned and
wiseman, of whose valiant service and politic counsel in the Persian war
he had good proof. Capitolin. 4 994 4213 243 C. Aufidius Vettius Atticus.

C. Asinius Praetextatus.

Gordianus opens the Temple of Ianus: marches against the Persians:
vanquisheth Sapor King of the Persians, and regaineth many cities. Capitolin.
Eutropius. 5 995 There happened so great an Earthquake, that itswallowed up
many cities with their inhabitants. Capitolin. 4214 244 C. Julius Apriauus.

Aemilius Papus.

Misitheus Prefect of the Praetorium, dies. In whose place was ordained
Philippus Arabs, who being forgetful of a benefit received by Gordianus,
attempted with wicked and cursed devises to hoist him out of his Imperial
seat. Capitoliu. 6 996 Argunthis King of the Scythians, wastes the borders of
the Roman Empire. Capitolin. 4215 245 Pereg^inus.

Fulvius Ae^ilianu^.

After that GORDIAN was by the soldiers slain in the month of March M.
JULIUS PHILIPPUS ARABS governed as Emperor, together with PHILIPPUS his son, 5.
years, and certain months. Eutrop. Victor. This Philippus Arabs was the
first Roman Christian Emperor. And Eusebius reports of him, that on Easter
day, the Bishop would not admit him to the Lords Supper, before that among
others confessing their sins, he stood up in the Church and showed tokens of
repentance. 1 997 4216 246 Imp. Mare.

Julius Philippus.

T. Fabius

Titianus.

New heresies sprung up in Arabia, which Origin suppressed for spreading
further. Ecclesiast. hist. 2 998 4217 247 Bruttius Praesen^.

Nummius Albinus.

3 999 4218 248 Imp. M. Julius Philippus, the second time.

Philippus Caesar his son.

This being the thousandth year after the foundation of Rome, was by Philippus
solemnized with great games and starely plays. Some reckon this solemnity in
the year following under the third Consulship of PHILIPPUS: 4 1000 As touching
this celebrity of Sports, see Capitolinus. 4219 249 Imp. M. Julius Philippus
the third time.

His son Philippus Caesar the second time.

5 1001 4220 250 Fulvius Ae^ilianus.

Vettius Aquilinus.

Both Philips Emperors, are by the soldiers killed. 1 1002 After whom
succeeded GN. MESSIVS QUINCTVS TRAIANVS DECIVS, who reigned with his son
DECIVS CAESAR two years and certain months. The Parthians invade Armenia,
and possess themselves of it, having put Tyridates the King to flight, and
taken his sons into their hands upon submission. Pomp. Laetus. 4221 251 Imp.
Traianus Decius August. the second time.

Maximus Gratus.

The seventh Persecution of the Christians set on foot by DECIVS, which like
unto some cruel tempest, swallowed up and drowned many holy men and Saints in
sundry places: Among whom was Fabian Bishop of Rome. S. Laurence, whose
constant faith shining among the very flames as he lay upon the gred-yron,
Prudentius depainteth to the life, and Babylas Bishop of Antioch: Also
Apollonia a virgin, who when her teeth were stricken out of her head, leapt of
her own accord into the flaming fire that was made for her, and so was
consumed to ashes. Ecclesiast. hist. 2 1003 The Schism of the Novatians
troubles the Church. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria reports in Eusebius,
that Chaeremon a bishop, very aged, together with his wife fled unto a
mountain in Arabia, and was never seen; and notwithstanding his brethren
sought him and his wife diverse times, yet could they never find them nor their
bodies: Whereupon some have guessed that they were taken up alive into heaven.
4222 252 Imp. Traiantis Decius the third time.

Q. Herennius Hetruscus Decius Caesar.

Decius in the war against the Goths was with his whole army defeated, and
his body being swallowed up in a deep whirlepit, or quave-mire, could not be
found. In the same battle was the son of Decius slain. Iornand. Cassiodor.
Orosius. Eutrop. 1 1004 A pestilent disease reigns in diverse Provinces of
the world: but most of all plagueth Alexandria, and all Egypt throughout.
VALENS LVCINIANVS usurpeth the Empire. Sext. Aurel. Victor. After the Decij
succeed C. VIBIVS TREBONI ANVS GALLVS, and CAIUS VIBIVS VOLVSIANVS, who reigned
not full two years. Eusebius. Eutrop. Under these Emperors the people of Rome
began first to pay an yearly tribute unto foreign and barbarous nations.
Pomp. Laetus. and Blondus. 4223 253 C. Vib. Trebon. Gallus August. the second
time.

C. ^ib. Volusianus August.

Aemilius Maurus usurpeth the Empire, but within a little after perished. Pomp.
Laetus. 2 1005 4224 254 C. Vib. Volusianu. August. the second time.

M. Valerius Maximus.

After the two Emperors GALLVS and VOLVSIANVS were slain, there succeeded
VALERIANVS, and GALLIENVS, who reigned 7. years: whose life Trebellius Pollio
has described. 1 1006 Origin an Ecclesiastical writer departed this life at
Tyros, when he was threescore and nine years of age: and there was he
buried. Concerning whose writings, this speech went in old time, Where he wrote
well, no man wrote better. Ecclesiast. hist. He left behind him many Scholars,
and among them, Gregory Bishop of Neocaesarea. 4225 255 Valerianus August. the
second time.

Gallienus Augustus.

2 1007 4226 256 Valerianus August the third time.

Gallienus August the second time.

The Goths break into Asia, wasting and spoiling all before them. Trebell.
Pollio. 3 1008 The Temple of Diana at Ephesus is burnt. Iornandes. 4227 257 M.
Valerius Maximus.

M. Acilius Glabrio.

4 1009 4228 258 Valerianus August the fourth time

Gallienus August the third time.

The eight persecution of Christians. Valerianus in the first year of his
Empire, as Eusebius witnesses, was mild and gracious to the Christians: but
afterward at the persuasion of a certain Egyptian Magician, not only
bitterly and cruelly persecuted the Christians, but also being given to
art-Magicke, learned by that Master of Iniquity, to cut the tender bowels of
infants, and to offer men and women for sacrifice. 5 1010 Sapores or Sapor King
of the Persians, lays Siria, Cilicia, and Cappodocia waste. Treb. Pollio.
Cornelius, a Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, in whose writings
every word, in manner, savor of martyrdom, were beheaded, the one at Rome, the
other at Carthage. Cassiodor. 4229 259 M. Aurelius Memmius Fuscus.

Pomponius Bassus.

Valerian with a puissant army takes a journey to war upon Sapores. The
Soldiers in Gaulesalute Posthumus for their Emperor: And in Pannonia Ingenuus
is by the army styled Emperor. Vopi c. Pomp. Laetus. 6 1011 4230 260 Fulvius
Aemilianus.

Pomponius Bassus the second time.

The persecution holds still under Valerianus, and Gallienus. Ecclesiast.
hist. 7 1012 One Paulus a Deacon began first to keep the wilderness, and
lead an Eremites life. Hieronymus. Ingenuus was by Gallienus overthrowen, and
his whole army put to the sword. Regillianus was by the Maesians made Emperor,
after he had vanquished the Sarmatians: and was by the Roxolanes killed, for
fear they should be infested by Gallienus. Pom. Laet. Aureolus in Illyricum
obtaines the empire. 4231 261 L. Cornelius Seculatis the second time.

Iunius Donatus.

Valerianus, after that he had ruled the Empire with his son Gallienus seven
years, encountering in Mesopotamia the Persians, struck a battle, wherein he
was discomsited, and taken prisoner by Sapores in the 77. year of his age, and
in miserable and perpetual servitude lived out the rest of his years among
the Parthians. For, the King, whenever he should get upon his horse, used his
neck, bowing and stouping underneath in steed of a footestoole; in such sort,
as that Valerian was forced to mount the King up into his saddle, not with his
hand, but his back. Gallienus moved with this calamity of his father, and
affrighted at this manifest judgment of God, granted peace again unto the
Church: and by proclamation of his Edicts, remitted and eased the persecution.
Eusebius, and others. 1 1013 During the Empire of Gallienus, there usurped
Imperial dignity in diverse places, and at sundry times, 30. going under the
name of Tyrants, who called themselves Emperors. Trebell. Pollio, and others.
4232 262 Gallienus Augustus the fourth time.

Petronius Volusianus.

Gallienus saluteth Valerianus his younger brother, and his own son Gallienus,
Caesar's, and jointly with them reigns. 2 1014 The Germans and Franks with a
great power forcibly invade Italy, killing and spoiling, until they come as
far as Ravenna. Eusebius, Orosius. Aemilianus in Egypt, assumed the
Imperial robe. Him Theodorus takes prisoner. Tr. Pollio. Odenatus King of the
Palmyrenes, takes upon him the Empire of the East, and in a great foughten
field, vanquisheth the Persians, in so much, as having put Sapores to flight,
he encamped hard under Ctesiphon. Tr. Pollio. Macrianus the father, together
with Macrianus and Quietus his sons, became Emperors. But both the Macriani
are by Aureolus the usurper of the Empire in Illyricum slain in battle. And
Quietus within a while after was killed by Odenatus. Tr. Pollio. The error of
the Chiliasts, together with the heresies of Sabellius and Samosatenus trouble
the church. Eusebius. 4233 263 Gallienus Augustus the fifth time.

Ap. Pomponius Faustinus.

A terrible plague reigns in Rome, and elsewhere. Many great earthquakes
happen, and fearful darkness for many days together. Treb. Pollio. 3 1015
4234 264 Numnrius Albinus.

Maximus Dexter.

The Goths waste Greece, Macedonie, Pontus, and Asia. And the inrodes of the
Barbarians sore shakes other Provinces. Tr. Pollio, Cassiodor. Iornandes. 4
1016 The Quadi and Sarmatians seize into their hands Pannonia. Eusebius. 4235 265
Gallienus Aug. the sixth time.

Aemilius Saturninus.

The Franks, Saxons, and Germans break into Gaul. Eusebius. 5 1017 Odenatus
holds the whole Empire of the East. Tr. Pollio. 4236 266 Valerianus Caesar
the second time.

L. Cesonius Macer Locillus Ruf^ianus.

The Franckes, Saxons, and Germans enter also into Spain. Eusebius. 6 1018
Odenatus is assumed by Gallienus into the fellowship of the Empire, and styled
Augustus. Tr. Pollio. Posthumous with his son Posthumus, was killed in the
seventh year of his Empire among the Gauls by a train that Lollianus laid
for him. Trebell. Pollio. Theheresie of Samosatenus is oppugned by the
authority of Synods, and godly learned Pastors of the Church, Eusebius. 4237
267 Gallienus Aug. the seventh time. Sabimlius. The Franks, Saxons, and Germans
under the conduct of Antharius and Lutterus, sons of Bartherus and Marbodus
kings of the Saxons, force Tarraco^ a city of Spain, and lay it even with the
ground. Eusebius. Trithemius. 7 1019 Odenatus by an ambush that Maeonius his
cousin German laid, was with his son Herod slain. Victorinus, whom
Posthumus had made his companion in the kingdom of Gaul, kills Lollianus,
and alone obtains the sovereign rule among the Gauls. Tr. Pollio. 4238 268
Ovinius Paternus

Arcesilaus.

Zenobia the wife of Odenatus, together with her sons 8 1020 Herennianus and
Timolaus holds the kingdom of the East. Tr. Pollio. After that Victorinus
was slain at Agrippina, for abusing the bodies of wives and matrons, Marius
kept the Empire for 2. days. This Marius had bin a Smith: and when he was
likewise killed, Tetricus entered upon the Empire, and after sundry occurrents
and events, was at length by Aurelianus (but not before he had laid down the
Imperial dignity) promoted to sundry honors. Tr. Pollio. 4239 269 Ovinius
Paternus the second time.

Marinianus.

Aureolus Emperor in Illyricum, after he had put Tetricus to flight,
concluded a peace with Gallienus: which being soon after dissolved and broken,
Gallienus together with his brother, was at Millaine by the soldiers of
Aureolus slain about the 22. of March. Tr. Pollio. 1 1021 After Gallienus
succeeded M. AURELIUS FLAVIVS CLAUDIUS, who ruled one year, ten months, and
fifteen days. 4240 270 M. Aurel. Fl. Claud. Aug. the second time.

Ovinius Paternus.

Claudius the Emperor vanquished Aureolus and disseiseth him of his Empire. He
subdueth the Goths, wasting Illyricum and Macedonia, and in battle slew of
the^ 320000. Tr. Pollio. 2 1022 4241 271 Flavius Antiochianus.

Furius Orfitus.

The fourth day of February Claudius dies, after whom succeeded M. Aurelius
Quinctilius his brother, who the twentieth day of February was killed. 1 1023
After Claudius succeeds L. DOMITIVS AURELIUS VALOR. AVRELIANVS, who governed
the Empire four years, eleven months, and seven days. He gives the
Suevians and Sarmatians an overthrow. The Marcomans that wasted Italy, he
overcommeth at Placentia. Fl. Vopiscus. This Aurelianus was a severe, rigorous,
and bloody prince. He killed his own sisters daughter for a very small cause.
Military discipline he kept most severely: for a soldier, who had committed
adultery with his hoasts wife, he punished in this manner: he caused the tops of
2. trees to be bent downward, which he tied unto the feet of the said
soldier, and so dainly suffered them to go back again: so as the poor wretch
being rent insunder, hanged by the half on both sides. Unto his deputy or
lieutenant general he wrote in this wise: If thou will be a Captain and
Commander, nay if thou will enjoy thy life contain thy soldiers hands: No
man be so hardy as to take away other men's goods: let none trample corn under
feet: let the soldier be content with his allowance, and live of the enemies
spoil, not of the Provincialles tears: let him have his wages in his belt,
and not in the Tavern and Tap-house. Of this Aurelianus Vopiscus writes thus,
that many reckon him neither among good princes nor bad; for that he wanted
Clemency the principal virtue of a Prince: and himself says, He was a
necessary Prince rather then a good. 4242 272 Aurelianus Pomponius Bassus. A
seditious broile arose in Rome, whiles the Emperor makes war against the
Marcomans. Vopiscus. 2 1024 Constantinus Magnus, who afterward was Emperor,
this year was borne in Britanny, whose father was Constantius, and his mother
Helena. Bucholcer. Samosatenus is declared an heretic, and cast out of the
Church. Eusebius, and others. 4243 273 Quietus Voldumianus. After the Marcomans
war was dispatched, the authors of the foresaid sedition in Rome are
grievously punished. Aurelianus vanquisheth the Barbarians in Illyricum and
Thracia. Cannabas the Leader of the Goths he kills on the further side of
Danubius. Vopiscus. 3 1025 4244 274 M. Claudius Tacitus, who afterward was
called Augustus.

M Moecius Memmius Balburius Furius Placidianus.

After the Barbarians were subdued, Aurelianus marches into the East, and
recovereth many pieces that had been lost. He vanquisheth Queen Zenobia, and
takes her prisoner. One Firmius seizes Egypt into his hands, and keeps it:
which soon after was by Valerianus a great captain recovered. Vopiscus. 4
1026 4245 275 Imp. Aurelianus August. the second time.

C. Julius Capitolinus.

Aurelianus triumphs over his enemies vanquished. He builds a Temple unto
the Sun: Fortifieth Rome with stronger walls round about: Delivers the
Vindelici from the Barbarians siege: Then sets he forward in a warrelike
expedition into Illyricum: and proclaims war upon the Persians. Vopiscus. 5
1027 The ninth persecution against Christians, was by Aurelianus proclaimed,
but by occasion of his death interrupted and impeached: wherefore some reckon
it not among the ten persecutions. 4246 276 Imp. Aurelianus Augustus the
third time.

T. Annonius Marcellinus.

He became never the more reclaimed, nor better minded, notwithstanding a
thunderbolt fell violently hard by him: nay, rather wrote his Mandates to the
utter destruction of the Christian churches: which done betwixt Heraclea and
Bizantium he was by his own company slain the 29. day of January. After his
decease there continued an inter-reigne or vacancy for eight months. Vopiscus,
Eusebius, Orosius, Onuphr. 1 1028 After Aurelianus succeeded M. CLAUDIUS
TACITUS, who reigned six months, and 20. days: a prince adorned with many
virtues, and singularly well accepted of the Senate. Vop. Eut. 4247 277 Imp.
Tacitus August. the second time.

Fulvius Aemilianus.

After they were all dispatched and put to death who murdered Aurelianus,
Tacitus enforced all those Barbarians who had broken forth from Maeotis to
return back again thither. But in the sixth month, as some say, he was
murdered by the treacherous practice of his own soldiers: others affirm,
that being surcharged with factions, his heart was broken, and his wits cracked,
and so for thought died. Vopisc. 1 1029 FLORIANVS the whole brother of Tacitus,
after his brother, took the Empire upon him of his own motion; but held it
scarce two months, and was killed by his soldiers at Tarsus, who heard that
Probus was Emperor, whom all the army had elected. After Tacitus therefore
succeeded M. AVREL. VALOR. PROBVS, who ruled five years, and four months. So
noble a warrior he was, and mighty in feats of Arms, that the Senate wished
for him, the soldiers chose him, and the people of Rome with open acclamation
called for him. His virtues and brave exploites Fl. Vopiscus has described.
The madness and cursed heresy of the Manichees is entered into many parts of
the world. 4248 278 Imp. M. Aurel. Probus Augustus the second time.

M. Furius Lupus.

Probus recovereth Gaul, which the Germans had possessed themselves of having
put 400000. of them to the sword. Eutro. and regained 60. cities out of the
Barbarians hands. Vopiscus. 2 1030 4249 279 Imp. M. Aurel. Probus Augustus the
third time.

Ovinius Paternus.

Probus having vanquished the Germans, subdued also the Sarmatians in
Illyricum: He overcame the Nations of the Getes in Thracia, and upon their
submission took them into favor and friendship. Vopiscus. From thence he
marched into the East. 3 1031 4250 280 Iunius Messala-Gratus. Probus took
Palfurius a most puissant Brigand prisoner, and slew him, freed Isauria, after
he had quieted the parts of Pamphilia, subdued the Blemmies, and granted
peace unto the Parthians and Persians at their suite and request. Being
returned into Thracia, he planted an hundred thousand Bastarnae, and other
Nations of the Gepidians, Goths and Vandales assembled together in Roman
ground. Vopisc. 4 1032 4251 281 Imp. M. Aurel. Probus Augustus the fourth time.

C. Iunius Tibetinus.

Saturninus aspiring to the East Empire, was by Probus overcome. 5 1033 Bonosus
and Proculus at Agrippina make themselves Emperors of Gaul, and usurp
therewith Britanny, Spain, and Gaul Braccata: These Probus overthrew. The
Gepidians, Goths and Vandales that rebelled, at diverse times, and in sundry
victories he subdued. After this he was received at Rome in a magnificent
Triumph, and exhibited unto the people most sumptuous shows. Vopisc. 4252 282
Imp. M Aurel. Probus August. the fifth time.

Pomponius Victorinus.

Probus an exactor of Military discipline, and an enemy of idle persons, and
withal, desirous to end all wars, whiles he addresseth himself to the
Persian war, as 6 1034 he journeied through Illyricum, was treacherously by
his own soldiers killed the second day of November. Howbeit afterward all the
soldiers together erected for him a mighty great sepulcher, with such a title
or inscription as this: Here lies the Emperor Probus, and truly called
Probus, that is, Good: Conqueror of all barbarous Nations: Conqueror also of
Tyrants. See more in Vopiscus. Him succeeded M. AURELIUS CARVS, who together
with his sons CARINVS and NVMERIANVS reigned one year. 4253 283 Imp. M.
Aurel. Carus.

M. Aurel. son of August. Carinus Csar.

CARVS taking in hand that Persian war, which Probus prepared for, together
with his son Numerianus, gained Mesopotamia, and came as far as to
Cresiphon: and there with lightning was consumed. Vopiscus. 1 1035 4254 284 M.
Aurel. Carinus Augustus the second time.

M. Aurel. Numerianus August. the second time.

C. VALOR. DIOCLETIANVS IOVIVS, was saluted Emperor, and reigned twenty
years: Numerianus was by his father in law, that is, his wifes father, Aper,
slain. 1 1036 * Dryas in Gaul. Diocletian, yet a privateman, having been
told by a * witch or wise woman, that he should then be Emperor when he had
killed Aper, which signifies a wild Bore, hunted often, and killed many a one,
but missed still of the Empire. He would often say; Many a Bore have I slain,
but others go away still with the sweet venison: At length with his own hand
he ran Aper aforesaid Prefect of the Praetorium through with a sword, and
then thought himself surely invested in the Empire. Fl Vopiscus. Carinus
fought many a field with Diocletian: but in the last battle at Murgum he was
vanquished, and suffered due punishment for his wickedness: For, murdered he
was by a Tribune or Captain, whose wife he had committed adultery with.
Vopisc. Eutrop. Aurel. Vict. 4255 285 Imp. Diocletian. Aug. the second time.

Aristobulus.

Many Commotions there were in certain regions of the Empire: also certain
usurpers or tyrants, who soon after were put down and oppressed. Pomp.
Laetus. 2 1037 4256 286 M. Iunius Priscillianus Maximus the second time.

Ve^tius Aquilinus.

MAXIMIANVS HERCVLIVS was by Diocletian made partner with him in the Empire,
and created Augustus. This Maximian with wonderful celeritie destroyed Amanius
and Aelianus chieftaines and principalles of the faction Bugarida or Bacaudica
(for so the rural multitude termed themselves:) the Almans beginning to stir
he repressed: Semblably, the Chaibones, the Heruli, and Gaul he quieted. Pomp.
Laet. Sigonius. 3 1038 4257 287 Imp. Diocletian. August. the third time.

Imp. Maximianus Augustus the second time.

Diocletian drives back the Goths, and places forts again in the limits of
the Empire. Sigon. 4 4093 Carausius usurped the kingdom of Britauny, and held
it for six years, whiles the Romans strived in vain against him. Maximian
tameth the Almaines again: makes a bridge over the river of Rhene, and
erecteth Trophies in the mids of Almaine. Sigon. Eutrop. Pomp. Laetus. 4258 288
M. Aurel Max. the second time.

Pomponius Ianuarius.

Some refer to this time, the martyrdom of Saint Maurice, who was the Leader
of the Thebane Legion: which being Christian, and abhorring the worship of
Idols, and abstaining from sacrifices, at the commandment of Maximian, was
first tithed, that is, every tenth man thereof was executed; and afterward
every one of them, together with their Captain Mauricius, hewn and cut in
pieces. Otho Frising. lib. 3. cap. 45. 5 1040 4259 289 Annius Bassus.

L Ragonitis Quinctianus.

Achilles possesses himself of Egypt. Pomp. Laetus. Maximian invadeth the
Frankes country, and forces their King Gennobon to seek for peace. But he
had like to have lost Mauritania sore infested by the Quinquegentians.
Sigonius. 6 1041 4260 290 Imp. Diocletian August. the fourth time.

Imp. Maximianus Aug. the third time.

Sundry wars in diverse places begin to show themselves. Diocletian marches
beyond the river Ister, against the Goths, Carpi, Quades, and Marcomans. Pomp.
Laetus. 7 1042 4261 291 C. Iunius Tibetianus.

Cassius Dion.

Diocletian and Maximian being overlaied with business, adopted unto them two
Caesar's, to wit, Maximianus GALERIVS and CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS. As for Galerius
he took to wife Valeria the daughter of Diocletian, and Constantius wedded
the wifes daughter of Maximian, after they had rejected and cast off their
former wives. CONSTANTIVS reigned fifteen years, and GALERIVS one and twenty.
Sigon. Onuph. Pomp. Laetus. 8 1043 4262 292 Afranius Hannibalianus, or
Anabalianus.

M. Asclepodotus.

Galerius takes the charge of defending Illyricum. He vanquisheth the
Sarmatians, and the Carpi. Constantius being sent against Carausus, recovereth
Gessoriacum. He delivers Clivia besieged by the Frankes. Maximian requires
to have the recoverie of Mauritania to be committed unto him. Constantius
gives unto Galerius his son Constantinus as a pledge of his love. Sigon. 9
1044 Galerius vanquisheth the Basternae, the Carpi, and the Sarmatians: and at
the comma undement of Diocletian draws the Sarmatians over on this side Ister.
Constantinus the son of Constantius bears himself manfully, and with
singular commendation in the Sarmatian war. Constantius prepares to war in
Britanny against Carausius, who is slain by Allectus. Maximian restrains the
Franckes, and sends an army into Afric against the Quinquegentians.
Constantius having vanquished Allectus, recovereth Britanny. Pomp. Laetus.
Carol. Sigon. 4251 293 Imp. Diocletianus August. the fifth time.

Imp. Maximianus August. the fourth time.

Diocletian overcommeth Achilles in Egypt. Having won by force Alexandria,
he deals cruelly with the Citizens, sacketh the city, pulls down the
walls, and so brings the Egyptian war to an end. He removes the
Nabatheans out of their borders, and enters into a counsel and purpose with
himself to persecute the Christians. Eusebius. Sigonius. 10 1045 Maximian and
Constantius bring over the Franckes into the waste deserts of Gaul. Sigon.
4264 294 Constantius Caesar.

Galerius Caesar.

Galerius encountereth Narses King of the Persians, fights a battle with
him, and gains victory. But within a while after; having received a foil and
overthrow, fled to Diocletian, where being rebuked by him, he repaireth his
army with fresh forces. After this, returning to the war, he over comes
Narses, and regaineth two Provinces beyond Tygris. Diocletian cannot contain
the felicity of the Roman Empire, and his own: but will needs be adored and
worshipped, yea he entendeth an horrible persecution against the Christians.
11 1046 4265 295 Nummius Tuscus.

Annius Cornelius Annullinus.

12 1047 4266 296 Imp. Diocletian August the sixth time

Constantius Caesar the second time.

Maximian goes forward against the Quinquegentians, whom at length he
subdueth. 13 1048 Constantius fights with the Lingones: at the first he had
the foil, but afterards the upper hand. He adventureth a dangerous journey to
the Vindones. Pomp. Laetus, Eusebius. Sigon. 4267 297 Imp Maximian August the fifth
time.

Galerius Caesar the second time.

14 1049 4268 298 Anicius Faustus the second time.

Severus Gallus.

Diocletian gives commandment, that most sumptuous and magnificent Baines
should be made at Rome: and Maximian at Carthage. These two Giants have no
better conceit of the Christians, then of the refuse and offskouring of the
world. Constantius grants unto the Clivians, Eumenes the Rhetorician, who
might plant Schools of learning in Gaul. Sigon. Pomp. Laetus. 15 1050 4269
299 Imp Dio^l. August. the 7. time.

Imp. Maximianus August. the sixth time.

Maximian builds baines at Millaine: likewise a palace at Aquileia and at
Brixia, and an Amphitheatre at Verona. Sigon. 16 1051 4270 300 Constantius
Caesar the third time

Galerius Caesar the third time.

Aelius Spartianus, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, Vulcatius
Gallicanus, Flavius Vopiscus, and Trebellius Pollio, Historiographers, all at
this time lived. Bucholeer. 17 1052 4271 301 Posthumous Titianus the ^ time

Flavius Popilius Nepotianus.

The church now beautified with many men endowed with pity and singular
erud^tion, whiles these Emperors prepare themselves to triumph, beholds the
cross hard at their shoulders. Eusebius. 18 1053 4272 302 Constantius Caesar the
4 time.

Galerius Caesar the fourth time.

Diocletian and Maximian triumphed most gloriously and magnificently at Rome
over the Persians and Germans: having the wife, sisters, and children of Narses
King of the Persians going before their Chariot. A little after this they
intend the tenth and most cruel persecution against the Christians, in diverse
countries of East and West both: whereof Eusebius and other Ecclesiastical
writers relate at large. 19 1054 4273 303 Imp. Diocletian Aug the 8 time.

Imp Maximian the 7 time.

In the second year of this perfecution Diocletian and Maximian laid off their
purple, and resigned up the Empire at Nicomedia the thirtieth day of April,
and committed the charge of defending the State and Commonweal to Constantius
and Galerius, who before were Caesar's, and now proclaimed Augusti. These two
divided 20 1055 the Roman Empire between them. CONSTABLE ANTIVS the Father of
CONSTANTINE reigned two years, and GALERIVS seven. Eusebius. Pomp. Laetus. 4274
304. Imp. Diocletianus, Aug. the ninth time.

Imp. Maximianus Augustus the eight time.

Galerius having gotten the Empire of the East, continues the persecution
against the Christians. Constantius yielded up again unto Galerius Italy and
Afric, neither troubles he the Christians. Eusebius, Sigonius. 1 1056 4275
305 Imp. Constantius Aug. the fifti

Imp. Galerius August. the fifth

Galerius riddeth his palace wholly of all holy men. Constantius gracious unto
Christians hasteneth into Britannie against the Picts and Caledones. 2 1057
4276 306 Imp. Consta^tius Aug the 6. time.

Imp. Galerius Aug. the 6. time.

Constantius dies at York the five and twentieth day of Iulie, in the six
and fiftieth year of his age. With him was present Constantine his son, who
had fled from Galerius. Others will have the death of Constantius to fall
upon the year following. 1 1058 After Constantius succeeded FLAV. VALERIVS
CONSTANTINVS, who ruled thirty years, nine months, and 27. days. Likewise
M. AURELIUS MAXENTIVS, and CAIUS GALLVS MAXIMINVS: For these two were called
Emperors. Onuphr. Sigonius. Galerius makes over unto Severus, Italy and
Afrike, and unto Maximinus the East: he keeps unto himself Illyricum, and
together with Maximinus continues persecution of Christians in the East.
Eusebius. Maxentius at Rome is by the Praetorian soldiers made Emperor against
Severus Caesar, and seems favorable and gracious to the Christians. Maximian
resumeth the purple imperial Robe. Sigonius. 4277 307 Imp. Constantinus
Augustus.

Maximianus the ninth time.

Maximian by a wile kills Severus. Diocletian solicited by Maximian,
refuses to take the purple again, contenting himself with a quiet rusticall
life. Constantius warreth with Asaicus and Gaiso Kings of the Franckes.
Maximian devises to depose Maxentius from the Empire, and afterward goes
into Gaul, to Constantine, unto whom he grants his daughter Fausta in
marriage. Sigonius. 2 1059 4278 308 Imp. Galerius Aug. the seventh time.

Diocletian the tenth time.

Galerius and Maximinus continue the persecution of Christians in the East. 3
1060 Constantinus goes against the Bructeri people of the Frankners. Maxentius
chalengeth Afric to himself, after he had slain Alexander the Tyrant, and
triumphs at Rome. Pomp. Letus, Sigonius. 4279 309 After the seventh
Consulship of Imp. Galerius August. the tenth of Diocletian. Maximinus
intends to warreupon Maxentius, and with Galerius continues persecution of
Christians in the East. Maxentius begins to tyrannize at Rome, persecuteth
Christians, after he had cast Marcellus ths Bishop into a Mill-house. Maximian
in Gaul lays wait for Constantine his son in law, and by him is slain at
Marsils. Constantine goes against the Bructeri, Eccles. histor. Pomp. Laetus
and Sigonius. 4 1061 4280 310 After the seventh Consulship of Galerius Aug. and
the tenth of Diocletian. Galerius persecuteth the Christians in Pannonia.
Quirinus the Bishop, not without a miracle valiantly takes his death for
Christ's sake. Prudentius in his Hymns: For having a querne stone tied unto his
neck, he was thrown headlong from a bridge down into the river, and swumme
aloft a great while, and when he had spoken unto the beholders, that they
should not by reason of his punishment be affrighted from Christian Religion,
he prayed unto God that he might sink, and so he was with much ado drowned.
Eusebius. 5 1062 Maximinus and Maxentius with infest arms and minds both trouble
the provinces and the Empire. Whereupon the sea could not be safely passed:
whence arose an exceeding great dearth of corn at Rome. Sig. 4281 311 Imp.
Galerius Augustus the eight time, without a Colleague: and after his decease
Licinius Augustus stepped into his place. Galerius being visited with a most
filthy disease, and acknowledging it to be the heavy hand of God punishing him
for the unjust death of Christians, divulged an Edict, that Christians should
be spared, and their churches and chapels restored unto them: craving withal,
that they would offer up prayers and vows for the Emperors health. And within
a while after of that disease he pined away, and died. Eusebius. lib. 8. 6 1063
During his sickness he took in Caius Aurelius Valerius Licinius to be his
consort in the Empire. Licinius held Illyricum, and concluded a league with
Constantinus and Maximinus. Maximinus spares the Christians, and afterward
urges against them. Constantinus is sent for by the Romans against Maxentius,
who prepares to make war. Pomp. Laetus, Eutropius, Sigonius. 4282 312 Imp.
Constantinus Augustus the second time.

Imp. Licinius Augustus the second time.

Licinius espouseth Constantia sister of Constantine. And these two jointly
together sent an Edict to Maximinus, that he should forbear the Christians.
Maxim. suppressing this Edict, permitted all to use and exercise their
religion. 7 1064 Constantine being confirmed by a sign from heaven, becomes
catechized in the Faith: and arming himself against Maxentius, after a field
fought in the Taurins country, when he had gained the hither part of Italy
goes toward Rome, struck a battle at Pons Milvius, where Maximinus was
slain, and his army put to flight. Constantinus, when he had recovered Rome,
triumphs, setleth the Roman State, grants free liberty to worship Christ,
sets forth plays and games, restores them to their places whom Maxentius
had condemned, the Accomplices of Maxentius he condemns, the Praetorian
soldiers he riddeth away, he disordereth the Praetorian Hold, is by the Senate
honored with laudatorie Titles, an Arch and Statues, a Trophee of the Cross
he erecteth in the middle of the city, he honors with good respect the
Bishops, he builds a stately church to Christ in the Lateran: then leaving
Rome, goes to Millaine, recovereth Afric, refreshes the afflicted cities of
Italy, and by Italy is adorned with a Column, Scutchoon, and a Crown of
gold. Eusebius. Eutrop. Pompon. Laet. Sigonius. The Schism of the Donatists
arises in Afric. Onuphr. 4283 313 Imp Constantinus Augustus the third time

Imp. Licinius. Augustus.

Licinnius having married Constantia, together with Constantine makes an Edict
as touching the liberty of Religion: goes again into Illyricum, warreth
against Maximinus, discomfiteth, and at length vanquisheth him at Astacum.
Maximinus at Tarsus, suddenly surprised with most dolorous torments of his
body dies, when being four years Caesar, and three years Augustus, he had
reigned as a most malicious enemy of Christians. Licinnius after he had
vanquished the army of Maximinus, adjoineth unto him the East, seateth
himself at Nicomedia, makes decrees against Maximinus, and favors the
Christians. Eusebius. Eutrop. Victor. Pompon. Laetus, Sigonius. 8 1065
Constantinus abolisheth the secular Plays, passes an Edict for the liberty
of Christian Religion, went again into Ga^le, repressed the Frankes that
coveted to pass over Rhene, and fortified the limite: provideth for the peace
of the Church. Then was Constantine his son borne. At Triers he sets forth
Games and Plays. Eusebius. Eutrop. Aur. Victor. Pomp. Laetus. Diocletian having
received minatory letters from Constantinus and Licinius, for that he had
favored Maxentius and Maximinus, killed himself. Aur. Victor. 4284 314 C.
Ceionius Rufius Volusianus.

Anianus.

Crispus (whose Schoolmaster Lactant. Firmianus was) Constantinus junior, and
Licinius junior, the sons of Constantine and Licinius Emperors, are proclaimed
Caesares. 9 1066 Constantine condemns the Donatists at Millaine. Eusebius,
Sigonius. 4285 315 Imp. Constantinus Aug the fourth time.

Imp Licinius August, the fourth time.

Constantine enlarges the cathedral churches of saint Peter and saint Paul,
enricheth the churches, erecteth a sacred Font to baptize in: Then making war
upon Licinius that he might win to himself part of the Provinces of
Maximinus, vanquisheth Licinius at Cibala a town in the lower Pannonia, and
having gotten Illyricum, lets him go. He sends Crispus into Gaul
against the Germans. Eusebius, Sigonius. 10 1067 4286 316 Fl. Rufius Ceionius
Cecina Sabinus.

Q Arcadius Rufinus Valor. Proculus.

Constantine warreth fortunately by Gallicanus in Illyricum. Sigonius. 11 1068
Romans and Gauls invade Frankeland. Clogio the five and thirtieth King of the
Frankes (after whom succeeded Clodomirus) was slame in battle. Eutrop.
Trithemius, Funccius. 4287 317 Ovinius Gallicanus.

Septimius Bassus.

Constantine himself in person goes into Illyricum against the Barbarians.
Crispus valiantly defends the limits of Germany. Constantius the son of
Constantine is borne. Sigonius. 12 1069 4288 318 Imp. Licinius Augustus the
fifth time

FI Valor. Aug. F. Crisp. Caes.

Crispus obtains a noble victory of the Frankes that rebelled, and tameth
them. Constantine adorneth Rome with sumptuous and stately buildings. Eusebius.
Sigonius. 13 1070 4289 319 Imp Co^sta^tinus Aug the 5. time.

C. Valor. Aug. F. Licinius Junior Caesar.

Licinius the Emperor forgetting his Lievtenants, and seeking by secret
trains to overthrow Constantine, went about to persecute the Christians: whom
notwithstanding 14 1071 that Constantine by his Letters admonished of his duty
and allegiance, and to desist from his malice, yet could he not persuade him.
Cedrenus. Arius a most pestilent heretic, enemy to the Godhead of Christ,
began now to spread abroad his blasphemies. Eusebius, and other Ecclesiast.
hist. Constans the son of Constantine is borne. Sigonius. 4290 320 Imp.
Co^sta^tinus Aug the 6. time

FI Valerius Co^stantinus the younger, Caesar.

Licinius in a mischievous mind to Christians intends cruelty against them.
Constantine appeaseth a mutiny of the old soldiers in Gaul. Eusebius,
Sigonius. 15 1072 4291 321 Crispus Caesar the second time.

Constantinus the son, Caesar, the second time.

Licinius afflicts the Christians. Constantine warreth against the
Sarmatians, and having slain their King, Rausimodus, retired to Thessalonica.
Zosimus. He makes a law, That every man might leave his goods to the Clergy.
Eusebius, Sigonius. 16 1073 4292 322 FI. Petronius Probianus.

Anicius Iulianus.

Licinius carrying still a malicious mind against Christians, is warred upon by
Constantine: whereupon he raises a power of 150000. footmen, and 15000.
horse men: and beside, riggeth forth a most strong Armada. Zosim. Constantine
relieveth Rome distressed with penury, Eusebius. Sigon. 17 1074 4293 323 Acilius
Severus.

FI. Iunius Rufinus.

Constantine lays siege to Bizantium, and vanquisheth Licinius in fight, both
on land and at sea. Licinius adjoineth unto him Martinian to be his associate,
and names him Caesar. Zosimus. 18 1075 4294 324 Crispus Caesar the third time.

Constantinus Augustus the son Caesar, the third time.

Licinius and Martinianus march against Constantine with a puissant army in
battle ray. Constantine after a hot field fought, got the upper hand. Of the
Licinians, who (by report) were an hundred and thirty thousand strong, scarce
thirty thousand escaped. When Constantine had recovered Bizantium, he
besieges Nicomedia. Licinius and Martinianus being deprived of their imperial
dignity, are beholden to Constantine for their life, and so retire unto a
private life. Eusebius, Cedrenus. 19 1076 The Churches delivered from external
tyranny, are grievously troubled with the inward assaults of Arians.
Constantine appeaseth the East, and against the year following, proclaims
the Nicene Synod. Licinius and Martinianus plota rebellion. Eusebius. Sigon. 4295
325 M. Iunius Caesonius Nichomachus Anicius Faustus Paulinus.

P. Publilius Ceionius Iulianus Camoenius.

Constantine kills Licinius and Martinianus: and after he had rooted out all
the persecutours of the Church, and obtained an absolute Monarchy, brought
external peace to the Christians. But then was the Church much molested with
inward and domestical stirs occasioned by heretics. At the Nicene Synod
Constantine is present: the Bishops there assembled he honors with respect,
and being at a jarre, he laboreth to reconcile them: and purposes to build
sundry cathedral Churches in diverse places. Being returned into Italy, he
puts his son Crispus to death, charged grievously with imputations by
Fausta. Zosimus, Eusebius. Sig. Terrible Earthquakes and Eclipses both of Sun
and Moon. Cedr. 20 1077 4296 326 Imp. Constantinus Augustus the seventh time.
Constantinus triumphs in Rome: and for that his mother Helena found the
Cross of Christ, he commands a 21 1078 Gonstanti. Caesar. more magnificent
church to be built, and puts the common wealth in order. Eusebius. Sigonius.
4297 327 Fl. valerius Constantinus.

Fl. valerius Maximus Basilius.

Helena hearing that Crispus Caesar, by the instigation of his stepmother
Fausta was put to death, chid Constantine, and caused Fausta to be shut within
a hot burning Baine, and so with excessive heat to be killed. Zosim. Victor.
Ierom. 22 1079 Presently after Fausta followed Helena, now four score years
old; but dying in peace, was by Constantine interred. Constantine returns
into the East, builds Drepane, and calls it Helenopolis; and begins the
Cathedral church of Antioch. Eusebius. Sigonius. 4298 328 Fl. Magnus Ianuarius.

Fabius Iustus.

Constantine determining to build a new city for the imperial seat of the
East, and to call it after his own name, first goes in hand with Ilium, then
with Chalcedon, and last of all with Bizantium. Hierom. Sigon. 23 1080
Constantine removes the soldiers of the Marches. Sigonius. 4299 329 Imp
Constantinus Augustus the eight time.

Constantius the son Caesar the fourth time.

24 1081 4300 330 Ovinius Gallicanus.

L. Autelius Symmachus.

Constantine divides the Provinces and Magistrates of the East and West
Empire: and ordains Generalles of Armies. Bizantium is reedified by
Constantine, enlarged, walled about, and beautified with buildings. Sigonius.
Onuphr. 25 1082 4301 331 Annius Bassus. Ablabius Aegyptius. Bizantium by the
new founder and reedifier thereof Constantine, is named Constantinopolis, and
upon the eleventh day of May, is with solemn ceremonies, and complements
dedicated, to be the Seat of the East empire, and therefore it was called New
Rome: and advaunceth the church of Constantinople to a Patriarchall dignity.
Hieron. Sigon. 26 1083 4302 332 Ovinius Paca^ianus.

Mecilius Hilarianus.

By an Edict of Constantine the Temples of the Gentiles are overthrown,
thirty years after the subversion of the Christian churches under Diocletian.
Constantine ordains Laws for both the Empires. The Eunuchs of his chamber
he restrains. Great stirs and troubles in the church. Eusebius. Hieron.
Sigonius. 27 1084 4303 333 Fl. Valerius Dalmatius named afterward Caesar.

M. Aurelius Xenophilus.

Constantine, after he had repressed the Goths, being misled by an Arian
Elder or Priest, commands Arius to come unto him, and for his sake troubles
Athanasius, the faithful Orthodox Bishop of Alexandria. He brings over the
Limigantes of Sarmatia, and the Vandals likewise into the Roman Provinces.
Eusebius. Sig. 28 1085 4304 334 L. Ranius Optatus.

M. Iunius Caesonius Nichomachus.

Anitius Faustus Paulinus Junior.

The Arians by their blasphemies and deceitful slights infestmany people:
assemble Synods, to establish that execrable heresy of theirs. Ecclesiast.
histor. 29 1086 Constantine styleth his son Constans Caesar, and writes to
Antonius a famous Heremite. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. 4305 335 FI. Valerius
Co^stantinus

C. Cesonius Albinus.

Constantine confineth Athanasius to Triers. Celebrateth the espousals of his
son Constantius: is honored by the Indian Ambassadors: and kills Sopater a
wise 30 1087 4306 336 FI. Popillius Nepotianus.

Facundus.

31 1088 and learned man. Eusebius in the life of Constantine, Ecclesiast.
hist. Sigon. Arius comes to a foul end. Ecclesiast. hist. 4307 337 T. Fabius
Titianus.

Felicianus.

Constantine having received a little before, holy Baptism, dies at Nicomedia
during the feast of Pentecost, the two and twentieth day of May, in the year
of his age 64. or 65. and after he had fully reigned one and thirty years.
Enterred he was at Constantinople, within the church by himself built.
Eusebius in his life, Hist. Ecclesiast. 1 1089 By his last will and testament
he had divided the Empire among his sons. After his death he had great
honor done unto him, and is most honorably, and in sumptuous manner buried.
Eusebius, Sigonous. After Constantine succeeded Impp. Caesar's, FLAV. VALERIVS
CONSTABLE ANTINVS IVNIOR, FL. IVL. CONSTABLE ANTIVS, and FLAVIVS VALERIVS CONSTANS.
They ruled together three years: after that, Constantius and Constans ten
years: and Constantius in all 25. years, 5. months, and 5. days.
CONSTANTIVS governed in the East, in Thracia, Asia, and Egypt. Constantine in
Gaul, Spain and Britannie; requires of Constans part of his Empire, and
restores Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria. Constans in Italy, Afric, and
Illyricum. 4308 338 Vrsus. Polemius. Constantius causes his near kinsmen, to
wit, Constantius his uncle by the fathers side, Dalmatius Caesar, and
Annibolianus his brother, Optatus also a noble man of Rome of Senators degree,
and Ablabius before time Prefect of the Praetorium to be killed. 2 1090 He
withstandeth Sapor King of the Persians in Mesosopotamia, Zosimus. Constans in
Pannonia keeps his residence against the Barbarians dwelling beyond Danubius:
and Constantinus seateth himself against the enemies beyond Rhene, and
endeavors to order all matters well in Gaul. Zosimus, Pomp. Laetus, Eutrop.
Sigon. 4309 339 Imp. Consta^tius August. the second time

Imp. Constans Augustus.

Constantius not very constant in maintaining the Decrees of the Nicene
Council, began to banish the Bishops of the true faith, and to foster the
Arians. Ecclesiast. histor. 3 1091 4310 340 FI. Septimius. Acyndinus.

L. Aradius Rufinus Valerius Proculas.

Constantine the younger is slain near Aquileia by his brother Constans: and
his Empire is devolved upon Constans. Eutrop. Hieronym. Zonar. Zosim. 4 1092
Constantius become an Arian, after the death of Alexander ordains Eusebius of
Nicomedia, an Arian, to be Bishop of the church at Constantinople: whereupon
there sprung innumerable contentions. Ecclesiast. hist. 4311 341 FI. Anton.
Marcellinus.

Caelius Probinus.

A Synod is holden at Antioch against Athanasius and the Bishops of the true
faith. Brawles and broiles between the Bishops of the true faith, and the
Arians. Constans 5 1093 returns out of Italy into Pannonia to encounter the
Barbarians. Whiles he was busied in Pannonia, the Frankes taking that vantage
and opportunity, brake their covenant, pass over Rhene, and began foulie to
waste Gaul, even against their Leaders mind. Ecclesiast. hist. Eutrop. Sigon.
4312 342 Imp. Constantius Augustus the third time.

Imp Constans Aug. the 2. time.

Constantius expels the Bishops of the true faith: In steed of Athanasius
there is substituted George of Cappadocia a most cruel varlet, whose tragical
stirs and troubles the Ecclesiastical Writers do report. Constans
vanquisheth the Frankes. Eutrop. Sigan. 6 1094 4313 343 M. Maecius Me^mius
Furius Placidus.

Fl. Pisidius Romulus.

Constans makes his abode in Italy, and before his brother Constantius
defends the cause of the true faithful Bishops, whom he had driven away.
Hieronym. Ecclesiast. hist. 7 1095 4314 344 Dom^ius Leontius.

Salustius.

By sundry devises and artificial sleights the Arians strive against the
Bishops of the true Faith. Eccles. hist. 8 1096 There happened great Earthquakes
in this year, and the next following: whereby Neocaesarea, Dyrrachium, and
twelve cities of Campania were shaken, and fell. Sigonius. 4315 345 Amantius
Ceionius.

Rufus Albinus.

The Bishops of the West Church refuse the Form of Belief set down in the
Heretical Synod of Antioch, and published. Ecclesiast. hist. 9 1097
Constantius in Mesopotamia keeps watch and ward against the Persians:
Constans likewise in Gaul against the Germans, that made incursions. Sigon.
4316 346 Imp. Constantius Aug. the 3. time

Imp. Constans Aug. the 3. time.

By commandment of both Emperors, a Council is proclaimed at Sardica. Hist.
Ecclesiast. 10 1098 4317 347 F. Rufinus.

Fl. Eusebius.

The Council at Sardica confirms the Decrees of the Nicene Synod, and
restores the Bishops of the true Belief unto their Churches, and condemns
the Arians. Socrat. 2. Hist. Tripartit. 11 1099 Constans by his threatening
Letters drives his brother Constantius to that pass, that he condescended to
the Decres of that Synod. Sigon. 4318 348 Fl. Philippus.

Fl. Salleas.

Constantius calls home unto their Churches, Athanasius, and other banished
Bishops, whom the Decree of Sardica had absolved. Eccles. hist. 12 1100 4319
349 Vlpius Limenius.

Aeo Fabius Catullinus Philonianus.

Constantius joineth in battle with Sapores king of the Persians, and had the
worst. Constans leading a wanton and voluptuary life, draws thereby his
principal captains, and Magnentius above the rest, to assail and set upon
himself. Zosim. Sigon. 13 1101 4320 350 Sergius. Nigrinianus. Magnentius
kills Constans in Gaul, by the hand of one F. Gaiso: he makes Decentius
and Desiderius his two brethren, Caesar's: possesses himself of Gaul, Spain
and Italy. 14 1102 Nepotianus hearing of the death of Constans, usurpeth the
Empire in Italy, and within a while, is by the Captains of Magnentius slain.
Vetrannio likewise catches the Empire in Pannonia. Zosim. Zonar. Constantius
hearing of Constans his death, makes an agreement with King Sapores, and for
to be revenged of Magnentius returns to Constantinople. Being seduced and
persuaded by the Arians, he persecuteth Athanasius and other Bishops of the
true and sincere belief. Full craftily he draws away Vetrannio from
Magnentius, because he would not be forced to fight with two at once. Zosimus,
Sigon. 4321 351 After the Co^sulship of Sergius and Nigrianus.

Magnentius tyrannizeth upon certain of the Roman Nobility. Constantius
rejects Vetrannio, and declares Caesar, Gallus his cousin german, the son
his uncles son.
of Constantines brother, and more openly then before favoreth the Arians.
Oros. Eutrop. Socrat. Sozom. Victor. 15 110 4322 352 Imp. Constantius Augustus
the fiftt time.

Fl. Constantius Gallus ^aesar.

Constantius makes war upon Magnenttus, who at Mursa is overthrown by
Constantius: but afterward at Ticinum he gives the Romans an overthrow.
Zosimus. 16 110 4323 353 Imp. Constantius August the sixth time

Fl ^onstantius Gallus Caesar the second time.

Magnentius vanquished in Gaul by Constantius, slew himself. Decentius his
brother being Caesar, was his own hangman. Desiderius submits himself.
Constantius assumeth the joint Empire of East and West. At Arles he exhibiteth
Games and Plays. Being by the Arians solicited, he sommoneth a general
Cnuncell to be holden at Millaine. Zosim. Zonaras, Sigon. 17 110 4324 354 Imp.
Constantius Augustus the seventh time.

Fl. Constantius Gallus Caesar the third time.

Here Am. Marcellinus begins the foureteenth book of his Story, the first
of those eighteen which are left of the one and thirty: and contains the
acts of six and twenty years, which he reports at large: whereof solloweth a
Brief. 18 114 Constantius, whiles he intends his war against the
Lentienses Almans, causes Gallus Caesar, who in the East committed foul and
wicked facts to be brought unto him, and commands that he should be killed
in I-stria. And after this he vanquisheth the Almans. Am. Marcell. lib. 14.
15. cap. 1, 2, 3. 4325 355 Fl. Arbetio. Mavortius

Lollianus.

Silvanus usurping the Empire in Gaul, is slain. Am. lib. 15. cap. 1, 2, 3.
19 1104 Constantius ill affected unto Athanasius, banisheth Liberius out of
Rome. Amm. lib. 15. cap. 6. * his own uncles sanne. Constantius declares
Iulianus, brother of Gallus, and Constantines * brothers son, Caesar, cap. 7.
and affianceth his sister unto him in marriage. cap. 8. 4326 356 Imp. Constanti
us Augustus the eight time.

Iulianus Caesar.

Iulianus marches into Gaul against the Almans. lib. 16. cap. 1. etc.
Constantius enters Rome after a triumphant manner, and vievverh it: in foolish
wise he wondereth at it, and being affrighted, goes his ways, and leaves
it. cap. 5. 6. 20 110 4327 357 Imp. Constantius Augustus the ninth time

Iulianus Caesar the second time.

Iulianus, in a bloody battle before Argentoratum, overthrows and defeateth
the Almans, takes their King Chonodomarius prisoner, and sends him to Rome.
Hereupon arose the grudge and displeasure of Constantius against Julian. Am.
Marcell. lib. 16. cap. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 21 1109 4328 358 Dacianus.

Nerat^us Cerealis.

Iulianus restrains the Almons, Frankes, and other 22 1110 neighbor Nations,
making tumults in sundry places, and forces them to keep quiet. Lib. 17. cap.
1. 2. 8. 9. The Persians Embassage. Ca. 6. A dreadful Earthquake, which shook
mountains and many towns of Asia, Macedonia, and Pontus. Cap. 7. Constantius
subdueth the Sarmatians and Quadi. The Sarmatian slaves he defeateth in
battle. The Picenses and Limigantes upon their humble supplication, he
reduces into their ancient habitations, and thereupon is styled Sarmaticus.
Cap. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 4329 359 Eusebius Hypathius. Julian wearieth the
Almans, and forces them to crave peace. Lib. 18. cap. 1. 2. 23 1111 The war
is kindled between the Persians and Romans: in the beginning whereof
Constantius is grievously foiled. cap. 4. 5. 6. 7. The former acts and
occurrents of this war, and the flight of the Roman troops. cap. 8. 9. 10.
11. 12. 13. Amida a most strong town is by the Persians assaulted, and after
much loss on both sides, forced, and won. lib. 19. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. Great dearth of corn and victuals in Rome. cap. 9. Constantius puts to
the sword, the Limigantes of Sarmatia, who rebelled, cap. 10. Constantius
cruelly proceeds by the means of one Paulus his Notary or Secretary, against
those that sought unto Oracles, and were given to the superstitions of the
heathen. An horrible monster was seen at Antioch. The Isaurians making a
commotion, are by Lauritius appeased. cap. 11. 12. 4330 360 Imp. Constantius
Augustus the ninth time.

Julian. Caesar the third time.

A memorable Eclipse of the Sun in the East empire. lib. 20. cap. 2. Julian
in Gaul is styled Augustus. With what cunning slight this was brought about,
Am. Marcellinus lays open in the twentieth book, cap. 3. 4. 5. 9. The
fortunate success of the Persians in the East against the Romans. cap. 6. 7.
8. The attempts of Constantius against Iulianus and the Persians take no
effect. cap. 10. 11. 12. 13, Julian represseth the Athuarij, a nation of the
Frankes. cap. 10. 24 1112 4331 361 Fl. Taurus.

Fl. Florentius.

Julian, desirous to overthrow Constantius, embraces the study of unlawful
and forbidden Arts: and for the time makes semblance of Christianity. lib.
21. cap. 1. 2. Certain Almaine traitors he chastises. cap. 3. He purposes to
make open war upon Constantius. cap. 4. The memory of Constantinus Magnus he
traduceth, and penneth an Invective against Constantius, cap. 8. He besieges
Aquileia, which was intercepted by Constantius his Legions; and in the end
wins it. cap. 9. 10. Constantius being freed from the Persian war, takes
arms against Julian, whom he terms a Rebel: But in the way, when he was
come to Tarsus, he died the third day of November. cap. 11. 12. 13. Julian
hearing of Constantius his death, comes out of Moesia to Constantinople, and
fetleth the affairs of the State: Impiously, hatefully, and craftily he
deals against Christ, and the Christians: A most foul sight and view of
Iulians court and army both. lib. 22. cap. 1. 2. 3. 25 1113 4332 362 Fl.
Mamertinus.

Fl. Nevita.

IVLIANVS is now Augustus and Emperor alone. He makes his abode at Antioch. A
professed enemy of true religion. Christian Grammarians and Rhetoricians he
debarreth from reading in Schools, lib. 22. cap. 9. 10. Great personages that
were his adversaries and opposites he makes away: the seditious Alexandrines,
who had murdered Georgius the Arian Bishop, he mildely entreats. cap. 11.
Addicted to magic arts, he addresseth himself to the Persian war, and
writes against the Antiochians. Certain prodigious signs are seen: and an
Earthquake happens, whereby Nicomedia is overturned. cap. 12. 13. 1 1114 4333
363 Imp. Iulianus August. the fourth time.

Secundus Sallustius Promotus.

Julian goes about in vain to reedifie the Temple of Jerusalem. lib. 23. cap.
1. He makes a journey into Persia. cap. 2. etc. With a most puissant army he
enters Persia: Anatha is yielded unto him: and after many warrelike
expeditions he wins Maiozamalcha. libr. 24. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7, etc. 2
1115 Being skared with an ominous sign, leaving the siege of Ctesiphon, and
wearied together with his whole army with the distemperature of the air and
the soil, forced he is to alter his journey. cap. 11. 12. At the last, after
certain skirmishes and battles fought, forgetting to take his cuirace, and
hasting to fight, he was mortally wounded by an unknown person, and within a
while after yielded up his vital breath, in the two and thirtieth year of his
age, the six and twentieth day of June. lib. 25. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4. After him
succeeded Fl. IOVIANVS, who reigned seven months, and two and twenty days,
being chosen by the Soldiers: he departs out of Persia, after he had
concluded peace with Sapor, and yielded up the provinces beyond Tigris. Am.
Marcellinus. lib. 25. cap. 7. 10. 4334 364 Imp. Flavius Iovianus August.

Fl. Varronianus August. his son, a child.

Iovianus dies in Galatia. lib. 25. cap. 14. 1 1116 After him succeeded. Fl.
VALENTINIANVS chosen by the Soldiers, who reigned eleven years, eight months
and two and twenty days. He being returned to Constantinople, took unto him,
in the Society of the Empire, his brother Fl. VALENS, and declared him
Augustus: and when he had committed unto him the East Empire where he ruled
fourteen years, four months and fourteen days) himself took his
progress into the West. Am. Marcell. lib. 26. cap. 1. 3. 5. 4335 365 Imp.
Valentinianus Augustus.

Imp. Valens Augustus.

Whiles Valentinian thinks of making war upon the Alemans, Valens is by
Procopius the usurper troubled and wearied. li. 26. cap. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 2
1117 4336 366 Fl Gratianus Ionne of Valentinian.

Fl. Dagalaiphas.

Procopius being apprehended has his head stricken off. lib. 26. ca. 12.
Marcellus giving the attempt to succeed 3 1118 Fl. Dagalaiphas. Procopius,
within a while after was put to death, cap. 13. Fearful Earthquakes throughout
the world, cap. 14. Valentinian in three battles under the conduct of
Iovinus, discomfiteth the Almans making war, lib. 27. cap. 1. 4337 367 Fl.
Lupicinus.

Fl. Iovinus.

A bloody sedition at Rome between Damasus and Vrsicinus contending for the
Episcopal dignity, cap. 2. 4 1119 Valens passes over Ister against the
Goths, but seeing none to make head against him, returns with his forces,
libr. 27. cap. 4. Valentinian sore visited with sickness, declares GRATIAN
his son Augustus, who reigned eight years, two months, and eight and
twenty days, cap. 5. The Britans war is by Theodosius the General happily
achieved, cap. 7. Rigorous judgments are exercised at Rome, cap. 6. The most
miserable state of Afric under Romanus the Lieutenant, cap. 8. 4338 368 Imp.
Valentinianus August. the second time.

Imp. Valens Aug. the 2. time.

Valens warreth upon the Goths, libr. 27. cap. 4. Valentinian beats down
the Almans, cap. 9. The king of the Persians having subdued Armenia, prepares
for war against the Romans, cap. 11. 12. 5 1120 4339 369 Fulius Felix
Valentinianus

Sex Aurelius Victor.

Valens makes a rode into the Almans lands, where there is a treaty of peace,
lib. 27. cap. 4. Valentinian makes streit inquisition at Rome about Witchcraft
and Sorcerie, libr. 28. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. His wars upon the Almans, cap. 6.
6 1121 4340 370 Imp. Valentinianus Augustus the third time.

Imp. Valens Aug. the 3. time.

The war that Valentinian made against the Saxons, discomfited, by a wise
enclosed, and killed to the last man, lib. 28. cap. 11. The Almans are subdued,
cap. 12. Afrike is oppressed by Courtiers, cap. 13. 14. 15. In the Court of
Valens be horrible Tragedies acted about the inquiry of a Successor in the
Empire by divelish arts, lib. 29. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 7 1122 4341 371
Imp. Gratianus Aug. the 2. time.

Sex. Anicius Petronius Probus.

Valentinian, by the means of Serverus, discovers what the Almans do, and
puts them to flight, libr. 29. cap. 9. 8 1123 The war in Mauritania is by
Theodosius happily achieved, cap. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 4342 372 Fl. Modestus.

Fl. Arintheus

War against the Quadi not justly begun, is as unhappily managed, lib. 29.
cap. 14. 9 1124 Theodosius the younger a brave young Gentleman represseth the
Sarmatians, cap. 15. 4343 373 Imp. Valentinianus Augustus the fourth time.

Imp. Valens Aug. the 4. time.

Para King of Armenia, by commandment of Valens is murdered at a feast, lib.
30. cap. 1. 2. 10 1125 4344 374 Imp. Gratianus Aug. the 3. time.

Fl. Equitius.

Valentinian makes war upon the Alemans; and enters into a league and
amity with their king Macrianus, lib. 30. cap. 4. The woeful condition and
state of the East Provinces under Valens, cap. 5. 6. 7, 11 1126 4345 375 After
the third Consulship of Gratianus August. and Fl. Equitius. Valentinianus in
his journey to the Sarmatians and Illyrians gives audience to the Ambassadors
of the Quadi: and being much enchafed and vexed with their speech, is surprised
with an Apoplexy, and so dies the seventeenth day of November, libr. 30. cap.
8. 9. When he was dead, VALENTINIAN his son a very child, was by the army
styled Augustus, cap. 12. 12 1127 4346 376 Imp. Valens Aug. the 5. time.

Imp. Valentinianus junior Aug.

By the permission of Valens, the Goths, by the Huns oppressed, passing over
Danubius were received into Thracia; and misused by the Roman Captains and
Governors, set upon the Romans, Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 31. cap. 1. 3. 4. 5.
6. 13 1128 4347 377 Imp. Gratianus August. the 4. time

Fl. Merobaudes.

Valens gives order to meet with the tumults that the Goths made in Thracia,
who receive a great overthrow, which notwithstanding was to the Romans cause of
much sorrow, lib. 31. cap. 7. 8. 14 1129 Gratianus happily ends the war
against the Lentienses, libr. 31. cap. 10. Valens advauncing against the
Goths, and envying the glory of Gratian, is vanquished and slain in Thracia,
cap. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15 1130

Thus ends the Chronology of Marcellinus his Story.

