The Jewel of Joy.
Philemon, Eusebius, Theophile, and Christofer, talk together. Philemon. SO
often as I call to remembrance (which for the most part I do eueri hour) this
commandment of our Lord and master. Occupy your selves til I come, wherbi
we are admonished diligently Luke, xix.
to emploie our tale^t committed unto us every one according to our vocation
in the auauncemente of Gods glory, and in the edification of our christian
brethren, whose health and salvation, not only with the loss of our temporal
possessions, but eue^ of our life also, if need so require we are bound under
pain of damnation to seek, leynge that God as the wise man testifies, (...).
xvii.
has given to every man charg over his neighbor, again seeing that
according to the doctrine of blessed John, as Christ gave his life for us, so
likewise i. Epistle. iii.
are we bound to bestow our life to win our Brethren to Christ,
forasmuch as we all are members of one body, and are commanded Romayn. ^ii.
i. Cor^in. ^ii. i. Timoth. i, i. John. iii. Leu^. (...). Mathe. ^ii. Romayn.
^iii.
without dissimulation to love our neighbor as our self, and to seek his
commodity profit, and furderaunce in all Godliness, no less then our own, I
can none otherwise then reprove and accuse mine own sluggishnes, which
almooste these five years past have omitted my butye toward my neighbors,
not going forth as I began in my Christemas bankette, in my Potation, in my
Nolegaye, and in my Neweyers gift to exhort the^ to godliness, and to encourage
the^ valeauntly to go forth in the same, and to persevere unto the end, but
traneing my life in other exercises, I trust not altogether ungodly, nor
unprofitable to the christen public weal, I have neglected the neighbourly
office which I ought to have practiced toward the^. Yea I fear lest through the
neglectyng of my duty toward my neighbors, I have not showed my self an
obedient servant in all points concerning the dilige^te acco^plishme^te of my
Lord and masters precept, which straightly charge me not only to occupye my
self privately in virtuous studies and godli exercises, but also openly, that
his holy and glorious congregation may be edified and brought to ye true and
perfect knowledge of his most godly will. Certes the omissio^ and leaving of
this my duty toward my neighbors does not a little disquiet me, seeing ye so
long time I have had no familiar talk with the^ of Godly matters, no nor yet
once seen them sense I gave the^ a new years gift, being vnwillynglye
through the furious and Nerolike cruelty of certain persons (whose tyranny
sens that time God has not left unpunished) dreue^ away from them to the
great and continual disturbaunce of my mind for lacking the company of so
loving neighbors, and sweet friends.

But I have sent my servants for them, that I may talk with the^ after mine
old sort, renew our acquayntaunce, and be merye togythere. For it is a sweet
thing when fryndes mete, and merry when old acquayntaunce flock togitherward.
I maruail that they tarry so long. I fear lest my servant does not his
message expeditelye, or else that they have some great lettynge. For I am well
assertayned, that if they once have knoweledge of my return into the contrye,
no worldly affairs can withdraw them long from my company.

But behold, where they come flockyng together. Oh pleasant and confortable
syghte. Tears distyll out of mine eyes for very joy, yet can I not withhold
my self from them, but must needs with m^ting arms embrace the^ lovingly
salute them, and swetely kiss the^. O most dear neighbors and christen
brethren, so hertelye welcome as heart can think. Blessed be God, which has
preserved us alive unto this day, that we may yet once again se one an
othere, talk one with an other, and freely rejoice in the Lord our God. Come,
come unto me. Let me embrace you, kiss you, and once again did you hertely
welcome.


Euse. O most true herted friend and unfeigned brother, we praise God for your
salfe return into the country.


Theo. This day most sweet neighbor has replenished us al with joy
unspeakable, forasmuch as it has offe red you again to our sight.


Chri. O dear brother Philemon your reparing into this country, your sight,
your company, your ta^ke has eue^ now suddenly so revived us, that we seem to
have put on a certain kind of immortality. And as for all other his benifites,
so likewise for this 'do we render to the immortal God most hertye thanks,
and with o^ voice we all bid you most hertely welcome home.


p^le. I know dear neighbors your unfeigned love and ready bent goodwyl
toward me. And you do not more rejoice at mi return, then I am entierly glade
that I have found you all in good health.


Euse. But I pray you tell us of good fellowship brother Philemon in what
parties of ye world have ye traueyled so long time? For neither by letters nor
yet by report of any credible persons sense your departure could we learn
where you trained your life.

We feared least in so perellouse time ye had been swalowed up of the
greadye cormorantes, and insasiable Locustes, which are never satisfied nor
filled with the sheadynge of innocente blood. Neither was the liberty of your
speech, nor the swyftenesse of your pen unknown to us, which ye swarm of
Antechristes sect, sense you first of all traueiled in the Lords harvest,
could never abide, but extre^ly persecute, blaspheme and condemn.


Philemon. What gentilnes I found for my Godly travails at the hands of some
men in these parties, ye know right well. Therefore when neither by speaking,
nor by writing I could do good, I thought it best not rashly to throw my
self into the raueneynge paws of these greadye wolves, but for a certain
space to absent my self from their tyranny according Matthew, (...).
to the doctrine of the Gospel.

For as there is a time to speak, so is there a time to keep scilence Ecclesi.
i^,
When the poor are oppressed and trodden under the foot, then shall the wise
man, says the prophet, (...), (...).
hold his peace, for the time is evil. And we have a manifest commandment
of our savior Christ, that we should Matthew, vii.
not give that which is holy unto dogs, nor cast pearls before swyne, lest
they tread them un der their feet, and they turn again and al to rent us.
For there be some kind of men so greatly infected with the nature of Suffenus,
and accombred with the properties of Menius, two foleish and vain gloriouse
Poets, that they think nothing well spoken, nothing truly written, except
they them selves be the authors and doers thereof, they are those same very
hypocrites, Matthew. vii.
which find fault at a little mote in an other man's eye, but they ca^ not
perceive a great ^eame in their own eyes. They are those same Pharisees, which
sparre up Mathe. xxiii.
the kingedome of heaven before me^. They are those same sawiers Luke, xi.
which take away the key of know ledge, thet the^ selves enter not in, nether
suffer they other yt would to enter in. They are those same Babilonical
backslideds, and ^yng children, which will not hear the law of the Lord, but
daily cry, Esai. xxx.
Loquimini nobis placentia Tell us pleasant things, provide us of errors, care
not for the right way, but away with the holy one of Israel from our face,
they are those same faulse christians, of (...). (...). iii.
whom saint Paul prophesied, which should be lovers of them selves,
couetuouse, hye minded, proud, evil speakers, disobedient to their elders,
unthankful ungodly, unkind, false of their promise, false accusers, riatours
fearce, despisers of them that are good, traitors, heady, standing in their
own conceit, lovers rather of pleasures, then lovers of God, having an
outward apperaunce of godliness, but deuyinge the power thereof. Like as Iannes
and Iambres wythstode Moses, eue^ so do they also resist the truth. Men are
they of corrupt minds and leude as co^ cerning the faieth, but they shall
prevail no longer. For their foleishnes shall be manifest unto all men, as
theyrs was. Where things be so ordered, that the truth can bear no place, nor
the professors thereof be tha^kfully received, but rather blasphemed
persecuted, enprysoned, and vngentillye handeled: what should men do, but shake
of the dust of their fete, for a wytnes against the at ye dai of judgment and
depart into some other place where they may do good, as Christ and ye Apostles
Matthew. (...). Matthew, (...). John. ^iii. vii Act. xiii.
did, and quietli to abide ye pleasure of god, as the prophet says.

It is good to look for ye saving Chr^n. (...).
health of the Lord with scilence After this sort did I appoynte my self,
and leauyng mine own natyue contrye, I traueiled into such strange places, as
were unknown to me, and I to them And yet I thank the Lord my God, which
never leaves his servants succourlesse, I although an unprofitable servant
in that exile and banishment wa^ted no good thing. Let the voluptuouse
worldelynges take though for the beal^, and be careful for this present life.
I have learned in that my journey to cast my care upon the Lord my God which
aboundauntlye feadeth so many as trust in him, and depend on his liberality
and goodness. For one house, I found. xx. and for one friend, an hundrede.
Psalm. ^xxiii. (...) x^. (...). (...) Matthew. vi.
I could wysh nothing for the provision of this my life, but I Luke. (...).
(...). Peter. (...).
had it plentuously, God so before seeing for me his unprofitable and wretched
servant.


Theo. The promise of God is even so. Every one, says he, that forsakes
house, or brethrene, or sisterne, or father, or mother, or Matthew. (...). Luke.
xviii
wife or children for my names sake, and for the kyngedome of God, that is to
say, for the love that he bears toward the Gospel of Christ, he shall
receive an hundred fold as much in this present time, and in the world to
come life everlasting,


Chri. Truth it is, but you have not yet declared to us, in what contryes ye
have been here in England sense your departing from hence.


Philemon. After I departed from you and had taken my leave of my most sweet
mother, and of m^ other dear friends, I traueyled into Darbyshere and D^bishere
from thense into the Peke, whither I appointed my books and The (...).
my clothes to be brought.


Euse. Into the Peke? Lord God what made you there?


Phile. Mine intent was by exercising the office of a schole master to
engrafte Christ and the knoweledge of him, in the breasts of those scholars,
whom God should appointe unto me, for to be taught.


Theo. I think you found there very peakeish people.


Phile. Not so, I confess to you, that I found there very good wits and apt
unto learning.


Chri. But how favor they christen religion in those parties?


Philemon. I will tell you. Coming into a little village called Alsoppe in ye
dale, I chau^sed upon Master A^soppe.
a certain gentilmanne called Alsoppe, Lord of that vilage a man not only
ancient in years, but also ripe in the knoweledge of Christ's doctrine.


Theo. By what means had ye knowledge of his Godly disposition?


Phile. After we had saluted one an other and take a sufficient repast for that
present, he showed me certain books which he called his Jewels and
principal treasures.


Eusebius. I pray you what books were they?


Phile. To rehearse the^ al by name, I am not able, but of this am I sure that
among all other there was the new Testamente after the translation of the
Godly learned man Miles couerdale, which seamed to be as well worn by the
diligente reading thereof, as ever was any portas or mass book among the
papists.


CHri. A rare thing and almost a miracle to find an old man namelye in
those parties, where Christ I think as yet was never truly preached, to be
so well affected toward the readyng of the sacred scriptures.


Euse. Yea and a gentylman also, For gentylmen now adays for the most
Gentilmen.
part delight so much in readinge the word of God, as a true christian does
in reading the Popes decretals, they are all together so addict to the vain
pleasurs of this world.


Theo. Many think it to be an vnsemly thing for a man of nobility to be
studiouse of holy letters, hawks, and dogs dise and cards (as I may speak
nothing of their seruise to lady Uenus) is their pastime and delectation. If
they read any thing, it is some vain trifle of love, or when they be best
occupied an history or cronicle.


Phile. I grant many ge^tilmen little answer their vocation, nether are they
studious of gods word as they ought, notwythsta^dinge (praised be God for it) I
know many both me^ and women of nobility which greatli delight in readi^g the
holy scriptures, and do not only love, but also live the Gospel


Euse. I pray God increase the number daily. For then shall it go well with
christian religion, when noble men shall be learned in those books, which are
fountaynes and head sprynges of all true, perfect, and christian religion.
Notable is ye sentence of Plato which affirms that the public weal is
most fortunate and greatly auau^ced, if such as be the governors thereof be
either wise or studiouse of wisdom. Deuter. x vi Iosue. i.
Therefore does the scripture in so many places exhort the civil Psalm. ii ^en.
i. vi
magistrates to be learned in the law of god. But I pray you tell us, had the
ge^tilman none other books but only ye new testament?


Phi. Yes verily. I remember right well, yt he had many other godly books, as
ye obedience of a christian man, the parable of ye wicked Man mo^, ye revelation
of Antichrist, the sum of holiscripture, the book of John Frith against
purgatory, al ye boks published in the name of Theodore Basil, with diverse other
learned men's worckes, In these godly treatises, this au^cie^t ge^tilma^ among
the mou^tains and rocks occupied him self both diligently and vertuouslye.


Chri. I would not lightly have believed that such a man could have been found
in so barbarouse and rude a country, nor yt so fruitful works had been placed
in so unlearned a regio^.


Phile. Neither would the prophet Helias have believed yt there had been any
godly me^ left alive besides him self, when king Achab and his wicked wife
Iesabel had cruelly murdered such great number of ye Lords Prophets and
servants, til god made him answer and said. I have yet re served to me. vii.
M. me^, which have not bowed their knees before iii. ^g xix. Romans. xi
Ba^l. When the Papists and Antichrists think their kingdom most strongest
and most Mark ye paistes.
like to continue, then is it most nighe unto down fall, so worcketh God for
the auauncemente of his glory, and for the profit of his poor afflicte
congregati on. When the enemies of God burn good men, and consume their books
unto ashes, then are these martyrs the better credited their doctrine ye more
regarded, and their books both ye more warely kept and hold in ye greater
reverence.


Theo. I believe it right well. For there be certain books whose remembrance has
fallen away long before this time from the minds of the people, if they had
not furiously, and without consideration been conde^pned for heresy. But when
the people saw them condemned and no cause why, but plain tyranny. Sic volo,
sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas: It caused the^ to have the more respect
unto the books, and when they had read them, perused them and compared them
with the scriptures of God, perceiving that in all points they did agree with
the^, it caused the readers to have an evil opinion of the adversaries, and to
embrace and safelye keep the books as holy relics, and precious treasures. So
yt where the Papists sought a final destruction to the books by burning the^,
contrary to their expectation they have made them as it were immortal, and won
to the authors of them a noble fame, and glorious renown. Uery truly, is it
said of Solomon, there is no wisdom Prouer. xxi
no forecast, no council that can prevail against the Lord. Euse. Truth it
is, but to return unto ye Peke, of what sort I pray you are the people
co^cerninge christian religion.


Phile. When I was there, al their religion co^sisted in hearing mattens, and
masses, in super Feigned religion
sticious worshipping of Saynctes, in hyeringe soul caryars to sing trentals,
in pattering upon beads, and in such other popeishe pedlary.


Theo. The history of the gentylman caused me not so much to rejoice, as the
hearing of this makes me sorry. I wonder yt the common people be ^o
ignorau^te.


Christo. Do ye wonder? What wonder is it? When such as should lead them in
the light of ^noraunt priests.
Christ's gospel, are the very self darcknes. The eye, yt is to say, ye
preacher of gods word is ye light Matthew. vi Luke. (...).
of the body, yt is, of the whole congregation of Christ. If ye eye be single,
yt is to say, if the curate or preacher be godly learned, then shall all the body
be full of light, yt is the christian congregation shall have the word of god
dwell in the^ plentuously, and truly walk in yt light of Gods most blessed
will, without haltinge on boeth parts. But if the eye be darkness, yt is to say,
if the preacher be unlearned, how great the^ shall the dark nes be, yt is, how
ignorau^te and blind shall the gross and tude people be? Is not this the saying
of Solomon. When the preaching of Gods word fails, the people Prove. xxi^.
perish and come to naught. The priests are the salt of the earth in deed,
but if the salt be unsavory and have lost his saltnes, what Matthew v
can be salted there with? It is afterward good for nothing but to be cast out and
to be trode^ under foot of me^.


Phil. I can not deny, but yt the priests in yt country are very
baselylearned, and in a manner such as are pointed of ye prophet saying. Esa^.
(...).
The curats are blind every one of the^, they are altogether with out knowledge,
they are dombe dogs not able to bark. etc.


Euse The priests for the most part universally through ye realm, are such as
Ezechiel cries out on saying. Woe be to ye shepherds Ezechi. xxxiii.
of Israel which feed the^ selves. Should not the shepherds feed ye floke? Ye
have eaten up ye milk Ye have clothed you with ye wolle, the best fed have ye
slain, but the stoke have ye not nourished the weak have ye not holde^ up,
the sick have ye not healed, the broke have ye not bound together, the
outecastes have ye not brought again, the lost have ye not sought up, but
churlishly, and cruelly have ye ruled the^ etc.


Chri. Where such unlearned pastors bear rule, no marvel though papistrie be
not exiled.

If the blind lead the blind, both Matthew (...)
fall into the dytche.


Phile. The people where I hauetraueiled for the most part are reasonable and
quiet enough, yea and very co^for mable to Gods truth. If any be stobournlye
obstinate, it is for fault of knowledge, and because they have been seduced of
blind guids.


Theo. It should help very much unto an uniformity in religion, and unto the
salvation of christen men's souls, if there were learned curates appointed in
every parish, if so many ca^ not be found, the^ to place in every country
certain learned and godly preachers, which may go from parish to parish,
preaching to the people the good will, and pleasure of god. And let the other
priests be ministers under the superatte^dentes or ouersears, and in their
abse^ce read to the people ye said scriptures, and the homiles, reuere^tly
minister the sacraments, vi sit the sick people, make colleccions for the
poor, and vertuo uslye bring up the youth of the town. If this were
brought to pass, what a flowrishing realm should we have? How should lear nig
and virtue prosper? How purely should we honor God? How faithfully should one
of us love an other? What christian works should issue out of our daily
co^uersatio^ and living.


Phile. I doubt not but yt the kings majesty with his most honorable counsel
will very gratioussi consider these thin ges, yea and that with expeditto^


Chri. But sit once again to the Peke. I pray you continued you there still to
this return into the coun trey.


Phile. I will tell you. While I was in the Peke, I learned yt R. Wisdom was in
Stafforde Robert wisdom.
shere, ye know the man I am sure


Eus. We know him to be a godli man in his co^uersatio^, and a faithful
preacher in his doctrine, and such one as has not been altogether fre from
persecution for the maintenau^ce of gods truth.


Phi. He was ye same to me, yt Aristarchus Colossi. iiii.
was to Paul. Desieringe greatly to se him, I bad mi frindes in ye Peke fare
well, and made have toward him. When I came to him, I did not only rejoice to
se him in health, but also gave god thanks yt he was so well placed and
provided for. For I found him in the house of a certain faithful brother
called John Old, a man John Old.
old in name, notwithstanding young in years, and yet ^uncie^te in true
Godliness and christen life. He was to us as Iaso^ wasto Paul and Silas. He
received us joyfully (...). ^vii
into his house, and liberallye for the Lords sake, ministered all good
things to our necessities. And as he began, so did he continue a right herty
friend, and dearly loving brother so long as we remained in ye country. Eue^ as
blessed ii. Timo. i.
Paul wished to Onesiphorus, so wish I to him, and with the same words pray for
him, ye lord grant to him that he may find mercy with the Lord in ye day. After
yt we had passed over certain days in the house of yt most loving brother,
refreshing our selves with the comfort of ye holy scriptures, after so many
grievous te^pests, troublous storms, and pain full labors I know not of what
friend our dear brother Robert wisdom was called away by letters, which was to
us boeth, no small pain and grief. Notwithsta^ ding we submitted our selves to
the good pleasure of God, with this hope and conforte, yt his return to his old
familiars should make greatly to ye auau^ceme^t of gods glory, and to the
quietness of his christen studies, whereof might spring hereafter no small
co^modi tie to the christian public weal And so we wishinge one to an other
the assiste^ce of Gods spirit repentance of our former life, strength of
faith and perseuerau^ce in all godliness to our last end, de parted, yea and that
not with out tears.


Chri. Did he write nothing al ye time yt he was in those parties?


Phi. He was ever virtuous occupied, and suffered no hour to pas away with out
good fruit. He is a man in who^ ye fear of god reigns unfeignedly. Besides
his other works, of this I am sure yt The books of of Robert wis dome.
he has written very godly and fruit full expositio^s upon certain Psalm. of
David, of the which also he trau^slated some into english meter very
learnedly. He has written also many godly and learned set mo^s upon the
epistles and Gospels that are read in ye temples on sondaies, part whereof I
have both seen and read. Moreover he has trau^slated the postill of Antonius
Coruinus and diverse other learned men's works. And, which I had almost
forgotten, he has made a confutation of those errors which were imputed and
lat ed to his charge very unjustly of his adversaries, a book farsed with al kind
of godli learning.


Theo. These his works are not pri^ted nor comunely published abroad.


pHiIe. Truth it is, would God they were. They should wtoute doubt bring
great profit to the readers, and highly auau^ce ye glory of god.


Euse. But I pray you, what exercise did you practice in Stafford there after
his departure, Stafford ^er



Phi. According to my tale^te I brought up youth in (...) knowledge of good
litterature and instill led into their breasts the elements and principles of
Christ's doctrine teaching the^ to know their Lord and god, to believe in him,
to fear and love him, and studiouslye to walk in his holy ways from their
very cradels even to ye yeldinge up of their last breath. I dout not, but that
Christ was so depeli graue^ in their hertes at yt time, yt he is not yet worn
out, neither as I trust shall be so long as they live.


Euse. How sauoured the people christ and his doctrine in those parties, when
you were there?


phi. Not altogether unlike yE people of the Peke, but yt they were not in all
points comunli so superstitious they sauoured somewhat more of pure religion.
This I think came to pass through certain english books yt were among them,
and through traueilers to and fro London. Priests.



CHri. What of ye priests?


The. Ye should axe, what of ye mouinge of the mou^tains.


Phi. In deed when I was there, they were al massemo^gers appliyng their
portasse and mass book very diligently, but the holy Bible very little.


Euse. Were they not as he writteth of Titus.
men of Crete, evil beasts, and slow bealies?


Phi. It becomes me to dispraise no man. For charity covers the multitude
of sins. Notwtsta^ding. I would wish more learned pastors to be appoi^ted for
to feed the flock of Christ. For they are Proverb. x. 1. Peter iiii. Malach.
ii. 1. Peter. iii.
not such priests, as whose lips keep knowledge, neither can^ their mouth
utter ye law of God, if any man should require it of them.


Chri. If I should rehearse here to you, ye childish ignorance yt was found in
priests at ye kings majesty's visitatio^, it would make your heart to blede for
to consider yt such blind curates should have the over sight and charg of
Christ's congregation.


phi. Their blindenes is rather to be lamented the^ to be derided,
notwtsta^ding this must I needs say by the way, I wysh with all my heart that the
church of Christ may be purged of such unprofitable cloddes of the earth, at
the lest that they may not occupye the tome and enteye the li uyng of a
preacher, they them sell ues being altogether unlearned and more mete to be
taught then to teach. He that should be a curate Tit. (...).
after S. Paul's rule ought to be a man able to teach the peo ple Gods word,
yea and such a man as should not only be able to ex hort, but also to convince
and overcome al such as speak against the truth.


Theo. A great faut in Bishops.
this behalf is to be imputed unto the Bishops, which admitted such
unlearned asses unto ye order of priesthod.


Euse. The patrons of the benefits are not altogether blameles for giving
(...) of benefices.
the lyuinges to such ignorant men, wether it be for affection or for
rewards, neither shall their punishment, I fear, be small at ye day of
judgment. For if when the blind ledeth the blind, both faule into ye ditch,
what shall we tha^ say of the^, which are the occasion that Math. xv.
the blind gide with his blind floke faule into ye dich, yt is to say, into
everlasting da^nacion? Shall not the blood of them that perish be required at
the Patrons hands in the dredeful day of judgment? If I put a sword in a mad
man's hand, which with the same Note.
immeadiatli kills a another man: am not I giltye of the blood of him that is
slain?


Phi. Let these things pass, for doubt ye not the kings highes with his most
honorable counsel will most graciously provide for the redress of such abuses.


Theo. Did you tarry I pray you continually in Stafforde shere until ye returned
into your country?


Phile. Nay forsoeth. After that I had consumed a year in that country and
some what more in the virtuous educacion and Godly bringyng up of youth, I
departed into Warwyke shere, where in like manner as before I frelye enjoyed the
liberallytie of my most sweet and dear friend John Old, which impelled by
vorgent causes departed into that country for to inhabit. There likewise
taught I diverse gentil men's sons, which I trust, if they live, shall be a
beutie to the public weal of Egland both for the preferment of true religion
and for the maintenance of Justice.


Euse. How fancied you that contrye?


Phile. I travailed boeth in Darbye shere, in the peke, in Stafford shere and
in Lechester shere, yet Warwyke shere was to me most dear and pleasant.


CHri. How so?


phi. In Lecester shere (as I may pass over the other) I had familiarite only
with one learned man a contriman of M. John Ail (...).
ours called John Aylmer, a master of art of the university of cambrige, a
young man singularly well learned both in the latin and greek ^onge, teacher to
my Lord Marquis Dorset his children, but Warwick shere ministered unto me
theacqueyntaunce and frenshyppe of many learned me^.


Chri. What are their names I pray you? For nothing deliteth me more than to
hear of learned men.


Phile. Friste comes to my remenbraunce a man worthey to be loved and
reverenced of all true herted christen men not only for the puernes Master
Latimer.
of his life, which has always before the world ben innocent and blameles,
but also for the sincerity and godlynes of his Euange like doctrine, which
since the beginyng of his preaching has in all points ben so comfortable to
the teaching of Christ and of his Apostles that the very adversaries of Gods
truth with all their manachynge words and cruel emprisonme^tes could not
with draw him from it, but that so ever he had once preached, he valeauntly
defended the same before the world without fear of any mortal creature
although of never so great power and high authority, wishynge and minding
rather to suffer not only loss of worldely possessions, but also of life, than
the glory of God and the truth of Christ's Gospel should in any point be
obscured or defaced through him. His life was not dear unto him Act. xx.
so that he might fulfill his course with joy and the office that he received
of the Lord Jesus to testify the Gospel of Gods favor. He might well say
with the holy Psalmographe, I spoke O Lord, of thy testimonies and Psalm. C.
xviii.
ordinauntes in the presence of Kings, Princes and Rulars, and I was not
abashed.


Euse. I much desire to know his name tell it us I pray you.


phile. Ye have heard I am sure of Master Latimer sometime By shop of
Worcester?


Chri. His noble fame and virtuous renoume is more known not only in this
Realm of England but also in foren countries a monge boeth learned and
unlearned, than it can be hid. I for my part have known him before. xx. years
in the university of Camb^ig to whom next unto God I am specially bound to
give most hertye thanks for the knoweledge, if any I have, of God and of his
most blessed word.


phile How so?


Chri. I was so^etyme a pore scholar of Cambrige very desirous to have the
knoweledge of good letters, and in the time of my being their, this godly man
preached many learned and christen sermons both in latin and english tongue, at
the which al, I for most part was present, and although at ye time I was but
a child of xvi. years yet I noted his doctrine so well as I could, partly
reposynge it in my memory, par lie commending it to letters as most
faithful treasurers un to memory.

I was present when with manifest authorities of Gods word and arguments
inuicible besides the allegations of doctoures he proved in his Sermons, that
the holy scriptures Bible in engl^she.
ought to be read in the English tongue of al christian people, whether they were
priests or lay men, as they be called, which thing diverse drowesy dunsers
with certain falls fliynge flatering Friars could not abide, but openly in
their unsavory sermons resisted his godly purpose, even as Alexander the
copersmyth and Elymas the sorcerer with many other resists blissed Paul and
ii. Timo. iiii.
his Godly doctrine, not wythstandynge Act. viii.
he (yea rather God in him, whose cause he handeled) gate the victory, and it
came to pass according to his teaching. Neither was I absente when he
inueighed against temptle works, good ententes, blind z^ale, supersticious
devotion. etc. Will works.
as the payntynge of tabernacles gylddynge of Images, setting up of candles,
ronnynge on pilgrimage and such other idle inuencions of men, whereby the glory
of God was obscured and the works of mercy the les regarded. I remember also
how he was wont to rebuke the beneficed Beneficed men.
men with the authority of Gods word for neglectyng and not teaching their
flock and for being absente from their cures, they them selves being idle
and mastinge them selves like hoggs of Epicurus flock, taking no thought
though their pore parishners miserably pine a way, sterue, perish and dye
for hunger. Neither have I forgotten how he at that time condemned ^owes.
folyshe ungodly and impossible vows to be fulfilled as the vow of chastity,
wyshinge rather yt liberty of mariag might be granted to the^ which have so
vowed by the highter powers, than so to continewe through single life in all
kind of abominable uncleanness. O how vehemente was he in rebukynge all sins,
namely Idolatry, falls and idle swering covetousness and whoredom? again how
sweet and pleasant were his words in exhorting unto virtue? He spoke
nothing but it leafte as it were certain pricks or stinges in the hertes of
the hertes, which moved them to consent to his doctrine. None except they were
stifnecked and vncircomcised in heart, went a way from his sermons, which
were not led with a fayethful repentance of their former life affected with
hight detestacio^ of sin, and moved unto all Godliness and virtue. I did know
certain men, which through the persuasion of their friends went unto his
Sermons swellynge, blown full and puffed up like unto Esoppes Frog, with envy
and malice against him but when they returned, the Sermon being done, and
demanded how they lyked him and his doctrine, they answered with the
Bishops and Pharisees servants. Nun quam sic locutus John. viii.
est homo, sicut hic homo.

There was never man that spoke like unto this man, so sharppe He^rus. iiii.
a two edged sword is the word of God (it enters through even unto the
deuydynge of the soul and the spirit, and of the ioynctes and the mary) so
watchethe God upon his word, so causethe the father of heaven (...). i.
his word not to return unto him void, but to do what so ever his good
pleasure is, and to take root and bringeforth Esai. iv. ^t. xiiii.
fruit in them that are before ordained unto everlasting life, in some an
hondered fold, in some three skore fold, in some their t^ fold. I leave of to
report his fre spech against biyng and selling Math. xiii.
of benefices, against the promo tynge of them unto the lyuinges Benefices.
of spiritual ministers which are Unlearned.
unlearned and ignorant in the law of God, against popyshe Ministers.
pardons, against the reposinge our hope in our own worckes Pardons.
or in other men's merits, against faise religion etc. Neither do I Maine hope.
here rehearse how beneficial he was according to his possibility Alms
deeds.
to pore scholars and other nedye people, so conformable was his life to his
doctrine, so watered he with good deeds, what so ever tofore he planted with
godly words, so labored he with all maine boeth in word and deed to wine and
allure other unto the love of christ's doctrine and his holy religion there is a
common saying, which remains unto this day, When Master Staforde read, and
Master Latimer prea ched, than was Cambridge blessed.


Euse. What was that Stafford?


Chri. A man whom the vnthanful M. George Stafforde.
world was unworthy any longer to have. As I may pass over the gifts of
nature and such goodly qualities, as win unto them that have them the
favor and commendacion of men, wherewith he was plentu ously endued, this I
unfeignedly say unto you, he was a man of a very perfect life, and if I may
so speak, of an Angellike conuersacio^, approuedly learned in the Hebrew,
Greek and latin tongues, and such one as had through his payneful labors
obtained singular knoweledge in the mysteries of gods most blessed word.

I doubt whether he was more bownde to blissed Paul for leauinge those Godly
Epistles behind him to cusituet and teach the congregation of God, whereof he
was a dear member, or that Paulle, which before had so many years been
foiled with the folyshe fantases and eluyshe exposicions of certain dotynge
doctors and as it were drowned in the dir^ye dregs of the drowsye dunsers,
was rather bownde unto him, seeing that by his industrye labor, pain and
diligence he seemed of a dead man to make him a live again and putting a way
all vnsemlines to set him forth in his native colors, so that now he is
boeth seen, read and heard not without great and singular pleasures of them
that travail in the studies of his most godly Epystles. And as he beutified
the letters of blessed Paul with his godly exposicions, so like wise did he
learnedlye setforth in his lectures the native sense and true understanding of
the fore Euaungelistes, viuely restoryng unto us the Apostls mind and the mind
of those holy writers, which so many years before had lien unknown and
obscured through the dark Math xxiiii.
nes and mistes of the Pharisees and Papists.

He was a faithful and prudent servant, geuinge meat to the Lords
howshoulde in due time He did cast away profane and old wives fables, and as
the good servant of Jesus Christ he exersised him self unto godlynes: ii
Tmoth. iii,
He was an ensample to the faithful in word, in conversation, in love, in
spirit, in faith, in purity. He gave his mind to readinge to exhorting, to
doctrine. He studied to show him ii. Tioth. ii.
self unto god a laudable work man yt needs not to be asha^med deuidyng, the
word of truth justly. He was gentle unto every man and with mekenes informed
the^ that resisted the truth, if God at any time would give the^ repentance
for to know the truth, and to turn again from the snare of the devil. He
fought a good fight, he fulfilled the course, he kept the fayeth, therefore is
there ii. Corin. iiii,
laid up for him a croune of righ tuousnes, which the Lord that ryghtuous
judge shall give him in that day, not to him only, i. Peter. v.
but to al them that love his com minge.


Phile. I am glad brother Christofer that ye have spoken no less truly then
frendely of these two me^ of God, of the which one reigns with the high
bishop in christ's glory (for the wise as the prophet Daniel says, which
have taught other shall glister Daniel. xii.
as the shynynge of heaven, and those yt have instructed the multitude unto
godliness, shall be as the stars world without end) the other is yet alive
worthy, if Gods good pleasure so were, to live the years of Mathusalath,
Genesis. v.
both for his godly doctrine and christian conversation.

With this true preacher of gods word, I chanced in Warwyke shere to be
somewhat acquainted (which was to me no small conforte) not with him only but
with diverse other, whereof some were men of worship well bente toward the holy
scrip tures, some were men very godly learned in the laws of the most
higheste, and professors of ye same. So often as I was in their company, me
thought I was clean delivered from Egypt and quietly placed in ye new glorious
Jerusalem which is described in ye revelation of blessed John, so sweet Ap^a.
xxi.
a thing is it to be in the company of Godly learned men.


Euse. Traueyled you into none other country afterward?


Phile. While I was traynynge up of youth, and fashyonynge their minds unto
true Godlynes in that country, behold unlooked for, were letters sent unto me,
from my most dear mother, in the which she required me, to return into my
native country, and to be a staff of her old Tobias. v.
age, for as much as my father in law was departed from this vale of misery.

I considering my duty and Exodi. xx. ^tero. v.
the honor which I owe unto her by the manifest commandment of God,
immediately after, not without the friendly consent of my well willers departed
from Warwyke shere, and with all haste repared home. And for as much as I have
now quietly reposed my self (thanks be to the high Lord) I remembrynge our
old friendship thought i^ my bounden duty to send for you and after mine
accustomed manner to talk with you of some part of the holy scripture.


Cristofer. The rehearsal of this your travail by diverse contreis has so
delyghted us that we seem now to have been with you in all your iourneys.


Theo. We magnifye God most hertely that he by his holy Angel has safe
conduite you in all your ways, preserved you in health, gotten you dear
friends and now at the last, brought you home again into your natyue
country.


Euse. But I pray you did you wright nothing in this your long absence?


Phile. I wrote diverse treatises, but as yet there are publishede only these
three, the governance of ver tue, an inuectiue against whordome, a dialoge of
Christ's nativity, between the Angel and the shepheardes. The other shall be
set forth, if the Lord will, hereafter at a convenient time. I tran^slated out
of latin into English^ diverse little treatises, the shyl^ of Salvation, the
solace of the soul, the commendation of death etc. Thus have I declared unto
you, how I spent my time, whilse I have been from you. It now remains that
for as much as hereafore I have perceived your gentilnes in accepting the pore
and homelye gifts that I have given you, I go forth to use still mine
accustomed liberality toward you, and to enryche you with mo gifts, which may
no less garnish your souls, the^ the other have done in times past,
howesoeuer the papists and Antichrists Soldiers have judged of them. The
gift which I will now give you, is called the Jewel of Joy, and not without
The Jewel of Joy
a cause. For in it you shall receive much true Joy and perfect solace,
much Godly pleasure and spiritual conforte. In it ye shall se in what thing
alone ye ought to rejoice, and how vain and transitory those things are,
wherein the foleishe and fantastical worldelynges repose their chief pleasure
and de lectation. This Jewel have I borrowed of ye blessed apostle. S. Paul, and
it is among his treasures cowched in ye fourth chap. of his Epistle to the
Philippia^s


Chri. I pray you what is it^let it be brought forth.


Phile. Lo, here it is. Rejoice in ye Phillip. iiii.
Lord always, and again I say rejoice. How like you this Jewel? Is it not
boeth goodlye and preciouse? Is it not worth ye lokynge on as they say? Is it
not a Jewel worthy to be worn of every true herted christian man?


Euse. It is a Jewel in deed not only amiable and pleasant in aspecte, but
also very confortable and wholesome to a Christian man's conscience.


Theo. It is no apt Jewel for the wicked worldelinges and bellied hypocrites,
which like to E soppes cock set more by a barley corn, then by all the
preciouse stones in the world, of this sort chiefly.


Phile. Truth it is. For if men estraunged from the public weal of the
true Israelites, car nallye minded, vncircumsed in heart, disobedient to the
yoke of Christ, not regenerate by the spirit of God, nor renewed by the holy
baptism, but in all points led captyue at the deuilles pleasure with the
affectes of the world, should hear this aforesayed sentence of the holy
apostle recited to them, and chiefly of such one as is enprisoned, fettred,
bound in chains (as blessed S Paul was, what time he wrote this Philippi. i.
(...)
Epistle unto the Phillyppians) which are instruments to the vo luptuouse
worldelynges of no gladenes but of sadenes, of no joy and pastaunce, but of
sorrow and greuaunce, they would no less then marvel at his fondnes, yea it
is to be thought, that they would laugh him to scorn as a person transposed
and far set beyond the limits of wyttye reason, and reasonable wit, seeing
he exhorts unto yt which in so great storms and tempests of troublous
adversity no heart led with human wisdom can easily approve, so blind,
foleishe, ignoraunte, and of no capacity, feeling or understanding in
spiritual things, is the wisdom of this world, as. S. Paul i. ^orhin. ii.
says. A natural man does not perceive those things that pertain to ye
spirit of god. For they are foleishenes to him, neither can he come to the
knowledge of them, because they are spirituallye judged. The head rulers
among the Jews, the bishops, the priests, the scribes, the Phariseis, ye
Saduces, the Lawiers with many other, which were in christ's time prove this
thing evidently true inoughe, which John ix.
although in their own conceit puffed up with the excellent know ledge of Gods
mysteries, perceiving nothing at all of Christ's blessed doctrine, so truly
is it said of the holy Apostle, The wisdom of this world is foleyshnes before
God. Neither want we exemples at this present.


Euse. To know Christ and Christ's doctrine, aright is the singu ler gift of
God, wrought in our hertes by his holy spirit, as Christ him self
testifies, saying. No man ca^ come unto me, John. vi.
except the father which sent me, draw him, and I will raise him Esai. i. iiii.
I^mp. xxxi.
up in the last day. It is written in the prophets, all shall be taught of
God, therefore every one yt has heard of the father, and has learned, he
comes to me.


Theo. In the Gospel of blessed Matthew our savior Christ Mathewe. xi.
gives thanks to his heavenly father, because he has hydden the knowledge
of his mysteries from the wise and prudente of this world, which gloried in
their own wisdom, and has reueyled them to the little ones that is to say,
to them that be humble minded, meke in spirit lowly in heart, and even such
as ascribe al glory and honor to God and not to themselves. Forsooth father,
says he, eue^ so was it thy good pleasure. All things are given over unto me
of my father. And no man knows the son but the father, nether knows any man
the father save the son, and he to whom so ever the son will open him.


phile. But this our Apostle and Roma. (...) Galath. (...) i. (...). ii.
fayethfull Embassadoure sent from god the father to be a doctor to the
gentyls in faith and verity, a true citizyn of the new celestial Jerusalem,
abundantlye replete with the fruits of ye holy Ghost, and plentuouselye
endued with wisdom from above to understand and declare the excellent
mysteries of Gods most high providence hid in ye bosom of his divine
secrets from everlasting, and now in this last age reueiled published and set
abrod to ye great comfort of al faithful penitent sinners through his son Jesus
Christ our Lord. This our apostle I say, eue^ in ye mids of his chains and
setters writes to the Philippia^s, and by them to all other true christians,
and exhorts the^ to be merye, and to rejoice in ye Lord. He is nothing
dismayed, nor yet abashede, of his bo^des, chains, and fetters, of his
enprifonnyge, lockynge, and stockyng, but being of a frank courage and lusty
stomach, not Acts. xxi.
only to suffer chains, but also death, if the good will of God so be, he with
a vehemencye of spirit, and stoutenes of heart commands us not to be
discouraged with what so ever kind of adversity we be assailed, but va
leantly and vnfainedli to repose fyxe, and set the eyes of our mind on ye
Lord, and in him, in him alone to rejoice at all times. Rejoice in the Lord
always, says he, and once again I say rejoice.


Euse. Every man moves other to delighte in that thing specially, wherein he
him self has reposed his chief delectation. The couetuouse man has his
greatyst de The couetuous man.
light in temporal possessions, and as he is only bent to the accumulatynge
and heapynge up together of worldely goods, so in like manner does he exhort
so many as he tenderlye loves to set their minds on gatherynge together the
Goods of this world, being not unlike them, Prouer. xxx.
which are ever criynge, Adfer, adfer, Bring hither, bring hither, The papist
has his mind The Papiste.
altogether set on papistry, therefore, labors he to the vttermoste of his
power to allure other unto his pernitiouse and damnable sect.


Phil. Truth it is that you say. Therefore the blessed Apostle haueynge his
principal joy in the Lord our God, exhorts, moves, and flyrreth us
earnestly to rejoice in the lord, that we may be partakers with him of one, and
the same glory. He is not con^ente him self only to be in P^. i.
the favor of God, except he have other also to be in the bowels of Jesus
Christ.


Chri. In the Epistle unto the Romans, Roma. ix.
he wysheth him self to be cursed from Christ, so that his brethren the
Israelites, which were his kynsmen as pertaining to the flesh might be
saved.


Theo. He disse^ted not much from the manners of Moses that most excellent
Prophet of God, which perceyuyng that God was minded to destroy the children
of Israel for their abominable Idolatry ^rodi. xxxii.
in worshyppynge the golden calfe, desiered God very hertely yt he would
either forgive them that fault, or else wype him out of the book of life.


Euse. O most faiethful heardman, which wished the salvation of his flock no
less then his own.


Phi. But we shall note that saynct Paul pricketh not us forward unto the
reioysyng in worldly and carnal things but unto a perfect joy in ye lord our
God, which endures for ever. For what thing is comprehended in the whole
circle of the world, wherein we may worthily rejoice?

Consider the air above, ye earth underneath, with the deep waters in the
secret and inferior parts of the world, and mark dilige^tlye if in the^ any
thing be contained yt may bring to us true and perfect joy. They may delight
our fa^seis, and move our affects for a certain space to delectacio^, while we
behold, hear, feel or taste them, but how sone does this carnal delectatio^,
and worldli joy vanish away? yea how sone are we weary of the^, if measure be
exceded? Musical instruments feed the ear Musyke.
with very sweet and pleasant armony, and for a time greatly exhilarate,
chere, and comfort our weried spirits, but in how short space do we loath them,
if they be continuallye played upon or exercised out of time? And though we
delight never so greatly in the^, does not the sownde strayghte way perysh,
and we receive none other commodity then loss of time?


Theo. The wise man says Like as the Carbuccle stone shines Ecclesi. xxxi^.
that is set in gold, so is the swetnes of music by the mirthe of wine. Again
wine and minstrels Ecclesiasti. xi.
rejoice the heart.


Phile. Yea but what follows? The best is behind as they say. But the love
of wisdom, is above the^ boeth. This sentence of the wyseman does not
condemn Music nor wine, so that the use of them be moderate and excedethe
not measure, notwythstandynge it prefers the love of wisdom that is to
say, a fervent desire to know the will of God, and aduaunceth that above both
wine and musyke.


Chri. I wyshe that al men, but cheifely such as be of nobility, did know and
would practice this before said sentence. For many delyghte in Music, but
few in the love of wisdom Many covet to excel in singyng playng and dancing,
but in the knowledge of Gods word very few. Many can abide to spend whole
days and whole nyghtes in musical exercises, but in hearing or readinge the
holy scriptures, they think one holy day in aweke a great matter, when the one
moves unto virtue, the other unto vice, 'the one gets the favor of God,
the other pro uoketh his wrath, indignacion and ve^geaunce, the one lifts up
unto heaven, the other detrudeth and thrusts dou^e into hell fire.


Phile. To say the truth, music is a more vain and triefelinge science,
than it becomes a man borne and appointed to mat ters of gravity, to spend
much time about it. And al though I have learned of histories, ye diverse
have exercised minstrelsye both kings and philosophers, which I thyncke used it
as a remedy against the tediousnes of there paynefull labors, and to make
them the more apt to return un to matters of great importau^ce: yet I remember
well that it was counted a reproach in many.

King Philipe when he heard his son Alexander that trium King Philip
phante conqueroure sing and play very pleasauntly, checkingly rebuked him
saying, art thou not ashamed, that thou canste play and sing so conningely?
Meaning that other arts and sciences are more worthi a king. An heathen
Prince thought that a great fault in his son, which Christen rulears count
worthy of high commendacion and singular praise. Sextus Nero Sextus Nero
the Emperor, lieynge on his death bed greatly lamented that he was so
excellent in the science of music, wyshyng that he had spente that time in
good letters and virtuous exercises, whereby he might have been made the more
able iustelye and truli to govern his realm.


Euse. Would God that his repentance might be a warning to all noble men.

There have been, would God there were not now, which have not spared to spend
much riches in norishynge many idle singynge men to bleate in their chappeles
thinckinge so to do God an high sacrifice, and to pipe down their meat and
their drink and to whystle them a sleep, but they have not spente any part
of their substance to find a learned man in their houses to preach the word of
God, to haste them to virtue and to dissuade them from vice. Therefore swarmed
their howses with pride, ambicion, vain glory, covetousness, whoredom,
swearinge, stealinge, polling, pic king, envy, malice, fightinge, flattery,
supersticion, Hypocrisy, papistrie, Idolatry and al kind of abhominacion, as
it must needs come to pass, where the word of God is banished though there be
never so much massinge and maskynge according to the say inge of Solomon,
when the Prove. xxix.
preaching of gods word fails, the people perish and come to naught.


Theo. It becomes kings, princes and rulars rather Note.
to here the preacher of gods word and to give ear unto the lamentable voices
and humble ^upplications of their pore aflict and oppressed subjects, than to
hearken to the sownde of vain instruments, and to delighte in in hearing the
fylthy and trifelinge songs of droncken Musicions, which rather provoke unto
fleshelye fantascis than unto virtuous exercises. A Christen man's melody after
S. Paul's mind consists in heart, while we recite Psalms, himnes and
spiritual songs, and sing to the Lord in our hertes, geueynge Ephe. v.
thanks al ways for all things unto God the father in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Al other outward melodye is vain and transitory, and passes
away and comes to naught.


Phile. Uayne and traunsitorye is it in deed, notwithstanding Music may be
used, so it be not abused. If it be so berly exercised and reputed as an hand
maid unto virtue it is tolerable, otherwise it is execrable and to be
abhorred of all good men. So that ye perceive, that Music is not so
excellent a thing, that a Christian man ought ernestly to reioise in it.


Christo. It is evident enough, saying that it endures not, but pa sseth away
like other things subject to vanity.


Phile. There are yt greatly delight in buildinge gorgeous houses and sumptuous
mansions, but how vain is their delectacion? Wha^ Gorgeous houses.
they have spente innumerable riches in erectinge their pleasant and fair
houses, what have they but a great heap of stones cou ched one upon a another,
which for a little season fedeth the eye well, but when we be once goone what
profit carye we away with us? The holy Patriarchs of the old time
remembrynge how vain it is to delyghte in gorgeous houses buylte them tents,
and in those safely dwelte considering with them selves that they were but
strangers and pilgrims, and therefore prepared them houses not for this world
but for the world to come by couchynge there treasures in the bosoms of poor
men.


Euse. To build necessary and conueniente houses for our use is not ungodly,
as I judge, but to repose our delyght in them, or so to spend our goods on
buildynge that the poor people are ye les regarded, socoured, releaued and
helped, this is wicked, this is ungodly.


CHri. Buildynge is the daughter of phansye and may in a manner be compared to
the web of Penelope. For that one sets up, ano there after the disbursinge
of many powndes, destroys, and buil death it up again with double ex pences
the third succedeth, and his pha^tasy not fully satisfied, he again alters
the buildynge and adds threfolde charge, so that to build (I spoke of to much
gorgeous and not necessary houses) is nothing else than to dalie with the
world and to be led with fansy.


Theo. What was in time paste more gorgeous than Rome, when she was called the
Lady and head of the world? What was more sumptuousiye buylt than the temple
of Solomon? yea and that at gods commaun demente, as I may pass over many
aunciente and famous cities? what is become of them? How are they decade?
Many are come to such and so great down faule and to so extreme tuine, so
deformed, so destroyed, so consumed to death that there remains not somuche as
a step, neither is there left of them any mention at all. Well were it with
Christen religion, if christen men would remember this sentence of blessed
Paul. We have no dwelling place in this world, but we lobe for another to come
Tha^ should the hea uenly mansion be more desired and sought after. But now
many build and they know not who shall enherite, and in ye mios of these
their gorgious buildinges ye pore people are not considered nor provided for.


Euse. Would God all such as so greatly delight in costu ous buildinges, would
sometime set this sentence of the wyseina^ before their eyes If you kepeste not
thy self, says he, in the fear of Eccle. xxvii.
the Lord continually, thy housse shall sone be subverted, topled over and
brought to naught.


Chri. Me think yt this curious buyldyng, which al most vniuersalli is used
now a days among us is a great toke^ of the day of iud gemente being at
hand. For Christ in the Gospel, among other tokens recites buildyng to
Luke. xvii.
be one of ye chief wherbi we may learn yt the coming of the son of man unto
the teribleiudgeme^t is at hand as. s. James says. Behold ye judge stands
before the John. v.
door.


Phile. I perceive now right right well ye are fully persuaded that no man ought
to rejoice in gorgeous buildings, wherein many delighte now a days.


Theo. Yea verily. The history of Luke. xii.
the rich man in the Gospel makes us afraid, which was a buil der also, and
when he had finished his buildinge and couched his goods in his fair and large
houses thinking yt he should have lived many years, suddenly it was said unto
him, you fool this night shall they take away ye life from the, and tha^ whose
shall these things be that you have gathered together?


Phile. To enjoy great possessions in this world seems not to a few a
singular commodity and high profit, but with how many cares and troubles are
they acco^pa ned? With what great labor at they gote^ and scraped up together?
Of riches.
With what carfulnes and disquiet of mind are they kept, the hordets up of
them being at al hours in more fear left they should be taken away from them
either by robbynge, polling, pillinge burning, or by some other chance How
shortly are they consumed and brought to naught, which were not gathered
together with out long time and great sweat? So vain and transitorye be the
goods of the world. Again, are not the wordly possessions many times left to
such heytes, as spend them no less prodigally, than their auncitours got
them hardely and kept them niggardly? What just cause also has a ny man to
rejoice in temporal riches, seeing that at the dreadful day of judgment they
shall render a straight acco^ptes of every farthing to the high and
everlasting. Judge Christ, how they have bestowed them? For God has not
endeued the rich men with their possessions that they should spend the^ at
their pleasure and phansy, but according to his most godly commandment,
will and pleasure. Silver is mine, and gold is mine, says the Lord of
hosts. Hereto agrees the say inge of the Psalmographe, the earth is the
Lords, and all that is contained in it. The Lord has committed his goods to
the ritche men, and he will cale them to accomptes a gain to se how they have
bestowed the^, and what they have won and gotten by the exercise of the^ for
the Lords advantage, as we may se in the Gospel. If there be found
unprofitable servants, and have not bestowed them in settingeforth the glory
of God, and in the hell pynge of their christen brethren, but have hid the^ up
in the ground that is to say, kept them nigardly to their own use, or spent
them about vain and wicked Matthew. ^ii
things, they may be sure to be bound, fete and hands to be cast Mar^e.
(...).
into utter darckenes, where shall be weping and gnashing of teth.


Chri. O that th^se things were Luke. xxii.
well considered, pondered and weighed in the just balance of reasonable
discression, than should the rich men of this world have little occasion to
glory in their terrestrial and worldly possessions, Matthew. xxv
but rather recounte them most happy, wealthy and fortunat, to whom least is
committed. For every Luke. xix.
man shall render accountes of the talentes received, be they few or many.


Theo. Blessed is the rich, which is found with out blemishe, say eth the
wise man, and has not gone after gold, nor put his trust in Esai. xxxi.
monye and treasures. Where is there such a one? and we shall commend him, and
call him blessed. For great things does he among Luke xvi.
his people. Who so is tried and found perfect in such things shall be
commended and praised. Yea his good shall be stablished, and the whole
congregation shall declare his alms Make you friends, says our Savior
Christ, of the vnryghtous Mammo^, that when ye shall have need, they may
receive you into everlasting habitacions.


Euse. To se the inordinate affecti on and insatiable desire, which the more
part of men have unto the goods of ye world, it is a world. Aunciente
Authors complain of the couetuousnes used in their time but if they were now
a live they would marvel, and with high indignacion wete their pen, and
wright Satyrs and Inuectiues against our covetous worldlyngs. For their coue
tous affectes know no end, ney there a^e they at any time sa^ate, be their
abou^dau^ce temporal possessions Spiritual me^
^er so much ouerflowynge and passing al measure. Oh good God, good God, how
do our spiritual men tumble benefice upon benefice, and prebende upon
prebende? And yet are they led with no care of fedynge Christ's flock neither
corporally nor spirituallye. Christ's threfolde Pasce, is turned in to ye Jews
double Toll. They feed nothing, except them selves they tol and catch
whatsoever cach they may, would God they once would be obediente to this
commandment of God given by the wise man. Let not thine hand be stretched
out to receive, and Ecclesi. iiii.
shut when thou should give, A bishop says. S. Paul (he i. Timo. iii.
means every spiritual ouersear) ought to maintaynehospitalitie. Again he
says, forget Hebrews. xiii.
not hospitality and household keeping. For thereby have diverse men received
into their houses Hospitality.
Angels unawares. Hereto agrees the saying of. S. Peter. Be i. Peter. iiii.
ye herbourours one to an other without grudgynge. As every manne has
received the gift even minister the same one to an other, as good ministers of
the manifold grace of God. God in the old law greatly tendering the
mayntenaunce of hospitality, in his ministers gave this commandment to his
people for paying their tithes, saying. Malachi. iii.
Bring ye in all tithes into my barn, that there may be meat in Why ^theo
were paid
my house. Here God commanded tithes to be paid, but for what cause, that the
ministe^s should spend them in the court or at the university? or about
whoreynge? or in kepeynge of hawks or dogs? or in maynteynyng a sort of idle
valeau^t lubbers, which do nothing but consume the good fruits of ye earth Nay
verily, but that there should be meat in his house (for the personage or
viccarage is Gods house) For whom? For the couetouse worldelynges and rich
me^ which have no need of it? Nay sir, not so, but for the pore christi ans,
as Christ prescribes saying, Luke. xiiii.
When thou make a diner or supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethrene,
neither thy kynsemen, nor thy rich neighbors, lest they also bid the again,
and a recompense be made the. But when thou makeste a feast, call the pore,
the feeble, the lame, and the blind, and thou shall be happy, for they can not
recompense the. But thou shall be recompe^ced at the resurrection of the
ryghtuous men.


Chri. I think the greatest cause why Whi priests are despised.
priests be conte^ned at this time is, yt they neither regard their office in
preaching Gods word nor yet their duty in mayntaynyng hospitality.


Euse. Truth it is, For God says Malachi. ii.
by the prophet. I have made you, O ye priests, to be despised and to be of no
reputation among all ye people, because ye have not kept my ways, but have
been parciall in the law. The ways and ordinances of God, which he has
prescribed to priests for to observe, is truly to preach his holy doctrine
reuere^tly to minister his blessed sacraments, and bountuouslye to maintain
hospitality. If they would do these things, they should recover their honor
which is due to faithful ministers by the word of God as, S. Paul says.
The priests that rule well, are worthy double honor, specialli they yt labor
in word and doctrine.


Theo. But couetuousnes reygneth not only in the spirituality? i. Timothe. v.



Euse. In the spirituality only? Temporal men.
No God knows. For the temporalltye is not behynd for their part. If ever
heretofore, in this our time specially is this saying of the Prophet found
true, From the lest unto the most they Ieremye. vi.
hang upon couetuousnes, and from the prophet unto the priest they go al
about with falshead and lies. How join they Lordshyp to Lordeshyppe, manner
to manner, ferme to ferme, land to land, pasture to pasture, house to house,
and house for a vantag How do the rich men, and spe Shepemongers.
cially such as be shepmongers oppress the kings liege people by devouring
their commune pastures with their sheep, so that the poor people are not able to
keep a cow for the confort of the^ and of their pore family, but are like to
starve and perish for ho^ger, if there be not provision made shortly? What
sheep ground scapeth these caterpillars of the common weal? How swarm they
with abundance of flocks of sheep? and yet when was wool ever so dear, or
mutto^ of so great price? If these shepemongers go forth as they begin, the
people shall both miserablye dye for cold, and wretchedly perysh for ho^ger.
For these gredy woulues and comberous cormerauntes, will either sell their woll
and their sheep at their own price or else they will sell none. Oh what a
diversity is this in the sale of wolles, a stone of woll sometime to be sold
at. viii. grots and now for. viii. s? And so likewise of the sheep. God have
mer cy on us. If the king his majesty, with his most honorable council do
not provide for the re dress of these things, God him self will surely se a
remedy, as he says by the Psalmongraphe (...)
for the wretchedness of the nedye and the bewailing of the pore. Even now will
I rise says the Lord.

Again he says, Woe be to the that spoilles^e, shalt not Esai. xxxiii.
thou thy self be likewise spoiled? And thou that despiseste the poverty,
shalt not thou in like manner be despised? When thou haste made an end of
polling and pyllyng, then shalt thou be polled and pilled thy self.

And when thou ceaseste to despise other, then shalt thou be despised and
naught set by.

O Lord have mercy upon us. For all our whole trust is in the. Be thou our
defense, yea, and that shortelye, and be thou our saving health in the time
of our trouble.


Christo. Rich men were never so much estraunged from all pytye and
compassion toward the poor people, as they be at this present time, they
devour Psalm. xiiii*
the people as it were a morcell of bread.

If any piece of ground delight their eye, they must needs have it other by
hoke or by croke.

If the poor man will not satisfy The unmercifulness of rych men.
their couetouse desire, he is sure to be molested, troubled, and disquieted on
such sort, that whether he will, or will not (though boeth he, his careful
wife, and miserable children with his whole family should perysh for honger)
he shall forgo it, or else it were as good for him to live among the furies of
Hell, as to dwell by those rich carles and couetouse churles. There is no end
of enlargynge their grounds, neither are they led with any fear of Gods
indignation, Esai. v
expressed by the Prophet saying. Woe and everlasting damnation be unto them
that join house to house, and couple land to la^d, so nyghe together, that the
pore can get no more ground. Shall ye alone dwell in the myddest of the earth?
These things are in mine ears, says the Lord of hosts. Surely says he,
many great and fair houses shall be made so desert and wast, that no man
shall dwell in them. Hereto agrees the saying of an other Prophet. Woe and
everlasting (...). ii.
damnation be unto him, that heapeth up other men's goods.

How long will he lade him self with thycke claye unto his own damnation? O
how suddenly will they stand up that shall byte the, and awake, that shall
tear the in peaces? Yea you shall suerlie be their pray, Seeing thou haste
spoiled many people, therefore shall they that re main spoil the, because of
me^nes blood and for the wrong done in the land, in the city, and unto all
them that dwell therein Woe and everlasting damnation be unto him that
couetously gathers evil gotten goods into his house, that he may set his
neste on hie to escape ye power of misfortune thou have devised the shame of
thine own house, for you have slain to much people and have wilfulli offended,
so that the very stones of the wall shall cry out of it, and the tymbre that
lies betwixt the joints of the buildynge shall answer. and ce.


Theo. These be greuouse threats of Gods vengeance against the couetuouse
worldelinges.


Phile. They be no less true then greuouse, and shall undoubtedly chance as
it is threatened, except the covetous worldlynges repent and amend. For God
is Psalm. (...) iv.
fayethfull in all his sayings and the word of the Lord abides Esai. xi.
for ever. He is the self truth, therefore can he not lie. What so John. xiiii.
ever he threateneth, he will surely bring to pass except faithful
repentance be a mean. Are not these his words? Woe and everlasting damnation
be unto iiii. Esor. xv.
them that sin, and keep not my commandments, says the Lord, I will not
surely spare them.

And the wise man says. Woe be unto you, O ye wicked persons, Ecclesi. xli.
which have forsaken the law of the Lord, that most high God. If ye be
borne, ye shall be borne to curssynge, if ye dye, the curse shall also be your
portion.

David says, upon the ungodly, the Lord shall rain Psalm. xi.
snares, fire, and brymestone, storm, and tempeste: this shall be their
portion to drink. How does our savior Jesus Christ thonder against the
ungodly rich in the holy Gospel.

Woe unto you that are rich says Luke. vi.
he, for ye have your consolation. Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall
ho^ger, Woe unto you that now laughe, for ye shall wayle and weep.


Chri. These be greuouse words against the couetouse wordelynges and
voluptuous Epicures, but full little do such things syncke into the breasts
of men now adays, Note.
the devil has so blinded their eyes, that they think that God is a childish
God, and will be pleased with this apple at ye last end. I am sorry for my
sins. Good Lord forgive me, I trust to be saved by Christ's passion, and
mani good morrowes So long as they live they never repent their wicked living
they go forth daily more and more to provoke the wrath of God against them,
they heap sin upon sin, they wallowe all in pleasures like fylthy swyne,
they have not thefeare of God before their eyes, they are without all mercy
toward their christian brethrene, they greuouslye oppress their neadye
neighbors, they make no end of rakeynge together the goods of ye world, they
follow the lusts of the flesh as miserable and bond captives, to conclude,
their whole life is nothing else but a serving of the devil, how can these
men at the last end truly repent and convert unto God, leadynge before a
life abominable, so wicked, so stynckynge, so hateful both to God and to al
good me^? I grant, the mercy of God is great, and excels al his works,
Psalm cxlv.
but how ca^ they which have led their whole life altogyther displeasaunte
unto God, be bold to crave mercy of God at the last end, whom all the days
of their life they have so despised by disobeyinge his most Godly will and
pleasure? Are not these his words spoken by king Solomon? I have called, and
Prouer. i.
ye refused it. I have streatched out my hand, and no man regar ded it, but all
my counsails have ye despised, and set my correction at naught. Therefore shall
I also laughe in your destruction, and mock you, when that thing that ye
fear comes upon you, even when the thing that ye be a frayed of, falls in
sodaynely like a storm, and your miserye like a tempeste, yea, when trouble
and heaviness comes upon you.

Then shall they call upon me, but I will not hear, they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me, and that because they hated knowledge, and recei
ued not the fear of the Lord, but abhorred my council, and despised all my
creation.

If the tyghtuous shall scasly be saved, says blessed Peter where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear?


Euse. Satan through couetuousnes Destroye^ of towns.
does so possess the hertes of many men in these our days, that they do
not only lincke house to house, but when they have gotten many houses and
tenementes into their hands, yea, whole towneshyppes, they suffer the houses
to fall into utter ruin, and decay, so that by this means whole towns are
become desolate, and like unto a wyldernes, no man dwelling there, except it
be the shephearde and his dog.


Phile. Truth it is. For I my self know many towns and villages sore
decayed, so that where as in times paste there were in some town an hundred
households there remain not now thyrty, in some fifty, there are not now ten,
yea (which is more to be lamented) I know towns so wholly decayed, yt there
is neither stick nor stone standing, as they use to say. Where many men had
good livings, and maynteined hospitality, able at all times to help the
king in his wars, and to sustain other charges, able also to healpe their
pore neighbors, and virtuously to bring up their children in Godly letters
and good sciences, now sheep and conies devour altogyther no man inhabitynge
the aforesaied places. Those beasts which Psalm. ix
were created of god for the nourishmente of man, do now devour man. The
scripture says that God made both sheep and oxen with all the beasts of the
field subject unto man, but now man is subject unto them. Where man Beasts
above men.
was wont to bear rule, there they now bear rule. Where man was wo^t to have
his liueing: there they now only live. Where man was wont to inhabit, there
they now raing and grease. And the cause of all this wrechednes and beggary
Gentle men shepmongers.
in the common weal are the gredy Gentilme^, which are shipmongars and
grasiars. While they study for their own private com moditie, the common weal
is like to decay. Sins they began to be sheep Masters and feders of cattle
we neither had vitaile nor cloth of any reasonable price. No marvel, for these
forstallars of the market, as they use to say have gotten all things so into
their hands, that the poor man must either bie it at their price, or else
miserably starve for hongar, and wretchedly dye for cold. For they are touched
with no pity toward the pore. It is found true in the^ yt S. Paul wrighteth. Al
seek there own adauntage, and not those Phili. ii.
things which belong unto Jesus Christ. They which in times past were wont
to be fathers of the contrie, are now pollers and pillars of the co^trie. They
which in times paste were wo^t to be the defe^ders of the pore, are now become
ye destroiers of ye same. They by whom the common weal sometime was preserved:
are now become the Caterpillars of ye common weal, and such as seem by their ma
ners to have made a sole^ vow vt terli to subvert the common weal, and to
procure ye final destruction of ye same. They a^ ^satiable woulues. They know
no measure. So they may reygne, they care not who rule. So they may abound
they care no who faulle to the ground. So they may be enriched they care not
who ^e enpoue rished. They are right brothers of Caine, which had rather sl^
Genesis iiii.
his brother Abell, tha^ he should have any part with him of world ly
possessions. The wise man says, Eccle. xxxiiii.
the bread of the nedye is the life of ye pore, he that defraudeth him of it,
is a mansl ear^. Do not these rich worldlinges defraud the poor man of his
bread, where by is understand al things ne cessary for a man's life, which tho
Bread wha^ it signifies.
row their insatiable covetousness sell all things at so high price, and suffer
towns so to decay that the pore has not what to eat nor yet where to dwell?
What other ar they than, but very manslears? They abhore the names of Monks,
Friars, Chanons. Nonnes Mark well.
and c, but their goods they gredely gripe. And yet where the cloisters kept
hospitaliti, let out their fermes at a reasonable price norished schools,
brought up youth in good letters, they do none of all these things. They
lightly esteem and in a manner contemn Priests, parsons, vicares,
Prebendaries. etc, yet their possessions they gladlye enbrase and niggardly
retain. So' that now they are become in effect although not in name, very
Monckes, Friars, Chanons, Priests, Persons, Ui cares, Prebendaryes, and at the
last what not? and yet how vainly those goods be spente, who sees not? The
state of England was never so miserable, as it is at this present.

Good Lord have mercy upon us and put in the hertes of the king and of his
counsel to redres these intolerable pestilences of Rome. ii.
the common wealth, or else make haste to dissolve this wreched world by thy
glorious coming unto the judgment, where thou Proverb. xx^.
shall render to every man according to his deeds, lest if we long remain in
this to much wretchedness, we be compelled through pouertye to attempe
unrighteous things, and forswere the name of the our Lord God. Well, of these
things before said I trust ye perceive that no man ought to rejoice in the
rytches of this world, seeing they are none of ours but Gods, and we as the
treasures and stuardes, of God must at the dreadful day of judgment render
acomptes to the high Judge Christ of all that we have received, be it much or
litel, saying also they are very transitorye f^itting from one to a another in
so much that he which is this day a Lord highely in favor and a man of
great Riches abu^d.
possessions is to morrow a traytoure and not worth a gallye half penye. A
gain if they be abused, they are very entisementes unto all myschefe and
naughti^es, they pluck our her tes from God to the devil, they make us
Idolaters by seruinge that wicked Mammon they pro uoke the vengaunce of God
against us they make is to be ab horred of God and of all good men, they
pluck from our bodies reast from our minds quietness from our eyesslepe from
our face natural color, and add to all the parts of man diste^perau^ce,
making man a slave unto that which ought to be obedient un to him.


Theo. We perceive these things right well. For the wise man says, their is
nothing Eccle. xx
worse than a covetous man, neither is there a more wicked thing then to love
money. For such one has his soul to sell, and yet is he but filthye dunge
while he lives And the Preacher says, he that Eccle. v.
loves money will never be satisfied with monye, and whosoever delyghteth in
riches, shall have no profit thereof.

Where as much richesse is, there are many also that spend them away. And
what pleasure more has he that possesses the^ sauinge that he may look upon
them with his eyes. A laboring man slepethe swetelye, whether it be little or
much that he eats but thabou^dau^ce of the rich will not suffer him to sleep,
yea many times riches are kept to the hurt of him that has them in possession.
For often times they perish with his great misery, and trouble, and if he have
a child, it gets nothing. Like as he came naked out of his mothers womb
Job. i.
so goes he thither again, and caryeth nothing away with him of all his
labor. etc.


Euse. It were wisdom for the rich men, if they tender their own salvation
and be led with any hope of the life to come, to hear what blessed Paulle
wryghtethe unto Bishop Timothe, and earnestlye to follow that. ^ys i. Timo.
vi.
words are these. Charge them which are rich in this world that they be not
hye minded nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God (which
gives us abundantly al things to enjoy them) that they do good works, that
they be ready to give and glad to distribute, leying up in ^ore for the^ selves
a good fou^ dacion against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal lif.


Phile. O that they would be advertised by this Aopstle. Then should God be
their defender in all their affairs, and cause both the^ and their posterity
long to enjoy then possessions with the favor and blessinge of al good men,
But let us go forth, and search whither a ny thing can be found in this
transitorye world wherein we may worthyly rejoice. What say ye unto nobility?


Christo. Not afewe do greatly rejoice in that, Of nobility.
magnifieynge them selves because they descend of noble parentage, and in
comparison of them selves they greatly despise other.


Phile. O folish and ignorau^te people. Why rather do they not consider yt
boeth rich and pore, noble and vnoble, hie or base do co^siste and are made of
the same eleme^tes, subject unto like diseases and bond G^e. iii.
to ye same affectes? Earth we are al and dust, and unto earth and dust shall we
return. As we were made to live so likewise are we al appointed to die. Bodies
have we al cor ruptible and bo^d to mortaliti. There is no exception among us.
Neither has any of us obtained such privilege of God, yt we may escape ye
bondage of frail nature. Seeing tha^ yt as touching our cor poral creacion there
is no difference no prerogative, what nobility or worthiness of blood, can
there be more in the noble personage tha^ in the base slave. Their beginni^g is
like, there end is al one. Twice mad are they therefore, yt brag of their noble
blood and esteem the^ selves ye more worthy because they desce^d of noble
parentages, neither do such any other thing tha^ bost of yt which is none of
theirs. King David says, what profit Psalm (...).
is there in my blood, saying I go dou^e unto corruption? And ye wise man
says, why art you proud, O you earth and ashes? We are al earth and ashes boeth
noble and vnoble, We Eccles. x.
al shall return unto corruption, and be so consumed as concerning our bodies,
as though we had never been. The Prophet also says, al flesh is gras, and al
his glory is like Esai. xi.
a flower of the field, Where is any me^cio^ made here of noble blood I know,
says. s. Paul, that there Romans vii
dwells in me, yt is to say in my flesh, no goodness, where is carnal
nobility tha^ become? Does not ye same lothsum vileness come from ye noble, yt
isueth out of ye unnoble? Are not the carcasses of al personages meat for
worms a like? Pour the blood of the vilaine in one basen and the blood of the
gentleman in an other, what difference shall there be proved? Dig up the bones
out of the sepulchers both of ye noble and unnoble, and who can deserne of the
sight of them, which was the servant which the Lord, who was rich and who was
poor, who beautiful and who deformed, which were noble, and which unnoble?
There is no difference, as S. Ambrose says, between the carcasses of the
dead, except paraduenture it be this, that the dead corpse of the rych stincke
more greouslye than the pore because it was more den tely fed.


Euse. So far as I perceive, they Tituled gen^emen.
err greatly, that bost of the kind red, and esteem the^ selves the more
worthy because they come of worcester they parents, although they the^ selves be
never so great dronckardes, glotones, diceplayers, Whoremongers, swerers,
fightters, thieves, ruffians, pickers of quarrels, riotous persons. etc. For
little does it profit a man to des cend of a noble house, if he him self be
of base and vile manners and lead a life defiled with wyckednes, yea it rather
brings unto him ignobilitie than nobility. Well is it said of our golden
mouthed doctor, the nobilite In Math
and goodness of our kinsefolke avails nothing, except we our selves be good.
For what doethe noble generation profit him, whom, his manners do defile? Or
what does vile generation hurt him, whom good manners do garnishe and
adourne? Certes he shows him self void of al goodness, yt glories in his
parents To glory upon ye nobility of other, says Petrarche, is a bostinge
even to be laughed at. And such as have nothing but the badges, counisauces
and arms of their Ancestors to set out their nobility with all, they differ
not much from Esopes crow, which decked him self with other birds feathers,
he him self being altogether black and vnami able.


Theo. The true nobilitye consists neither in strength, beauty, Wherein tru^
no^litie con sisteth.
nor riches, no nor yet in any other exernall and bodily thing but in the
suppressing of vice and embraseinge of virtue. Virtue is the alone and only
nobility, as Antisthenes was wont to say they that are endued with virtue,
they have the true nobility, Notably is it said of the golden mouthed In
Matthew.
doctor John Chrisostom. He is a man of great renoume, he is a worthy
personage, he is the true noble man, that disdayneth to serve vices, and by no
means will be over come of them? And Cocceus Nerua the Emperor said that the
virtue of a man and not his kynnered nor his contrye is to be considered.


Chri. Would God all men of nobilitye were persuaded that virtue and godly
conversation were the alone and only true nobility. Than would they not
repose their glory in their ancestors, as many very folishely do at this
present, but rather endeavor them selves so to train their life in all
godliness and virtue, that even for their own god ly and virtuous enterprises
they should be co^pted noble and worthy of praise.


Euse But what say you unto beauty?


Phile. Even as Solomon says, favor is deceitefull, and beautye Beauty
Prouer. xxxi.
is a vain thing. They are much (...) ^ro the course of true reasonne, that
rejoice in so frail a thing. For it is more britle the^ glass, more
transitorye than the flower, more inconstant than the wind, more vain than
the smoke, and more f^ittynge away than the time. Beautye is a thousand manner
of ways corrupted and defaced. How does one little fever make the fairest
woman in the world, the fowlest and the must vnpleasau^t in aspect? And to
say the truth, is beauty any other thing, than a litell thine skyne well
colored? If the inward parts might be seen, how great filthynes would
there appear even in the most beautiful person? Neither is the fairest
bodiein the world any other thing the^ a dunghyl covered with a clothe as it were
of white and purple color. And what a madness is this for any person to
glory in beautye, seeing that Beauty is an ^ntisemente to uncleanness.
the beholder of it has more delectation and pleasure in it, as one that has
the use and fruition thereof, then such as are endued with the beauty. I
leave of to speak that beauty is a entisement unto uncleanness, and a very
enemy to chaste and pure conversation, as we read in diverse histores.


Chri. This seems to be true by the saying of the wise man, Look not to
narrowly Ecclesi. xxv.
says he, upon the beautye of a woman, lest you be provoked in desire toward
her. Again he says, Turn away thy face from a beau tiful woman, and look not
upon the Ecclesiasti. ix.
fayrenes of other. Many a man has perished through the beautye of women, for
through it the Prouer. vi.
desire is kyndled as it were fire

Hereto agrees the saying of Solomon. Let not thine heart lust after the
beauty of a woman, least thou be taken with her fair lokes. What kindled David's
heart with love toward Bethsabe, the wife of Urias, and caused him to commit
adultry with her, but only her beau ii. Reg. xi.
ti? David, says ye scripture, arose out of his bed, and walked upon the roufe
of the kings palaice, and from ye roufe he saw a woman washing her self, and
the woman was very beutiful to look on. Again how came it to pass yt the. ii.
Judges burned so ferue^rly with the love of Daniel. xiii.
Susanna Ioachims wife, and sought all means possible to have defiled her,
but yt they were drowned with the sight of her beau ty? The scripture says she
was a very fair woman, but there is a goodli addition, she was also such one as
feared god. When beuty and Note well
ye fear of god are licked together beuty is not to be disco^me^ded, otherwise
it is but a net, where with ye devil uses to catch ye folish peo ple. A fair
woman without discrete Prouer. xi.
mauers says Solomon, is like a ring of gold in a swines snowte. And yt we may
be well ascertened yt it was her beauty yt moved the^ wtoute shame to provoke
her to uncleanness, these words of ye history declare it manifestli: Susa^na was
a tender person and merueylous fair of face. Therefore the wicked me^ commanded
to take ye cloth from her face (yt at ye lest they might so be satisfied in her
beuty.


Phi God se^d us mo Susa^s. Beauti reigns F^low y^ was.
in mani, would god it were acco^paned with ye fear of god, yt the beutiful
persons might not abuse their beutye, but choose rather to be stoned with Susa^,
then once to defile their h^sbandes bed,


Euse. God send us the beautye of the mind, which consists in Godly
virtues and honest qualites, for yt is the true beauti, ye other is but
frail, vain; trau^ sitory, and does not long endure. But what sai you unto
galaunt apparel, where of so many brag Of galaunt apparel.
and boaste now adays? Is it not a thing, where in we may worthily rejoice?


Phile. Nothing less, for the wise manne says, Glory not in thine apparaile
at Ecclesiasti. xi.
any time. Uestures were given us of God to cover our filthye nakedness, and
not that we should glory in them, and make them instruments of pride. We
ought rather when we put on our garments to lament our mischau^ce our
mortality and uncleanness, then to rejoice in them. For so long as our
gra^dfather Adam continued in the state of innocency, he neded no kind of
apparel to cover his body (for he was altogether clean, beautiful, good,
holy, innocent and perfect) but after he had broken the commandment of God
by geuinge ear to Satan's subtle, persuasions, perceiving his misery and
wretchedness, wherinto he was fallen through his disobedience, he was ashamed of
him self, and boeth he and his wife perceiuinge yt they were naked sowed fig
leaves together, and made them selves apr^ns to cover their filthy and
shamfull nakedness wythall. Afterward Gene iii.
when God drove them out of Paradise, because their feeble and mortali bodies,
which now were subject to all kind of diseases, tempests, and blastes,
should not perish for cold, again that they might have, where with to
cover their filthye nakedness, ye they might walk the more honestly, he made
them lethern garinentes, and clothed them therwyth. Here even from the
beginning do we learn both what garments were given unto manne of God, and for
what purpose.

Neither with fine clothe, nor with Saten Dam^ske, velvet nor with cloth of
gold, did God apparayll Adam, neither did he trime and set forth our
grandmother Eve with sumptuouse apparayle, of cloth of silver, or clothe of
gold, neither did he set upon her head a french hode with an edge of gold
besides pearls and precious stons and such other trime trames, I can not tell
what, but he clothed the^ boeth with simple garments of leather, not that they
should rejoice and be proud of them, but to use them as things necessary
to cover their wretched nakedness, and to defend them from the cruel storms
and fearce tempests of wind, rain, snow hayle. etc.


Euse. As in other things, so likewise in apparel is the world at this
present, wonderfullye fallen from the first institution of things,

For if we should compare the children with the father, I mean, if we
should consider what apparel God appointed unto Adam, and what is used now a
days, a man should find as great differ^nce between them, as is between
the Sun, and the least star in light and bryghtenes, to behold the vain
and folish light fashyons of apparayle used among us, it is to much wonderful.
The madness of English
I think no realm in ye world, men in their apparel.
no, not among the Turks and Sarazyns dote so much in the vanity of their
apparel, as the English men do at this present Their cote must be made after
the Italian fashion, their cloak after the use of the spanyardes, their gown
after the manner of the Turckes, their cappe must be of the french fashion,
and at the last their dagarde must be Scottish with a venecian tassel of
sylke. I speak nothing of their dublets and hoses, which for the most part
are so minsed cut, and iagged, that shortly after they become boeth torn
and ragged. I leave of also to speak of the vanity of certain light brains,
which because nothing should want to the settyngforth of their fondenesse, will
rather wear a Marte^ chain the price of. viii. d, the^ they would be
vnchayned. O what a monster and a beast of many heads is the English manne
now become? To whom may he be compared worthily, but to Esoppes crow? For as
the crow decked her self with the feathers of all kind of birds to make her
self beautiful, even so does the vain English man for the fond
apparelynge of him self, borow of every nation to set forth him self galaunt
in the face of the world He is an English man, he is also a Italia^, a
Spaniard, a Turk, a Frencheman, a Scot, a Uenecian, and at the last what not?
He is not much unlike a mo^ster called Chimera, which has three heads, one
like a Lyo^, an other like a Got, the third like a dragon. I pass over the
light and wanton apparel of women now a days, partlye because it is so The
apparel of women.
monstrous, and partlye because I have not been nor yet am very much
acquaynted with them, whereby I might be the more able to discribe their proud
Pecockes tails, if not at the full, which were an infinite, labor yet at
the least somewhat to set it forth as a painter does, y^r he do lay on colors.
But of this am I certain, that they observe not in their apparel the rule of
the holy scriptures. For. S. Peter i. (...). iii.
says, that the apparayll of honest and virtuous women should not be outewarde
with broyded hear, and hangyng on of gold, either in putting on of gorgeous
apparel, but let the hid man which is the heart be without al corruption,
so that the spirit is before god a thing much set by.

For after this manner in the old time did the holy women which trusted in God,
tire them selves and were obediente to their husbands, even as Sara obeyed
Abraham and called him Lord, whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well.

Hereto agrees the saying of S. Paul to Timothe, Let the i. Timothe. ii.
women array them selves in comely apparel with shamefastenes and discrete
behauour, not with broyded hear, either Gold or pearls, or costelye array,
but as it becomes women yt profess godliness through good works. A game to
Titus he says. Speak Titus. ii.
to the women that they be in such raiment, as becomes holiness. Solomon in the
description of an dishonest woman among other proprieties rehearses sumptuouse
and galaunte apparel, Prouer. vii.
calling it whoreishe apparel fit to deceive souls, signifiyng that this to
much costelye and proud apparayle is more mete for whores that lie awayt to
allure men unto their love, then for honest womenne which profess Godliness.


Phi. As filthy, beggerlike and sluttishe apparel becomes not christian women,
if they have, or ryghtously and with honesty may have other: so likewise is
it not convenient for them to wear to much sumptuouse, costely, and galaunt
array. It is enough for chaste and pure maids to wear clean and simple
apparel, as a testimony of the uncorruption and cleannes boeth of their mind
and body without the flaringe out and coleryng of their hear, without the
payntyng of their faces, without the puttyng on of wanton and light array,
whereby they be entised rather to pride and whordome the^ to humility, shamfast
nes, and cleannes of life. It is sufficient also for honest married wives,
that they be so appareled that they please their husbands, they that deck
them selves to please the phanseis of other, and to make them selves
gaseyngestockes to the world, practice rather the manners of whores, then the
conditions of honest women There is nothing that does better adourne, garnishe,
and set forth an honest woman, then sobriety, shamfastnes, cleannes of life,
honest co^uersatio^, integrity of manners, scile^ce, fear toward God, loving
obedience toward her husband, comely behauour in countenance, in lokynge, in
going, in speaking, in doing and at the last to wear such apparel, as
serves for her state and degree, She that is endued with these goodly and Godli
virtues atoresayed is a very fair and beautiful woman, though her face may
tyghte well be resembled to the color of an Ethiope and she may say as it is
written an^ (...).
in Solomon's Balades. I am black, yet am I fair. For though she be black in
color of face, yet is she beautiful in mind, And look how much the mind
excels the body, even so much does the beautye of the mind excede the
fayrnes of the face.


Christo. Hester was a very Godly and virtuous woman, yet did she wear
glorious apparel.


Phile. I grant but ye must consider that she was no private person, nor
one of the base sort, but she was the most worthy woman in the realm, eue^
the kings wife, notwythstandynge how little she delited in that gorgious
apparel, which she was compelled to wear for to serve her state and degree,
these her words do evidently show. Thou know, O lord says she my
necessity, that I hate the token Hester. (...).
of preheminencie, and glory or worship, which I bear upon my head, what
time as I must show my self and be seen and that I abhor it as an unclean
cloth, and that I wear it not, when I am quiet and alone by my self.

Do we not also read, that when she prayed to the Lord, she laid away her
glorious apparel, and put on the garments that served for sighynge and
mou^ninge?

Again, do we not also read that when the Jews at any time did humble them
selves in the sight of God, and would obtain any at his hand, yt they laid
aside their galaunte appa rel, and put on sack cloth? Laid they not away their
precious oynte^e^tes and sca^red ashes and dung upon their heaues? this meante
somewhat.


Euse. Of this am I sure that holy John Baptist did wear very homelye
apparel. Mathewe. iii.
His raiment says the scripture was of Camels hear, and he had a gyrdle of
leather about his loins. It is to be thought also that Christ and his
Apostles, which were but pore me^, had not very su^ptuous apparel to wear.
And. S. Iho^ writes. He yt says that he dwells in Christ, ought (...).
John. ii.
to walk eue^ as Christ walked. How can gorgious and galau^t apparel then
agree with christian profession? Is the disciple above his master, or the
servant above his Lord? Does no^ Sayncte. Paul in his Epistle to the
Hebrews declare, yt certain faithful ^br. xvi.
and godly persons walked up and down in shepes skins and got skins and
were highly commended of God? Does not saint James Jacob. v.
rebuke the rich men, that have such plenty of garments, that they be
motheeaten? Does he not also reprove such as will accept and make much of
the^ that be clothed in goodli apparel, and Jacob. (...).
neglecte the pore, which are but homely apparelled? Was it for naught that
Christ said to the people of Saint John Baptize, what went ye out to se a man
clo Math. (...).
thed in soft raiment? Behold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings
houses. Is it in vain, yt Saint Luke in the discri^tion of the rich gloton
decla (...). xvi.
reth, that he was clothed in purple and fine white? Do we not read also, that
King Herod Act. xii.
was arrayed in royal apparel, when the Angel of the Lord smote him, so that
he dyed a very miserable death? To rehearse what the doctoures of Christ's
church write of the vanity of gorgious apparel, again to declare out of
profane histories how greatly the noble princes and mighty Emperors eue^
among the Ethnyckes abhorred su^ptuous raiment, both time and tongue should fail
me.


Phi. It is very sitting A rule for apparel.
and praise worthy enough for all degrees of personnnes to wear apparel
according to their state and calling, so that vanity, excess and reioysyng
therein be banished. But confusedly every man or woman to wear as them lyketh,
is boeth without order and greatly disco^mendable, and ought by the higher
powers to be redressed. To be short in this behalf, it shall be convenient
for so many as profess Christ always to set before ye eyes of their mind this
saiynge of the Apostle, having i. Timo. vi.
fode, and wherewyth we may be covered: let us be content. For we brought
nothing into the world, neither shall we carry any thing out of it. And he
appareleth him self well, which forgets not to cloth the pore according to
this commandment of god. When you see the naked, cloth him ^sa. ^viii. Act.
ix
as we read of the noble and virtuous woman Tabitha, which made cotes and
garments for ye pore.


The. If these things were deeplye weighed and considered, they that so
greatly delighte in sumptuous apparayle, would sone cease from that vanity,
and no more repose their delectatio^ in it. For these garments, which we now
set by very much, within few years we put the^ to vile offices and threw
them away upon the dou^ghili, so that we have litel occasion to rejoice in them.


Phile. Truth it is, as these things aforesaid be proved to bring no
perfect felicity nor true joy to men, so likewise these that remain,
whatsoever they be, make a man no more truly joyful than the other. To pamper
the beally and to fare deliciously is reputed Of (...).
among the voluptuous Epicures an high and singular pleasure, yet these
meats and drynkes which are so deraely bought, and wherein many so greatly,
delight become afterward so vile and loathsome, that we can neither abide the
syghte nor the smell of them. What does yesterday fasting profit the gredy
appetite of ye day following? O short and vain pleasure.


Chri. This bealy chere and bancketinge brings no^ only to man a transitorye
delectacion, and such pleasure as sone passes away, but it also wastes a
man's substance and pearceth him with the darts of poverty, as Solomon
says, he that has pleasure in bancketes Pro. xxi.
shall be a poor man, and who so delyteth in wine and delicates, shall not be
rich. Again he says, keep not company with wine bibbers and ryotous eaters
of flesh, for such as be dronckardes and ryotous shall come to poverty. Pro.
xxiii.



Euse. They shall not only come to poverty, but such as are ryotous persons
shall get to them selves through their diste^perau^ce and excess of eating and
drinckinge diverse sickenesses and diseases very hard to be put a way as the
same Solomon says, who has woe? who has sorrow? who has strife? who has
brawlinge? Pro. xxiii.
and who has wounds without a cause? Or who has red eyes? Even they yt be ever
at the wine, and seek excess. Look not thou upon the wine, how red it is,
and what color it gives in the glass. It goes down softly, but at ye
last it biteth like a serpent, and styngeth like an adder. Hither makes the
saiynge of the wise man. Be not greedy in every eatinge, and be not Eccle.
xxxvii.
to hasty upon all meats. For excess of meats brings sickness, and glotony
comes at the last to an unmeasurable heat. Through surfeit have many one
perished, but he that dieteth him self temperatly, prolongeth his life. Our
Luke. xxi.
Savior Christ commands us to beware of excess in eating and drynckynge,
when he says, take heed yt your hertes be not ouercharged with surfetyng and
dronckenshyp. S. Paul also says. Be not drunken with wine wherein is excess.


Phile. Of these holy Ephe. v.
sentenses may ye gather yt there is no cause, why any man should rejoice in
banckettinge, except he have a pleasure to procure his own destruction, which
comes by no means sooner then by poverty and sickness, which spryngeth out
of delicate the, as I may leave of to speak of other inco^ueniences, yea and
pestile^ces to man's life, which issue from ba^cketting in like manner.


Euse. It is an easy thing to gather out of the ho ly scriptures not only
se^te^ces, but histories also, which declare what destruction to man
ba^ketting, dru^cke^ship, and the study of ye bealy brings. Did not Ada^ and
Eve through eating ye forbidden fruit cast not only, the^ selves but al their
post Gene. iii.
ritie in to damnacion? How was Noe much laughed to scorn eue^ of his own son
wha^ through his drou^ke^ship, he fell on sleep and lay naked with his
priuities? Into Gene. ix.
what abominable uncleanness did loath fall through droncke^nes, when he committed
incest with his Gene. xix.
own daughters? Did not ye children of Israel give them selves to bankettynge
and afterward fell to the worshipping of the golden calfe committyng most
shamful Idolatry? Was not Holofernes Ex^ xxxii.
that mighty and valiaunte captain in his dronckennes Iudeth. xiii.
slain of a woman? Is not that rich man, which would have no Luke. xvi.
pity upon Lazarus and therefore was after his death carried into hell fire,
described of blessed Luke Math. xiiii.
to fare de^tely every day? What shall I speak of king Herod (...) which
in the mids of his banketyng was co^tente to grant that holy John Baptistes
head should be stricken of? It is therefore conuenie^te for a christen man to
remember in all his eating Of the favor of great men.
and drinking christen sobriety and always to avoid excess, lest he fall
into some of those inco^uenie^ces, whereof is made me^tio^ before.


Theo, But what say y^ to the favor of noble me^? may we not rejoice in that?


Philem. There are not a few, which couuet nothing so greatly as to be in
favor with great men, and to be placed in their houses, thin king by this
means to avoid the cruel darts of fortune, to obtain wealthy lyuinges, and
to have al things at their own will and pleasure, but I se not, why any man
should repose his chief delectation in the favor of any noble man, seeing yt
holy scripture says. Put not your trust in prin Psalm. (...). (...).
ces, nor in ye children of me^, in who^ there is no health. And the Prophet
says. (...) be he, yt puts his trust in man, and makes flesh his arm.


Chri. How vain Jeremy. xvii.
a thing the favor of great men is, the history of Ama^ declares, which was
so high in his kings Hester. vii.
favor, yt he might do what he list, kyl, save, exalt, depresse, lift up,
pluckedowne, and as we say co^ mo^ly, bind bears, and yet was he not shortly
after cast out of favor on such sort, yt he was immediately hanged on the
same gallows, which he had newly prepared for an other?


Euse. There is nothing more vncerte^ tha^ the good will of great men. For who^
they now love, streightwayes they hate, and such as have done most forthe^,
are mani times least regarded, and most cruelly entreated. How handled king
Alexander his most trusty cou^sellers, which Alexander.
so often had put their lives in i^opardy for him? How tyra^tlike did he slay
the^, and yet no cause why^ I leave to speak of Nero ye monster Nero.
of nature, which caused his own mother to be slain, and such as had done
most for him. Who was so much in favor with the Emperor Iustini^s
Bellisa^ius and Narses, which ^ing most noble warriors su^d diverse Justinian.
kingdoms to the ^yre, but how were they (...) Bellisarius ye most valiau^t
captain without deserte had at ye Emperors commandment both his eyes plucked
out, and afterward was compelled to beg his bread from door to door, and at
the last dyed miserably a most wretched beggarre. Narses also, if he had not
fled, had been most unworthily handeled, so are good men many times
recompensed for their intolerable pains, and paynfull service. Of such
ensamples the books of Histories are full. Whereof we may learn how vain
and to much folishe a thing it is to trust in the favor of noble men, so far
it is of, that any man may worthily rejoice in it.


Chri. I can none otherwise do but marueyle at the madness of some men, which
rather chose Serving men
idly to spend their time in great men's houses with this hope to have some
what at the last to live with al (which many times chances never) then in
their youth to learn some honest occupation, which may^ defend them at all
times from the bitter storms of needy and cruel fortune. Of all creatures are
they slaves most miserable, and for the most part come to the most wretched
end. A young courtea^ an old beggar. Ah how many have I known, which after
twenty or-thirtie years service have been with great displeasure driven away,
and so dyed most wretchedly? And thus is that common saiynge found true.
Service is no heritage. Serving me^ may well be compared to Esoppes tothlesse
greyhounde, which so long as he could hunte well, follow and get his pray,
was much made of, but when he began to wax old and could catch no more,
he was no more loved of his master, but rather hated, despised and beaten.
Nothing now adays is dear, where profit is abse^t. If these things were
well pondered, men would not so headlonge and without consideration run
unto service, there to spend the flour of their youth and when crocked old age
comes either to go a begging, or else to be put in some alms house. But how
so ever the matter goes, of this am I sure, yt no man ought to rejoice neither
in men, nor yet in men's services, saying that nothing is more uncertain then
their favor, seeing also that cruel fortune does oppress so suddenly noble me^
many times, that they being turned to a base state, have neither to succoure
them selves, nor yet to healpe their pore servants.


Philemon. Well, thus have we searched the principal things, that perteyne
unto man outwardly, wherein the folyshe world does most chiefly rejoice, and
we have found among them all not one thing, wherein we may worthily glory
and repose our delectation.


Theo. Truth it is, but what say you to the inward natural gyftes' of man,
as wisdom, strength, knowledge and such other gifts of the mind?


Philemon. Hear what God says by the Prophet. Iere ix.
Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, neither the rich man in his riches, but who so will rejoice, let him
rejoice in this, that he understands and knows me, for I am the Lord
which do mercy, equity and righteousness upon the earth. Therefore have I
pleasure in such things, says the Lord. Whether we have respect to the
body or to the mind, if we find any good thing in them, it is the gift of
god, as S. James says. Jacob. (...).
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the father of lyghtes, and therefore ought no man to glo ry neither in him self
nor in the g^ftes, but in God alone the gyuer, as S. Paul says, what have
(...). (...).
thou, that thou have not received? If thou haste received it wherefore do
thou rejoice and glory as though thou had not received it? But wherefore
do we tarry long before we come to our matter, while we labor to show Of man
yt there is nothing in the world, wherein we may worthily rejoice, saying
that man him self, which is the principal creature yt ever God made in this
world is but vanity, and not worthy, wherein any true and perfect
delectation ought to be se^? Are not these the words of the holy scrip ture*
Every man that lives, is altogether vanity. What is the body of man, comes
it of never so noble house, but earth, duste (...).
and ashes? Or as S. Barnard says, a stynckynge sperme or seed, a sack of
dounge and the meat of worms. Who will re ioyse in such a body? to garnish
such a body with gold, silver pearls, precious stons, owches galaunte
apparel, sumptuous garments. etc, What other thing is it, then to cover a
dunghyl with clothe of gold? Now as towchynge ou^e inward manne, I mean the
soul, what are we?

What have we received of Adam In what case has he set John. ii^ Romans v^i:
us, before we be regenerate by Christ? Are we any other thing then flesh,
and f^eshely minded? As Christ says. That which is borne of the flesh is
flesh. And says not blessed Paul, that we (...). (...).
are the children of wrath? Is not our heart unclean, lewd, wicked Pro. xx.
and unsearchable? Are not our senses, Imaginations, and thoughts, even from
our infancye, Ieremi. xvii. Gene. viii.
evil and naught? Are not al our righteousness like a cloth Es^i. lxiiii.
defiled with me^sture? Are we not all hypocrites, liynge children, Esai. ix.
workers of iniquity, vnprofita ble servants, sinners, ungodly, Luke. xvii.
and of our selves al yt naught is? What have we then either of our selves, or
in our selves (I mean before our regeneration) whereof we may worthily rejoice


Chri. Truly nothing at al.


Phile. It is convenient therefore, seeing hitherto we have found nothing wherein
we may worthily rejoice, to sequester our joy, our mirth, our delectation,
from worldely things, and to traunsfer it unto the Lord our God according to
this admonicion of the holy Phllyp. iiii.
Apostle. Rejoice in the Lord always, yea once again I say Rejoice.


Theo. But we would gladly hear, what earnest occasion we have to rejoice in
God.


Philem. My desire is to declare this thing aboundauntly unto you, if ye will
hear.


Euse. We all will gladlye give ear.


Phile. God in whom we are The benefits of God toward man
so instantly mocioned to rejoice eue^ from the beginning, had such favor to
man, yt when the Angels for their disobedient pride, and proud disobedience were
worthily cast down headlonge into hell, there perpetually to remain in most
Job. iiii. ii. Peter. ii.
greuouse and intolerable pains, he willing again, to furnishe the
celestial mancions with other Creatures, made manne, not like unto other
brute beasts, but according unto his own Similitude, lykenes, and Image,
not to be a fire brand of Gene. ii.
hell, but heir of his most glorious and regal palaice, not to perish for
honger, but to enjoy all kind of pleasures most aboundantlye, not to be
subdued of other, but as Lord and chief ruler under God his creator and maker
to have ye dominion of all beasts fyshes, and fowls, of all lands meadows
and pastures, of al trees herbs and flowers, and what soever other thing is
comprehended in this great and unmeasurable world. Yea the high element, the
sun, the moon, the stars, the day, the night, the water, the fire, the
cold, the heat the rain, the wind, and what so ever other thing ye can
reken besides, did he make not only to show forth his glory, might and power,
but also for man's conforte, wealth, joy and pleasure.


Chri. O the vnoutspekeable goodness of god toward man.


Phile. Have we not here a great occasion unfeignedly to rejoice in the Lord
our God, and for ever and ever to glorify, celebrate and magnify his most
glorious and blessed name? To make us like to his own similitude? to appoint
us heyers of his most glorious mansion? to ^due us with the fruition of so
many goodlye and sweet pleasures? to make us rulers and Lords over al his
creatures in the world? to prepare all things for our solace, joy, and
conforte? Who is so flynte herted, that melts not at the hearing of these
thin ges so pleasant and sweet? Who is so estranged from God, that he
applies not with all main to embrace so gentle, so kind, so louinge a Lord,
yea such a Lord as is altogyther set to magnify man, to exalt him unto the
high heavens, to place him among the holy Angels, and blessed spirits, to
kiss and kull him as his dear dearling and well-beloved heyer? Can that man
rejoice inoughe in his Lord and master, which of a base slave makes him a
man of honor of a beggar a man of great possessions, of a vi^e condition, a
man of high and noble renoume.


Euse. Truly the goodness of God toward man can not be expressed.


Phile Yet are these benifites. which one man gives to an other more vile then
dust, if they be compared to ye precious gifts heretofore rehearsed, which
God gave to man. But marcke what follows.


Theo. Say on, we beseech the.


Phile. Satan that old and subtle serpent perceiving man to be made of God for
this ente^te, yt he should enherite that glory, from the which for his
intolerable arrogancye he was most worthily deiecte and cast ^ene. iii.
down, craftelye, subtly, and like him self with many sweet pro^ses and
fair flaterynge words at the last allured our grandmother Eve to the
traunsgression of Gods commandment, and she likewise her (...), so that by
this men's (...) they and their posterity were not only deprived of those
pleasurs and commodities, which I rehearsed heretofore, but also vtterli
damned for their disobedience. And all this came to pas through the envy of
Satan, as ye wise man (...). (...)
says. God created m^ to be vnde stro^ed, yea after ye image of his own liknes
created he him. Nevertheless through enu^ of the devil death entered into the
world.


Christo. O lamentable chance. Now is man become of the Image of God, the
Image of the devil, of the heir of glory, the enheritour of everlasting
pain of immortal, mortal, of good and Godly, wicked and deuillishe, of fre,
a bond slave with all his powers to Satan, sin, death, hell, desperation.
etc.


Euse. But what, enioied that rauenynge woulfe his pray?


Phile. Nothing less, for God which is gentle, and the self gentilnes moved
with loving compassion, tender zeal and fatherly pity toward man, forgettyng
the displesure yt man had done to him through his disobedience castyng al his
sins behind his back, enflamed with no less love toward man concerning his
salvation (behold what grace and mercy does) then he was before the
traunsgressio^, and minding to show him self of no less puissaunce and
strength to recover and save man, the^ Satan was to destroy and co^de^ne (...).
iii.
man, came into Paradise, sought him up, made garments for him to cover his
nakedness, sent him into this world, made him Lord over all, and promised him
that the sede of a woman, even Jesus Christ his own son borne of Mary the
vyrgin, should deliver him from the power of Satan, reconcile him to his
Godly favor, satisfye for his wyckednes, make him a new man, endue him with
his holy spirit, fynallye, through his merits and good works bring him unto
the celestial enheritaunce from the which Satan at that present had exiled
him. This John. xiiii.
promise was so fayethfull (for God him self spoke it which is (...). (...).
the self truth, which can not lie, which is just in all his words and
again so comfortable, that Psalm. ^xiv.
so many (I mean Adam and his posterity) as did apprehend and lay hand on
that with earneste fayeth, were fre from that miserable thraldom, wherinto
they were cast through Satan's willnes, received into favor, taken as most
dear children, and recounted perfectly rightuous, for the assured perswation
and undoubted faith, yt they conceived in the blessed s^de Jesus Christ at the
time promised of God the father. So that so long as they lived in this present
world, they lived in the favor of God, and when they departed from hence God
appointed their bodies to reaste in the earth, placed their souls where his
good pleasure was unto the coming of his son, the^ to receive that blessed
joy and heavenly felicity, that they had lost through their disobedience,
Jesus Christ that most blessed sede workynge this salvation for man, no^ for any
good deeds that we had done, but of his own mere mercy and tender pity.


Theo. O here is the good (...). ^v.
shephearde, that sought up the lost sheep, and when he had found it laid
it louyngelye upon his shoulders, and ^e^derly brought it home again to the
shepefolde. O here is ye most sweet, loving, and tender father, which with so
great joy and embrasing arms received home again the lost son. O here is ye
merciful Samarita^, which Luke. x.
py^ying the wounded man being half dead, poured wine and oileinto his wounds,
bound the^ up, laid him upon his beast, carried him to an inn, and paid for
his heali^g. Mathe. xviii.


O here is that most puisaunte Math xviii.
king, which of his own liberality forgave his servant the ten. M.
tale^tes which he ought. O here is ye mighty Lo^d, which trod down the wine
p^sse alone, Esai. (...).
alone, neither was there any at all that help him.

O here is that most loving savior, that saves his people from all their
sins. O here is that Math. i.
diligente Physician, that is ready at all times to healpe the diseased, Math.
ix.
to refreshe them that labour^ and are laden. O here is that mighty David,
that slew Math. xi.
Golias, and delivered the Israelites from the cruel Philistia^s. O here is
that most valiau^te i. Re^. xxi.
Emperor, which for our sakes has conquered Satan, ^el, death, sin,
desperation, damnation, O^. xiii.
with all the powers infernal. O here is that tender herted lover, i. (...). xv
that can no more forget us, then (...). x^ix.
a mother can forget the child of her womb, and though she forget her child,
yet can not he forget v^. For he has written up us in his hands, so that we
are always in his sight. To whom is not here opened an exceading great and
large window to rejoice in the Lord our God, except we be estra^ged from all that is God or Godly.


Phile. I am glad brother Theophilus to hear you speak on this manner. But
let us go forth. After so many pleasures showed to man, which all through his
own fault he so wyckedly lost, after so great a sin committed against
the divine majesty, so frelye to forgive man, so to accept him into his
favor, so to love him, that he promises to send down from his most
glorious throne his own dearly beloved son to make a perfect reco^ciliation
and everlasting agremente between him and man, that they may for ever and ever
dwell together in ioyefull glory. Oh what a feruente charity, and
unmeasurable love of God is this?

Who can worthelye either by heart think, or by tongue expres or yet by pen
set forth the exceadynge greatenes of Gods kind hertye love towa^d man?
The King of all Kings, the Apo^. ^ix.
Lord of all Lords, yea, that Lord to whose majesty al things Philyp. i^.
are obediente boeth in heaven, earth, and Hell, so to set his mind on man
being but a pore vile, and miserable creature, yea of all mortal Creatures
most synne^ull, most disobediente, most frail, and ready to fall, so to
love and tender him, that Romayn. viii
to do him good, to bring him unto glory and honor, he dis John. iii.
dayneth not, but most wyllyngelye vowchesafeth to send down his only
begotten and dearelye beloved son, yea and that into this synnefull vale of
miserye here to become manne, to be circumcised, to be made obediente to the
law, to be baptized, to preach, to work miracles, to honger, to thyrst, to
watch, to fast, to pray, to suffer all kind of adversity, to be
persecuted, to be laid wait for, to be snatched at, to be blaphemed, to be
rayled upon, to be conuented before worldly tyra^tes, Bishops priests, lawiers.
etc, to be scorned m^d, buffeted, whipped, crow ned with thorn, nailed on ye
cross, s^d, ^earsed to ye heart with a sp^re, and at the last diynge the mos^
desp^ful and shameful death that could be invented of the wicked worldelynges
unto the utter defaceynge of this blessed seed Christ, and of his Godly
doctrine, yea, and all this for the love that he bears toward man. Oh what a
kindness is this? what love, what amitye, what herty frendshyp? Far be it from
us, dear brethren, to be so stony herted, and ungodly, that we feel not this
tender love of God toward us.


Chri. There is in mine opinion no fayethful manne, no true professoure of
Christ, that does not earnestly rejoice at the hearing of these most heavenly
benifites promised t^ man of god in this blessed sede Christ Jesus.


Phile. Moreover after the promise made to our first parents concerning their
reco^ciliatio^ to be made by the blessed s^de Jesus Christ, whereby they with
all their posterity were in the mean season well conforted, enarmed against
Satan, blessed and saved, how frendelye ever after dealte God with man? What
be nefit was there, whereof man was not made partaker? In what kind of benignite
did man at any time (I speak of the faithful congregation) perceive the te^
der bowelles of God to be spared against him? What desired he, and obtained
not his request? How often did God familiar^ye (...) viii. (...). (...) c.
talk with man by his holy Angels? Was he not so loving to man, that he
sent his Angels to eat and drink and to be merry with him? If any plage or
misfortune were immine^t and at hand for the ungodly, did he not declare it to
man, and so provided G^n. viii.
for him that he was fre from all danger? How many victorious battles gave he
to man against his enemies* How did he so acco^ panie him at all times, yt he
ever found favor even among the Barbarous and strangers? How wonderfully
delivered he his peo ^rod. xii.
ple from the Egiptians* How mer u^ilously fed he the^ with ye meat of angels
from heaven? How might ly did he subdue ye heathen Kings and brought his
people into ye land of behest a land that flowed with Gene. xii. xv. xvii
milk and honey, a land full of al plenty and pleasure. But what shall I
speak of this most singular benefit, that he gave his law to Psalm. xviii.
man, yea such a law as is pure, tur neth souls, gives wisdom to ba bes,
makes hertes merry, lighteneth eyes, and is sweter than the ho^ye and honey
comb. Prophets Esa. ^vii (...).
also gave he to man to premo^she and aforewar^e him if any mischife were at
hand, to teach him his holy ordinances, to re new the promise of sendynge the
blessed sede Jesus Christ for man's salvation, that he might not wax fainte in
faith, but with valiau^t hope look for that blessed Savior. And when the time
predefined and tofore appointed from everlasting was come of se^dinge down
this blessed sede and glory ^ala. iiii.
ous Messiah, how fayethfully and no les louyngly sent he him ^sai. vii.
into ye womb of the most blessed Uirgine Mary through the wonderful Math. i.
operacion of the holy ghost there to take very flesh without Luke. x. ii.
the sede of man, there to take on him humayne nature, and to be come of that
holy maid perfect and true manne, as he was before Romans (...).
of god perfect and true God.


Christo. Would God this thing were no les of all men truly Gala. iiii.
believed, than it is in the holy scriptures aboundanlye proved. Io^n. i.



Euse. The Anabaptists in this our time do vehemently impugn this Article of
our fayeth, and affirm obstinately, that Christ. took no flesh of the
blessed virgin The Anabaptists.
Mary, but brought his body with him from heaven.


Theo. Of this matter, if I remember well, y^ taught us, Neighbor Philemo^,
in your new years gift.


Phile This Article, that Christ took natural flesh of Mary the virgin, is so
necessary unto salvation, that who so ever believes it not, believe the other
in vain, neither is he of God, but of the devil, as Saint John says,
derely beloved, believe not eueri spirit, but i. John. iiii.
prove the spirits whether they be of God for many falls Prophets are gone
forth into the world By this know ye ye spirit of God Every spirit that
confesses, that Jesus Christ came in the flesh is of God. And every spirit
that does not confess, that Jesus Christ came in the flesh, is not of God. And
this is that spirit of Antichriste, of whom ye have heard that he should
come, and he is now all ready in the world. And this most pestilent heresy,
which The deniynge of Christ's incarnacion is an old heresy.
the apishe Anabaptists have renewed in these our days (as Satan is never
idle, nor cease in his members to disquiete the congregation of Christ) was
holden many hundred years paste of diverse heretics as Marcion, Cerdon,
Manicheus, Ualentinus, Apelles, and such other ofspringes of the devil, and
was condemned and confuted by diverse great learned men. But to our matter.
And because we should not fear to come unto this our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ, all that ever he did, was done in such humility and lowelynes both of
outward behauioure and mind, that it would allure any reasonable creature in
the world with high boldness and faithful courage to come unto him. He was not
borne of a noble Empress, nor of a devout vowe^e, Luke. ii.
nor yet of an holy Nun but of a pore maid in a pore stable, and porely
wrapped in pore clo^es. In stead of a mighti and galau^t Esal. i.
guard of m^n, he was accompanied with o^en and asses. Thus became Christ
poor, when he ii. Cor. viii.
was rych and the King of glory, that we through his poverty should be made
rich. Moreuer he being without al sin and Lord of the law, became subject
to the law, and was circumsised according to the law. He was Luke. ii.
obediente to his mother Marye and to Iosephe her husband, and led a pore
l^fe with them unto the age of thirty years, and wrought diligentely for his
living after the manner of other men. At the age of. xxx. years he was
baptized Luke. iii.
of blessed John, son to zachary the Priest. After his baptism Math. iii.
was he led of the holy Ghost Math. iiii.
into, Wyldernes, where he fasted. xl. days and. xl. nyghtes, and was
grievously tempted of sa^an Immediately after humbly and low Marcke. i.
ly at the commandment of his hea uenli father he took on him the office
Luke. iiii.
of preaching declaringe free remission of sins to so many as repent in
faith. And as he was pore in worldly riches and lowly in Math. iiii.
mind, so did he chose pore and hum ble men to be his disciples, yt they i.
Cor, i.
might go and b^are abrod like faith full ministers ye heavenly riches, of I^.
ii.
his exceeding mercy toward man.


Christ. Not with out a cause. For the rich galau^te, and pompous. worldlynges
are no fit vessels t^ Math. vi.
c^rye the treasures of the kingdom of heaven, so unequally Luke. vi.
matched are Christ and Mammon, heaven and earth, Gold and Math. xi.
gods word, light and darcknes They may pretend and bear an outward fac^ to
the world as though they were the Apostles and ministers of Christ, as
Judas, Simon Magus, and The dis^ples of Christ,
such other did, but inwardelye and before God they are the Apostls and
ministers of Satan, and when they seem most of all to talk of Christ, of
Christ's doctrine and of his glory, than are they most of all ennemies of the
cross of Christ, seek the condemnacion both of his doctrine and glory, and
labor to stablishe their own drousy dreams, lowe^ye laws, crooked
co^stitutions, devil lishe decres, Antichristian acts, and al for their God ye
belly. So sweet a thing is it to these false ministers and crafty apostles of
Satan, to tomble, and walow in all kinds of carnal pleasures and worldly
riches. Christ therefore knowing all such Bellye gods to be unapt for the
prea chynge of the Gospel as he was pore and humble him self, so did he chose
to be his ministers and Apostles por^ homble men, ^i shars, day laborers,
tolgatherers, and such other vile persons and abiectes of ye world. These
appointed he unto the office of prea chyng his heavenly fathers will. These made
he dispensatoures and Stuwardes of the mysteries of god. These commanded he to
goforth and preach the Gospel, the joyful and glad ^idings the favor of God
toward i. Cor. iiii.
manne Repentance, fayeth, fre remission of sins, in his blood, peace,
tranquillite of conscience, everlasting life. etc.


The. These your words does blessed Paul (...). ^or. (...).
affirm sayeing, the folishenes of God is wiser then me^ and ye weakness of
god is stronger then men. Brethren ye se your calling, how yt not mani wise
me^, after the flesh, not many mighty, not many of hie degree, are called: but
god has chosen the folishe things of the world to confound the wise. And god
has chose^ the weak things of the world to co^^ou^d the things which are
mighty. And vile thin ges of the world and things which are despised has god
chose^, yea and things of no reputacion, for to bring to naught things of
repu tatio^, yt no flesh should rejoice in his presence.


Phi. Again, to show his humilite and lolines, how was he content at every
man's desire to ^o whither they would have him, and gladly to do, what so ever
they re quested him? Did he not heal ye deseased? Restore ye blind to their
sight? The deaffe to their hearig The du^be to their speaking? The Math. iiii.
dead to their life? Yea ye very Lepers did he not disdain to purge and cl^se
of their leprosy, and to touch with his own hands, who^ the fine Math. viii.
Pharisees ye lusty lawers, ye solemn saduces, ye sawsy scribes, the brag ing
byshopes, ye pattering priests with ye whole rabble of ye hypocritish sort
disdained once to look upon: so far is it of, yt these holy fathers sought any
remedy at al to help ye pore disseased. After many tra gedies had between
Christ and the spiritual sorcerers with ye other po^pouse worldlings for his
doctrine The passion of Christ.
and miracles wha^ the time came ap poynted of his heavenly father from
everlasting, that he for man's reconciliation, and pacifiyng of the divine
wrath, should offer himself* a sweet and everlasting Sacrifice to God his
father, whereby he might redeem man from the tiran^y of Satan pay his rau^some
by the price of his dear heart blood, fatisfie for his offe^ses, set a
perpetual peace between God the father and man and by his death and passion
bring an whole sea of heavenly treasures to the faithful penitent sinners,
with what alacrity and cherefulnes of mind, with what desire and redines went
he to his glorious passion? No kind of pain,
Did he disdain,
For to sustain,
To do man pleasure,
His own heart blood,
To shed on the rode,
It did him good,
To make man al pure.



Euse. O the vnoutspeak^able fa uoure of God toward man. If he had sent down
faithful Abra ^a^, or any other of the old Patri arches or aunciente holy
Prophete^s to have suffered for man's salvation, it had without al doubt been a
token of singular great favor toward man: but to send down his only
begotten and derely beloved son from his glorious throne, yea and that for
Romans v.
his enemies, for their health and salvation, it is love passing all love, it
is charity far exceading all charity, it is favor rather to be depely
marvelled at than a ble worthily to be expressed. The son of god to be come
man and suffer dath for our sake. Oh how ca^ we otherwise the^ ernestly and
from ye very heart rejoice in ye Lord our God?


Christ. Truly to much iron herted are all they, which rejoice not in ye
blessed incarnacio^ and glorious death of this most ble ssed sede Jesus christ
our Lord by whom so many and so excellent treasures of heaue^li goods have fre
ly chanced unto us. Al things eue^ unto the very death did he for our health,
and salvation, yea, and yt so co^su^mat and perfect, yt there was no thing left
behind vnacco^plished yt might turn unto our wealth, co^ modite and profit
concerning our rede^pcio^. Let the turckes bost their ^he turks.
Mahumet and rejoice in him so much as they list, let Papists auaunce ^he
papists
their pope and triumph in him so much as is possible, let the rich
worldlinges magnify their The christians
wicked mamon and rejoice in it full their hertes, let ye glistering hypo crites
delight in their god the bell ly eue^ unto the uttermost, yet let us, let us I
say, yt profess Christ aright only rejoice in Christ, in Ga. vi.
Christ's natiuite, passion, blood and death, as s. Paul says, god forbid yt I
should rejoice in any thing, but in the death of our lord Jesus Christ. For so
louinge and gentle a Savior can no where be found so favorable and liberal a
Lord ca^ no where be sought out. In this savior and lord therefore let us re
ioyse, and in none other.


Theo. The papists can not broke this doctrine The papists
yt Christ alone (ye most high and everlasting priest) has by his death and
passion in offering up his Ephe. vi.
own blessed body a swet smelling sacrifice to God the father so ple^ tuously,
so omnisufficiently, so at the full made satisfacion for our sins, yt we need
none other sacrifice satisfactory to put away our wickednesses.


Phile. No mar Of the mass.
uel, for in defacing the glory and honor of ye true and only sacrifice Jesus
Christ, they set up and magnify an Idol of their own maki^g which is ye mass
and presume in yt to offer sacrifice daily for ye sins of the quick and
dead, and crake that it is of no les price, valor strength and virtue, than
the passion and death of Christ^is. Again, that what so ever christ did for
the salvation of man upon (...).
the altar of ye cross, they do the very same at the mass.


Chri. O extreme blasphemy. Who ever denied ye Lord that bought them, if these
popish massemon ii. Peter. ii.
gers do it not? Who justly may be called the enemies of the cross of Christ,
if the mumblynge Massehunters be not the very Phil. iii.
same? Who at any time has trodden underfoot the son of God, and counted
the blood of the testamente, wherewyth the fayethfull are sanctified, as an
Hebru. (...).
unholy thing and done dishonor to ye spirit of grace: if these shameless
sacrificers have not done it? And yet it is a world to Mass hunters.
se, what a number there are not only of the ignorant and unlearned, but of
them also which brag boeth of wisdom and learning, that cleave to this
Idolatrous mass with to the and nail, that defend it to the vttermoste with
swerd, fire, and halter, that maintayn it with their tyches and possessions,
that strive for it with as strong reasons, and arguments, as they can,
partly because they are afraid May ye Pa^ are loath to forg^ the mass.
(I speak of the Popeishe priests) lea^t this commune whore their mass
should be driven out of the game place, and by this means their kitchen
should ware cold, and their idle bea^ies be no more fed with the labors of
other men's hands, p^rtelye because they think, if this abominable strompet
the mass were banyshed out of the temples (I speak of the rude and
ignoraunte people) all true religion were gonne, al christen devotion were
perished, in so much that they could not tell what to do for to please god,
nor yet how to worship him, partly (I speak of the worldly wise) because they
will give no place to the truth lest if they should conse^te to the putting
away of this most stynkinge and filthye whore the mass that old baude and
gra^dmother (...). xvii.
of whoredom and abominations of the earth, they should be compelled to
grant as they think, to their great shame and ignominy, that both they
have been blind, and also led other blind these many years and so they should
lose their estimation, renoume, and fame, among the people, which things they
most chiefelye hunte and haucke after. For they love the John. xii.
praise of men more then the glory of God. What incom modities follow the mass



Euse. Certes so long as that Popeyshe Mass shall be continued in the church
and believed to be a sacrifice for the sins of the quick and dead: Idolatrye
shall bear rule among us infidelity shall lie couched in ye hertes of me^,
Supersticion shall never be exiled from the bonds of Christianity, Hypocrisye
shall still fytte in the consciences of men, the usurped power of the
Bishop of Rome, shall not loose her strength, the fruits of Christ's death
shall never be truly known, neither our heavenly father worthylye thancked
for them, the purging furnace of the Italia^ bishop shall never be quenched, the
idle shaue^ nation of the popeish mass mo^gers shall still be mainteyned in
their disolute and beastlye manner or living, the papisticall sa crificers
shall not cease to blaspheme that most sweet smelling sacrifice Jesus Christ
that most high and everlasting bishop, the holy and blessed supper of the
Lord, shall never be truly frequented and used in the church of Christ, to
be short, an whole sea of euyls shall raygne, florysh and triumph in the
christen congregation.


Phile. Truly I think there is no christen heart, which considering these
things tofore rehearsed lamenteth not to se so great an evil and pestilence
as the mass is, to reygne among them that profess Christ, yea and to be had
in so high price, that it is believed to be of no less strength and virtue the^
the glorious passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But let us se,
how this wicked opinion of the sacrifice of the mass agrees The sacrifice of
the mass
with Gods most holy word.

The Papists affirm that the sins of the quick and dead, are put away by
the sacrifice of their masses, which they mumble daily. Against this deuillish
doctrine must we set (as an invisible bulwark) this text of blessed. S.
Paul. It became us to Hebrew. vii
have such an hye priest, as is holy, innocente, undefiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher then heaven, which neadeth not daily (as the other
priests) to offer Sacrifice first for his own sins, and then for the syns
of the people. For this did he, that is to say, Christ, once for all, when he
offered up him self. Let these sacrificers here note, that no priest can
offer any sacrifice for our sins but such a one as is holy, innocent
undefiled. etc. which is Jesus Christ alone. Seeing then that they want this
holiness, innocence, purity. etc. It is euidente by. S. Paul's words, that they
can not sacrifice neither for the quick nor for the dead.

Again blessed Paul says, that this everlasting priest Ie sus Christ,
neadeth not daily (as the other priests) to offer sacrifice, which by one
oblation of him self has delivered for evermore so many as believe in him,
from al their sins. Uerili these missars are altogether amise. What will they
say now?

If Christ neade no more to offer sacrifice, much less need the priests.
If one oblation of Christ be altogyther suffitiente the^ are the daily
oblatio^s of the popish massemo^gers vain and unprofitable. If Christ offered
him self once for all, then can not the papists offer him so often as it
pleases them. Whereof it may be concluded, that they do no thing in their
satisfactorye masses but blaspheme the Lord and his anointed, seeing they so
arrogantly arrogate unto the^ selfs power to offer sacrifice for the sins of
the people, when this one oblation of our Savior and Lord Christ Jesus is
all whollye suffitiente, and thorowlye able in every point even unto the
vttermooste to save all the elect and chose^ people of God, yea and yt so
abu^dau^tlye and at the full, yt henseforth there needs no reiteracio^ nor no
renewing thereof. If there were no mo scripturs to condemn this wicked opinion
of the Sacrifice of the mass but this one tofore recited, it might seem to any
christen judgment sufficient to subvert, overthrow and tople down, what so
ever the Papists have builded upon the sand of their own inventions these
certain hundred years.

What is chafe in comparison Jeremy. xxiii.
to wheat, says the Lord? Is not my word like fire, says the Lord? and
like a twibytte cleauynge the rock of stonne? But let us rehearse mo
scriptures. The blessed Apostle says. Christ Hebrews. ix.
being a bishop of good things to come came by a greater and a more pe^fit
tabernacle, not made with hands, yt is to say, not of this manner buildinge,
neither by the blood of Gotes or calves, but by his own blood entered he
once for all into the holy place, and found eternal redemcion.

Again in the later end of the same chapter, Christ is not entered into ye
holy places that are made with hands (which are but similitudes of true
things) but into the very heaven, for to appear now before the face of God
for us. Not to ofter him self often as the high priest enters into the holy
place every year with strange blood, for the^ must he often have suffered
se^ce the world began. But now in the end of the world, has he appeared
once for all, to put syn to flight by the offering up of him self. And as it
is appointed unto me^, that they shall once dye, and then comes the judge
mente, even so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many.
Blessed Paul has no shyfte of descante, but sings ever one song, nothing
less the^ pleasant to the ears of these Sacrificers. He affirms that
Christ by his own blood entered into heaven once for all, and found eternal
redemption.

Where we may learn yt Christ Ephe. v.
is so sweet a smelling sacrifice to God the father, yt by the once offering
up of him self, he has found everlasting redemption. Redemption and
remission of sins is so ple^tuously purchased by the death of Christ, that
it remains for evermore. The papisticall sacrificers do greatly err
therefore, which take upon the^ daily to sacrifice for the sins of the quick
and dead, as though Christ's sacrifice endured no le^ger and were of no more
effect and virtue.


Christo. O blasphemouse hypocrites.


Phile. Again he says, that now in the end of the world Christ has
appeared once for all to put sin to flight, by the offering up of him
self, as though he should say, Many sacrifices were offered of the priests
of the old law, but none of them could put synno to flyghte. Therefore
Christ the high priest in these last days became manne, and was not
offered of any other, but he offered him self, yea and that once for all for
the sins of so many as unfeignedly repent and truly believe, and his
oblation for ever and ever abides of so great strength, virtue and power,
that that alone and none other, chaseth away, and puts to flight the sins of
many both of Jews and ge^tils if they believe. Once again he sai Hebru. x.
eth. We are sanctified and made holy by ye oblatio^ of christ's bodi once for all. Are not these words plain enough? How often does. S. Paul resite the oblatio
of Christ's body, yea and that once for all, and stiffly affirms that by that
once offering up of him self we are per fectly sanctified and made holy. What
need the^ have we of ye sacrifice of ye mass to be made holy, if there were
any such sacrifice, as the papisticall sacrificers feign? It follows also in
ye same chapter. Every priest is ready daily ministerynge, and often times
offreth one manner of offering, which can never take away sins. But this
manne that is to say, Christ, when he had offered for sins one sacrifice,
which is of value for ever, sat him down on the right hand of God, and
from thenceforthe tarieth, till his foes be made his footstool. For with one
offering has he made perfect for ever them that are sanctified: this one
sentence makes to fall flat upon the ground, all that ever the Papists have
builded for the mayntenaunce of their Missall sacrifice. First he says that
all the sacrifices, which the Note this ya note it well
other Priests offer, can take away no sin. Secondly, ye Christ offered one
sacrifice for our syns, which is of value for ever, by the which one
Sacrifice he excludes all other. Thirdely ye he sat him down on the right
hand of God the father, and there tarieth till the day of iudgme^te The^ can
he be offered and sacrificed no more, what so ever the Romain. vi.
pedlerlyke Papists chatter as S. Paul says, Christ raised from the dead,
dies no more.

Death shall have no more power over him. For as towchynge that he dyed, he dyed
as concerning sin once, but as towching that he lives, he lives to God.
Fourthlye, that with one offering he has made perfect for euerthem yt are
sanctified. If we be made perfect with one offering, which is the oblation of
Christ's body upon the aultare of the cross, what imperfection remains there
in us, that we should have need of the missal sacrifice: If one Sacrifice make
us perfect for ever, what need we to have so many sacrifices offered daily
in the Popeyshe masses? All these scriptures tofore aledged show evidently,
that ye death of Christ is a sacrifice so omnisufficie^te, so perfect, so abso
lute, so co^su^mate, so ple^tuous at the full, ye it alone makes clean for
ever the faithful from their sins wtoute any repeticion or renewing.


Euse. Curssed therefore are these papistical Sacrificers which so arrogantly
dare presume to offer and sacrifice Christ again, as though the first oblation
and sacrifice were imperfect.


Phile. God amend them, turn their hertes, and give the^ grace to know his
truth. For what other thing is it to set up a new oblation, then to anulle
the old to make God a liar, to deny Christ as Saint Peter right well
prophesied of such subtle ii Peter. ii.
Sacrificers.

For he that says, that sins are forgeuen by the mass, and that the mass
is a Sacrifice for the sins boeth of the living and of the Dead, he must
either grant that the alone Sacrifice of Christ upon the cross is not
sufficient for the fayethful, or else that the missal sacrifice is a mockeynge
of Christ and a plain scorning of god the father. O abhominatio^. Why is
Christ called an everlasting Priest, Psalm. ^ix
but that his sacrifice once done on the aultare of the cross endu reth for
ever in full strength and power for so many as believe, though they sin never
so often, if they return unto God, and seek remission of their sins in the
precious blood of our alone savior Jesus Christ? As sa^ct i. John, ii.
John says. If any man sin we have an advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ the rightuous, and he it is that obtayneth grace for our sins, not for
our syns only, but also for the sins of the whole world. What need (...),
(...).
we the^ more oblations? S. Paul says, without effusion or sheadynge of
blood, there is no remission of syns. If the papists therefore will have their
mass a sacrifyce, so is it proved by the

(...) words of the Apostle that they crucify Christ again and shede his
blood


Christopho. O bloody sacrificers. What Christen heart can bide to be present,
where such ignominy is done to Christ the lord?


Phile. He that sacrifices is greater than the sacrifice, so does it follow
that the pristes are greater than Christ the King of glory? He offered us a
sacrifice to God, and go we about to offer him. Again, he that sacrifices,
Prouer. (...).
ought to be so pure as the sacrifice, and who, I pray you, can be so pure,
as Christ our sacrifice? Who is able to say my heart is clean, and I am fre
from sin? To presume to offer sacrifice for the sins of the people, is it
any other thing than to, make them selves Christ's and saviors, and to say
with that most proud Angel, as it is writ Esai. xiiii.
ten by the prophet, I will clyme up above the clouds, and will be like the
highest of al? Do not they go about to show them selves equale to Christ,
yea Christ him self, which take upon the^ to offer sacrifice for the sins of
the people? What other thing did Christ A comparison between Christ and the
Mass mongers.
but take away our sin? If our Massemongars do the same are they not
Christ's in deed? And yet this prerogative have they a boue Christ, that where
as Christ could not obtain pardonne for our sins but by suffering great
pains, yea and very death, they do it without any pains taking at al. Christ
was mocked and scorned they be praised and much made of. Christ was accused of
heresy and treason: they be counted good catholic me^ and fulle deuote
fathers. Christ was pricked to the brains with a crown of thorn, they have
a bald patch upon their heads in stead of crowns, and some have on their
cappes and miters for catching cold. Christ was stripped naked of all his
clothes: they be clad in sylke, saten, damask, velvet and cloth of gold.
Christ bare his own cross of wood upon his shulders when he went to suffer:
they have crosses of gold and silver borne before them. Christ was nailed unto
the cross: they stand at the altar with turn, return and half turn.
Christ hanging on the cross prayde for his very enemies: they standinge at
the altar pray for such as be their patrones, Founders, Been factours, and
for such as hyere them for money. Christ patiently suffered the blasphemies
and opprobrious words yt causeles were spoken against him, they if any man
offend them, straight ways accuse, condeme, curse and excommunicat them.
Christ with his sacrifice sought to do good to other: they with their
sacrifices seek to bring men to superstition, to wrap the^ in Idolatry, to
graffe in them wicked opinions, but above al things to enriche Corban, Corban,
that they may have plenteously, wherewith to feed their idle and beastly
bellies. Christ at his passion had vinegar and gall given him to drink: but
they have bread of the fineste and wine of the beast to eat and drink.
Christ offered his own blessed body a sweet smelling sacrifice to God the
fa there for the sins of the people: they offerre a wafer cake and (...)
sponefull of wine, making the people to believe that it is a sacri fice, which
they offer pro salute uiuorum et requie omnium fidelium defunctorum. For the
health of them that be alive and the rest of all the faithful that are dead.
Christ after he had offered his sacrifice, said. Consummatum est, John. xix.
Every thing is done and pefectly finished, that makes unto the salvation of
man, yea and that by this my one oblation. They can not say so, neither bring
they any thing unto perfection. For their sacrifices are so imperfecte, that
they are as redye to offer to morrow as to day, and never the bet ter. Christ
after the oblacion of his most blessed body, commended his spirit into the
hands of his heavenly father, and died straight ways, they after they have
offered their new found oblation, faull to bancketynge, drinckynge, gullynge
and glossynge, to hunting, whoring, dis inge and cardynge, and all the days
of their life they live dissolutely in most vain pleasures boethe of the
flesh and of the world. What feloweshippe and agremente is there here I pray
you, between Christ and the Massemongers? between the ob lacion of Christ and
the popish sacri fice, between the Mass and the death of Christ? Ye may se
into what absurdities and to much inconveniences these pedlerlyke Papists
faulle, while they stablish an Idol of their own making. How say ye, are
they not goodly Christ's and pretye sauioures?


Theo. Christ's? They are even such Christ's, as the true Christ him self
speaks of in the Gospel of Sayncte Mathewe. There shall arise, says he, falls
Christ's and false prophets. Here they be called Christ's, but there is added
unto it, False, so that they be Math. xxiiii.
false Christ's, feigned Christ's liynge Christ's, deceyteful Christ's.


Christo. Of such Christ's, Christ gave us warning and bade us take heed,
saying, if any man shall say unto you. Behold hear is Christ, or there is
Christ believe him not. ^f they shall say unto you. Behold he is in the
wyldernes, go not out. Behold he is in the pixe, believe them not. Lo, I have
told you before hand. These popish Mass mongers are the ministers of Satan,
which change themselves into Angels ii. Cor. xi.
of light. These are those men that have corrupt minds, which are without all
truth, which thyncke that luc^e is godliness. These are those false Prophets
and false teachers which, says Sayncte Peter, shall priuelye (...). vi.
bring in damnable sects, even deniynge the Lord that has bought them, and
bring upon them selves swifte damnacion, and many shall follow their dam ii.
Peter. iii.
nable ways, by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, and through
covetousness shall they with feigned words make Marchaundise of you, whose
judgment is now not far of, and their damp^acion sleapeth not.


Philemo. We have textes almost innumerable contained in the holy scriptures,
which declare that Christ alone by his blood has perfectely wrought our re
demptio^, satisfied for our sins, pacified the wrath of God, and brought us
again into favor. But if there were no mo places of the scripture to condemn
the sacri fice of the Mass, but this one, which Christ hanging upon the
cross, said. Every thing is John. xix.
made perfect, it were sufficiete. For if Christ by his death have made all
things perfect, than left he nothing imperfect. So does it truly follow
that the papistical sacrificeynge for the sins of the quick and dead is
damnable, injurious and despitful to the blessed passion of christ, saying
Christ made all things co^su^mate and perfect by his pre cious death and by
that alone ob tayned perpetual remission for all the sins of the faithful.
For his glorious death and bitter pa ssion is eue^ now of as full strength and
of as much virtue, as it was what time he suffered, and so shall co^tinewe unto
the worlds end, as blessed Paulle says, Jesus Christ yesterday and to day,
and the same continues for ever. Therefore is he called an everlasting Hebrn.
xiii.
priest, because he does al things perfectly, and requires none other to
healpe him as he him self says by ye prohet, I am he that tea cheth
righteousness, and am of power Esai. lxiii
to help. The congregation of the faithful speaks. Wherefore the^ is thy
clothinge red, and thy rai me^t like his yt treads in the win press? Christ
answers, I have trodden the press alone, and of al peo ple there is not one with
me. Neither John. i.
Abraham nor Isac, neither zachary nor John Baptist, neither Mary nor
Elizabeth, neither Peter nor Paulle, neither man nor Angel has paid our
ransom by his blood shedynge, but Christ alone, alone, that most pure and
i. Pet. i.
undefiled lamb, which takes a way the sins of the world. In him alone
and in none other Act. iiii.
is all our health and saluacton Neither is there any other name Esai. liii.
given unto me^, wherein they must be saved, but only the name of our most
blessed lord and bounte ous savior Christ Jesus that King of glory. He
only has taken on him our infirmities and Math. viiii.
borne our pains. He was wounded for our offenses, and smitte^ for i. Peter.
ii.
our wyckednes. The chastisment of our peace was laid upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. Esai liii.
As for us we have gone al astray like sheep every one has turned his own way.
But the Lord has Psalm cxix
heaped together upon him the iniquity of us all. He suffered violence and was
evil entreated, and did not yet open his mouth. He was led as a sheep to be
slain Iere. xi.
yet was he as still as a lamb before the shearer, and did not open Math. xxvi.
his mouth. He was had a way (...). viii.
from presonne, his cause not heard and without any judgment. Al ii. Cor. v.
this suffered he for our sake and to put away our iniquities. Yea he was cut
of from the ground of the li uing, which punishment did go upon him, says God,
for the transgression of my people, which in deed had deserved yt punishment It
pleased the lord thus to burst him with plages, and to smite him with
infirmities, that when he had made his soul an offering for sin, he might
se long lasting seed. He has justified the multitude, and borne away their
sins. These words are spoken by the Prophet, which teach us manifestly,
that there is no sacrifice, that deserves remission of sins to us, or
pacifieth the wrath of God styred up against us through sin, but on Esai.
liii.
ly the death of Jesus Christ. By the means of Jesus Christ, says Sayncte
Paulle, ye which Ephe. ii.
sometime were far of, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. By Ephe. i.
Christ we have redemption tho row his blood, even the forgive nes of sins
according to the riches of his grace. God has de linered us from the power of
darck nes, and has translated us into the Kyngedome of his dear son, by
whom we have redemtion through his blood, even the forgiueues of sins. It
plea Colo. i.
sed the father, that in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to re concile
al things unto himself and to set at peace by him through the blood of his
cross boeth thin ges in heaven and things in earth.

This is a true sayeinge and by all means worthy to be reaceyued Timo. i.
of us, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. There is one
God and one mediator between God and man Timo. ii.
even the man Christ Jesus, which gave him self a ransom for all men. Ye
know, says blessed Pe i. Peter. i.
ter, how that ye were not redeemed with corruptible thingse (as silver and
gold) from your vain conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, as
of a lamb undefiled and without spot. The blood of Jesus Christ gods own
son, makes us per fectly clean, says S. John, from (...) ^ohn. (...).
al sin. Again he says, Christ loved us and washed us from our sins in
his own blood If these sentenses were truly known of the Lay people and
unfeignedly believed, they would sone give over their popyshe sacrifices, and
only cleave, as they ought, to the alone sacrifice of the high and
everlasting Priest Jesus Christ, which he once for ^ebru. i^.
all offered upon the aultare of the cross. They would leave to run madyng to
ye masking Mass of the papists, and make more have unto godly sermons and
unto the holy and blessed Supper of the Lord.


Euse. Me think these Massemongers, which make of the Lords Supper a
private Of the Lords Supper.
churlish breakefaste, for as much as they eat and drink alone, and make the
people believe that in their Mass they offer Sacrifice for their sins boeth
of the living and of the dead, and boste that their Mass is of as great
virtue and strength as the passion of Christ for the satisfaction of our
wickednesses, besides their intolerable blasphemies a gaynste the Lord and
his anointed, offend greatly against the dignity and the right use of the
Lords Supper. For Christ when he instituted this blessed Supper to be
celebrated with bread and wine and appointed them to be the holy mysteries of
his body and blood, gave no commandment to offer and sacrifice for the
sins of ye quick and the dead, but to eat and drink these holy mysteries
in the remembrance of his death, as he him self says, Do this in Luke. xxii.
the remembrance of me. Hereto agrees. Saint. Paul, so often, says he, as
ye shall eat of this i. Cor. ii.
bread, and drink of this cup ye shall show the death of the Lord till he
come. So that the Lords Supper was not instituted of Christ to be a sacrifice
propiciatorye, satisfactorie, expiatory, and I ca^ not tell you what: but only
a commemoration or remembrance of that sacrifice, which could not but once be
offered, and a certain confirmacion or seal for the infirm and weak linges,
that they be redeemed by Christ, by Christ's passion, blood and death, that
hereby they may be assured of the favor of God of remission of sins, if
they sted fastly believe, that Christ has sa tisfied for their sins upon the
cross, and in this faith eat and drink the mysteries of his body and
blood. For when so ever the true Christians eat and drink the body and
blood of Christ Mark well.
in fayeth and with a beleuinge spirit, their sins are forgeuen them no les
than if Christ even at that present had died upon the cross, not for the
eating and drinckynge, but for the fathers sake in Christ's blood, so mighty
in operacion is Christ, and so present is he at every hour unto so many as
believe in him and are gathered together in his name. For he is the eternal
god, therefore has his death an eter nal and everlasting fruit.


Christ. Ye have taught us Neighbor Philemon many goodli and god ly things
concerning the sacrifice of Christ which beat down the sacrifice of the
popish mass even unto the ground, yea they drive it down even unto the pit
of hell, from whens it first came. Now will I rehearse unto you again, what I
have read and heard of the papists concerning this matter, that ye may se
what their opinion was and is of the Mass and of the sacrifice thereof.


Phile. I pray you speak on.


Christ. The Mass, say they, makein men holy, yea it makes them ryghtuous
and delivers them from sins. The Mass is a sacrifice, and not the sign of
a The doctrine of the papists
sacrifice only. In the Mass is the body and blood of Christ truly
offered for the quick and conserninge the Mass.
dead. The mass of a priest, be he never so naughti, is profitable ex opere
operato Christ with his pa ssion satisfied for original sin and instituted the
mass to be an oblacion for the sins committed daily, boeth mortal and ve
niall. To hear mass is the hono ringe of God, whither the hearer
understands it or not. Missa sounds sacrifice, ergo the mass is a
sacrifice, Missa is derived of Mitto, to send, for in the mass the lamb, that
is to say, Christ is sent unto the father to forgive our sins. The Mass
delivers s^ulles from purgatory, for as much as it is a satisfactory
sacrifice for sins. Not only the sacrifice of Christ, wherein he offered him
self, was a sacrifice for sin, but we also offer for our sins a continual
sacrifice in the mass. The sacrifice of Christ obtayneth mercy only for
original sin, and for the sins paste. The sacrifice of the mass every
day, is the true sacrifice for sins. Although Christ was once offered on
the cross in the open likeness of flesh, yet is the same Christ dayelye
offered on the altar at mass. The words of con secracion duly spoken of the
priest there is made a transubstantiacion of wine into the blood of Christ
and of the bread into his body. Every man may lawfully worship the host
consecrated. Although Paul calls the sacrament of the Supper bread, yet
may we not believe therefore that the substance of bread remains in the
sacrament. Christ said. Hoc est corpus meum. This is my body, therefore must
we needs hold, that there is a transubstantiacion, and that the substance of
bread is changed in to the body of Christ. The body of Christ is present
in the Mass so great and large, as it was, wha^ it hanged on the cross
Forasmuch as Christ that most high majesty of God is present at the mass,
therefore is it very godly to appointe many ceremonies, that Christ may be
entertay ned honorably. Mass ought not to be said but in an holy place and
upon an altar of stone, for Christ him self is called a stone The mass
among all the suffrages for the dead, does profitte most of all for the
deliverance of soulles out of purgatory. By hearing of mass we may obtain
not only spiritual goods but all manner of corporal and temporal goods
also. The cannon of the mass is godly and catholyke and it was ordained of the
Apostles. The mass, ex opere operato, justifies and takes away the giltines
of the fault and pain in the^, for whom it is done With ye sacrifice of the
Mass the satisfactio^s of the dead are read med. The mass, ex opere operato
gives grace, and being applied for other deserves unto them ex opere operato,
forgyuenes of the fault and pain, and obtayneth what so ever we have need of
in all our life. In the old testament there was a bishop, that offered
sacrifices for the sins of ye people, therefore in the new testamente must
there be priests and Bishops to offere sacrifices for sins. The body of the
Lord once offered on the cross for original sin, is continually offered for
daily sins upon the altar, that by this means the church may have a
gift, where with they may pacify the wrath of god. It is an heresy of the
Arrians to hold that the mass is not a sacrifice for the quick and the
dead. How say ye Neigheboures to this doctrine of the massekynge papists?
Is it not good stuff?


Theo. God have mer cy on us. I have not heard more blasphemous doctrine in my
life against the truth of Gods most blessed word, nor more injurious and
dispiteful against the glorious passion of our only Lord and savior Jesus
Christ. O to much miserable is that realm, where such doctrine is taught.
Bond slaves and wreched captives are they to Satan and to his Antichristian
sinagog, where such tea chers reign and bare rule. Oh, when will these papists
cease to speak blasphemies against the son of the living God? The teachers
of this doctrine are right chaplens to that beast, which had seven heads and
ten horns, and opened her mouth to speak blasphemies against God and his
name and against his holy congregation with so Apo. xiii.
many as inhabit the heavens. These are those marked Merchants, which have
committed abominable whoredomme with that fylthey and unclean stromppette
Babylon, and weep now because no man will bye their marchaundise nor their ped
lary any more, their gold, silver and precious stones, their pearl raynes,
purple and scarlet, their Apo. xv^ii
orname^tes, their franckensence, wine and oil, their fine flower and wheat
with the bodies and souls of me^.


Phile. I have spent the more time in declaringe unto you the wicked opinion of
the papists concerning the sacrifice of the mass and co^futinge of the same,
because ye should rejoice in none other thing as touching your redemption and
satisfaction for your sins and a perfect atonme^t made between God and us,
but only in the death and passion of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, as
S. Paul says, God forbid that I should rejoice in ^ln. vi.
any thing, but in the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now the sacrifice
of the mass being reproved, and proved of no force and virtue to put away
the sins of the quick and dead, as the papists have falsely taught and
made the folishe simple people to believe for lucr^s sake, of what price, I
pray you, is the mass now to be esteemed? It agrees no more with christ's
supper, ^n antithe^s between the Lords supper and the po pes Mass.
tha^ Christ and Belial, light and darckenes, truth and falshode. Christ made
a sermon before he ministered the sacrament of his body and blood to his
Disciples: the papists say masses the devil and all and yet no sermon at all.
Christ sat at the table and turned his face to his Disciples John. xiiii. xv
xvi. Math. xxvi.
when he gave them the mysteries of his body and blood: the papists
sequester them selfs Marcke. xiiii.
from the people, they stand at an altar and turn their backs to Luke. xxii.
the multitude. Christ reheresed the words of the institution of his supper
openly, yea and that in such a tongue as al his Disciples understood: ye
papists whisper to them selves playenge silence glome, and utter althinges in
a straung tongue that no man understands what is spoken, nor for the most
part them selves neither. Christ gave the sacrament of his body and blood
to his Dysciples for to eat: the papists give nothing to any man but eat and
drink altogether them selves. Christ ministered the misterye of his body in
com mon bread, the papists minister printed waferre cakes other wise not
commonly used. Christ mi nistered wine to be a co^memoracion of his blood
shedeynge to his Disciples: the papists minister to the people not only wine
but water also myngled their with. Christ gave the sacrament of his body and
blood into the Disciples hands: the papists put it in the peoples mouths,
not sufferynge them to touch it with their hands for their to much base
filthiness. Christ delivered the sacrament to his Disciples sittyng at the
table, the papists co^pel ye people to receive it kneling upon their kenes.
Christ deliueringe the bread and wine to his Disciples, said unto the^ take
ye: eat ye, and drink ye, the papists say, behold, honor worship and
reverence your maker here. Christ instituted his supper to be a remembrance
of his death and passion, which is the only sacrifice for the sins of the
people, the papists affirm that their massekyng Mass is a perfect sacrifice
for the quick and the dead, and of as great virtue and strenght as the
blessed passion of our savior christ is. Christ deliueringe the miste ries
of his body and blood to his disciples told them that his body should be
broken for them and his blood shead for them and many into the remission of
sin nes, the papists shame not to lie that Christ by his death satisfied
only for original sin and the sins paste, as for all our sins what so
ever they be, venial or mortal, they be put away by the sacrifice of ye mass.
Christ delivered the sacrament of his body and blood under both kin des to
his disciples, the papists steal away from the common people the misterye of
Christ's blood. Christ gave to his Disciples the sacrament to be eaten for a
remembrance of his death, the papists hold it up above their heads and
command the people to worship it as God. Christ ministered the sacrament in
such apparel, as he did customably wear, the papists put on maskyng apparel,
Albes, girdels vestimentes, coopes, subdeacon, deacons, tunicle and what not?
Christ plainly and puerly ministered the sacrament to his Disciples without
(...) ceremonies: the papists must have sensers, belles, candles, (...),
paxes, corporasses Superaltaries altar clothes, cruetres napkins besides their
dowkynges and lowtynges, their turnynges and returnynges, their gaspynges and
gapynges, their knelynges and winkinges their mockinges and mowynges, their
crossinges and knockinges, their kissynges and lickeynges, their noddynges and
nosynges, their washynges and wypynges, their booynges and bleatinges, as I may
speak nothing of their prostracions and inclinacions, of their commemoracions
and histrionicall gesticulacions, more meat for mad brains and dronckardes
than for grave and sober honest men. Christ commanded his Disciples to
receive the sacrament so often as they would: the papists appoynte the common
people only to receive it at Easter, or when they be in perell of death.
Christ wylled his Disciples so often as they eat of that sacramental bread
to remember his death till he come, he mea neth unto the judgment: the
papists say they have him al redye in there hands and in their mouths, in
their boxes and in their pixes. Christ did not appoynte any part of the
sacrament to be reserved after the co^ munion: the papists reserve it and
ha^ge it up with an haltar in the pixe, sense it, carye it about in procession
and make a pageaunt of it. Christ appointed his sacrament to be eaten in the
remembrance of his passion, the papists keep it so long, that it corrupts
waxes moul^, and breadeth full of worms. Christ in the institutio of the
mystery of his body, said. ^hys is my body, which is given Luc. (...).
for you. Do this in the remembrance of me. The Papists in their
consecration, as they call it, mangle the words of Christ, in some place
addinge of their own to the words of Christ, and in an other place leaving
altogyther out. In the consecracion of the bread they have Enim, which Christ
has not, nor any word for it in the Hebrew tongue. And herein do they
grievously offend Dent. xii.
against God, which commands that nothing should be added to his word.
Again they leave out this confortable promis^. Prou xxi.
quod pro uobis datur. which is given for you, wherein our chief consolacion,
joy and comfort is Apo. xxx.
contained. And here again do they not a lityll offend against the high
majesty of God, seeing they pluck so many words from the institucion of
Christ. They are also very thieves and enemies to us seeing they depryue us of
so sweet and confortable promise wherein is co^prehe^ded the misteri of our
salvation. Christ in delivering the cup of the mystery of his Math. xxvi. Luke.
xxii.
blood spoke these words, Drink ye all of this. This cup is ye new Testament
in my blood, which is shed for you and for many into the remission of sins.
The Papists rehearse not the words in the consecration of the wine (as I may
go forth to use their term) in all points, as Christ did, but add more unto
them, as though there were a certain im perfection or insuffitiencye in the
words of Christ. Their words are these. This is the chalice of my blood a
new and everlasting testament, the misterye of fayeth, which for y^u and
many shall be shed for the remission of sins. Although in the addition of
these words there is no untruth, yet is it not conueniente for any man which
is but flesh, earth, duste, and ashes, to put John. iii.
ought to the words of Christ, which is the wisdom of the father, and
knows best what Ecclesi. x
is most expediente for the setting forth of his glory. If a man Collo. ii.
add any thing to the Testamente and last will of any mortal manne, or do
pluck ought therfro, his fault is counted very Note
great, and he him self for ever after discredited because he has so
unjustly dealte with his neighbors will. In what estimation then are they to
be had which corrupt the testamente and last will not of man only but of
God and man also, wherein are bequethed not worldely and transitorye things,
but things heavenly and perpetual. Neither is this blessed testament sealed
with wax, but with the preciouse and dear heart blood of our Lord and
savior Christ Jesus, to mancle this heavenly testamente, to corrupt this
blessed will, wherein is bequethed unto us, the favor of God, remission of al
our sins and eternal life, if we truly repent, and earnestly believe, is much
vnsittyng for any christen man, neither are such manckelers, and corruptours,
such thieves and robbers, any more to be believed of the faithful congregation.

Christ (as I may once make an end) after he had fed his disciples Math. xxvi.
with the holy mysteries of his bo Mathe. xiiii John. xvii.
dye and blood, gave thanks to God the father, and so prepared him self
through earnest prayer unto the death. The Papists after they have once droncke
and eat up all together, they give no thanks, whereby the common people are
edified, except it be when they bless with the empty cup, or bid them go
home with Itemissa est. Well this may ye easly perceive, how greatly the
Popysh mass differs from the true institution of the Lords supper, and that
they agree together as Christ and Beliall, light and darcknesse, truth and
falsehode. and ce.


Christo. It shall therefore be convenient for all true christian hertes no more
to repose the trust of their salvation in the Sacrifice of their Popeyshe
mass, nor in any thing apperteynynge to the same, but only in the blessed
passion, in the precyouse blood, and gloryouse death of our Lord and savior
Jesus Christ, which by the alone Sacrifice of his most holy body, has even
un to the vttermoste, and at the full paid our ransom, and brought us
everlasting health.


Theo. This is a confortable hea ring for all fayethfull penitent sinners.

But I pray you, neighbor Philemon, remain there no mo causes of reioysyng
in the Lord our God? Of Christ's resurrection



Philemon Yesse verilye. For this our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ did not
only boeth wyllyngely and frelye give him self unto the death of the cross
for our sins and wyckednes, and by this means pay our ransom to God the
father for our offe^ses, that Satan might have no power over us, but he al so
through the might of his godhead, rose again gloriously and triumphantlye on
the third day according to the scriptures for our justification, as the
Apostle says.

He was betrayed unto the death Romans. iiii
for our sins, and rose again for our justification.

For as by the death of Christ our ransom is paid, the divine wrath is
pacified, our sins are washed away in Christ's blood, a reconciliacion and
perfect atoneme^t is made between God the father and us, the obligation of our
debt is rased out, the law is fulfilled, the curse of gods wrath is taken
away, al things both in heaven and in earth are pacified: so in like manner by
the Resurrection of Christ we are made ryghtuousse, accepted into Gods
favor, recounted for just, holy, and vertuousse, set at liberty, from
the tyranny of Satan, admitted into the celestial court of the new
Jerusalem, and become fellow cityzyns of the household of God with the
Saynctes, and blessed spirits.


Euse. O inestimable treasures brought to us by the gloryouse resurrection of
our most blessed savior Jesus Christ.


Phile. Yea, let us mark this also by the way, that as our most valeaunt
Lord and Emperor Jesus Christ by his resurrection, gatte the vyctory over
Satan, Sin, Death, Hell, Desperation, and all that is enemy to Man's
health, so in like condition have we in him and through him gotten a glorious
victory over Satan and all his kingdom, that we may with a ioyeful voice
say, death is swalowed up into victo i. Corhin. xv
rye. O death where is thy vyctorye? O death where is thy styng? The stynge of
death is sin, the power of sin is the law. But thanckes be to God which
has given us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.


Christo. O what a joy and comfort is this to a Christen man's heart, to se
his enemies, which before so greatly sought his distruccion, thus
vanquished, subdued and trodden under his foot? This have we gotten, as ye very
truly have said, by Christ's resurrection, as Christ him self testifies
sayeinge, now is the judgment John. xii.
of the world, now shall the prince of this world be cast John. xvi.
out. Again, be of good comfort, I have overcome the world By the Prophet Ose
he also says, I will deliver them from the Osee. xiii.
power of death, yea from death it self will I redeem them. O death I will be
thy death. O hell I will be thy destruction.


Phile. Moreover by Christ's resurrection have we obtained not only
Justification and victory over our enemies, but also resurrection of body and
everlasting immortality. For as our Lord and sa uioure Jesus Christ did
put of the mortality of his body, and became immortal at his resurrection,
so by the power of that his most glorious resurrection shall we also at the
great day of judgment in our resurrection receive immortal and
incorruptible bodies, even like unto the glorious body of our most mighty
and valeaunt captain Jesus Christ.


The. Oh who ca^ expres the worthiness and excellency of these heavenly gifts,
which we obtain by the most victorious and triumphante Resurrection of
Jesus Christ our Lord and savior?


Philemon. Let these things therefore (dearelye beloved brethren) make you
to rejoice in the Lord.

Let these things provoke you to wythdrawe your mind from transitory things
and steadfastly to fyxe it on things co^staunt and everlasting.

Let these things sequester your Joy and pleasure from the sweet
entisynge moremaydes of this world, and allure to the alone delectation in
celestial treasures.


Christ. O blessed is that man, to who^me it is given from above truly to
sauoure these things, fayethfullye to believe them, and earnestly to rejoice
in that Lord which is the alone geuer of the^ Sure m^ ^at man be, that his
name is written in the book of life.


Philemon. But let us go forth to declare more benifites of God toward man,
that our joy in Of Christ's ascentio^
the Lord may be unfeigned, co^summate and perfect. After this most noble
conqueste and victorious triumph, which our most mighty Emperor Christ
Jesus had over Satan and his infernal ministers, he tarried here in this
world, certain days with his Disciples, eating, drynkeynge, and talkyng
with the^ of the kingdom of his heavenly father, and confirming them in the
way of truth. And this did he not only to make the^ strong in the article of
his resur rection, but also by the instruction of them to corroborat, fortifye
and strength us in the same, seekynge no les our health then the salvation of
them. For as the Romain^. x
Apostle says, if thou doste confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
believe with thine heart that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be
saved. Cer Acts. i.
tayne days paste from his resur rection, Christ our Lord by the power of
his godhede in ye sight of his Apostles ascended into heaven God and man. Have
we no cause to rejoice in this behaulfe? Has this his marueylouse asce^sion
brought no commodity and profit to us? Have we a just cause to rejoice in
his natiuitye, preaching, miracles, good works, cross, passion, blood,
death resurrection (which al are ours) and not in his ascension also? We read
that the Apostles were very sad, when Christ told them that he should
ascend unto his father. But Christ said unto them, I tell you truth, it is
expedient John. xvi.
and profitable for you that I go and ascend unto my father. Christ told the
Apostles that it was expediente and profitable for them that he should go up
into heaven. If it were expedient for them, it is eue^ so like wise for us. For
we are saved by ye very same way, whereby they received salvation. Let us
therefore consider what commodities and profits the Apostles had by Christ's
ascension, and let us with a constau^t faith and hope look for the same For there
is but one Lord of all Romain. x The fruits of Christ's asce^tion. John. xiii
rich enough for so many as call on him.


Euse. I pray you let us hear, that our joy may be full.


Phile. First that we may truly rejoice in Christ's asce^tio^, I will labor
to show you some of the co^ modities of it, as we are taught in the sacred
scriptures. Christ in his last sermon said unto his disciples. I go to
prepare a place for you, If I gooe my way and prepare I will come again and
take you unto my self, that where I am, ye may be also. Here have we one
vrgente cause, why we ought earnestelye to rejoice in Christ's ascension.
For of this aforesayed sentence we learn, yt Christ is ascended unto his
father to prepare a place for us in heaven. Can any thing sound more
pleasant and thank worthy to our ears, then to hear that the son of God
came down from his heavenly throne, became man, suffered death, rose again
for our sake, and is now ascended very God, and very man into heaven to
prepare a glorious ma^cion for us in the kyngedome of heaven? What is more
comfortable for a Pilgrim, then after long traueling by strange contries at
the last to come home to his own house, and there to find all things well
provided for him Are not we strangers and pylgrimes i. Peter. ii. Hebrews.
xiii.
in this world? Do we not wa^der from place to place uncertainly, and look
for an other ma^cion more quiet and merry to come? If there were not such a
dwelling place to be looked for after this present life, of al creaturs, the
true christians were most miserable. But there is vndoubtedli an heavenly
palaice prepared for ye faithful, yea and yt by Christ's asce^tio^.


Theo. Certise here have we, I co^ fesse, one great occasion to rejoice in the
ascension of Christ, seeing by it he has prepared for us a dwelling place
among the holy saints and blessed angels, and promises yt he will come again,
take us unto him, and place us even there, where he him self is.


Phile. An other commodity that we have by Christ's ascension, is the gift of
the holy Ghost. For Christ him self says. If I go not away, the
confortou^e shall John. xvi
not come unto you. But if I go my way, I will send him unto you. By this
confortoure he understands the holy ghost, which conforteth and makes strong
with Godly puissaunce, yea and leads into al truth, ye hertes of so many as
he inhabiteth. What an inestimable treasure the gift of the holy Ghost is, no
man knows, but he that is endued with wisdom from above. Whence come al
these back slyders from God and his word, but only of the lack of the holy
Gooste? Whence come so many Heretics, scismatikes, anabaptists
sacramentaries, papists, with all the whole rabble of sedicious sectaries, but
only that they are destituted of this co^fortoure, of this holy spirit,
which should comfort the^ in fayeth, and lead them into all truethe? David
knew full well, what a singular and great treasure to a fayethful man the
having of the holy Ghost is, again, what an utter decaie and extreme
destruction it is to yt man, that whanteth this confortoure, when he prayde on
this manner. create in me a pure heart, O God, and a right spirit Psalm. li.
renew thou in my inward parts, Cast me not away from thy face, and thy
holy spirit take not away from me. This holy spirit do the fayethfull
receive from God the father through the ascension of Christ. Is this a small
gift to have the holy ghost given unto us to dwell within our breasts, and
with him all the heavenly fruits of the spirit, Gal^. v.
fayeth, love, hope, patience, joy, long sufferyng, meakenes, temperaunce,
justice, goodness, ge^tlenes, modesty, honest behauioure peace, with an whole
sea of good things mo, yea and at the last everlasting life? Who reioyseth
not in this most excellent gift purchaised for us by the ascencion of the
Lord Christ our God and savior?


Christo. That such gifts should be given unto men of Christ after Christ's
ascension, it was long before prophesied of the holy Psalmographe, Psalm.
lxvii.
thou art gone upon hye, thou, haste led capptiuitye captive, Ephe. iiii.
and received gifts for men*


Euse. Of the gift of the holy ghost plenteously to be given after Christ's
ascencion, God him self speaks by the Prophet Ioell, sayeinge: it shall be
in the Jewel. ii.
last days, says God, of my spirit I will power out upon all Actu. i^
flesh. And your sons and your daughters shall prophesye, and your young men
shall se visions and your old men shall dream dreams. And on my servants
and on my hand maidens I will power out of my spirit in those days, and
they shall Prophecy.


Philemon. Neither do here cease the commodities and profits that we enjoy
by the ascension of Christ. For besides the preparacion of the heavenly
mansions and the gift of Christ our in (...) in ^ure and (...).
thy holy Ghost (which without doubt are most high and syngulare
treasures) Christ by his ascension is become our intercessoure, mediatoure
and advocate. He sits on the right hand of God the father making
intercession for us. If we will obtain any thing of God the father, he is
straight ways redye to be an advocate and to plead our cause before his
father, and easelye obtayneth what so ever he desires so great is his
dignity and exce^ncye. Again, if at any time Jacob. iii.
we offend God (as we all do amysse in many things) and by our offense
provoke the wrath of God unto vengeance, Christ our advocate and mediatoure
is at hand immediately to pacify the i^e and wrath of God, to reconcile us
unto him, to purchaise remission of our sins, and to recover the favor
that we had lost through our weak nes, as S. John says, if any man sin,
we have an advocate i. John. ii.
with the father Jesus Christ that ryghteouse one. And he is a mercy stock
for our sins, not for our sins only, but for all the worlds also. For
the blood of Christ is not like the blood of Abell. For the blood of Abell
Heb. xii.
cries for vengeance upon his brother Cayne, which unjustly Gene. iiii.
slew him (as the blood of al innocences and martyrs do in like manner call
for vengau^ce against the^, that have oppressed the^ and shed their blood
unjustly) but ye blood of Christ cries for grace, favor and mercy, cries for
pardon, forgyuenes and remission of sins cries for joy, quietness and ever
lastyng life. God, says Saint Paull, sets forth his love won derfully
toward us, for if when we were yet sinners Christ died for us, much more
than we being now justified in his blood shall be saved from wrath by him. If
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by ye death of his son, much
more we being reconciled shall be made safe through his life. No man can
sufficientlye express the worthynes of this co^modite, that Christ is not
only become by his ascen cion a preparer of a heauenli and glorious mansion
for us, again a purchaser of the holy ghost to comfort us and to lead us
into al truth, but also an intercessour mediatoure and advocate, where by he
obtayneth for us all good things, and puts a back from ^s what so ever
should hinder ^e obtaynynge of gods favor and the heavenly enheritaunce.
Christ purchases for us of his father thoroughe his intercession so
abou^dantly and so altogether sufficiently, al things necessary for the
conseruacion boeth of our body and soul, that we need not to pray unto any
saint in heaven as the papists have taught us neither unto mary, John,
Peter, James, nor any other to be our intercessoure, mediator or aduo cate.
It is Christ's office alone to be a mediatonree between god and us, as blessed
Paulle teaches us in his Epistle unto Timo the. I doubt not neygheboures but
so many as are fayethful, are replete with exceadynge joy to consider how
manifold and diverse benefits, gifts and graces chance to us by the
wonderful ascencion of Christ our Lord and savior.


Theo. Who so ever considers depely in his mind those things that ye have
taught us hitherto, shall be occasioned unfeignedly, to obey this
commandment of the blessed Apostle, he that rejoices, let him rejoice in i.
Cor. i.
the Lord, so sweet and full of all heavenly pleasure are these commodities,
which we receive of God through Christ our Lord.


Philemon. But let us make haste unto an end concerning this matter, that we
may learn in few words, what so ever remai neth of gods goodness toward us
in Christ, I mean so much as our wit can comprehend, and we be taught in
the holy scripture, that we may earnestely rejoice in the Lord our God We
have heard heretofore many vrgente and wayghtie causes, why we should of
very right and bounden duty rejoice and be merry in the Lord. Now it
remains orderlye to declare the final and last cause, why we ought to be
glade and rejoice in God.


Christ. I pray you let us Of christ's ^inge unto the judgment
hear.


Phile. As Christ was borne for us, wrought al good things in his manhood for
us, suffered for us, died for us, rose again for us, ascended into heaven for
us, purchaised the holy ghost for us, prays for us, obtayneth al best things
for us, so likewise at the last day shall he being our head come again
from the right hand of his father to fet^ us his members, and to enunite us with
him in the same glory there ever to remain. And although to the wicked he
shall come as a ter rible and ryghteous judge, to revenge and not to pardonne,
to punish and not to forgive, to co^deme and not to save, yet to the
fayethfull shall he come in his glorious majesty and all the blessed Angeles
with him like a most loving and Gentle savior, sayeynge to them on this
manner, come ye blessed of my father, possess ye the kingdom, prepared for
you from the beginning of the world.

O whooe is able, to express what joy and comfort this before said sentence
shall bring to the hertes of the fayethfull? But to the vnfayethfull it shall
be sayede get ye hence ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the devil and his Angeles.


Euse. O that day shall be to the wicked a bitter day, a, day of wrath, a
day of tribulacion and anguishe, a day of calamity mise ry and wrechednes, a
day of darcknes and miste, a day of cloudines and boistuousnes, a day of
fearful trompettes and shawmes blowynge.


Philemon. I grant, notwythstandeynge to the fayethefull it shall be a sweet
day, a day of favor, a day of quietness and peace, a day of wealth and
felicitye, a day of clearenes and light, a day of comfort and solace, a
day of heavenly mirth joy and pleasure. For as blessed Paulle fayeth, the eye
has not seen, nor the ear has not heard, neither can the heart of man think, what things God has prepared for them that love him.

They shall be as Angels of God in heaven. They shall shine as the clearenes
of the firmament, and as stars for ever and ever. They shall be counted
among the sons of Sapi. v.
god, and their lot shall be among the saynctes. They shall receive of the
Lords hand an honorable kyngedome and a beautiful diadem. They shall be
clad with long whighte garments. They shall be be fore the throne of God, and
serve him day and night in Apoc. vii.
his temple. They shall ho^gar and thyrste no more, neither shall the son or
any heat faul upon the^ for the lamb Christ, which is in the mids of the
throne, shall govern them, and lead the^ unto the fountayues of the water of
life, and God shall wype a way every tear from their eyes. They shall dwell in
a city, that needs neither son nor moan to shine in it. For the clerenes of
God shall Apoc. xxi.
illumine it. They shall behold the glorious face of god presently, Apoc. xxii.
and his name shall be written in their foreheades. They shall eat of the tree
of life, which is in the paradise of God. To conclud they shall have a crown of
glory Apoc. ii.
and sit with Christ their elder brother in his throne, even as he sits
with his father in his throne, and shall live with God and his holy angels in all kind of honor and glory, joy and pleasure world without end. Apoc. iii.
O what can a Christen man desire more of the Lord his God, then these
things, which I have heretofore rehearsed? Come of, tell me now I pray you,
if we have not many yea and innumerable boeth urgent and wayghtie causes, why
we should rejoice in the Lord our God. I doubt not, I doubt not, most dear
brethren, but by the hearing of these thin ges ye are now so rapte into the
love of God for the most high and singular pleasures, which through Christ
Jesus ye have allredye received, and here after shall receive a thousand times
more abound a untlye, that from he^ceforth al worldly things shall wax vile
unto you, and ye shall even from the very heart endeavor your selves at all
times to repose all your joy, comforts pleasure and felicity in the Lord
our God alone, alone, so that ye shall rejoice in none, neither in heaven nor
in earth but in him alone, alone.


Chri. Neighbor Philemo^ we all are kindled with so feruente and so hertye
love toward God for these his most singular and inestimable benefits, that
we do not only defye the world and all the vain plea sures of it, but we also
are redye for our steadfast love in God and for the perfect reioysinge in him
gladly to say with the blessed A postle, who shall seperat us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulacion or anguishe? Or famine? Or nakedness? Or parel? Or
persecution? Or sword? I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor
soueraignties, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
strenghte, heyght, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


Philemon. I am glad to hear these your words, and I am fully persuaded yt
this your joy shall increase unto an exceeding and perfect reioysynge in the
Lord our god, unto the great and syngulare comfort boeth of your bodies and
souls. But ye shall note, that the holy Apostle does not only bydde us
rejoice in the Lord, but he adds unto it. Always. Rejoice in the Lord
Always, says he,


Theo. What means the blessed Apostle by this word Always?


Phile. Uerily he will that our joy and reioysynge Prouer. xiiii.
in the Lord be not flittyng, transitory and of small con tinuaunce as the
pleasure that is conceived of worldly things is, the end whereof is bitter
and sorrowful, as Solomon say eth, the end of worldelye joy is heaviness,
mornening and lamen tynge) but constante, steadfast, inmutable, not
diminishinge but encreasynge unto an high perfection of godly mirth, joy,
felicitye and pleasure. For he that conti nueth unto the end, says Christ
Math. x.
shall be saved. It is not enough to begin well and to continue in the same a
certain space, except we persevere even unto the end of our life. The wife of
Lot began well, when she came out of sinful Sodom, but because she did not
go forth, but looked Gene. xix
back again unto it, she was turned into a salt pillar. The wise men that
came from the East part of the world to worship Jesus Christ the new
Matthew. ii.
borne king of the spiritual Israelites: were commanded of god no more to
return to the most blouddy and wicked king Herod. Judas began well and was
one of Christ's disciples, and very earneste in setting forth the kyngedome
of God for a certain space, but seeing he did not persevere in that Godly
purpose, but became of a preacher a treytour, of a disciple a thief, of a
minister a murderer, he is now the son Matthew. xxi.
of perdition and dampened for evermore. He is not ye true son that promises
his father, that he will work in his viniyarde and does not, but he that
ma^fully works in it indede, and so perceue teth to ye end, he shall enjoy ye
enheritaunce of his father. For the kingdom of god shall be taken away from
idle lubbers, and given to Mathe. xiii.
them that work and bring forth the fruits thereof. Not they Mark. iiii.
which, when they hear the word first of al, do joyfully receive it, Luke.
viii.
believe it for a time, talk of it, and in the time of tentation go away, slide
back and become other me^, shall possess eternal life: but they which with
great joy and gladness of mind, hear it, receive it, believe it, cleave fast
unto it in the time of persecution, and persevere in the same eue^ unto the very
last breath. ii. Timo. i^


No man is crowned says saint Paul, except he fight lawefullye, that is,
until he have gotten the victory by resistynge the world, the Devil, and the
flesh through Christ our Lord.

And the Lord him self says. No man that puts his hand to the plough,
and looks back, Luke. ix.
is meet for the Kyngedome of heaven.

Hereto agrees the saying of Saint Peter: If after they have forsaken the
uncleanness of the world by the knoweledge of the Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, they yet again being wrapped ii. Peter. ii.
in them are overcome, the last is worsse then the first to them. For it
had been better for the^ not to have known the way of ryghtuousenes, the^
after their knoweledge to turn away from that holy commandment, that was
given them. But that it chanced to them, that is wont to be spoken in a
true proverb. The dog is returned unto his vomit, and the sow clean washed
Prouer. xxvi
unto the wallowinge in the mire. Of these things aforesaid may we learn
that it is not inoughe to begin well, except we persevere and continue even unto
the geuynge up of the Ghost, as they use to say. He that continues John. viii
to the end says Christ, shall be saved. Again he says. If ye abide in my
word, truly ye shall be my Disciples, and ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall deliver you. We must abide in the word of God, or else we can not be
Christ's disciples. We are delivered from the rule of our enemies, says holy
zachary the priest father to that most excellent Prophet of God. S. Luke.
i.
John Baptiste, that we being without fear should serve god in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. Note that he says, all the
days of our life must we serve God in such holiness and ryghtuousnes as is
acceptable before him. The holy scripture requires of us a continual
progress and an vnletted perseuerau^ce in ye way of Godliness. In
consideration whereof the blessed Apostle does not only exhort us to rejoice
in the Lord, but he adds unto it Always, requirynge of us not a flyttynge
and transitorye reioysynge, but a constaunte, steadfast, sure, continual and
unchangeable reioysynge in the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord always, says he.


Euse. It is but a trifle to joy and rejoice in the Lord, in his Note well
word and ordinances so long as prosperitye endures, and the world
laugheth upon us, but to rejoice in the Lord, in his word and ordinances when
we be assailed with troublous adversity, when we be visited with greauouse
sickness, when we be empouerished through miserable misfortunes, when we be
hated, blasphemed, persecuted, oppressed, en prysoned, punished of worldelye
tyrants for God, for his word and ordinances, this is a perfect joy, and
christian rejoicing to bear the cross of Christ, to suffer patientlye all
kind of adversity, to cleave fast to God in the time of temptation, to be
co^tente so well to abide troubles as prosperouse things, and tha^kfully to
take what so ever plages or punishments God shall lay upon us, either by his
own loving visitation or by the crueltye of the wicked worldelynges, which
are always enemies to Gods truth, and to al true lovers of the same, this is
in mine opinion to rejoice always in the Lord, and to acknowledge him to be
our most gentil father and louinge savior, whether he send prosperity or
adversity.


Phile. Truth it is yt ye (...), brother Eusebius.

If therefore any of you at (...) good lesson
any time be visited with sickness or diseases of the body, murmr not, nor
grudg not against God, blaspheme him not, nor speak not irreverently of him,
nor yet wyshe not that syckenes to be taken from you otherwise then his Godly
pleasure shall be, which knows much better what is expedient or profitable
for you, then ye your selves do, but with high patience, and most herty
thanks geuynge, receive that loving visitation of your heavenly father, as
an holy enplasture and wholesome salve to heal all those pockye diseases wherwt
your souls are infected through the stynkynge corruption of old sinful Adam.
We are corrected and punished of the Lord, says i. Corhin. xii
S. Paul, that we should not be dampened with this world. David also says. It
is good for me that thou haste thus humbled and brought me down full low, that
I may learn thy ryghtuous ordinances. If thou therefore in thy sycknes shall
feel thy flesh to be Psalm. exviii.
impatiente, disobediente to the will of God and at defiaunce with God for this
his loving correction, pleasant to the spirit, altogyther bitter to the
flesh for a season, restrain and pluck her back with the bytte of patience
and never leave to fight against the furious and rageynge motions of the
flesh, till thou haste made her obediente to the spirit and wyllyng to suffer
what soever kind of adversity God shall lay upon her back. Labor in thy
syckenes so to joy and rejoice in the Lord, that with high patience and
cherefulnes of mind even in the mids of thy most bitter vexation, thou
may say with. S. Paul. We are not weried, ii. Corhin iiii.
but though our outward man peryshe, yet the inward man is renewed day by
day. For our tribulation which is momenta nigh, of short continuance and
light, prepares an exceadynge and an eternal wayeght of glory unto us, while
we look not on the things, which are seen but on the things which are not
seen. For things which are seen, are temporal, but things which are not
seen are everlasting. Again, we know surely, ii. Corhin. iiii
if our earthly mantion, wherein we now dwell, were destroyed, that we have a
buildynge ordained of God, an habitation not made with hands, but eternal in
heaven. And that ye may with the more patiente and thankeful mind receive all
kind of sicknesses and diseases, wherewith ye are at any time vexed, look that
ye persuade your selves and believe undoubtedly, that your punishme^tes come not
unto you by chance, but by the council, providence and appoyntme^te of God,
without whose will an hear does not fall from your heads Matthew. x.
which also keeps al your bones so that not one of the^ shall be bruised Psalm.
xxxiiii
without the permission and Psa. xcix
sufferau^ce of that our good god. He made us, and we not our selves. We are
his flock, and the sheep of his pasture, therefore like a most gentyl
shephearde considering the greuous^e diseases, wherewyth we are already
infected or else like to be, he prepares his tar and greaseth us with that,
that we should be free from all contagious diseases, and be found whole and
sound, when so ever we shall be searched. For God does not visit us with
syckenes and other plages that he might destroy us, cast us headlong into hell
fire, and damn us perpetually, but to call us to repentance, to provoke us to
come home again unto the shepefolde, to exercise, prove, and try our fayeth,
yt by this means he might save us.

For that Lord, which is the searcher of raynes and hertes, perceyuinge how
old Adam begins to wax cruel and fearce in us, restrayneth and plucketh
him back with the bridel of sycknes that he shall not do what he him self
would, but what the good will of our heavenly father is, which else without
all doubt would so rage and grow unto such licencious ryote, that with his
vain pleasures and fleshly lusts he would deceive the most precious and noble
soul, and so deceived throw it into the danger of eternal damnation.


Theo. Of these your words may we right well perceive that afliction, troubles
sycknesses, and diceases be no tokens of Gods Ire wrath, and dispeasure toward
us, but of much high mercy, favor love, and good will, yt he bears to us.


Phile. Truth. For if this most gentle Savior and best God did not seek our
salvation, our wealth and health everlasting: he would not with so sharp and
loving corrections call us home again unto the shepefold, but suffer us to
run hedlonge into all kind of carnal voluptuousnes and beastly pleasure, and
afterward for our dissolute living reward us with pains eternal among the
bealye Gods and Epicures.


Chri. O who is so far estrau^ged from the right course of reason, that he had
not rather have his carnal affectes and beastly will mortified with temporal
and short sicknesses in this world, then for a little space to tumble and
wallowe in all kind of carnal pleasures according to his fleshly desire, and
afterward for ever and ever to be cast into such The p^ynes of hell
pains as are boeth intolerable and everlasting, where wepinge and gnashynge
of teath is, where the darcknesses are so great that Mathe. xiii.
they may be felt, where the fire shall never be quenched, where the worm
that shall gnawe the Esai. ^xvi
conscience of the wicked shall never dye, where there is a lake and stinckeynge
puddell, that burns Apoca. xx^
continuallye with fire and brymstone, where nothing shall be fealte but pain,
nothing remembered but sin, nothing tasted but bitterness, nothing seen but
our most wicked enemies Satan with his infernal ministers, who shall not be
greaued and led with a certain compassion toward the damned for the
multitude of the most bitter pai nes, wherein they shall se the^ most miserably
tormented, but they shall rejoice, yea they them selves shall never cease to
minister intolerable punishme^tes to the damned souls world without end.


Euse. O whose heart is so enflamed with the fire of carnal pleasure, that
waxes not cold at the hearing of these things? Who had not rather in this
world continnally to be shaken with hot agues, greaued with bone ache, eaten
with canckars, pyned away for hunger, and to suffer any other temporal
diseases that can be named, be it never so greuouse and bitter to the flesh,
then to fall into those most horrible pains that you named heretofore?

The pains that are suffered in this world are great and bitter (I confess)
but they have an end, and work health to the soul. And in like manner: the
pains that are sustained in hell, are boeth great and bitter also, but they
have no end, and bring eternal damnation to the soul.


Phile. O what plage can be named like unto this? Who is now so stifenecked
and hard herted, that he will not say with the Apostle. I will with all my
heart rejoice in my infirmities and ii. Corhin. xi^.
weakness, that the virtue, power and strength of Christ may dwell in me. Who
now is so blind which sees not, that to be visited with syckenes in this
world is to receive a singular and high benefit of God? Who is so far from
true fayeth, that will not be persuaded, ye afflictions, troubles, syckenesses
and diseases be plain testimonies, and evident signs of Gods good favor
toward us? as the wise man says. The chastening of God thou Prouer. iii.
shall not refuse, neither grudge thou, when he shall correct the. For whom
the Lord loves, him he corrects, and delyghteth him self as the father in
the son David also says, O blessed is that man, which is under the law and
nourtoure of the Lord, Again, It is hyghely, for my wealth, O Lord, that thou
haste Psalm. cxviii.
brought me under to learn thy ordinances. Hereto agrees the saying of the
Apostle, my son despise not the chastenyng of the Lord, neither faynte thou,
wh^ thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, him he Hebr. xxi.
chasteneth, yea and he scourges every son, that he receives. If ye endure
chastening, God offers him self unto you as unto sons. What son is that,
whom the father chasteneth not? It ye be not under correccion (whereof al are
partakers) than are ye bastardes and not sons. Wherefore seeing we had
fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we have them in reverence,
should we not much rather be in subjection unto the fa there of spiritual
gifts? And they verelye for a few days nourtered us after their own
pleasure, but he learneth us unto yt, which is profitable, yt we might receive
of his holiness. Nomaner of cha stesynge for the present time seems to be
joyous but grievous, not wythstandynge after ward it brings quiet fruit of
righteousness unto them, which are exercised in the same. Bear not therefore,
derely beloved impaciently the cross of sickness, when so ever God lays it
on your back, neither strive ye against the good pleasure of your heaven ly
father, which only seaketh your comoditye and eternal saluaci on, but
pacie^tely suffer and pray, yt his godli will (which is always best) may be
done in you, and whether he sends sickness or health ever glorify his name,
and rejoice in him being thoroughly persuadid that he will handle you none other
wise, than shall make boeth unto his glory and your salvation, which to resist
were extreme impiety and to much ungodliness.


Chr. For as much, o lord, as we are thy workma^ship A godly pr^pet.
and are in thy hands eue^ as ye claye is in the potters, do with us according
to thy most godly plea sure only give us a pacient and tha^k full heart, yt
whither you se^dest prospe ritie or adversity, siknes or health quietness or
trouble, we may at al times praise and magnify thy most blessed and glorious
name.


The. Let it so come to pass O Lord.


Phile. Now Neighbors even as I would wish you to rejoice O^ poverty or
loss of goods.
in the Lord our God, whansoeuer he visit you with his loving correction and
scourge of sickness, so would I gladly also have you to joy and rejoice in
him, if he at any time sends pouertye or loss of gooddes to any of you all.
If therefore it so chances, that ye be acombred with any misfortune, grudge
not against God, but show your self comfortable to his godly will in all
points, nothing doubting but that loss of your temporal possessions shall
turn unto your high commoditye and furtheraunce in obtaynynge goods, which
are a thousand times more precious, I mean gods fa uour, quietness of
conscience and eternal glory. Let the brother, says Sayncte James, that is
poor and of low degree rejoice Iaco. i.
in that he is exalted, and the rich in that is made low. For eue^ as the
flour of the grass shall he vanishe away. The son rises with heat, and
the grass widereth, and his flower falls away, and the beauty of the
fashion of it perishes: even so shall the rich man perish with his
abundau^ce The goods of this world, where with ye be ryghtuouslye endued are
gods, if therefore it shall be his good pleasure at any time to take them from
you, grudge not against him for takeynge his own, but rather with a tha^full
and reioysynge heart say with the paciente manne Iobe, Job. ix.
the Lord gave it, the Lord has taken it away again. As it pleased the
Lord, so is it come to pass. Blessed be the name of the Lord. Paraduenture
God perceyueth, that thy mind is so Why God ^aketh away
much set on te^porall possessions yt the worldely goods from them whom he
loves.
you clean forgettest ye spiritual riches and heavenly treasures of the soul,
therefore he mi^di^g to make the his son and heir of eternal glo ry and of much
better and more excellent goods than this beggarly vale of misery can
comprehend, takes away from the mucke of this world, that you may ye more
freely aspire and breath forward unto the getti^g of heavenly riches, where with
the soul being gorgeously decked may after this transitory life sit gloriously
in the glorious palace of heaven. For what does it profit a man, says christ
though he win neth al ye world, and loses his sole? Again, hord not up
tresures unto you on ye earth, where rust and mothes Math xvi.
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But hord ye up treasures
in heaven, where Math. vi.
neither rust nor mothes corrupt, and where thieves break not up nor yet steal.
For where your tresure is, there will your heart be also. And yt ye may bear ye
cross of poverty with the more pacie^t mind remember Math. vii.
yt though christ was lord over al, yet was he so pore from his infancy unto
his depature out of this world, yt he had not a place, where once to rest his
head. His mother and al ye apostles with mani blessed marters, faithful ministers
of gods Luke. ii.
word and other innumerable yt were good me^ and derely beloved of god escaped
not ye hard dart of pouer Actu. iii.
ty. Now sei^g ye have christ ye lord of lords and king of kings, his blessed
mother, with ye holy Apostles and marters etc exe^plars of pouerti to follow and
practice, if God at any time do lay ye cross of necessiti on your backs,
suffer it boeth pacie^tly and tha^kefully. Disdain not you being servants
to bear ye burden, which your lord and master refused not to take upon him.
Ye know the liberality of our ii. Cor. viii.
Lord Jesus Christ, says S. Paul, that for your sake he became poor when
he was rich, yt ye through his poverty should wax rich.


Euse. Neighbor Philemon, although, thanks be to God, we have our breasts
so well furnyshed and fortressed with the weapons and armours of holy
scriptures against the violence of all misfortunes, yet some perchance not
being thoroughly instructed of Gods liberality toward his creatures, will
object and say, as the common proverb is, necessitye is an heard darte. And
honger is a sharp thorn, how than can we take pouertye so patiently, that
we may rejoice in the Lord our God, namely in so great penury and scasenes
of things.


Philemon. I answer with the Psalmographe, I have been young, and now I Psalm.
xxxvii.
am old, yet never saw I right tuous man forsaken, nor his sede beggynge
their bread on the earth. If thou therefore be right tuouse, that is,
fayethfull to God and just to thy neighbor laboringe diligently for thy
living according to the vocacion and calling, as God has commaun ded the,
thou may be sure not to want, that shall suffice nature Who ever trusted in
God, and Psalm. lv.
went away succoureles? Cast thy care on the Lord, and he shall nourishe
the, says David. The Psalm. xlv.
Lord gives meat to the hungrye. Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon them
that fear Psalm. xxx^ii.
him, and upon them that trust in his mercy, that he may deliver their lives
from death, and nourishe the^ in the time of honger. They that fear the Lord
shall have no scarsenes. They which seek the Lord, shall want no good thing.
Fear not my son, says Tobias, we lead a Tobi. iii^.
pore life, notwythstandynge we shall have plentye of al good thin ges if we
fear the Lord, depart from all sin and do well. God (...). Timo. vi.
gives us abou^dantly in all thin ges to enjoy them says saint Paul. God
him self says, I Iosue. i.
will not fail the nor yet forsake the.


Christo. Who being a fayethfull manne, although never so Hebru. xiii.
much oppressed with pouertye, will not rejoice in the lord, which has
promised and will no les per form, that he will not forsake so many as trust
in him.


Philemon. And that ye may be through ly persuaded of his, faythfulnes
concerning thaccomplishement of his promise, consider, I pray (...) you, how
friendly and fayethfully he dealt in times paste with his servants, and will
no les favorably handle us, if we have Exo. xvi. x^.
like fayeth in him. Did he not feed the people of Israel with meat from
heaven, and gave the^ iii. Reg. xvii.
drink out of the rock? Did he not send meat twice a day by the ravens to
the Prophet Helias, and so miraculously fed him, wha^ the unfaithful perished
for ho^ger? Did not Christ turn wa ter into wine at the marriage in Iohu. ii.
Cana Galile? Did not Christ with five barlye loves and two fyshes feed five
thousand men Math. x^ii.
besides womenne and children, and yet there of remained xii baskettes full of
the fragmentes? ^ohn. vi.
Do not all these histories teach us to have fayeth in God, and to believe that
God has a father lie care for his servants? What so ever things are written,
are written says blessed Paul for our learning, that through patience and
comfort of the scriptures Romans xiiii.
we should have hope. It is not to be passed over at this present, that
Christ has in the gospel of Mathewe. Be not care Math. vi.
full for your life what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for
your body, what ye shall put on. Is not ye life more worth than meat? And the
body more of valor than raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow
not, neither reap nor carye into the barnes, and your heavenly father fedeth
them. Are ye not much better tha^ they? Which of you by takyngr thought can
put one cubite to his stature? And why care ye the^ for raiment? Consider the
lylies of the field, how they grow. They labor not, neither spinne, and yet
I tell you, yt Solomon in all his rialtie was not arrayed like unto one of these.
Wherefore if god so cloth ye grass, which is to day in the field, and to
morrow shall be cast into ye furnace, shall he not much more do the same to
you, O ye of little fayeth? Take therefore no thought saying, what shall we
eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewyth shall we be clothed? After al
these things seake the heathen. For your heavenly father knows, that ye
have need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of heaven and
the ryghtuousnes thereof, and all these things shall be cast unto you.


The. O swet and comfortable scriptures. Let the heathen take thought for
their living, which know not God, as for the faith full Christians they have
a lord which will provide for them abou^dauntly. Let adulteres forni cators,
thieves, Dronkardes, swe rers, and such other wicked par sons take care
wherewith they shall be fed and cladde, as for the servants of God they
have an almyghtye Lord in heaven, which will send them plentye of all good
things. If ye be loving Esa. i.
and obediente, says the Prophet Esaias, ye shall enjoy the best thing that
grows in the land. But if ye be obstinate and rebelious, ye shall be
devoured with the swerd. For thus the lord has promised with his own mouth.
The wicked therefore and not the faithful shall want and be oppressed with
famyne.


Euse. If God takes such fatherly care for his servants, how than comes
it to pass many times, that those, which seek most of al his glory, led in
this world the most base and miserable life, and often are found socourles and
destitute of all man's healp? When they which be vnfayethfull regard, neither
God nor any thing that is godly, dis pise his most blessed word, persecute
the true preachers thereof, oppress their pore neighbors deal unjustly with
all men etc, have over flowyng abou^daunce of al things, live like voluptuous
Epicures in all kind of pleasure, and possess whatsoever their hertes can wish
or desire. This thing se we presentely before our eyes, and as it may be
gathered of the holy Scriptures, many good men in times paste have
complained of this thing unto god and almooste, as it were, accused God of
unrighteousness. Are not these the words of the holy and paciente man Iobe^
When I consider my self I am Job. xxii.
a trayde, and my flesh is smitten with fear. Wherefore do wicked men live in
health and prosperity, come to there old age and increase in riches? Their
children live in their syghte, and their generation before their eyes.

Their houses are safe from all fear, and the rod of God does not smite
them. Their bullock gendereth, and that not out of time, their cow calueth,
and is not unfruitful. They send forth their children by flocks, and their
sons lead the dance. They bear with them tabrettes and harpes, and have
instrumen tes of music at their pleasurs. They spend their days in wealth
thynes. etc. The holy Prophet Ie I^e. xii.
remye maruelynge greatelye at the prosperity of ye wicked speaks to God on
this manner. O Lord thou art more ryghtuous then I should dispute with the.
Nevertheless let me talk with the in things reasonable. How happens it,
that the way of the ungodly is so prosperous? and that it goes so well with
them, which without any shame offend and live in wyckednes? Thou plantist
them, and they take rote, they grow and bring forth fruit.

Are not these the words also of the blessed Psalmographe? truly God is
loving unto Israel, Psalm. lxxiii.
and unto such as are of acleane heart. Nevertheless my fete were almost gone,
my treadinges had welnigh flypt. And why? I was grieved at the wicked, I do se
also the ungodly in such prosperity. For they are in no parell of death, but
are lusty and strong. they come in no misfortune like other folk, neither are
they plaged like other men. And this is the cause, why they be so holden with
pride, and overwhelmed with crueltye, their eyes swel for fatnes, and they do
even what they lust. They corrupt other, and speak of wicked blasphemy their
talking is against the most higheste. For they stretche forth their mouth
unto heaven, and their tongue goes through the world. Therefore fall the people
unto the^, and therout suck they no small advantage. Tush say they how
should God perceive it? Is there any knowledge in the most hygheste? Lo,
these are the ungodly, these prospere in the world, and these have riches in
possession. Again the Apostles of Christ, even Christ him self being with
them, were sumtime so hungry and destitute of al kind of vitaile: yt as they
went by the way they were compelled even for very hunger to pluck ye ears
of ^athew. xii
corn, and to eat it. And does not S. Paul in these words declare Marcke. ii
the miserable state boeth of him self, and of his felowaposties? Even unto
this time (says he) Corhin iiii.
we hunger, and thyrste, and are naked, and are buffeted with fystes, and have
no certain dwelling plase, and labor worckynge with our hands.

We are reuyled, and yet we bless. We are persecuted, and suffer it. We are
evil spoken of and we pray. We are made as the fylthynes of the world, the
ofscourynge of all things, even unto this day.

At the marriage in Cana Galile where Christ him self was present with the
blessed virgin Mary John. (...).
his Mother and his disciples, was there not such scarsenesse, that they
wa^ted wine before the wedding feast was done? And yet it is to be thought,
that both they which were married and the other there assembled, were Christ's
friends and dearly beloved of Christ. What shall I rehearse the historye of the
rich manne which was gorgeously appareled Luke. xvi
and fared daintilye every day, and of the pore Lazar, which died for hunger?
The rich glutto^ lived pleasauntly and was dam ned in hell, the pore Lazar
living in all kind of worldelye miserye after the death of his body reigns
in glory with god. The enemy of God has after his own carnal lust all
things, the fre^d of God wants, that should suffice the necessary appetite
of nature.


Phile. I confess that for the most part the wicked in this world have
more abundance of temporal goods, and live a thousand times more
pleasau^tlye in the face of the world, then the true christians do, God through
his unsearchable wisdom so appoyntinge, which before sees much better then
we, what is necessary for us. Notwythstandynge though God does not
customably send to his servants such abundaunce of worldelye treasures, as
voluptuous world lyngs do possess, lest their minds snarled with the love of
the^ should be withdrawn from the true and everlasting goodness (as it comes
to pass in mani) yet ve ry seldon or never does he leave them socourles but
se^deth them, what so ever is necessary for the sustentation of their ^eadye
and pore life according to his promise, as he said unto his disciples, Luke.
xxii.
When I sent you, without wallet, and scrippe, and shou^s, lacked ye any
thing? And they said, No. Truly no more shall we lack any necessary
thing, if we love God and obey his word The fayethful may perchance sometime
feel the dart of poverty, yet will not God leave them socourles and destitute
of help

For God sends poverty sumtyme to the ryghtuousse for to prove his fayeth,
and to stir him up to call on him which is the geuer of al good things, that
he may know by the exercise of his fayeth, yt they be the gifts of God, as
the wise man says. Good and evil, life and death, Ecclesia. xi
pouertye and riches are of God. Trust in God, and abide in thy place. For it
is an easy thing in the sight of God, quickly to enriche a poor man.
Disconfort not yourselues therefore (dear brethren) though sumetyme ye feel
the cross of poverty, but be on a good confort, joy and rejoice in Iosue. i.
God. For God has promised, that he will not leave nor forsake Hebrew. xiii
you, but give you all good things abundauntlye for your present i. Timo. vi.
necessity..

His delay is only to prove your fayeth, and to provoke you to fle unto him
by teruent prayer, and to require of him al things necessary for your living.

If ye do this (so ye be not idle, but work according to your calling) the
earth shall sooner cease to give forth her fruit, then ye shall want your honest
necessaries. Rejoice therefore in the lord alwai, and once again I sai rejoice


Chr. The Lord of heaven give us al grace so to order our life accor dyng to
his holy word, so to repose our affiaunce in him, so to call on his most
blessed name, in all our adversity, and so to be thankful for his exceadynge
goodness toward mankind, that we be not found altogyther unworthy the
recepte of his benefits.


The. So be it.


Phile. Fi nallye as I would have you to rejoice in the Lord, when so ever he
sends you syckenes, poverty Of the cross
or any other cross to nurture you, to mortifye old Adam, to slay your carnal
lusts, to make your bodies subject to the spirit that they may be a living
and holy sacrifice to God, so would Romans. xii
I exhort you to rejoice also in the Lord, if at any time he rayseth up
tyrants to persecute you for the fervent zeal, and Godly love, that ye bear
toward the ve ritie and truth of his most blessed word. For as it came to
pass in the time of Moses and the prophets, in ye days of Christ and his
Apostles, eue^ so has it been from their time unto this day, that the
bealyed hypocrites, and wicked wordelynges have ever hated, and still unto the
worlds end, shall hate the glorious light of Gods word. Neither is it any
meruel

For as concerning the bealied hypocrites, Gods word condemns Hypocrites
their hypocrisy, superstition, feigned holiness, new found religion, carnal
ceremonies, outward sanctimonie, and all the whole glitterynge face of their
popish solemnity. It cries out upon them, that they are so idle and do not
only not preach the^ selves, but also forbyde other, yt would boeth gladlye
and frelye set forth ye glory of Christ's gospel unto the exceadynge conforte
and great Joy of all true christians, yea they persecute the^, blaspheme
them, enpryson them, burn them. etc. It cries out upon the^ that have so
great multitudes Matthew. v
of worldelye possessions, and yet make no provision for the poor people, for
the vertuousse bringing up of youth in good letters and vertuousse manners,
but spend it upon gorgeousse buildinges, lusty horses, delicate fare, idle
lubbers, yea upon hawks, dogs and whores. It cries out upon them, that
whereas they ought to be the light of the world, and to give example of
virtuous living to all men, they are become of all men most abominable,
most leude, most ungodly, most given to idleness most drowned in
voluptuousenes, and altogyther sworn to do mischief. How can these bealygods
and swynyshe Hypocrites whose life is overwhelmed with the darcke clouds of
syn, abide the glorious light of Christ's gospel? How can these gluttonyshe
Epicures suffer their Hypocrisy and feigned holiness to be rebuked of the poor
abiectes and vyllaynes of this world by the authority of Gods word? It can
not be, it can not be. For every one that does evil, says Christ, hates the
light, neither comes he to the light, least his works should be reproved. Now
as co^cerninge the wicked worldlings, John. iii.
they ca^ favor no more the truth of Gods word, the^ the bealied hipocrites.
For it conde^neth Worldelings
their covetousness, their ambitio their vain glory, their pride, their
whordome, their polling, their pillinge, their falshode, their oppression,
their unmercifulness, their cruelty, their tyranny, and what so ever
ahomination they use beside. How can it otherwise come to pass, but they
which rebuke these vices, must neades be hated, persecuted, enprisoned and
slain of the wicked worldlynges for telling the^ the truth and for rebukynge
these their most abominable and outragiousse sins? as the prophet says.

They hate him that reproves Amo^. v.
them openly, and who so tells them the plain truth, they abhor him. Can
light and darcknes agree? Can Christ and Beliall be at unity? No more can
ii. Cor. vi.
the worckers of wyckednes, and the rebukers of the same be led with one
consent. There must needs be disse^tion between the^, as was between Abell,
and Cayne, Jacob and Esau, Christ and the bishops, the Apostles, and the
worldelye tyrants. And for as much as the same impiety and ungodliness, the
same wyckednes and abomination reigns now in the world, that has been
used in times paste, and it ought of very duti to be rebuked at this present
with no less liberty of speech, then it has been in times paste, except
we will wyncke at so great abomination, and with the wicked worldelynges,
and bealied hypo crites syncke down to the devil for our labor, it is not
to be doubted, but they that shall take upon them that office, shall prove and
find even that same gentilnes at their hands, that Moses and the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles, the holy martyrs and blessed saints, received of
their bluddy predecessors. Therefore if the waves and surges of cruel
persecution shall at any time rise against us (the good will of our heavenly
father so prouidynge, without whole sufferaunce all the hypocrites in the world
can do nothing against us) let us not despair nor cast away our hope but still
go forth to rejoice in the i. Corhin. i.
Lord our God, and manfullye abide by the verity of his word, remembering yt
it is called the word of the cross, trouble and persecution remembringe that
no kind of adversity chances to us, but the same happened in times past to
the Prophets and Apostles, yea to Christ him self that pure Lamb of God,
remembrynge yt all, which will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution, remembrynge that by the cross away is prepared for us unto
eternal life. And that we may with the more free spirit and francke courage
rejoice in the Lord, when so ever the cross or persecution is laid on our
backs for Gods sake and for his Gospel, let us enarme our selves with the
comfortable textes of the holy scripture, and call to remembrance the
hystories of the blessed men of God, which also suffered like or greater pains
for the glory of the Lord, not forgetting that even from the beginyng of
the world, the wicked began to persecute the godly Gene. iiii
as we may see in Abel and such other.


Euse. Unto this patience Mathe. xxiii
and the following of the prophets, does blessed James exhort Jacob. v.
us saying. Bepatient brethren to the coming of the Lord. Behold the husband
man waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
thereupon until he receive ye yarelye and later rain. Be ye also patiente
therefore, and settle your hertes, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh,
Grudge not one against an other brethren, lest ye be dampened. Behold the
Judge stands before the door. Take (my brethren) the prophets for an exemple
of sufferynge adversity, and of patience, which spoke in the name of the
Lord. Behold we count them happy, which endure.


Chri. Our savior Christ Matthew. v.
says also. Blessed are ye, when men revile you, and persecute you, and shall
falselye say all manner of evil saying against you for my sake. Rejoice and
be glade, for great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted they the
Prophets, which were before The persecuon of the prophets.
you.


Phile. What pleasures the holy prophets of God found at the worlds hand, it
is not hard to express. Esaie that most excellent Esai.
Prophet of God for his liberty of speech in rebukynge the syn of the princes
and of the people, and for prophesyeng of the vengeance of god to fall upon
the co^treie and people for not receiving the word of god, was cut in two
parts a su^der with a saw of wode.


Theo. O intolerable pain.


Phi. The prophet Jeremy was stoned unto death of his Jeremy.
people at Taphnes in Egipte, because he rebuked them of their wicked living
and exhorted the^ unto repentance and amendment of life. The Prophet Amos
at the commandment of Amos.
king Amasias for his preachinge was cruelly beaten and grievously tormented,
and at the last the Kings son Ochosias caused him to be thirst into the
temples of the head with a great nail oftrone, and so shortli af iii. Re.
xxii.
ter died. The Prophet Micheas was cruelly beaten, emprisoned, and fed with
bread and water, because he spoke the truth, and told the king, Micheas.
what should chance unto him. The Prophet Helias was grievously persecuted of
queen Iesa Helias.
ble king Achabes wife for speakinge against Baall and his chaplens. The
Prophet zachary zachary
son of Barachias was stoned to death for telling the king truth. The Prophet
Daniell was cast (...). Para. xxiiii
into the den of lions, because that contrary to king Darius commandment
he prated unto his Lord the God Israel. Which of the prophets escaped Dani.
vi.
without persecution? And as the wicked worldlynges and bellie^ Hypocrites
handled the prophets of God for telling the truth, Daniel.
so handled they al other yt obeyed not their wickedlawes and filthy requests.
Were not Sidrach, Misac, and Abednago cast into a fiery furnace, because they
would not worship the golden Image Dan. iii.
that king Nabugodonoser had made, but only ye God of Israel? Was not
Achimelech with certain other holy me^ of god slain at king Saules
commandment, because he she wed kyndenes to David the hertye beloved
servant of God? Was not Io Ichimel^ch.
sephe cast into prisonne, because he would not lean to the filthy request
of his Lords wife? ^g. xx^.
Was not Susan that virtuous woman at the point to be stoned Joseph.
unto death, because she would not consent to the unlawful Gene. xxix.
and fylthy requests of the two Judges? Was not Eleazarus Susanne.
miserablye put to death, because ^e at the kings commandment Daniel. xiii.
would not eat swines flesh contrary Eleazarus.
to the law of God? was not a certain woman with her ii. Maca. vi.
seven sons most cruelly put to death, because they would not obaye the
wicked precepte of the ii. Maca. vii.
most wicked king? I pass over many other of the old testament, which were
unmercifully persecuted and slain for gods truth Some, as the blessed Apostle
say eth, were tried with mockynges Hebru. xi.
scourginges with bonds and prisonment, some were stoned, some were hewn a
sunder, some were slain with sword, al were troubled and vexed.


Theo. These are Sap. iii.
they, of whom the wise man spea keth, god proved the^, and found the^ meet
for him self, yea as the gold in the furnace did he try the^, and received
the^ as a brunte offeringe. etc.


Phi. As I may at ye last come to the new testament, Christ.
to who^ is it unknown, that Jesus Math. xxvii.
Christ our Lord and savior after mani blasphemies, rebukes Luke. xxiiii.
slanders and bitter torments, suffered the most spiteful death of Math xiiii.
ye cross, and so entered in to glory? Holy John Baptist that blessed John
Baptist
priests son for truth telling to king herod for reproving him of his
abominable living, was Actu. xii.
cast into prisonne and beheaded. James the brother of John had James.
his head stricken of for preaching Christ to be son of ye living god. The holy
martirs. Stephen was stoned unto death, because he prea ched Christ, and
affirmed that God dwells not in temples made with man's hand, What kindness Peter
and Paul with the other apostles Actu. vii.
found at ye hands of the^, whose salvation they most diligently sought, the
histories make mencio^. Neither Stephen.
do I hear speak of those blissed martirs, which syns their days have died
for the confession of gods truth, so that the Gospel of Christ is not without
a cause called of saint. Paulle, the word i Cor i.
of the cross. For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, says he, shall
suffer persecution. To consider ii. Timo. iii.
these histories before rehearsed, shall stablishe our fayeth greatly, and very
much comfort us in the time of our tribulacion, so that we shall not lyghtely
slide from God and from his holy word, but rejoice in him, recou^tynge our
selves most blessed, fortunate and wealthy, that god has vouched safe not
only that we should believe in him, but also suffer for him. It shall be
expediente for us also to remember that Christ calls them blessed Mathe. v.
which suffer persecution for righ tuousnes sake, and says, that Math. x.
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Again, that the servant is not greater
tha^ his Lord, but if they persecuted Christ our Lord and master, they will
also persecute us his servants and Disciples. If they have called the father
of the household Beelzebub, much more John. xv.
they will call them so, that are of his household. If we were of the world, the
world would love us, but for as much as we are not of the world, but Christ
has chosen us out of the world, therefore does the world hate us. And did not
Christ tell us before, that we should lament and weep that is to say, be
oppressed of tirauntes, but the world should rejoice, and that in the world
we should have affliction and trouble? Ihon. xv^.
Again, are we not taught yt by many tribulations we must Actu. xiiii.
enter into the kingdom of God.


Chri. The flesh abhors trouble and persecution, namely when death is like
to follow.


phile. The Math. xxvi.
spirit, as Christ says, is redye and of a good courage to suffer al things
for the glory of God, but the flesh is weak. The outward man is loeth to
dye, but the inward man wishes to be losoned out of this corruptible body and
to be with Christ. But if the good will of our heavenly father so be, yt we
must needs suffer death for Christ's sake, let us set this saying of S. Paul
before our eyes, and stedfastli believe it: if we ii. Timo. ii.
die with christ, we shall live with him. If we suffer with him we shall also
reign with him. And our sa uioure Christ says, whosoever shall lose his life
for my sake and for ye Gospel, he shall keep it. Here to agrees the saying of
s. Peter, Mark. viii.
detelye beloved, marvel not, that ye are proved by fire (which i. Prter.
iiii
thing is to try you) as though some strau^g thing happened unto you, but
rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of christ's passion, yt when his glory
appears, ye may be merry and glad. If ye be railed upon happy are ye. For ye
glory and the spirit of god rests upon you. Again, if any man suffer as a
Christen man, let him not be a shamed, but let him glorify God on this
behaulfe And let the^ yt are troubeled according to ye will of God, commit
there souls to him with well doing as unto a faithful cre ature. They yt suffer
trouble for ye lords sake and for the gospel, shall stand before the glorious
seat of God, and before the lamb ^po vii.
Christ, and they shall be clothed with long white garments and palms in
their hands.

They shall ever be in the presence of the seat of God, and serve him day and
night in his temple, and he that sits in the seat, shall dwell among
them. They shall honger no more neither thyrste, neither shall the sun light
on the^, neither any heat. For the lamb which is in the mids of the seat,
shall feed the^, and led them unto fountaynes of living water, and God shall
wype away al tears from their eyes.

Furthermore it shall be great comfort for us also to remember, with what
willing hertes Christ and all the blissed martires suffered death for the
glory of God. Christ our Lord and savior, when the time of his bitter
passion began to draw nyghe, and perceived that Judas went about to
betraye him to the Byshopes and priests said, that thou entendeste to do, do
it quickelye and out of John. xlii.
hand. And when the Bishops servants came to lay hand on him, where as he
might have escaped their cruel hands, he wyllyngely offered him self unto
them, whereby we may se, that he went unto his death with a merye and
ioyefull heart.


Christofor. These his words, Math. xxvi.
which long before his passion he spoke to ye Jews, do also testify and wytnes
his ready bente good will to suffer for the salvation of mankind. Therefore does
my father love me, because I give John. x.
over my life, that I may take it again. No man takes it away from me, but
I give it over eue^ of mine own good will I have power to give it over, and I
have power to take it again.


Theo. Of the willinge oblacion of him Esai. liii.
self, it was prophesied by the holy Prophets. The prophet Esai says, he
was offered, because it was his good pleasure. David also says in the parson
of Christ, I will offer sacrifice unto the willingly. Psalm. liiii.
He speaks of the sacrifice of his body. Again Christ him self says by
the forsayde Prophet unto his heaue^lye father as for sacrifice and offering
thou would none, therefore madeste thou me a body. As for burnte offeringes
for sin, thou have not allowed them. Than said I, behold Psalm. xxxix.
I am at hand In the begin ing of the book is it written of me, that I should
do thy will O God


Phile. As the lord Christ willingly suffered for the health of man so likewise
did the apostles suffer al kinds of torments ioyefully for the glory of God,
for the settinge Actu. v.
forth of his blessed word and for the name of Jesus Christ the lord, as we
read in the acts of ye apostles. They were whipped of the byshopes servants,
as S. Luke testifies, because they prea ched Christ, and so sent away. But
when they came from the council, they reioysed, yt they were counted worthy to
suffer rebuke for the name of Jesus. How glad, ioyeful and ready the blessed
Apostle S. Paul was to suffer any kind of Actu. xx.
torment for Christ's sake, these his words do abou^da^tly show. Behold I
being bound in the spirit, go forth unto Jerusalem, not knowing what things
shall chance unto me there, but yt the holy ghost in every city does testify,
saying, yt bonds and troubles do abide me. But I care not for the^, neither
is my life dear un to me, so that I may finishe my course with joy, and ye
office which I have received of ye lord to testifithe gospel of the grace of
God. Again, when Agabus ye prophet took Paul's girdel, and bound his Actu. xxi.
hands and fete there with, saying, thus says the holy ghost, the man, whose
girdel this is, shall the Jews thus bind at Jerusalem, and they shall deliver
him into the hands of the heathen: and when they that were with Paul hearing
these things, most insta^tly desired him, that he should not go up unto
Jerusalem, the blissed apostle answered saying, what do ye weeping and
troubelynge my heart? I am redye not only to be bound but also to die at
Jerusalem for the name of ye Lord Jesus. O faithful Apostle. The lord Jesus
christ was so dear unto him, yt for his sake for the anauncement of his glory,
for ye setting forth of his most glorious gospel, he feared neither chea nes
nor death. He always had before his eyes ye short pains of this world and ye
everlasting joys of ye world to come. He ever remembered this saying of ye
lord Christ, whosoever shall lose his life for Marc. viii.
my sake and for the gospel, he shall keep it. He never forgot these his
masters words, whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my sayi^gs in this
whorishe and sinful generation, the son of man shall also be a shamed of him,
wha^ he shall come in ye glory of his father with ye holy angels. But whosoever
shall co^ Math. x..
fesse me before me^, I shall confess him also before my father, which is in
heaven. We read also yt the blissed martire Ignatius after many grievous
torments was thratened if he would not forsake christ and his word, yt he should
be cast unto Ignatius.
wild beasts, and so be devoured. But he being nothing abashed with those
threats but perceiving his death to be differted, which he so greatly desired
to suffer for christ's name, wrote an Epistle to the Romans, and desired the^
that they would keep him no longer from his martyrdom, but with al expedicio^
bring to pass yt they had so long threatened. In the which epistle among many
other words which declare his valiant faith and mighti courage in god, he
wrigh teth on this manner. O wholesome beasts yt are prepared for me.

Wha^ shall they come? when shall they be sent out? when shall they eat my
flesh? I would wish with al my heart, yt they might be more gredy, and I will
bid the^ unto ye deuouri^g of me, and pray the^, lest par adventure, as they
have done in many, they fear to touch my body. Yea if they shall make any de
lay, I my self will brast into the^, and offer my self to the^. Give me
liberty I beseech you, for I know what is expedient for me. Now that I begin
to be the disciple of Christ, let fyres, galowes, wild Not^
beasts, breakyng of my bones, rackynge of my members, pain thorowout all my
body, and all the punyshmentes of the world, that can be invented by the craft
and subtilty of the devil be ministered unto me. I will refuse none of them
all, so that I may deserve to obtain Jesus Christ.


Theo. O blessed and glorious martyr. O valiant and noble souldi our of our
most mighty capitain Christ Jesus. O what a myrrour glass and spectacle is here
offered unto us, wherein we may se and learn not only high patience, but
also an exceadynge desire to suffer al kind of torments for the glory of
Christ.


Phile. Not only the blessed martyr Ignatius showed him self wylling and
joyful to suffer all kind of adversity, yea very death for the confession
of Christ, and of his blessed truth, but other holy men innumerable, as we
read in histories. When Decius the Emperor that most cruel tyraunte had
spoiled the blessed martyr Hypolitus of his Hypolitus.
vestures, because he would not do sacrifice to false Gods, the man of God
spoke boldly unto him, saying, thou haste not spoiled me of my garments, but
thou haste rather begun to clothe me. And when the aforsayde tyrant commanded
that he should be clo thed again with his own accustomed kind of apparaile, and
said unto him. Use thine old service which thou have ever had in our sight,
and be our friend: the blessed martyr with a stout courage answered, my seruyse
is this, faithfully to serve Christ, and by seruyng him, spedly to come unto a
fruitful victory. Shortly after the tirant seeing his steadfast and vnshake^
co^sta^cy commanded him to be depryued of all his goods and to be headed with
diverse other about ye nu^bre of nintene, which al with joyful courage
suffered death for Christ's sake. The blessed martyr Tiburtius was apprehended
Tiburtius
of ye cruel judge Fabia^, and commanded either to offer sacrifice to ye
Idols, or else to go with naked fete upon the hot burning coals. He boldly went
on the^ barefoted having no harm, and said to ye tyrante. Lay away thine
unfaithfulness, and learn that he is the God alone, who^ we confess to have
power, over all creatures.

For through the might of my Lord Jesus Christ, me think that going upon
burning coals I walk as it were upon red roses without fealynge of any pain or
hurt of my fete. For the creature obeys the commandment of the creatoure.
When the tyrant saw that the fire did him no harm, he commanded that he
should be slain with the swerd.

The blessed martyr went unto his death with a toyfull heart, praysynge God,
that he would vouchsafe to give him strength for to confess his most
blessed name and holy word before worldly tyrants. When Galerius the
Proconsull commanded that. S. Ciprian.
Cipria^ should be headed, because he was an enemy to the Gods of the
Romans, and would serve none but Christ alone the son of almighty God, ye
blessed martyr with a lusty courage and me ry heart braste out into these
words, saying. I thank almighty God, which voucheth safe to losen me from
the ba^des of this Mauricius and his fellows
body. And so died. When Maximianus that most cruel Empe roure commanded his
soldiers to worship false Gods and to slay so many as professed Christ
and his blessed word, Mauricius with his fellows answered that either in
worshypping false Gods, or in sleaynge the true Christians, they by no means
would obey the Emperor, We are, said they, thy souldidur^, O Emperor, but
yet we freely confess, that we are the servants of God, which gave us this
our life. We can not follow the Emperor so, that we should deny God our
maker, yea and thy ma ker also, whether thou will or will not. We are
christian men, therefore may we not persecute such as profess Christ. We
are ready rather to dye, then to kill such.

And we are more desierousse to dye innocents, then to live wicked and
sinful. Know thou that the minds of this army by no means can be overcome.

These wordly weapons we cast away. Our breaste is enarmed with the fayeth
of Christ, which is our shylde bucler, and defense against the fyrye darts
of the devil, and of al his soldiers.

Therefore slay thou, kill thou, mur there thou, minister what kind of pain thou
will, we with a bold courage offer our selves to suffer for the glory of God.
And shortly after ye holy man of God, with a great nu^bre of blessed martyrs
mo were slain with the swerd. Eus. These be notable exe^ples and worthy to be
practiced of al faithful christians, if God at any time calls the^ unto this
conflicte with the worldely tyrau^tes and fained holy hypocrites for the
confession of his blessed truth.


Philem I could rehearse many mo godly hystories to declare with what a ready
will with how rejoicing an heart, the blessed martyrs of Christ suffered all
manner of bitter torments for the Lords sake, but these at this present shall
suffice.

For hereof may ye learn to practice this word of the Apostle Always. I mean
to rejoice in the Lord our God not only in prosperity, but also in
adversity, be it in sycknes, loss of goods, poverty, persecution, or any
other cross, yt god our father lays upon us. For this the duty of a true
christen man to co^ceyue that same Note
fayeth, hope and joy, in God, when he is assailed in tribulation, that he had
before, when all things were most prosperouse to him. So means the Apostle
when he says. Rejoice in the Lord always. And because he would have us
earnestlye to rejoice in the Lord at al times, be it in prosperity or
adversity, he doubleth this word, Rejoice, saying. Rejoice in the Lord always
yea once again, I say rejoice. Piththye and full of efficacye is this
sentence of the Apostle, and comprehends in it many Godly mysteries, as ye
have hitherto partly heard. S. Paul desiereth nothing more, then that we
should rejoice in the Lord. His joy is altogyther in God, therefore would he,
that yours should be so likewise. And unto this does that princelyke prophet
ex Psalm. x^
hort you also, saying. Be ye glad and rejoice in the Lord, O ye rightuous, and
al ye that are true her ted, be merry in the Lord. Again Let so mani as trust
in ye, O lord, be meri, yea, they shall be joyful for Psalm. vi.
ever, and thou shall dwell among them. And all that love thy name, shall rejoice
in the. Therefore if we love the name of God, if we trust to be saved by his
mercy if we look for good things at ye hand of our heavenly father through
Jesus Christ, let us sequester our joy from all worldelye things, which are
but vanity as ye have heard before, and repose it only in the Lord our God


Chr. That Lord which is the ii. Corh^n. i.
father of mercies, and the God of all consolation might grant unto us his
most holy spirit to work in us such a swetenes and delectation in spiritual
things, that what so ever is of the world may wax vile, unpleasant and
bitter unto us, and that we by this means may unfeignedly and even from the
very bottom of the heart rejoice in the Lord our god alone, alone.


Theo. The Lord might bring this thing to pass in us.


Philemon. Well neighbors.

Now according to my promise have I given you this Jewel of Joy, not so
conningelye and worckemanlyke (I confess) handeled, as some other of better
knowledge and more ripe judgment in ye mysteries of God could have done it,
notwythstandynge (...) bu^ (...)
truly and fayethfully wroughte according to the pure vain of the holy
scriptures.

But what so ever this your gift is I pray you take it to good worth and
accept my loving heart toward you.

Though possibilitte fails, yet good will shall never want in me, but what
so ever the Lord shall give, at all times I will bestow it upon you and upon
his holy congregation, and by no means suffer the talente given unto me of my
Lord God, to lie Idle by me, but for my power I will so employe (...), that it
may turn to the glory of God and to the profit of his blessed church.

For the hystorye of the unprofitable servant, which hid up the money of
his Lord in the Matthew. xxv.
ground and therefore was condemned cast into utter darckenes, where weeping
and gnashyng of teth shall be, ought to make al me^ afraid that have received
any gift at al of God, and to provoke them not to be sluggyshe and idle, but
to use their talentes according to the commau^demente of God, which says.
Occupye your selves till I come.


Euse. Blessed is that man, which so occupies Luk^. ix.
his talent, that God therewith is glorified, and his neyghbouredifted. Sure
may he be at that great and dreadful day of judge mente to hear of his Lord
God this most sweet and joyful sentence. O mine own good seruau^te Math. xxvi.
and fayethfull. Thou haste been faithful in little. I will make the ruler over
much. Enter in, into thy Lords joy.


Philem. Neighbors I will disease you no longer, but as I have given you a
spiritual Jewel, joyful and comfortable for the soul, so will I in like
manner at this my coming home and return into mi native contrye bestow
somewhat upon you, that shall not be unprofitable for ye body. For I wysh good
boeth to your soul and body. And would God it lay in my power to gratify
you in both alyke.

But that which, shall want in worldely things, shall, if I live be
recompensed in spiritual thin ges. But as I may at the last make an end,
remember brethren remember, what ye have heard of me at this present. Remember
that all things in this world, be subject unto vanity, yea they them selves
are mere vanity, as Ecclesiast. (...).
the preacher says. Al is but vanity, yea altogether is plain vanity. What
marvel, when man him self, for whose sake al worldelye things were created, is
very vanity. Remember that the end ofal worldly joy, of al carnal
pleasure, of all temporal felicity, is bitter sorrow and grievous pain
Remember that we are borne to dye, prepare therefore for your last end.
Remember that the goods of this world are transitory, ^ttyng away, and
seldom tarry long with their old possessour and owner, gather not there fore
treasure together on earth, Matthew. vi.
where rusie and mothes corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal, but
gather ye treasure together in heaven, where neither rust, nor mothes corrupt,
and where theaues neither break up nor steal. Make you friends of the Luke.
xv^.
wicked Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may receive you into
everlasting dwellinge places. Remember that what soever ye sow, that shall ye
reap, whither it be of the flesh, corruption Galat. vi.
or of the spirit, eternal life: If ye on this wise judge both of the world,
and of worldly things, doubt ye not, but that yours hertes shall burn with
such an earneste and unfeigned love toward God, that ye shall rejoice in him
alone, alone, yea and that always, that is boeth in prosperity and adversity,
and at all times have a quiet and a merry conscience which of al treasures is
the most precious in this world. And yt ye may do this the more fortunately,
consider your vocation, remember your calling. Ye are called christians,
express Christ your lord and master in all your co^uersatio^ and living. He
that says he dwells in Christ, ought to walk eue^ as Christ walked. Ye
(...). John. ii.
are called gospellers, love, and lyu^ ye gospel. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may se your good worckes and glorifye Matthew. vi.
your father, which is in heaven. The Papists rail on you, blaspheme you,
call you heritikes, seditious persons. etc. Order so your life, that the
adversaries seeing your Godly conversation, may either be won to confess
the same truth with you, or else be ashamed to speak any evil of you For this is
the will of God, that i. Peter. ii.
with well doing ye should stop the mouths of folysh and ignorant men, as
fre, but not making liberty to be a cloak of noughtynes, but even as the
servants of God. Ye confess your selves to be justified before God by
faieth alone, prouid that this your fayeth be not idle, sluggishe, nor dead,
as. S. James says, but ^iuish, and mighty in operation, and full of all good
and Chrian works. For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision any thing
Galathi. v.
worth, neither yet uncircumcision but faith, which works by cha ritie, and
the end of the co^maun dement is charity, that comes of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, i. Timo. i.
and of fayeth unfeigned. Ye believe to be saved by the alone sacrifice of
Christ's most blissed Hebru. ix. x.
body, commit nothing unworthy the gentleness of so kind and loving Tit. i.
savior. Ye confess to know god, deny him not in your deeds, but be always
studious of good Romans xiii.
worckes. Ye profess ye doctrine, which requires of you and of al (...). Pet.
ii.
subjects fayethfull and humble obeisaunce to ye King his Majesty, answer to
your profession, obey unfeignedly, not only for fear of ^nisheme^t, but for
co^sience sake (...) For there is no power but of (...) ^e powers yt be, are
(...) ^d. Therefore whosoever resists the power, resists ye ordinance of
God. And they yt resist, shall get to the^ selves da^nacion. Fear god and the
king, says Solomon. Fear god and hououre Pro. xiiii
the King, says blissed Peter. Therefore fear, obey, love, and honor i.
Pet. (...).
our most excellent Prince. Neither thick, breath, speak or do anything, yt
may be prejudicial to the godly doi^ges of ye king his highness, but be you
always led with a reuerente fear toward his grace. Neither co^sente to any
tumult co^motio^, insurrectio^, sedicion, conspiracy etc, neither co^seale any
thig, whereby any dishonor to the Kings Majesty, any displeasure to his most
honorab^ counsel, any unquietness to ye p^ que weal may be wrough^ (...)
evermore set before yo^ (...) this sentence of the (...) wyshe the king
(...) thought, and speak no hurt of the Eccle. x.
noble man in thy priui chamber. For a bird of the air shall betraie thy
voice, and with her feathers shall she bewraye thy words. How grievously they
have al ways be punished yt were sedicious and walked without any godly fear
toward the ciuille Maigistrates, the histories of Dathan Numer. vi.
and Abiron, of zambry and Baa sa of Bagatha^ and Thares, show iii. Reg. ^i.
manifestly. Neither have we wa^ ted experience of this thing in these our
days. And as unto the King his Majesty, so likewise He^. ii.
submit your selves unto the other Rulers yt are sent of him, for the
punishemente of evil doers, but for the praise of the^ yt do well. Ye have a
pleasure to hear the preachers of gods word, reverence i. ^eter. ii.
the^ as the ministers of god giving the^ no les honor, than the child
gives the father, remembering Malach. ii.
yt they be the Angels of God, the messengers of Christ the light of the
world, ye salt of the earth, ye dispensatours of the i. Cor. i.
mysteries of God, the feders of Math. v.
Christen men's soulles, the comfortours of the weak, the Phisicians i. Cor.
iiii.
of the sick, the vpholders of the whole, the exhorters unto the virtue, the
fraiers away from vice which watch continually John. xxi.
for the health of our soulles. Be not unthankful to the preachers, but to
such as minister spiritual Hebru. xiii.
things to you disdain not to give corporal things, yt the prea chers may ye
more freli give their mind to ye studies of ye holy scriptures. If we sow unto
you spiritual i. Cor. ix.
things, says s* Paul, is it a great thing, if we reap your carnal
things? The Lord has ordained, yt they which preach the gospel, should
live of the gospel. Again he says, let him yt is taught with the word, minister
unto ^ala. vi.
him yt teaches him in all good things. Be not deceived, god is not mocked.
Moreover ye yt are Ephe. (...)
married, love your wives, even as christ loved the co^gregacio^. Nou rishe, and
cherish the^ as your own bodies, reme^brynge that they be your own flesh and
your own bones, and se yt by no means ye be bitter unto the^, but give honor
un to the^ as to the weaker vessels, and Colo. iii.
as to the^ yt are fellow heirs also of the grace of life. Teach your wives to
be obedient unto you as i. Peter. iii.
unto ye lord, to love you as their own selves, to be of honest beha uoure,
chaste, housewifely, good, no evil spekers, but sober and faith Tit. ii.
full in all things. Learn them to keep silence with al subjection and to a raie
the^ selves in manerly apparel i. Timo. iii.
with shamefastnes and honest behauoure, not with broided hear, other gold, or
pearls or costlye a^aie, but with such as becomes woe (...). Peter iii
men, yt profess ye worshipping of God through good works yt the hid man of
the heart may be incorrupt with a meke and quiet spirit, which spirit is before
god a thing much set by. For after this manner in the old time did ye holy we
men, which trusted in God, try the^ selves, and were obedient to their
husbands, even as Sara obeyed Genesis xvi^i.
Abraham, and called him lord. Bring up your children with the nourtoure Eph^. vi.
and informacion of the lord, and teach the^ to obeie and honor you. Do yt
unto your servants, which is Colo. iii.
just and equal, reme^bringe yt ye also have a master in heaven. Exhort your
servants to be obediente unto you in all godly things, not with eye service
as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart, fearing god. Love al men as your
selves In few, whatsoever things are Phi. iiii.
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, what so ever
things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love whatsoever thiges are of
ho nest report, if their be any virtuous thing, if there be any laudable Colo.
iii.
thing, those same have ye in mid* And al things, whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, do in the name of the lord Jesus, geuinge thanks to God ye father by him.
So shall ye in this world live with a merry co^ science, and after this present
life joy and rejoice in eternal glory with god ye father, to who^ with his son
christ Ie su our most precious Jewel, and the holy ghost ye sweet co^fortoure be
al honor and praise for evermore. The, Amen.


Chri. So be it.


phile. Now dear neighbors come with

(...)

