An Inuectyue agenst the most wicked and detestable vice of swearing, newly
co^piled by Theodore Basille.

Eccl. 23. A man yt uses much swearing, shall be filled with wyckednes, and ye
plage, yt is to say, ye vengeance of god shall not go away from his house. The
Inuectyue speakethe.
LAmentably do I now proceed
Of mine Author sent at this season
In a sad and lamentable wede
To make my complaynte and lamentacion.
Lament I must both day and night
To behold the great^ abhominacion
Which through swearyng in all men's sight
Is now used without lamentacion.
Lament all christen hearts do I am ^u^e
To hear God and his ^reatur^s e^he one
So wyck^dly blasphemed without ^ure
And yet noman makes lamentacion.
Lament o^ye Swearers, lament, lament
And look ye cease from this great abusion,
For if to do thus ye be not now bent
In hell shall ye make full sore lamentacion.
Lament your sins, and take me to you
For to leave your great abhominacion
I will teach you, yea and all thing true
That ye may be fre from lamentacion.
Lament if ye will not in hell fire
But enjoy the divine fruicion,
Look that ye accomplish my desire
So shall ye be fre from lamentacion.
To the right worshypfull Master Richard Skotte Theodore Basille wysheth long
life continual health, and prosperous felicity.
^
GOD the father says by his Prophet, Esa. lviii.
Cry cease not Lift up thy voice as a trompe, and show to the people their
wickedness, and to y^ house of Jacob theyesynnes. That this is chefelye spoken
to them that are Prechers and Ministers of Gods word, There is no man that is
but meanly learned, ignorant thereof. For it is their duty to cry and not to
cease. It is their duty to exalte and lift up their voice as a tro^pe. It is
their duty to show unto the people their wyckednesses and sins. It is their
duty to preach the Gospel to every creature. It is their duty to preach
Repentance and remission of sins in the name of Christ unto al nations. ^at.
xxviii
It is their duty to give meat to the Lords family and household in due
time. It is there duty to feed Christen people with doctrine and knowledge. ^uke.
xxiiii.
It is their duty to conforte the weak, ^at. xxiiii.
to bynd up that is broken, ^uke. xii.
to bring again that is cast away, Timo. v
to seake up that is lost, ^zec. xxxiiii
and to cheryshe all the slocke of Christ. It is there duty to cast away ungodly
and old wives fables, Tim. iiii.
and to exercise themselves unto godlynes It is their duty to be an example of
the faithful in word, in conversation, in love, Tim. v
in spirit, in faith, in purite. It is there duty to rebuke the^ that sin
before all men, that other may have ^eare. It is their duty to show them
selves commendable to God work men y^ need not to ^. Tim. ii.
be ashamed, justly dyuyding y^ word of truth. It is there duty not to strive,
but to be gentle and peaseable toward all men, ready to teach, sufferyng the
evil with mekenes, enformynge them that resist, if God at any time give them
repentance to know the truth. ii. Tim. iii
It is their duty to preach the word, to be fervent both in time and out of
time, to reprove, to rebuke to exhort with all foftnes and doctrine. Titus. i.
It is their duty to watch i^ al things, not to shrinck in affliccions, to do
the work of an Euangeliste, to make their ministracion commendable even unto
ye uttermost. It is their duty to be fautles, as the stewardes of God, not
high minded, not angrye, not droneken, not ^yghtyng, not given to fylthy
lucre, but mayntenyng Hospitalite* studious of good things, so^er ryghteous,
godly, temperate, and holdyng fast that faithful word, which is according to
doctrine, that they may be able to exhort by wholesome doctrine, 1. Pet. v.
and to overcome them that speak against it. It is their duty to feed y^
^locke of Christ, so much as lygheth in their power. To be short it is there duty
to show themselves dispe^satours of the divine mysteries on such manner, that
they may seem and appear unto all men to have taken there power to edifye and
not to destroy. For they are the light of the world to show men how they
ought to walk. They are the salt of y^ earth to sauoure such as be unsavory.

But alas, the light of the world I mean Prestes, is now so do dymme, y^ it
shewethe almost no ^yght at al. Men y^ walk in darkness can not perceive how
to walk, the Prestes are so wrapped about with the works of darkness. The
salt of y^ earth I mean the Prestes, is so unsavory that it can not suck out
the corrupt humores. The people that are diseased can not be healed, y^
preastes themselves are so f^ble, weak, infirm, sick and wounded on every
part.

Morouer y^ Prestes, Esaias. lvi.
which should be ouersears of y^ people, are al blind as the Prophet says, they
are all with out knowledge, they are dumme dogs, not able once to bark, they
have a pleasure to look upon vain things, they give them selves to
sluggyshenes, they lyghe snortynge all day, yea they are vnshamefaced dogs,
that have never enough. The sheppardes themselves are without all knowledge. All
follow their own ways, every one of the^ ^s given into covetousness, Esa.
lviii.
even from the highest to the lowest. God says, Cry, cease not. But they
turn ca^te in ye pan and say, Cease, cry not. God says, Lift up thy
voice as a tro^pe. But they say, whyst, not a word unless we be suspecte to be
fellows of the new lerning. God says, show unto the people their
wyckednesses, and rebuke their synneful living. Na by saint Mary say they, al
thing save that. It is good sleapyng in an who^e skin. He is not wise yt will
cast himself into trouble, when he may live in rest. O Lord have marcy upon
us. By this means is it come to pass, that virtue is so little regarded, and
vice so universally used. Woe be to those prestes, which neglecte their
office, flatter the people and suffer them to live in all wyckednes. For they
are the Authors of all evil. They are the occasion that so many souls perysh.
They cause y^ so much myschyfe and abhominacion reygneth now a days. Their
negligence, there silence, their dissolute living cause, y^ Gods word is so
evil regarded among many, and y^ so great wyckednes suppresseth y^ honor of
the christen religion. Is it any marvel? We se that y^ body wythereth away,
perysheth and decays, if it wants corporal sustenaunce. Is it tha^ to be
thought y^ the soul ca^ be in salve estate, if it wa^teth her meat, I mean y^
word of God? Matthew. iiii.
Christ says, Man shall not live with bread alone, but with every word,
Deuteronomy. viii.
that comes forth from the mouth of God. Solomon also says. P^o. xxix.
When y^ preaching of Gods word fails, than perysh the people and come to
naught. We find this true every day more and more. For the longer we live, the
more wyckednes do we se reygne.

It pytyeth a Christen man's heart to behold y^ face of this world.

What ungodliness, supersticion, Hypocrisye, dissimulacion, swearynge, pride,
envy, dronkenshyp, glotony, fornicacion, adulterye, whoredom, covetousness,
and an whole sea of euelles has ouerflowed the world? And all this is come to
pass through the sleapye negligence of Curates, nether can there as yet be
perceuedony amendment. The Prestes go forth still to neglecte y^ office of
preaching Gods word, and y^ people remain still in their old blyndenes, not
carynge much though they never hear one word of the holy Scripture preached
unto them in all their life, so little pleasure have the poor selye souls in
it, because they know not what a precious tresure y^ most holy word of God
is. What than remains, but that one of us mo^yshe, Colos. iii,
teach and exhort another? as S. Paul byddeth, teach and monyshe ye one
another For if one lay man were no more mercyefull to a another, than y^
Preastes are for the most part, surely the greatest part of the world should,
phil^. ii.
I thyncke, run hedlonge unto the deuel for want of knowledge. Wherefore I
exhort al me^ of what degree and ^orte soever they be charitably to monyshe one
a another when they se any man offend, and rebuke him by the Scriptures of God,
y^ we may shine in the mids of a froward and crooked nation as great lyghtes
in the world, pure, fauteles, Romans vi*
and such as noman can complain of, holding fast the word of life. Let us
suffer no sin to reygne in this our mortal body, but mortifye all things y^
strive agenst the spirit. Let us so watch and give diligence to our selfs, y^
nether Satan nor the world, nor yet the flesh, may have any interest in us.
Math. v.
Let us hate deteste and abhor sin, Jacob. v.
as y^ most grievous pestilence and pestiferous poison, that can chaunse unto
us. But above al things, as Christ and James monyshe^he us, let us not
swear at all, nether by heaven nor by earth, nor yet by any thing that is
contained in them. If one of us at onye time shall chaunse to hear a another
swear and pollute y^ name of our Lord God by vain, idle and vnlaful oaths,
let us charitably monishe the offe^der, exhort him to cease from his swerynge,
and move him unto y^ prayle of God and of his most holy and blessed name. For
surely if there were no mo sins committedde in England, but only y^
blasphemynge of God and of his creatures by vain swearyng, it were enough to
bring final destruction unto this Realm from y^ which I beseech God long to
preserve it, and give the Inhabitau^tes thereof grace to correct and amend
their synful manners

And to the intent that men may know how great offense it is before God vaynly
to swear. I have made this Inuectyue against swerynge which here follows,
wherein as in a clear myrrour they shall unfeignedly perceue and se, what great
dampnacion hanggeth over the heads of all swearers, and that it is not
possible for them to escape y^ most grievous vengeauns of God, except with al
haste they repent, for sake, their detestable manner of swearyng and earnestly
fall unto the hearty praises of God. This mine Inuectyue I dedica^e to your good
Master ship, to who^ I confess my self more ende^ted and bound, than my
poor beggary shall ever may be able to recompense your most kind and free
ge^tylnes, desiring you for your accustomed humanite to accept this my little
gift with y^ mind wherwyth I have offered it to you and to take it as a testimomy
of my faythefull and seruiseable heart toward you. I was the gladder to
dedicate this my little treatise to you, because I have in times paste
perceived, and still daily do, how greatly ye desire that al men should ly^e
according to their profession at Baptime, that through their good works they
may garnysh the doctrine of our Lord and Sauyoure Jesus Christ. Nether is it
unknown unto me what a fervent and godly affeccion you bear toward the holy
scripture, and how desirous ye are that the word of Christ should dwell in
Christen men ritchely with all wisdom as saint Paul says. Joan. x*
Chele be the singular and great gifts of God, which he has wrought in you
by his holy spirit, and are manifest ^^g^es and tokens yt ye are the child of
salvation* e^heri toure of eternal glory, and one of Christ's flock seeing ye
are ^o earnestly bent both to hear and practyse the word of god in your daily
manners. Titus. i^.
For Christ says, Lo^o. iii.
He that is of God, hearethe y^ words of God. Again, My sheep hear my voice.

God might vouchsafe to increase these his gifts in you daily more and Joan.
viii.
more unto y^ glory of his most blyssed name and the salvation of your soul,
in whom I desire to your^ right worshypful Mastership and to the good Gentle
womanne your wife all good, luckye and prosperous things.

AMEN.
Yours at commandment and will Theodore Basille.



Leuit. 24. Who soever curses his God, shall bear his sin. And he that
blasphemethe the name of the Lord, he shall dye for it. All the multitude
shall stone him to death. Whyther he be Cytezyn or Stranger, if he blaspheme
the name of the Lord, let him dye the death.
August. in Math. THey sin no les. which blaspheme Christ reyguyng in
heaven, than they which crucified him walkyng in earth.
The Inuectyue.
WHense shall I take my beginning, while I lament the corrupt ma^ners of this
most wretched world, more aptely and fytter for the purpose, than of ye
Prophet Jeremy, and with weeping tears and sorrowful heart cry out with him,
Hiere. lx
saying. Oh who shall give my head water enough, and a well of tears for mine
eyes, that I may weep night and day for the slaughter of my people?

The Prophet does not here bewail them, that have their bodies slain with
swearde, or with any other kind of violence, but he lamenteth the to much
wretched and damnable state of such as are slain in their souls with the
multitude of sins (for what so ever the sweard is unto the body, even the
very same is sin unto the soul (as it manifestly appears by his words
that follow. For he calls them adulterers, and a company of wicked
tra^sgres^ours. They bend their tongues like bows, Ve^itasodium parit.
says he, to showte ou^e lies. As for the truth, they may nothing away with
all in the world. For they go from one wickedness unto another, and hold
nothing of god. They are so false and crafty, tha^ every one had need to keep
himself from another. No man may safely trust his own brother, for one
brother undermines another, and one neghbour begyleth another, Exulat Veritas.
yea one dissembleth with another, and they deal with no truth, They have
practiced their tongues to speak lies, and have taken great pains to do
myschefe. They have set their stool in the myddest of deceate, and for very
dissembling falshode they will not know the Lord. Their tongues are like
sharp arowes to speak deceat. With their mouth they speak peasably to their
neighbor, but privily they lay wait for him.

These words of the Prophet declare evidently, that he bewaylethe the^ that
are slain in their souls, by the reason of the manifold wyckednes, wherwyth
they are wounded inwardely and slain, that is to say, cast away from the
favor of God, and condemned unto perpetual death, except they repent, believe
and amend. So likewise I at this time vsyng the words of the Prophet do not
lament such as have tasted the death of the body and are gone, but them that
are yet alive in this world as concerning their bodies, but dead through sin
as towchynge their souls. These I lament, these I bewail, these I sorrow and
sygh for ^oth day and night. These make me to lay aside all myrthe and joy,
and to walk as one desolate* and confortelesse. These cause me to with that I
being one and a private parson might be banyshed, yea cursed from Christ, so
that so great a multitude might be saved My faith is y^ I am written in the
book of life, and nombred among the vessels of mercy, notwithstondyng would
God I might be wyped out, Romans ix
so that these ye are slain in the soul through sin, might be saved. What
one man having but a carnel of Christen salt in his breast wyssheth not so? Who
desyrethe not rather being one parsonne to be damned, than so great a number
should peryshe? What need I rehearse here the tender affeccion of Moses,
Christ and Paul, Exo. xxxii
which they bare toward the salvation of other, Phili. ii
whom all we ought to follow? Romans ix
Moses when the Isralites had offended God for worshyppyng of the golden calfe,
prayed for them on this manner: Forgive them, oh Lord, this fault, or e^les
wype me out of the book, wherein you have written me. Christ by the Prophet
says, Esa. v
Judge I pray you betwyxte me and my vyneyard. What more could have been done
for it, y^ I have not done? Romans ix
S. Paul wyshed himself to be banyshed from Christ for his brethren and
kynnesfolke as pertaynyi^g to the flesh, which are the Israelites. Certes he
is no true Christen man, that provides for his own salvation, and carethe not
for the health of other. God, says Chrysostom, Hom. vii. i^^ Genes^.
will not that a Christian man should be contemed with himself alone, but that
he also edifye other, not by teaching only, but by living and co^uersacion
also. Charity, says saint Paul, i. Cor. xiii Phil. ii.
seaketh not her own. Again, let no man seake his own, but the profyt of
other. This made all the holy fathers in times past to be so desirous of the
health of other that they wyshed even with ye loss of their own health,
Hi^. ix
the salvation of their Christen brothers. who being of their mind, and godly
enspired wishes not y^ same at this hour For even as the Prophet Hieremye did
lament the wyckednes of ye people which lived at that time, Vice greatly
increased
even so I am sure, do so many as are godly minded, bewail the ungodliness that
reygne among us at this day. For consider what sin and how manifolo reigned
at that ^yme, eue^ the very same with a great heap more reygneth yea and
triumphs in these our days, so greatly has wyckednes prevailed and gotten
the vppermoost hand.

If I should descend and go down in to the great Occean and main see, which
ouerfloweth the whole world with thaboundans of all euelles, so should I never
be able to sail and pass through. I will therefore at this time take upon me
only to search the several sea of one sin only, although it may seem to be
both great, large, broad, deep, bottomeles, and not able to be sailed through of
any man, and show how many dangers and grievous perrelles abide them, that
presume to pass in that cruel and fearse see. And this sin is the most
wicked and detestable vice of swearyng, which now reygneth so greatly in every
place, that I fear all admonicions, exhortacions, warnynges and councels are
frustrate and vain, so evil is a noughtye and perverse custom, so rare a
thing is it to heal that pocke, which is rooted by the bonne. Notwythstondyng
although some peradventure shall laugh at this my labor as a song sunge to
them that are deaf eared, yet for as much as my trust is, y^ al which be
entangled with this vice, are not of a desperate mind, nor so overwhelmed with
the waves of this unmerciful sea, but that they may be called again, and
brought unto amendment, eue^ for their sake, and to win their souls unto
glory, will I speak somewhat in this matter, and declare how greatly the
abominable sin of swearyng is to be detested, and abhorred of every true
Christen heart. Therefore I shall most intierlye desire all faythefull and
Christen people that shall read this my work to mark diligently what so ever
they shall here find, and to repose it in y^ bottom of their hearts as a
grave and weyghty matter pertaynyng unto the health of their souls. Say (...)
but (...) are (...)
If any man will not amend after this our admonicion, his damnacion f^ll upon
his own head. For I am free from his blood, and have done my duty in this
behalf.

After that God had brought his people the Israelites out of Egipte, myndyng to
institute and appoyn^e a new public weal, that should be governed after his
deuyse and appointment, he ordined certain ceremonies and ordinances, which
they should observe, and by the obseruasis thereof show and outwardly declare
their obediente heart toward him. Among all other for the right i^stitucio^ of
their life, he gave them by his servant Moses ten commandments, which by no
means they might transgress, except they would faull into his great
displeasure, wrath and indignation. To the kepers of those commandments he
promised all good, Deuteronomy. xxviii
fortunate and prosperous things, but to the tra^sgressours and such as break
them, he threatened all troublous, grievous and paynefull things, as we may se
in the books of Moses and of y^ other Prophets. Among all other he gave a
commandment, which is this. Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord God
in vain. For the Lord will not hold him gylteles / that takes his name in
vain.

As though he should say, Behold I am y^ Lord thy God, which have done the
many great and singular pleasures. I have made the like unto mine own
similitude, lykenes and image. I have preserved the from eternal damnacion,
unto the which thou had made thy self bound through the offense of thy
first father Adam, Genesis iii
which he committed in Paradise. Romans ^
I have fed the in thy mothers womb. I have norysshed the hitherto. I have
sent the thy health, and saved the from all dangers. And now at the last also
eue^ of mine own mere mercy and fre goodness. Exo xiiii
I have delivered the out of Egypt that land of servitude and extreme bondage,
eue^ out of the hands of that thy most cruel and vnmercyful enemy Pharao I
feed the with meat from heaven Ex. xvixv^^
I give the drink out of the hard and stony rock, and now I have with all
main to lead the into the land of y^ Cananites, even such a land as flows
with milk and honey, and abundethe with all good things, where (thine enemies
cast out before thy face) thou shalt live and reygne like a most wealthy
Prince and rulare of the earth. Exo. xx.
Look therefore that thou keep my commandments and ordinances, Deuteronomy. v.
Hear my voice. Fly the voices of strangers. Look thou have none other Gods
besides me. Take me ^or thine one and alone god. Fear, honor and worship me
alone. Love me with all thy heart, myade strength, power, soul. etc. Hang on
me. Seake for all good things at my hand. Believe me to be that God alone,
which am omnisufficient, ple^teous to give and nedy of nothing. Make the no
graven ^mage unto y^ lykenes of any thing in heaven, earth or else where. Do no
reverence nor honor unto them. But above all things look thou take not y^
name of me thy lord God in vain. For if you so do verily thou shall not escape
vnponyshed. I will be revenged of thy wyckednes. A comparis^^ between god and
man.
For by no means will I suffer my name to be polluted and de^iled with thine
abominable and unlawful oaths. Job. xxxvii
And that thou may take my name into thy mouch with honor, E^o. xv.
and reverence it when it is named, Deuteronomy. iiii
remember that I am a Lord, Heb. xiii.
terrible in aspe^^e, Psalm vi.
great in power, Math. vii.
righteous in judgment, Psalm. ^.
ready to take ve^geau^ce on y^ wicked, Genesis vi. viii
and such one as am aco^sumi^g ^yre, and by no means ca^ suffer iniquite* And
as for the workers thereof I hate, detest, and utterly abhore. Again thou art
a miserable, wretched and vile sinner, begotten, conceived and borne in sin,
full of al fylthynesse, wicked in all thy thoughts, words and deeds, deseruyng
at every hour by thine abominable living to be cast into hell fire, were not
I called away from taking vengeance by my great mercy, and long suffryng
what art thou than O man, which being so so vile, wretched, sinful and
stynkyng dareste presume to take my name, which am king above all kings, and
Lord above all Lords, into thy polluted mouth, seeing it is a name, that
excellethe all other, Phil. ii.
seeing also that unto it every knee that is in heaven earth, or hell bow and
give reuereuerence unto it, again seeing that the dignite, greatness, and virtue
there of can by no means be comprehended? Use not therefore my name
irreverently, but magnify, laud, praise, honor and worship it hoth day and
night. Fly unto it as unto a strong Bulwark, and holy anchore in all thine
aduersite. Seake for remedy, aid, and succoure of a^l thy diseases at the
goodness of that. If thou doste otherwise, know that I am the living God, into
whose hands it is a dreadful thing to faull. For I will visit the with most
grievous affliccions. Hebre. x
I will ponysh the with many intolerable diseases upon thy body in this
world. I will smite the, thy wise, thy children, thy cattle. All that ever
thou have, will I bring to naught. Of al men living will I make the most vile
and wretched. What so ever thou go about, shall not prosper, but come to an
euel end. So that in this world my vengeance, that is to say, corporal
plages shall faull upon the, and after this present life, Math. xiii
shalt thou with out fail be cast into utter darkness, Esa. lxvi
where weeping and gnasshynge of tethe shall be, where the fire shall never be
quenched, where thy torments shall never have end, where the worm that
gnaweth thy conscience, shall never dye.

Whose eyes send not forth large fountaynes of tears to hear these things?
Yea whose heart faynteth not for distyllyng of bloody tears, to hear so great
and so grievous threats, Joan. xiiii
yea and that from the mouth of God, ^itus i
which is y^ self truth, Psa. ^ xliiii
which can not lie, which is faithful in all his words? What man is so
infected with the abominable sin of sweryng, that does not now tremble,
shake, and quake for sear, to hear what grievous and intolerable pains abide
him: Who has an heart so indurated and hardened through the detestable and
vicious custom of swearyng, which is not now ready so cease from hensforthe
so wickedly to abuse the most holy and blyssed name of God, and to honor,
reverence and worship it ever after? Thou shalt not take the name of thy
Lord God in vain. For the Lord will not hold him ^y^te^esse that takes his
name in vain. God has given ten commandments, ye^ have none of them all
co^minacions and threats subioyned expressly unto the^, but two only, which are
the second and the third, one for Idolatrye, the other for the unjust ^
usurpation and unlawful vsyng of the name of God, Idolatry and sweri^g are
the moo^re grievous sins
whereby he manifestly declares how great the sin of Idolatrye and of
swearyng is in his sight above al other vices. Who is now so at defyaunce
with the christen religion, and so little estemeth the glory of the most
excellent name of God, that he will not cease from his wickedness of swearyng,
and learn from hensforth to glorify the most blyssed name of God, if not for
lous, yet for fear of the most grievous and intolerable plages that shall
undoubtedly faull upon him?

Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord god in vayn. God speaks these
words with a marvelous great and vehement* emphasis, because he would have
us imprynt this his precepte in our memory. And because we should harke^ the
more unto it, he adds a threte and says, For the Lord will not hold him
gyltlesse / that takes his name in vain.

This is a grievous threat, and shakes al y^ parts of a Christian man's body,
y^ is led with any fere at al toward god. Now let us lern^ what it is to take y^
name of our Lord God in vain, y^ we faul not into that sin, What it is to
take the name of God in vain
and receue a reward worthy our wyckednes. To take the name of God in vain,
is to caull God a wytnes in unjust and trifelynge matters, vaynely to swear
by his most blyssed name, to take it in our mouths without a necessary and
urgent cause, and to obscure the glory of it through wicked and ungodly oaths.
All they that thus do, shall not escape vnponysshed. O Lord God how many are
there at this time that transgress this holy precepte? How many caull God a
wytnes in unjust and trifelyng matters? How many pollute and defyle (y^ in
them is) the glory of Gods most blyssed name? How many swear continually not
only by God, and al y^ ever he made, again not only by his derely beloved son
our Lo^d and savior Jesus christ, but also, with honor and reverence I speak
it, by all y^ holy members of his most glorious body: How common an oothe now
days is Gods flesh, Gods blood, Gods heart, Gods body, Gods wounds, Gods
nails, Gods sides Gods guts, and all that ever may be rehearsed of God? O
wickedness. O abhominacion. What part of Christ's most blyssed body do these
wicked and abominable swearers leave vnre^t and untorn? They are much worsse
tha^ the Jews, which cried, Toll, toll, crucifige eum. Away, away, to the
gallows with him, Joan. xix
crucifye him, torment him, leave not one part whole of him. For they only
cried upon Pylate to have hi^ crucified, but these swearers them selves crucify
him, rent, and tear him. The Jews crucified him but once, and than their fury
ceased, In math
but these wicked caytiffes crucify him daily with their unlawful oothes,
neither does their malice and cruelnes cease at any time S. Austen says, They
syn no less, which blaspheme Christ reygnyng in heaven, than they, which
crucified him walkyng on the earth. Yea there want not, which have so great
pleasure in swearyng, y^ they think the^ selves no men, except they face
crake and brag out their matters with large and shameless oothes.

They judge it a point of elogancye, ciuilite and good nourtoure to enterlase
their talk with abu^da^s of oothes. They recount him an ass a dastarde, and
an hobbe of the country, that can not swear valeauntly, so greatly has vice
prevailed, so greatly has wickedness rooted herself in the hearts of men, so
little authorite bearethe virtue and godliness now a days in the world. Me^
of occupacion
The man of occupacon fears no thing at al to swear by God and to call him a
witness in a vain and triflyng matter, when he byeth or sells any thing, so
that he may get but a penny by this means. O Lord what does it profyt a man
to win all y^ whole world, and to loose his soul? How customably is this
heard daily among them that be buyers and sellers. O ^^tre^e abhominacio^.
By Gods soul man take it unto the, and say not, but that thou haste a friendly
penny worth. For by the blyssed body of god thou have it as good chepe as ever I
bought it? And yet are all together stark lies. But let it be granted, that
their ooth were true, is it therefore convenient, y^ in worldly matters and for
every light trifle, what (...) and faith ought to reygne among christen men.
we should thus abuse the name of god, whom we ought never to have in our
mouths without great reverence, and for vrge^t and weyghty causes? There ought
to be so great sincerite, faythfulnes, truth and singlenes among Christen
men, that yea yea, nay, nay, should be sufficient. But alas there is so much
craft, deceate, suttelty, falshode, and doublenes reygnyng in the world at
this time, that none dare trust another, no though they promise never so
fair, except they swear, Exula^ fides
no nor than nether, He that fears notto blaspheme y^ name of god will not let
to deseaue his neighbor
except they have them bound in black and whyght, as they say, O Lord unto
what point are we come, when all truth and credence is so far banysshed from
the bounds of Christianite, y^ there is more faith and trust given to an
obligacio^ or such other trifle, than to y^ word and promise of a Christen
man? It is even as the Prophet says, Oze. iiii
there is no truth upon the earth, Psalm. ^x.
but swearyng, cursyng, and lye^g. Romans iii
Every man is a lyare. Luke. xviii
Every man that lyuethe is nothing but vanite, nether is there any trust in him.
Do ye think, says Christ, that the son of man shall find any faith on
the earth, wha^ he shall come? Verily I think but a little, which is an
evident toke^ that the day of the great and terrible judgment is not far
of. ^


More^uer how is God rent and torn by blasphemous oaths not only among men in
bargaynynge, Dysers and Card^rs.
byeng and sellyng, choppyng and cha^^gyng. etc. but also in playeng and yole
matters? How will the diser swear rather than he will loose one cast? How
will the carder tear God on pieces, rather than he will loose the profyt of one
card? How will they that stand by and behold, forswear them selves for the
love yt they bear to one of the parties?

Again how depely do men of law swear unto their Clientes, Men of law.
y^ they have labored their matters earnestly to the Judges, when many times
they have not spoken one word, but still prolonge the matter that their
advantage may be the greater?

How does the pressed swear, that if it had not ben for the love of such and
such an honest man, and for y^ good Prestes and benefyced men
report that he has heard before of the Parysh, he would never have be^
person of (...)? And yet it is not unknown, that the most part of the love
their paryshners so derely, that after they be once ^ure of their benefyce,
they care not although they never se none of the^ after, so that they may have
the aua^untage of the benefice, except peradventure of their devotion it be at
harvest, when the tithe barnes are full, or else at Easter to search how good
the Easter book will be that year. This once done, hense go they again, and
leave asyr John Lack latin in their stead which teachethe not much more, than
the hill mouethe. The wolffe may come, and easily rent, Joan. x.
tear and devour the poor sheep. For the shepparde has gotten the milk and
wolle, and he is gone. He has lycked the fat from his paryshners berdes,
and has taken his journey. Take thought for the flock who lysteth. O Pastor
and Idolum derelinquens gregem. Za^h. xl
O shepeparde and Idolle, that thus forsakes his flock. But alas what
consciences have these men, which take so much and do so little? If they
will reap carnal things, so must they sow spiritual things, says ye
scripture. The labouryng plow man and not the idle lubber must receive of the
fruits, i. Cor xix.
says S. ii. Tim. ii
Paul. i. Tim. v
They that rule well are worthy double honor chefely they that labor in word
and doctrine. i. Cor. ix
For the Lord has ordined that they, which preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel. Woe be to me, says S. Paul, if I preach not y^ Gospel. Shall these
good men tha^, and God will, escape free, seeing they do naught, and yet
receive so great fruits, commodities and rewards? Hom. vii. Super illud.
Dignu^ est operarius. etc.
what do we, O ye sheppardes, says S. Gregory? How may we be bold to receive
wages, and yet be no work men? We take the profytes of holy church for our
daily stipende, and yet do we labor no thing at all in prechyng for the
everlasting Church. Let us consider and weyghe, what great damnacion it is to
take here the reward of labor, and to do no thing for it. Behold we live of
y^ oblacio^ of y^ faithful, but what do we labor for y^ souls of the
faithful? we take for our stipend what so ever the faithful have offered to
redeem their sins, and yet do we not once show any diligence against those
sins either by the study of prayer or preaching. Let beneficed men, which
give so little attendaunce upon Christ's flock, mark well thafor said words
of the holy Doctore, and consider with them selves whyther they may justly
receive so much and do so little for it, Did. xviii cap. opor^et.
or not. Again the same Doctore says the prestes, to whom the Lords people
are committed, must watch with great diligence upon the Lords sheep, that they
be not rent and torn with the bytynges of the wolf, that is to say, with the
mocions of the dyuell. God give them grace once to be prestes and sheep herdes,
not only in name and apparel, but also in work and truth.

Among seruyng me^ also above all other, what wicked and detestable oothes are
there heard? Serving men
If there be any of that sort, which fear God and love his word, and
therefore abstain from vayn oothes, how does his company lout him. Look what
an ass is among a sort of apes, eue^ the very same is he among his fellows.
They thyncke him not worthy to wear a sweard and buckelare, that cannot face
out the matter with plentye of oothes. He y^ can swearebest, and soonest give
a blow, he is counted an hardy fellow, and fyt to do a Ge^tyll man se^uyse,
when to say the truethe, of all men he is most wretch and coward, and most
of all unapt to do such a Gentle man seruyse as ^oueth God and his holy
laws. Yea such pestilent swearers and fylthy blasphemers of God and his
creatures ought all honest and virtuous Gentle men to put out of their
houses, unless they bring the vengeance of God upon their whole family, wife,
children, servants. etc If they know that onye man have been in that place,
where the plage reygneth, and would come into their houses, they spear the
gates agenst him, they shut him ou^, by no means will they suffer him to
enter. And why? Verily because they will not have y^ plage brought in among
them, unless they should be infected and so dye. Alas for pure pite, to dye we
are all borne, and dye we must at one time or other, whyther it be by the plage
or otherwise, and therefore it may seem that the death of the body ought not so
greatly to be feared why than rather do they not put out of their houses
these pestiferous caytisses, which through their abominable swearyng infecte
all their family, not only their bodies, but their souls also, and provoke
God to pour out his most fearse and grievous plages upon them? Is not this the
saying of the wise man, the man that uses much swearyng shall be filled with
iniquite, Eccl. xxiii
and the plage, y^ is to say, the vengeance of GOD shall not go away from
his house? Awake therefore, O ye gentle men, awake, and ye men of nobilite
awake, An admoni^ion for Gentle me^.
suffer no swearers in your houses, eschew them more then a venomous serpent,
feed a dragon sooner in your house, than any such one as has pleasure in
swearyng. For as towchyng the one, it only hurts the body, the other
destroys the bodies and souls of so many as be under you, and dayelye
provoke the vengeance of God against you and all that ever ye have in town,
Eccle. xiii.
field or else where. He that touches pytche, says Jesus Syrache, shall be
defiled of it. And he that keeps company with them y^ are proud, shall learn
pride. Likewise they that accompany such as be swearers and blasphemers of
Gods most holy name, must needs prove like unto them, and therefore run into
like damnacion. Away therefore with such out of your houses, except they will
amend. Maintain none that shall bring y^ plage of God upon your house. Suffer
not the tender breasts of your children to be poysonned in their young age
with the pestilent and damnable co^municacion of these abominable swearers.
But above all things look that ye your selves have the name of God in so
great reverence and honor, that by no means ye abuse it at any time by your
vayn^ oothes unto the euel example of your^ family.

Again, when the common sort o^ people in a parysh are gathered together at any
time to make merry, Paryssh (...)
a^ the custom in many places is to do chefely on the Sondayes, and other h^ly
days at after noone, when the^ ought rather to be occupied in seruent
prayers, or else in the readyng or hearing of the holy Scriptures what shameful
and wicked oothes do they swear? Wha^ they are once set upon the alebenche,
and well whytled in their brains through the many cups that have been filled
in, how faull they then to swearynge? What part of Christ's most blyssed
body is least untorn? He is taken for ioylyest fellow, that can best swear. I
let pass their other fylthy talk, droncke^shyppe, and excess. O wyckednes.
Are these Christen me^? Not much before, they were in the Temple, and full
solemnly went up and down patteryng with a pair of ^eades in their hands,
and when y^ priest read the Gospel, although they understood not one word,
yet of custom they stood up like men, and when the pressed named Jesus in the
Gospel, and they saw him for y^ reverence of it, make curtesy, they also full
manerly bowed their knees, as devout parsonnes, pretending by that means that
they have the name of Jesus among them in great honor, yet straight ways go
they unto the alehouse, and by their wicked oothes, do they there the gretest
dishonor to the name of Jesus that can be done in the world. These people
may well be resembled to those Jews, which in despyte strypped Christ, and
put on him a purple robe, and platted a crown of thorns and put it upon his
head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees before hi^ and
mocked him, saye^g, Aue rex Iudeorum, hayle king of the Jews. God amend
these crooked customs.

Furthermore this damnable use of swearyng has so greatly prevailed Children.
among them that profess Christ that it is also exepte into the breasts of
young children. It is not a rare thing, now a days to hear boys and mothers
tear the most blyssed body of Christ with their blasphemo* oothes, even from
the top unto y^ too. What meruel is it tha^, though they be abominable
swearers, wha^ they come to age? But whe^se learn they this? Verily of their
pare^tes and such as bring them up. Cursed be those parents which so behave
them selves either in word or deed, that they give any occasion of evil at
all unto their children. Great is their da^nacion. The blood of their children
shall be required at their hands. Better were it for such fathers and mothers,
if they had a mylstone teyed about their necks and so to be cast into the
sea, tha^ blaspemously to abuse the name of God unto y^ evil example of their
children. Is it any marvel therefore though we be so greatly plaged, seeing the
name of God is so much blasphemed among us now a days of every degree and age?
How can we be bold to say, y^ we believe in God, when we live no thing
according unto his word? With what forhead may we be bold to call upon the
name of God in our aduersite, seeing we without all honor and reverence do so
shamefully abuse it with ungodly oothes? How may we hoope that Christ's
body was offered up to God the father a sweet smellyng Sacrifice for our
sins, Ephe. v
when we so irreverently swear by it? Heb. ix.
How may we boldly say, 1. Joan. i
that all our iniquities be washed away by Christ's blood, wha^ it shameth
not us wickedly to swear by it, and to obscure the virtue of it by our
unlawful oothes, so much as lies in our power? With what cou^tenau^ce shall
we be bold at y^ dreadful day of judgment to behold and look upon y^ most
glorious face of the everlasting and righteous Judge Christ whose honor we
have so often defaced with our vain and idle swearyng? Undoubtedly these swearers
and blasphemers of the name of God are in a far worse case, The world and
gods word judges diversely of swearers.
than they appear before the world. The world by the reason of the long
custom and continuance thereof, thyncke it no sin ydelly to swear, nether
does it judge them that are swerers to be in onye worse case, than the other
sort be, but the word of God judges other wise of them. Gods word declares
them to be the most grievous enemies of god, of his most blyssed name, of
Jesus Christ his son, and of his most bitter passion. Gods word utters
them to be the chyldrenne of wrath, fire brondes of hell, captives of Satan,
and right heirs of eternal da^nacion. Gods word shows manifestly, y^ they
have in no part y^ celestial heritage, but are already judged to hell sire, if
they do not in this life repent, bewail their wretchedness, confess their
abhominacio^ desire marcy, and believe faithfully to have forgyuenes. For heaven
and earth shall pass away, but y^ word of the Lord abides for ever. Math v
Esaias. xl.
Therefore this comminacion and threate, which accompanies the commandment,
must needs be true, and come to pass. The Lord will not hold him gyltelesse
that takes his name in vain.

Let not these swearers therefore glory in their wickedness, and think y^ they
shall escape vnponished, ^ota
because God takethe not vengeance on them straight ways, but rather let them
thyncke that their damnacio^ shall be so much the more grievous, seeing they
escape so long without punishment. The rytche glo^tonne of whom we read in
the Gospel of Luke, Luke. xv^
lived in this world according to his fleshly appetyte, and wanted nothing that
might satisfy y^ beastlyke desire of y^ flesh, yet y^ end of him was
everlasting da^nacio^. So shall it chau^se to al the^ y^ be wicked
tra^sgres^ours of this holy precepte of God The Lord will not hold him
gylteles says the scripture, y^ takes his name in vain.

This thret of god is not to be laughed at. For if there be a God, as I am
certainly persuaded there is, I am sure that these abominable Swearers shall not
escape vnponysshed, let the^ esteem their sin as light and as little as they
list, yea I am sure, ye vengeance of God hangs over their heads, where so
ever they be. And although God take the not vengeance on them straight ways,
yet am I sure that they shall not escape, if in this world, yet not in the
world to come, Ps. exliiii
so righteous a Judge is God, so faythefull is he in all his words. How can
it otherwise be? We se by daily experience that if any manne blasphemeth an
earthly Prince, Genesis iii
or speak^ evil of his name, he dies y^ death streyghtwayes without mercy. If
such honor and reverence be given unto a worldly Prince, which is earth, and
unto earth shall return age^, what is tha^ to be thought of the^ which
blaspheme y^ name of ye most high and celestial king, which is king of all
kings. and Lord of all Lords? The blasphemy done to a mortal man is
ponyshed with swearde, and shall the blasphemy done to god escape, thyncke you,
with a fylyppe in the forhead, or with the knock of a little woden betyll: as
it began in certain monnes houses to be ponyshed now of late? Na verily. It
is no fylyp matter, except ye will admyt such a fylyppe, as shall fylyppe them
down into the botome of hell fire. God is no popette nor no babe. It is not a
fylippe, that can wype away y^ blasphemy of his most blissed name before his
high throne and glorious majesty. Woe be to the^ y^ syn, and keep not my
comaundementes, says the Lord, for I will not surely spare them. iiii. Es. xv
In the old law God gave this commandment for the blasphemers of his name.
Who so ever curses his god, Le. xxiiii
says he, shall bear his sin. And he that blasphemeth the name of the
Lord, he shall dye for it. All the multitude shall stonne him to death.
Whyther he be Citizyn or stranger, if he blasphemethe the name of the Lord,
let him dye y^ death. What will the blasphemers of God say to this precepte?
Do they think that God is a sleep, so that now he cares not for the glory
of his name? Na let them be sure. GOD tendereth now his glory so much as ever
he did, and abhors wyckednes now no less tha^ he has done ever heretofore.
He is a ielous god, and will not suffer the^ to escape vnponysshed, that pollute
and defyse his most glorious name. In math.
S. Auste^ says, they sin no less, which blaspheme Christ reygnyng in
heaven, than they, which crucified him wall king in earth. In qecalogum.
A certain writer also in the Hebrew tongue called Rabbi Aben Ezra writethe on
this manner: Certes this is the custom in Egypt even unto this day, that if
any man does swear by the head of the king and does not fulfill his saying,
he shall be the child of death. If that he would offer for his ransom a
great su^me of gold, yet shall he not live, seeing he has despised the king
openly. If a king does so, which is flesh and blood, whose beginning and end
is vanite, and whose kingdom is vanite, much more, yea a thousand times more
ought a man to take heed, yt he offend not God with his to^g, y^ he does not so
order his mouth, y^ he makes his flessh to sin by reme^bryng God in vain.
Age^ he says, there are many, which think it no great offense if a man takes
y^ name of god in vain. Ibidem^
But I will show the^, y^ it is greter and more grievous tha^ y^ brekyng of al
y^ commandments yt follow. For he y^ is a ma^sleare or an adulterer, which
surely are great offe^ses, he ca^ not slay nor play y^ whoremonger at al times,
for he is in fear. But he that has accustomed him self unto vain oothes, he
commits in one day in numerable oaths, and he is so greatly in use with this
fault, that he perceaueth it not, when he swereth. And if thou rebukest him and
say, wherefore haste thou now so sworn? He streyghtwayes swears that he
swear not, yea and that for the to much use of sweryng. For such before they
bring forth any word, they swear first, thynkyng that it garnyseth their
communicacion very pleasauntely so to swear. But if there were in Israel no
more faults, but this one alone, it were enough to prolonge our captivity,
and cause y^ we should be plaged every day more and more. These are the words
of the Hebrew Interpretoure, whereof we may learn how great an offense it is
vaynly to swear, and how it heapeth up on us the plages and vengeance of God
more then the breakyng of any other commandment, except it be for ydolatry,
which sin this also matcheth. But let us return to the scriptures of God.

Hear me, (...). xxiii
oye children, says the wise manne. I will give you a doctrine how ye shall
order your mouth Who so kepethe it, shall not perysshe through his lyppes, nor
be hurt through wicked works. As for the sinner, he shall be taken in his own
vanite. He that is proud and cursed, shall fall therein. Let not thy mouth be
accustomed with swearyng. For in it there are many faulles. Let not the
namyng of God be continually in thy mouth. For like as a servant, which is
often ponyshed, can not be without some sore, eue^ so what so ever he be, that
swears and names God, shall not be clean purged from sin. A man that uses
much swearyng, shall be filled with wyckednes, and the plage shall never go
from his house. If he begylethe his brother, his fault shall be upon him. If he
knowledged not his sin, he makes a double offense, and if he swears in
vain, he shall not be found ryghteous. For his house shall be full of plages.
The words of the swearer bring death (God grant that it be not sound in the
house of Jacob) but they that fear God, exchewe all such, and lygh not
weltryng in syn. Use not thy mouth unto dishonest and fylthy talkyng. For in it
is the word of sin.

Here the wise man plainly affirms, that they, which swear and take y^
name of God in vain, shall be replenyshed with wyckednes, and the grievous
plages of Gods vengeance shall ^aul upon them. So that their house shall be
visited with diverse ponyshmentes and plages. O terrible layeng. To much
saxeous and stony is his heart, that tremble the not at the hearing of these
words. Zach. v
The Prophet Zachary also says, I turned me, lyftynge up mine eyes, and
looked. And behold a flyeng book. And he said unto me, what see you? I
answered, I se a flyeng book of.xx cubits long, and ten cubits broad. Than
said he unto me, this is the curse that goes forth over y^ whole earth. For
all thieves shall be judged after this book, and al swearers shall be judged
according to the same. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of hoostes, so
that it shall come upon the house of the these, and upon the house of him that
falsely sweatethe by my name, and shall remain in y^ myddest of his house, and
consume it with the timber and stones thereof.

What will swearers and blasphemers of Godsmoost holy name, say unto these
words of the Prophet? Here may they se, that the terrible curse of God is
come abroad for all Thieves and swears, so that it shall faull upon their
house, and consume it with all that ever pertayne unto it. Here may they
learn, that they judgment is at hand, that their da^nacion can not be
exchewed, except^ they shortly repent, believe and amend. For the book of curses
slieth abroad. It is no longer kept in secret, and it shall undoubtedly faull
on the houses of so many as vaynely swear. God can no longer abide this
abhominacion, it is so great, and grown^ up into such an heygh^, Woe be unto
all swearers for their oothes. For a daggar pryckethe not so sharply, says
Chrysostom, ^om. xv
as the nature of an ooth does. A sweard sleath not so cruelly, as the plage of
an oothe does. For a swearer, although he seems to live, yet is he dead
already and has receued his deadly wou^d. And as he that takes an halter
before he goes out of the City, and comes unto the place of execucion, and
has the Hangman followyng him, is dead, so soon as he goethe out of the
place of judgment, so likewise is he that is a swearer. The oothe is not so
soon come out of the mouth, but that the swearer is condemned streyghtwayes
unto eternal damnacion.

What will these blasphemers of Gods most holy name say to this golden
mouthed Doctore, which co^parethe all swearers to thieves, Swears are like
thieves cond^ned to be hanged
and says that they are like unto a these that is condemned unto death, and
wereth his halter ready to be hanged? Are not these swearers come now unto a
fair promocion? They be like thieves condemned to dye, says the holy Doctore
Chrysostom. The Judge has given sentence. They be condemned. So that
although they be yet fre from y^ plays of gods vengeance, as the these is
before he comes unto the gallows, yet they may be as sure not to escape
them, as though they were now already in their necks. And the longer their
punishment is differed, the more grievous shall it be, when it comes. Many, I
grant, in this world are not ponysshed for their great abominable swearynge,
yet have there not wanted examples in our time, which have abundantly
declared, how greatly the sin of swearyng displeasethe God. Examples of
sweari^g ponyshed in our time.
There live at this day, which have known certain me^ to be great swear^rs of
whom some many years before they dyed, were grievously punyshed with strange
and innumerable diseases, some by y^ strong hand of God had their houses, as y^
Prophet Zachary says, consumed with fire, some lost their speech before they
dyed, another sort certain days before they dyed, Felix que^ faciu^t alienape
ricula ca^tum.
had such an heat and bre^ning in their mouths that by no means they could
suffer to have them speared. Their tongue and all that ever was within their
mouth, was so black as a cool. Were not all these manifest tokens of Gods
wrath and vengeance for taking his holy name in vain? Would God they y^
were thus punyshed, might be an example unto us for to leave the wicked and
ungodly custom of swearyng. If we will not cease, but still provoke god unto
anger, surely we shall prove and feale those same plages, and much more grievous.
And would god our pains might cease in this world, that we might be free
from everlasting damnacion. We all profess Christ, Joan. viii Joan. x Joan.
xviii
and caull our selves christians, why do we not tha^ those things, that Christ
commands us? Christ says, he that is of God, hears the words of god.
Joan. xv
Again, any sheep hear my voice. Mat. ^
Also in another place, every one that is of the truth, hereth my voice. If we
therefore be of God, why do we not hear the words of God? If we be y^ sheep of
Christ, why do we not hear our sheppardes voice? If we pertayne unto Christ,
which is y^ self truth, why do we not hear his voice?

Christ says, ye have heard, that ii was said to them of you old time, thou
shall not forswear thy self, but perform unto the Lord, that y^ haste
sworn. But I say unto you, swer^ not at al, neither by heaven, for it is the
throne of God, neither by earth for it is the footestoole of his feet, nor by
Jerusalem, for it is the citis of the great king, nether shall thou swear by
thy head, because thou art not able to make one hear whyght or black. But let
your communicacio^ be yea, yea, nay, nay. For what so ever is more than that,
comes of evil. Hereunto agrees S. James saying, before all things, Jacob. v
o my brethren, look ye swear not nether by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any
other ooth. Let your co^municacio^ be yea, yea, nay, nay, that ye fall not
into dissimulacion.

Here are we forbyddan to swear by any thing that ever God made. If it be not
lawful for us to swear by any thing y^ ever Godmade, tha^ is it not lawful
for us to swear by him that made al things. If it be sin to swear by the
creatures tha^ must it needs be damnable to swear by y^ creatore. Why do we
not remember these things, and leave our great swearynge? It is a shame to se
christen men live so contrary to their profession. It shall be more tolerable
to Tyrus and Sydon, to Sod^ me and Gomorre at the day of judgment, Math. xi
than to us, except we shortly repent, believe and amend. For that servant
which knowethe his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten w^ many
strypes. Swearyng has ever been counted a thing of so great absurdite, Luke.
xii
that the very Ethnyckes and Gentiles did deteste it, in so much that a
certain Greek Poet writes on this manner, fly swearyng, although thine ooth
be rygh^ and according to the truethe. Our damnacion is greata
What a saying is this of an Infidel? Shall not he and such other rise up at
the day of judgment, and condemn us, seeing they were Infidelles, and we
Christen men? Our Lord be merciful unto us. All hunte after worldly
promocions, and seake to live in pleasure and wealth, but no man seaketh how to lead a godly and innocent life, how to leave their swearyng, and to magnify
the most glorious name of God. For we go forth still to sin, as though
there were no punishment ordined for it at all. We blaspheme ye name of god, as
though he were so chyldysh, that he would never caull us unto an accou^tes for
our ungodly blasphemies. We so ^eare Christ and all the parts of his most
blissed body, as though he should never come unto the judgment for to reward
the good, and to condemn the evil. Christ says, that we shall give an
accou^tes at y^ day of judgment for every idle word, Math. xii
that we have spoken, what is tha^ to be thought of our abominable oaths
whereby God is so greatly dishhonoured? What accosites shall we give of the^?
How narowly shall we be examined of them? What will we answer in this behalf?
What will we say?

what excuse will we make? I fear unless we shall be ready of our own free
will, to run hedlong into hell sire, before the terrible sentence of
damnacion be given, our conscience shall so condemn us. Lord hold thy holy
hand over us, and give us grace to amend.

Sayente Paul's says, Colos. iiii
let your speech be well favored and powdered with salt, that ye may know
how to answer every man. What place has this commandment of thapostle
among them, which so powder their words, ye there come nothing out of their
mouths, but vain oaths and wicked blasphemies? The communicacio^ of these men
savor little of salt, whereby is understand the wisdom of Gods word, what
sa^e signifies
it is so fresh and unsavory. Yea would God these abominable blaspemers of
Gods most holy name, were not extreme enemies to gods word, chosyng rather to
remain dastardes still in the folyshnesse of the world, Swearers are enemies
to gods word
than to become wise and prudent in the wisdom of gods word. All swerers
therefore are enemies both to god and his word. A Christen man may not
acquaynte himself with such ma^ners, nor so wyckedly abuse his tongue. For our
tongue is given us, not that we should swear, lie, blaspheme, ieste, rail,
scoff, mock, and use ungodly talk, but y^ we should only speak those
things, which may both turn unto the glory of god, and the health of our
neighbor. And this is it that S. Paul says let your speech be well favored
and poudered with salt. Colos. iiii.
Our speech is well sauoured, semely, honest and comely, when there appear the
no thing in it that may offend the ears of any true Christen man, Mark well
but is agreeable in all points to godlynes and honest. It is poudered with
salt, when it vttreth those things, which are godly, wise, and edifye so many
as are the hearers of it. Let all swerers mark this, and amend their
co^municacion, unless they be that unsavory salt, Math. v
which shall be cast out and trodden under foot.

Again he says, let no sylthye co^municacion proceed out of your mouths,
Ephe. iiii
but that which is good to edify with all, when need is, that it may have
favor with the hearers If no fylthy communicacion ought to proceed out of our
mouths, much less ought any vayn dothes, ungodly swearynges, blasphemies.
etc. come forth out of them. If our words ought to be good to edify with all,
tha^ ought they not to be such as should destroy both our selves and the
hearers, which many times chaunseth through wicked oothes. Let not dome, Ephe. v
says he, and all uncleanness or covetousness, or fylthynes, or folyshe talking,
or jesting be once named among you, as it becomes saynctes, but rather
thanckes gyuyng.

If these things may not once be named among us, surely much less, yea a M.
times much less ought oothes, swearynges and blasphemies of Gods most holy
name be named among us and heard in our daily speech. If the wrath and
vengeance of God be wont to faull upon the children of unbelieve for these
things aforesaid, as S. Paul testifyeth, certainly let all swearers be
certenlye assured that they shall not escape the plages of Gods vengeasice, and
their damnacion shall be y^ more grievous, for as much as they profess godlynes,
and live nothing according thereunto. What are they any other, than blasphemous
mockers of God? They say that they know God, but with their deeds they deny
him, seeing they are become abhommable and disobediente, and enell minded unto
all good works, as S. Paul writes. Titus. i
They are wells without water, clouds carried about of a tempest, to whom y^
mist of darckenesse is reserved for ever. They are trees without ^rute at
gatheryng time, ii. Pe. ii
twyse dead and plucked up by the roots. Judas Epistle.
They are the ragyng waves of the sea somyng out their own shame. How can
they than escape the vengeance of god? The Sodomites and Gomorrians sinned
against nature, and therefore were they consumed with fire and brymestonne from
heaven, the swearers sin against the God and maker of nature and is it to be
thought, ^e. xviii
that they shall escape vnponyshed? If such as commit the lessest sin, be
punysshed, how can they than escape, which of send in the greatest? They may
be sure, if they do not amend, not only to be plaged with fire and brymestone,
but also to suffer all other kinds of intolerable pains, yea and that in
hell, where is no redemcion nor marcy to be had. The Lord, Psalm. xi
says David, sees both the ryghteous and ungodly, but who so delyghteth in
wickedness, him his soul abhors. Upon the ungodly he shall reygne snares,
fire, brymestonne, storm and tempest, this reward shall they have to drink.
For the Lord is ryghteous and he loves righteousness, his cos^tenauce
beholds the thing that is just. Again he says, God is a ryghteous Judge,
Psalm. vii.
and God is ever threatenyng. If men will not turn he has whet his swearde, he
has bent his bow, and made it ready. He has prepared him the weapons of
death, and ordined his arrows to bestroye.

We read in the forth book of Moses, that when the children of Israel were in
the wyldernes, they found a man gatherynge styckes upon the Sabbath day.
(...).xv*
And they that found him gatheryng styckes brought him unto Moses and Aaron and
unto all the congregation, and they put him inward. For it was not declared,
what should be done unto him. And the Lord said unto Moses, the manne shall
dye. Let all the multitude stone him with stones without the host. And all the
multitude brought him without the host, and stoned him with stones and he dyed,
as the Lord commanded Moses. If the man that gathered styckes upon the Saboth
day for transgressyng that commandment, which notwythstondynge was but a
ceremonial law seruyng but for a time, and a figure of our spiritual
quietness and reast, which we ought to have continually in our consciences
toward God, which precepte also is now abolyshed, and stond in none effect (so
that we are Lords of the Sabothe day, and may appoynte what day it shall
please the head rulers to cease from labor, y^ we may the more conveniently
come together unto the temple for to pray, to hear the holy word of God, to
se the blyssed Sacraments ministered. etc.) If the man that gathered styckes, I
say, upon the Sabothe day was stoned unto death by the commandment of God
for transgressynge that precepte, how may these swearers than persuade
themselves that they shall escape vnponished, although they swear and abuse
God and all his creatures by their unlawful oothes? The other precepte was
ceremonial, The Jews at this day accordi^ge to their old wont, will tear
there garments, when the hear Gods blessed^ame blasphemed, for the dread of
Gods feercewrath that is ^^yred up there by. Butte who among us Christian,
shewethe himself by any means, to be displeased there wtal, in whom ough to
be the love, fear and dread of God so well as in y^ Jews.
and is now of no strength, but this commandment is moral and abides
still in perfect strength, and so shall do so long as the world stondeth,
shall y^ transgressio^ of this than escape vnponyshed? The other was punyshed
by death, and shall this escape fre and without punishment? Let the wicked
worldlynges laughe at the matter so much as they list, there lives a god,
against whom the offense is committed, which will not suffer the blasphemies of
his holy name and of his creatures to escape unpunished And well were it with
these abominable swearers, which go forth in their wyckednes and will not
amend, if in this world they might he consumed with fire and brymestone from
heaven, as the Sodomites were, or stoned unto death, as the transgressour of y^
Saboth day was, so that their plages and pains might on this manner end, and
they afterward enjoy everlasting life. But it is to be feared, that after this
life they shall feale more grievous torments, than ever the Sodomites did either
suffer in this world, or where they be now. God be marcifull unto them, and
give them grace to amend.

Hitherto have we heard how grievous an offense it is before God for to
swear, and to take his most blissed name in vain, or to abuse onye of his
creatures by vain and unlawful oothes. We have heard also, how God will not
suffer by any means them to escape vnponished that wickedly swear and break
this godly commandment.

Now seeing that GOD will so sharply ponysh them that take his name in vain,
or fear not to swear for every little trifle by him or by his creatures, what
is than to be said of per^^ry? Of per^ury
What is to be thought of them, which both falsely and wyllyngely forswear
them selves? Into how great ponyshment shall they faull, which fear nothing
at all to swear in a false matter upon the holy Euangely that most ^lyssed
word of everlasting truth, yea and to call God and all his holy saynctes to
be witnesses in that behalf? In how troublous and ragynge sea sail these
wretches and miserable caytisses? What intolerable plages abide them? What
fearse punyshme^tes and cruel torments are prepared for the^? How is it
possible, that they may escape the most extreme ven^eaunce of GOD? Not only
to swear, but also falsely to swear? Not only falsely to swear, but also to
swear upon the holy Euangely? Not only to swear upon the holy Euangely, but
also to caul God and al his holy saints to be witnesses, yea and that in a
wrong matter? O detestable abhominacion. O wickedness, more than can be
expressed. O shameful sin worthy all kind of punishment. O incomparable vice
worthy to be reu^ged not with papers wearyng only, but with the most bitter
and intolerable pains, that are prepared in hell for Satan and his ministers.
Thou shall not forswear thy self, says the scripture. It is not lawful for
us vaynly to swear shall we than presume falsely to forswear our selves?

Although the comp^ny of them, which suffer them selves to be perjured I
trust, be not to be compared in number unto the multitude of them yt be ye
customable swears yet want there not at this day, which are gilty of that
fault, and would God it were not so in England What is to be said of those
men, who so swears by god y^ is y^ truth and righteousness and takes hy^. to
wytnes to maintain his lyeng dis^ea^e and unrighteousness he is a periure ill,
light, and such one y^ little regards godd^s truth, and his ^ommaundementes.
which for a little trifle will forswear them selfs, and give their souls
from god to the dyuell? How miser^ble agay^e are they, which although they
know the matter to be wrong, will for a little money or for favor of the ^arty
willyngly take an oothe upon a ^oke, and falsely forswear themselves ^^^rary to
their own conscience? Are not there, think you, in the world, which for
covetousness of te^porall possessions make claim to other men's lands, fordge
false evidence, invent wrong titles, and bring in falfe witnesses with them to
swear upon a book, that all is truethe, when they know the contrary, and
their conscience condemns the^ for so swearyng? What abominable wretches are
all these? What perjured caytiffes may these be counted? What ponyshmente can
be invented sufficicie^tly great for their detestable wy^kednes?

Thus by their perjury and false wytnes is the true owner deceived of his
right, deprived of his goods cast into pouerte, made a wretch, and throne
into such misery, that nether he, nor his wife, nor yet his children are able
to live, but many times perysh for honger. O wretched creatures. O insatiable
wol^^es.

While they have respect only unto their covetous affeccion, and labor to
satisfy that, they neglecte and despise both the health of their own souls,
and the wealth of their neghbour. What for all that? Yet by this means have
they obtained their purpose, and set the other beggarly fellow besides the
sadle. Now they are men of fair lands. They are Gentle men's fellows.
They are able to live without their dame. They shall be are a rule in the
country, and be counted among y^ most honest me^ of the Paryshe. They shall
have now, whereof to live at their hearts ease, so long as they live.

And when they dye, they shall leave their heirs such lyuynges, that y^ best
Gentle men in all the country shall be glad to marry their daughters unto them.

Are not these great commodities? who would want these pleasures, and may have
them by one means or other: O miserable wretches, which for a little easy
lynynge, and that they may leave their children wealthy behind them, fear
nothing at all to cast their souls into hell fire.

What does it profyt a man to win all the whole world, and at the last to
lose his soul. To much a wretch is he, which for worldely possessions will
put his soul in danger: Mark well
To far estraunged is he from GOD, which regards the goods of this world
more than his own souls health. And what commodity shall he have by those
goods wrongfully gotten, which he has leafte unto his son, when his soul
lyghethe brennyng in hell fire, and grievously ponyshed with all kind of cruel
and intolerable pains? A comparison between y^ father and the son
The son is counted a Gentle manne before the world for the goods sake, y^
father is reckenned before God and his holy saynctes a fire bronde o^ hell. The
son is Lord of many possessions, y^ father is a wretch and has nothing. The
son is replenyshedde with deynties, joy and pleasures, the father is filled
full of bitter sorrows grievous pains and i^tollerable torments. The son
syngeth, plays daunceth and makes merry, the father weapeth lamenteth,
soroweth, and wysheth himself never to have been borne. Fidem spectato
Behold what is the end of evil gotten goods. Behold how Dame Perjury
rewardethe her servants at the latter end. Behold unto what point falshode
brings them, that use it. Why do not me^ remember these things, and labor
to live justly, ryghteously and of their own? Godliness is great riches,
says S. Paul, i. Ti. vi
if a man be content with that he has. Oh that me^ would once be wise, and
remember their latter end. So would they not hu^t about to get the goods of
this wretched world by hook or by crook, as they do now a days, but rather
lay up treasures for them selves in heaven, where nether rust nor moulthes
corrupt, Mat. vi
and where thieves nether break up nor steal. Treasures that are wickedly
gotten profyt nothing but ryghteousnes delyuereth from death, Pro. x
says Salomo^. Let not therefore those men think, which so gredely gather
together the goods of the world, yea and that vnryghteously, that those
possessions can long endure in their stock, kynred and lynage. For we have
both heard and seen, that goods wrongfully gotten be soon dispersed abroad
and come to naught. Is not this a common saying among us: Euel gotten goods
will never come to good proof. Again, the goods, which are wrongefully gotten,
the third heir shall scasely enjoy. The Latinistes also say, Male partum
peius perit. A thing that is evil gotten, never thryueth, but y^ spendyng of
it is worse, tha^ the getting was. The Poet Claudianus have very godly verses
pertaynyng unto this our matter, which I will here now rehearse.

In prolem dilata ruunt periuria patris, Clandia nusi Cur^tium

Et paenam merito filius ore luit.
Et quas fallacis collegit lingua parentis,
Has eadem nati lingua refudit opes.
That is to say, the periuries of the father escapyng punishment in this
world, ^aull upon the son, in so much that the son is plaged for that the
father has offended. And look what rytches the tongue of the deceatfull
father has gathered together, even the very same has the tongue of the son
paid home again and wastfully spent. The Greek Poet Hesiodus also says,
Hesiodus
that that man which wrongly testifies and falsely forsweareth himself, does
not only hurt Justice, but he himself also is so hurt, that he can never be
healed after. Moreover he says, that all his posterite and children shall be
of the less reputacio^ ever after, so that they shall live in ignominy, and
their renown shall be obscure, dark and of no price before all men.

Who now therefore is so mad as falsely to forswear him self for a little
dungelyke mucke, seeing that by this means he shall not only provoke Gods wrath
unto him self, condemn his own soul, cast himself into everlasting
damnacion, but also procure plages for his children yt succeed him? Oh that
men would once be wise, and learn this lesson of S. Paul and follow it, ^
Tim. vi Job. i
having meat, drink, and cloth, let us be contented. For we brought nothing
in to the world, neither shall we carry any thing out of it. Fear not, o my
son, Tobi. iiii
said Thobias, we live a poor life in this world, notwithstondyng we shall
have many good things, if we fear God, and go away from all sin and do
well.

But would God, would God that Lady Perjury did exercise her unmerciful and
tyrannical ^r^elnes only in gettyng and scra^chyng ^p together falsely and
contrary to all Peiurye thyr t^the innocente ^loude
justice the goods of this world.

Would God, would God, she did not also through her unrighteous violence and
churlysh malice thyrst, shede, and suck up innocent blood. Would God that
through her false wytnes bearyng, true men were not put unto death causeles.
Has it not been heard, yea known and seen, think you, that of very malice,
and through the periuries of false forsworn caytiffes, which have taken an
oothe and testified contrary to the truth, and given false evidence at syses,
sessios or else where, True me^ are sometime hanged.
many men both honest and true have been hanged, or other wise rydde out of the
way? yea and that without a cause, as it has been proved afterward? Some also
have been condemned for Heretykes, and (...), for speaking against A^^^christ
and Idolatry. etc. What will me^ say unto this? Is not this a thing worthy to
be lamented?

Would not here be a redress in this behalf. De^er^ethe this malicious
perjury to be wy^ked at, and not rather to be ponyssh^d according to y^
de^ertes thereof? Awake, awake, ye Quest mongers, An adinon^^on for ques^^mong^^s
and take heed you give a true, just and right verdi^. Remember that ye go upon
life and death, and the^fore ought ye to do nothing rathly. Remember that it is
not the blood of an o^e or a calfe that shall be sh^d but the blood of a
Christen man, for whose life and health our Lord and savior Jesus Christ
did suffer his most pricious blood to be shed, ^. Cor. iii
and in whose heart the holy Ghost dwells. Remember that he is the Image of
god, which has h^s life put into your hands either to be saved, Genesis ii.
or to be cast away. Remember that if ye defyle the Temple of God, and handle a
Christen man otherwise, tha^ right require, surely god will destroy you. The
blood of that innocent, whom ye so cruelly have murdered, shall cry for
vengeance against you both day and night, as the blood of Abell did upon
Caym, Genesis iiii i. Joan. iii Math. vii Luke. vi.
and neu^r cease until God has taken vengeance on you. Remember that with
what mesure ye mete to other wych the same shall it be mesured again unto you.
Therefore take ye head. Be not rash nor hastye in gyuing your verdit. Be
prudent, wise and circumspecte. Ponder all things with a right up conscience.
Weyg^ the matter in the balance of justice. Mark all parties. Believe not every
lygh^e tale streyghtewayes, but boulte out with all diligence the original o^
it. Let another the rytches, nor the fame, nor the dignite, nor yette the
gifts of that manne, which puts in the indictment agenst another, move you
any thing at all to give the more credence unto his words, and by that means
to cast away the party accused, until ye have thoroughly boulted out y^
truth of the matter. Show such indifferency, yt ye may not be found at the
dredefull day of judgment gyltye of the shedyng of any ryghteous blood, but
blameles and with a pure conscience.

Ye Judges also execute your office according to equite. An admonicion for
judges
Suffer not the confortles to be oppressed. Let justice conjoined with a
fatherly pity and tender compassion reygne in your breasts. Suffer no matter
of unrighteous to prevail before the seat of your iudgyng place. Remember
that while ye sit in judgment, ye are no private persons. Ye represent the
parson of God. Ye execute Gods office. Psalm. ^viii Joan. x
Ye are the Image of God. Yea ye are Gods and the sons of the most highest,
as the scripture calls you. Your judging place is the iudgyng place of God.
Your mouth is the mouth of God. Beware therefore what sentence ye pronounce.
Math. vii
Let all things be done with great deliberacion. Give not judgment so
hastily, yt ye shall afterward repent you thereof. Remember that as ye judge,
Why God hat^ given men two ea^es
so shall ye be judged. God has set you in authorite, that ye should
ryghteously judge of all things. Remember that God has given you two ears,
one to hear the accuser, and another to hear him that is accused, that by
this means ye should not be percial nor wedded to one tale, but indifferentely
to hear both parties. Remember that for as much as ye occupye the place of
God, ye ought not to pervert judgment, but to do the office of God, and to
execute justice, unless the high Judge for your unrighteous sentence
pronounced condemn you and cast you into hell fire. Sap. v^
For GOD, says the scripture, shall appear to you, O ye rulers and Judges,
very dredfully, yea and that without any long tariauns. Wonderful hard
judgment shall they have, y^ bear rule. To the man of small power mercy is
granted, but as for the mighty, they shall suffer mighty and exceadyng great
torments. For God which is rulare of all things, Deuteronomy. xii. Pa. xix
will not regard one parsonne more tha^ another, nether will he fear y^
greatness of any man, for he made both the little and the great, and he has a
like care for all. Notwythstandyng surely the men that be in authorite, Job.
xxxiiii Eccl. xxxv Romans ii Gala. ii Ephe. vi Colos. iii Act. x ^. Pet. i Sap. i
Psalm. lvii
shall have the greater ponyshment. Therefore ye that judge y^ earth, take heed,
love ryghteousnes. Judge truly, o ye sons of men. Seake all means possible,
that no innocent blood be shed. Admit no f^lse witnesses, none unlawful
oaths, no false swearynges, no malicious periuries to be brought and received
before your iudgyng place, which is the seat of God, so long as ye judge
truly, and do your office according to equite.

When any matter is brought before you, How Judges shall be have them selu^s,
wha^ any matter to brought before the^
first weygh, ponder and consider it your self diligently, and afterward
deliver it to the Quest mo^gers according to the course of the law, and
exhort them in the name of God christenly, charitably, friendly, ryghteously,
indifferently, and with a single eye and incorrupte conscience to look upon the
matter, and to deal so vpryghtly in that behalf and to give so true and just
verdit, eue^ as though it should be presented and offered up to the high and
everlasting Judge Christ. ^eclare unto them how great an offense it is before
god to give up a false verdit, and by that means to have innocent blood shed
and their own souls condemned.

Let the Questmongers have convenient ^easure to debate the matter among them
selves soberly, di^cretely and prudently, and so after much consultacion and
long deliberacion give an answer according to truth and justice. And let such
as shall be upon the quest, What men Questmongers ought to be.
be honest men, sober, sage, faithful, wise, discret, prudent, godly,
merciful, ryghteous, loving indifferent, pitiefull, brotherlyke, and eue^ such
as fear god, love his word, have knoweledge in his holy law, walk with a
right up conscience both before God and man, and have always been of good
report and honest fame among their neighbors This undoubtedly, (all things
handled according to equite and justice) shall not only maintain true and
righteous judgment, but also make greatly unto the preseruacion of innocent
blood, so that God the high Judge shall hyghly be glorified in all our judicial
affairs. But let us proceed with our matter.

Not only these aforsayd are perjured parsonnes, which falsely forswear
themselves, and testify in unjust and wrong matters, but also so many as have
taken upon them just and lawful oothes, and by them promised to do some
ryghteous and godly thing, and yet leave it undone, and work contrary to
their godly promise. Magistrates.
As for an example, the Magistrates and head officers of the public weal
promise with a solemn ooth to do all things according to equite and justice,
and to accept no parsonne in judgment, but to do all things vpryghtly, to
maintain the good, and to ponysh the evil, to exalte virtue and to suppress
vice, now if they contrary to their ooth work vnrighteous^es, oppress the
socourlesse, judge for favor, condemn the good, save the evil, persecute
the favorers of Gods word maintain the Papists, neglecte virtue, uphold
vice. etc. so are they falsely forsworn, and shall not escape the plage of
Perjury.

The Bishops and prestes promise faithfully to be earnest Preachers Bishops
and Prestes
and setters forth of Gods word, and to live according unto y^ same, now if
they do the contrary, that is to say, not labor in the harvest of the Lords
word, nor led an honest and ver^uous life unto y^ good example of other but
seek after worldly promocio^s, live ydelly upon their benefices, walowe in
all^bestiall plesures, tumble themselves in all kind of sin, hate the^ that
are prechers of Gods word, drive men from readyng the holy Bible. etc. so are
they fal^ely forsworn, and shall not escape y^ plage of perjury.

The man and wife have promised faith and ^routh between the^, Married folk
that they will be just, and true one to another, the man to love his wife as
himself, and to ^olde him contented with her, the woman reverently to fear and
obey her husbonde, now if they break this promise, so that one delyghtethe
not in another, but each of them seake after straung flesh, so are they falsely
forsworn, and shall not escape the plage of perjury.

All Subjects have promised to their rulars unfeigned obedience and wyllyng
seruyse, Subjects
now if contrary to their promise they resist the high powers, become
disobedient, and repugne against the^, so are they falsely forsworn, and shall
not escape the plage of perjury.

Al these heretofore rehearsed are gylty of the sin of perjury, if they do
contrary to the ooth, which they have made, and therefore may they be sure to
receive a reward worthy their blasphemous tongue.

Some man will say peradventure, A demand whyther all oothes, promyses and
vows are to be performed.
are all oothes to be observed? Shall a man faull into the sin of perjury, if
he performs not, what soever he has promised? I answer nay, not so. God
forbid, y^ all oothes promised and vows should be performed. For many are
folysh, wy^ked and ungodly. Therefore as such^ displeased God, so ought they to
be broken. These are they, which fight agenst Gods word, which also inarle
the consciences of so many as keep the^, What oothes promises and vow^s ought
to be broken
and make them that accomplysh the^ to commit impiete and wyckednes. These by
no means are to be kept of any christen man, except he will offend GOD
grievously by the obseruaunce of them. For an unfaithful and folysh promise,
Eccle. v
says Solomon, In Sinoni mis. lib. ii.
displeases God. Cap. xxii.
In evil promises break thy faith, Quaest. iiii Ca^. In malis.
says Isydorus, in a fylthy vow, change thy determinacion. That thou haste
vowed unadvisedly, look thou do it not. For that is a wicked promise, which
is fulfilled with sin. A^ayne he says if any man does rashely define to do any
of those things that please not Ibidem
God, let him be sorry for it, and seeing that his determinacio^ was done
contrary to the commandment of god, let it be called back again, and stond
in none effect. S. Jerome also says, Lib. aduesus. Iouinianum.
thou shalt do better, o brother, if thou doste abstain from the ungodly
act, Quaest. iiii
than if thou doste styffely perform folysh words and perilous vows. Can
magnae.
Hereto agrees the saying of S. Austen, De offic.
it is a point of great wisdom for a man to call that again, Lib. i.
which he has evil spoken. S. Quaest. iiii
Ambrose also says, Can. Est etiam
It is agenst al godly honest many times to perform the oothe that is made,
as Herod, which swear that he would give to the daughter of Herodias, what so
ever she would ask. He therefore s^ue Iohu^, because he would not deny his
promise.

In concilio Toletano it was decreed, Quaest. iiii Can. Si publicis.
that it is better not to fufyll the vows of a folysh promise, than by the
obseruaunce of them to commit any wyckednes. That oath, promise or vow
therefore, which displeases God, Mark well
repugnethe the divine verite, fight against the Lords word, provoke unto
sin, condemns the conscience of the keeper, and can not be performed
without wyckednes, ought by no means to be observed and kept, but reiecte as
a thing much dangerous and hurtefull both to the body and soul.

Such an oath, Iud. xi
promise, or vow made Iepte, that if God would deliver the children of Amnon
into his hands, when he came home again in peace, what so ever thing comes
first out of his doors, should be the Lords, and he would offer it up for a
burnt offering. At his return it fortuned that his daughter being his only
child came out agenst him with tymberelles and daunces.

When he saw her, he was much amassed and greatly sorrowful because of his vow,
that he had made to god Notwythstondyng he said, God desires thanckes gyuyng
and not bloody sacrifices
I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and can not go back. So that to
fulfill his folyshe and wicked vow he committed the grievous sin of
manslaughter, and cruelly ^^ue his own daughter contrary to y^ law of God,
when it had been better and much more godly to have broken his folyshe vow,
and to have kept his hands clean from the blood of his daughter, and to have
given God right hearty thanckes for the victory that he had gotten over his
enemies. Psalm. i
For it is the sacrifice of praise that honourethe God. Heb. xiii
The calfes of our lyppes are acceptable sacrifyce and welcome unto god, Psalm.
xlix
I mean thanks gyuyng. For he delyghtethe not in the slaughter of any
creature, but rather wylleth, that they should live unto that use and end for
the which they were made. God the father by the Psalmograph says, hear, o my
people, let me speak, let me testifye among you, O Israel: I am god, yea I am
even thy God. I will not reprove the because of thy sacrifices, thy burnte
offerynges are always in my sight. I will take no bullockes out of thy house,
nor goats out of thy feldes. For all the beasts of the field are mine, and
thousands of cattle upon the hills. I know all the souls upon the
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are in my sight. If I be hongry
I will not tell the, for the whole world is mine and all that therein is. Thynkest
thou, that I will eat the flesh of oxen, or drink the blood of gotes? Offer
unto god the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows unto the most highest. And
call upon me in the time of trouble, so will I hear the, that you shalt thank
me. The Psalmograph himself also says, Psalm. ^v
in me, o god, are thy vows, which I shall pay unto the, even very hearty
praises and thanks gyuyng. Vows ofentymes in the scripture are taken for
praises and thanks gyuyng
He calls the vows, y^ we should offer unto God for his benefits, praises
and thanks gyuyng, and not the kyllyng and offryng up of our children, or the
performynge of such folysh and wicked vows which ca^ not be performed without
sin and ungodliness.

Herod also made a promise to the daughter of Herodias, wha^ she dau^ced and
salyed so plesantly before him and his Lords at a certain banquet, that he
would give her, what so ever she would ask even unto y^ half of his kingdom.
She by the council of her wicked mother asked the head of John^ Baptiste. So
that the king, because he would not go back of his word, suffered the holy
Prophet of God to be slain, and no cause why, but only y^ he thought it would
not stand with his honor and royal dignite to break his promise. Ah folysh
vow and more folysh king. Ah wicked promise and more wicked king. Better had
it been for him a thousand times to have gone back of his word, to have
broken his wicked vow and to have lost al his royal dignite, than so virtuous
a man should have been slain. We ^e to all those vows and promises, which
are not fulfilled without sin and wyckednes.

Again we read in thactes of thapostles, that there were mo than forty men,
which had conspired agenst Paul, Act. xxiii
and made a solemn vow, an earnest promise, and a foul devout ooth, that they
would neither eat nor drink, until they had slayn^ Paul. For we are ready,
say they, to kill him, before he come nygh unto us by a mile. A whotte zele in
deed but not according to knowledge
Here was a whotte brennyng zele. They thought every hour a thousand year, till
they might mete with tholy Apostle, and shed his blood, they were so loathe
to be found double in their words, and so sorry that he should teach any more
such new learning and late sprung up heresye unto the great confusion of their
holy synagoge, and the utter shame of y^ fool d^uout fathers the Pharisees,
Scribes, Lawers, bishops, prestes, rulars of the Temple, elders of the
people. etc. To prevent these high inconveniences and to suppress y^ great
enormities newly raised up by the mea^s of Paul's doctrine, ye will not easily
believe, what pains these good men took. They could not rest nether night nor
day. As for meat drink and sleep was gone with them. B^ merry at their
hearts they could never until they had slain Paul y^ great Heretyke, that
teacher of new learning, that brynger in of new laws that destroyer of all the
old laudable customs, that troubler of the common peace, Joan. xvi.
that sower of discord, y^ peruertour of the holy old religion, that enemy of
all good devotion, etc. Therefore made they a solemn vow, in good time might it
be spoken, that they would taste nothing, no not so much as a pore ale bery for
y^ comfort of their heart, until they had slain Paul, in so much that they
were gone so far in deed, that they had rather slay Paul, and cast their
souls into hell fire for doing that mischeuous act, than they would once
break their vow. For they judged by this means to do God an high sacrifice.
Surely I thyncke that if the porke of Rome had at that time (...) reygnyng, and
in his full power scaulled, they would scasely have believed that he had been
able to dispe^se with their vow, it was so solemn, fervent, and spronge out of
the heart root. Is it not to be thought, that they were whot in their matters,
wha^ they could not keep their mischeuous pretense secrette, Dignu^ patella
operculum.
but came unto the chief prestes and elders, as couers worthy such cups, and
gostly fathers fyt for such a confession, and told them that they had bound
them selves with a vow, that they might eat nothing until the had slain
Paul? Had it not ben great pity, think you, that these men should have
dyed for ^onger, seeing they fasted for so good a purpose? O holy votories. I
marvel how they could ever pacify their consciences afterward, seeing they
made so solemn a vow, and yet brake it. For they never slew Paul, so mighty
a Lord is God to defend his serualltes from the cruel hands of bloody
tyrauntes. But the holy religious men are to be holde^ excused, for as much as
their will was good, although they could not bring it to pas^e. Voluntas
reputatur pro facto. There will was taken for the very act. So y^ before the
world they were counted godly parsonnes, because they had a mind to pay
their vows, and did the best that in them was to perform their promise so
solemnly made and taken, and before god were they recounted malicious and
cruel bloody manslears. Nam uoluntas reputatur pro facto.

Now in all such folysh, wicked and ungodly vows, oothes and promises ought
there to be no faith kept, seeing the end of them tend unto a noughty
purpose, and plain wyckednes, as holy Bed a testifiethe. I^ it shall chau^se,
says he, at any time y^ we swear or promise any thing unadvisedly, which
being kept should turn unto an evil end, ^omel xlv. Quaest. iiii. Can. Si
a^^quid
^et us know that that with more wholesome council ought to be changed freely
and without any scruple o^ conscience, and when necessite does compel us, we
ought rather to forswere our selves than for the eschewing of perjury, we
should fall into any other more grievous sin. For David did swear by ^od
that he would ^. Reg. xv
slay Nabal a folysh and ungodly man and destroy all that ever pertayned unto
him, yet at the first intercession of A biga^l being a wy^^ woman, he straight
ways let go his threats, put again the sweard ^^to the scabb^rde, nether
sorowed he any thing at all, De offic. Lib. i.
as though he had committed any fault at all for such perjury. Here unto
pertaynethe the saying of S. Ambrose, that David did not fulfill his ooth by
the shed dynge of blood, it was the greater godlynes. I se that David being a
godly and holy man did faull into rash swearyng, and yet that he had rather
not to do that he had sworn than to fulfill his ooth by the shed dyng of
man's blood. In Hieremiam.
S. Jerome says, that an oothe ought to have three compagnio^s, truth,
judgment and ryghteousnes. An oothe ought to have three co^pagnio^s
Where these want, says he, it is no oothe, but plain perjury. Therefore the
ooth, promise or vow, that is not grounded on truth, judgment, and
ryghteousnes, ought to be broken. It is grounded on truethe, when it is
agreeable to Gods word, which is the self truth. Mark well
It is grounded on judgment, when it is not rashely, folyshly and chyldyshly
made, but advisedly and with high prudence and great deliberacion. It is
grounded on ryghteousnes, when there shall rise up no evil o^ it, neither unto
our selves nor unto our neighbors. Al oaths and promises thus taken and made
ought to be observed and kept, but otherwise to be broken, refused and cast
away without any scruple of conscience or veracion and trouble of mind. For
this sentence of the preacher abydethe always true. Eccl. v.
An unfaithful and folysh promise displeases God.

Thus perceive we, what oothes, promises or vows ought to be observed, and
which they are y^ should be rejected. So that all godly oaths and promises
ought to be observed. They that do not labor to fulfill them, forswear them
selves, and shall not escape the plage of perjury.

Now will I return thither, from whense I made digression.

God in the old law among the gross Iues could not abide a fa^^e Deuteronomy. xix
wirnes, ^r^ xi^
but commanded y^ he should dye the death. If he can not abide a false witness,
which may testify without an ooth, ^owe tha^ can he abide the, which do not
only here fal^e witness, but also in the conf^rmacion thereof adds an oath,
yea and that a false ooth, and makes God to be a wytnes in an unjust and
wrong matter, What in co^mod^ty^^ rise of Perjury
so that by this means y^ wretch is wyllyngly perjured and falsely for sworn,
God is bla^phemed, Gods most holy name is abused, iustice^ subverted, truth
is oppressed, false hode is mayntayned, wrong sente^^ is pronounced, the
contrary part although the truth be on his syd^ is condened, the man is
utterly empoueryshed, and for ever after beggr^d, both he, his wife, and all
his ch^dre^, if he has any: Are all these th^ges but trifles? Are all these
things light matters, and things of small ^mportaunce? Is it but a trifle to
bear false witness? to swear? to be piured? to be falsely forsworn? to
blaspheme God? to abuse his holy name? to subuerte justice? to oppress y^
truth? to maintain falsehode? to pronounce wrong sentence? to condemn the
gylteles parsonne? to empouerysh and utterly beggare both him and so many as
pertayne unto him for ever and ever? Per^ured persons shall not es cape
vnponyshed.
Do all these things, which God so greatly abhor, deserve no ponyshment?
These perjured wretches shall not escape, let them believe me, they shall not
escape from the terrible vengeance of God. For although y^ day go on their
side, and God differs his plages, so that they are not ponyshed so soon as
they have committed the offense, yet let them be well assured, they shall not
escape, surely they shall not escape. The Poet Tibullus being but an Ethnycke,
and yet not ignorant of the greatness of this abhominacio^, and certainly
persuaded that perjury can not escape vnponysshed, be it never so secretly
handled, and craftily dawhed, writes on this manner.

Ah miser, Lib. i. Eleg. ix
and si quis primo periuria caela^
Sera tamen tacitis paena uenit pedibus.
Ah wretch, says he, although a man at the first does keep his periuries and
false oothes never so secret, yet may he be sure at the last that they will
come to light unto his great shame, so that punishment will come upon him
before he be awars for his wickedness. In earm. admon.
The Greek Poet Phocylides also says, forswere not thy self neither
ignorantly nor wyllyngly. For the immortal God hatethe the false swerer, what
so ever he be that swears. Lib. ii. de legibus.
Again Cicero y^ famous Prince of ornate eloquence and most eloquent Orator
says, the pain of perjury before god is everlasting damnacion, and before men
perpetual dishonor, iiii. re. x^iiii and.xxv
shame, reproach and ignominy. God hate the perjury so greatly in every
condition, that he grievously ponyshed Zedechias, because contrary to his oothe
he rebelled agenst Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon.

Seeing tha^ that God will so grievously ponysshe all kind of oothes both vain
and unjust, both idle swearyng and perjury, what will these idle swearers and
false forsworn creatures say unto this matter? With what conscience will
they appear before the high throne and ryghteous iudgyng place of Christ? What
will they lay for them selves? What excuse will they make? What shyfte will
they invent? Will they fly unto the custom, Excuses of swearinge
and say, that it is y^ fashon of the world so to do? I answer, Christ said
to his disciples, ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world. Joan. xv
Now they that follow the fashons of y^ world, are none of Christ's disciples,
so follows it that all swearers pertayn not unto Christ, seeing they so
diligentely follow the manners of the world. Of the custom Not^.
And where as they obiecte, that it is the custom so to swear, this can
nothing excuse them. For we may not look what the custom but the truth of
Gods word wylleth us to do. Follow not the common sort of people, says the
scripture, for to do evil. Again, do not ye those things, which they have
done, that were before you, E^o. xxiii. Lem. xviii Zacha. i
nether be ye polluted and defiled in them. The Prophet Zachary also says, Be
not ye like your forfathers, neither follow ye the fashons of them. Lib. Epist
ii. Epist. iii ad Ca^c^^
The ^oly Martyr S. C^pr^an says, vndou^^^d^y we must ^othe hear and do that,
that Christ has done, and that he has commanded to ^e done, seeing that he
says in his gospel, if ye do chose things that I command you, In y^ no more
call ye servants but (...). And that Christ alone ought to be hea^d, the
father from heaven testifyeth, saye^g: This is my (...) beloved so^e, Math xvi^
Mar^. ix Luke ix ii. Pet. i
in whom I am fully satisfied, hear ye him. I^ that Christ alone ought to be
heard, we ought not to ma^ke, what any man before us thought best to be done,
but what Christ did first, which is before all men. Epist. ad pomp. co^tra
Stepl^ Did. viii Can, Consuetado
Again he ^ayth, a custom with out truth, is an old error. Therefore leauyng
the error, let us ^o^lowe the truethe. When the truethe is once come to
light, says S. Austen, let the custom give place to y^ truth. For Peter
also, which did circu^cyse, gave place to Paul preaching the truth. D^c
vnico bap. lib. ii
Therefore seeing y^ Christ is the truethe, we ought rather to follow the
truth than the custom. If thou doste lay against me the custom, Guiel.
Auers. Did viii. Can S^consu^
says S. Gregory, thou must mark what the Lord says, I am the way, truth
and life. He said not, I am the custom but y^ truth Now has Christ said to
us in his holy Gospel, thou shalt not swear at all. Why than do they not
follow y^ truth and doctrine of Christ, Joan. xiiii Math. v
tha^ the wicked and ungodly custom? But many are so addicte to customs and
old vsages now a days, y^ although they se y^ scripture manifestly condemn
their crooked customs and wicked vsages, yet will they by no means give place
to the truth. If a man obiecte and lay the scriptuagaynst them, and would so
reform them charitably, than are they ready streyghtwayes to accuse him of
heresy, O blood ^oupers.
and to bring him unto a faggot of so little authorite is the most holy word of
God recounted with these belly Gods and wicked worldlynges now a days, and so
hard a thing is it to speak against a custom, be it never so wicked and
ungodly.

Another sort glory and rejoice so greatly in their wickedness of swearyng* that
they fear nothing at all to take upon them for to mayntayn it by the
scriptures. Psa. lxii^
Says not the Psalmographe, say they, Laud abuntur omnes qui iurant in eo?
All y^ swear by hi^, shall be praised? Does not god y^ father also give a
commandment and say, Deuteronomy. x
Dominum Deum tuum timebis, and per illius nomen iurabis? Thou shalt fear thy
Lord God, and swear by his name? As concerning the first text, which they
allege, I answer, theyse glorious and famous swearers differ no thing from
their father y^ dyuell. Math. iiii
For as he wrested the Scripture, wha^ he tempted Christ, so likewise do they.
The words of y^ p^almographe are these, all that swear i^ him ^hal be (...).
He ^ayth not all that swear by him, but in him. To swear in God, What it is
to swear in God
is to call God a wytnes in a just, ryghteous and earnest matter, to take an
oothe for the glory of God, for the promocion of his word, for the
mayntena^^ce of the Christen faith, or else for ye helch of our neighbor. They
that thus do, swear in God, and they shall not be condemned but praised for
their oothe.

As towchynge the second text, How sweary^ ge^ame up fyr^^e
wherein they say, they are not only suffered freely to swear, but also
commanded so to do, I answer: When evil things began to increase in the
world, Hom. xxvi
as Chrysostom writes, when there was a confusion made in every place, and no
order, when men fell unto the seruyse and worshyppynge of Idolles, when all
says was lost, and all vnfaythefulnesse reigned, than began the Infidelles,
seeing that one would not trust and believe another in matters of co^trauersy, to
call upon their Gods for witnesses, protestynge thereby that they spoke truth,
forasmuch as they called their Gods to wytnes in the matter, (whom to name
they thought it not lawful but in serious, earnest, grave, weyghty and
necessary matters) and by this means obtained they faith one of another. Now
for as much as God had selected the Israelites from the Gentiles to be his
people, Ho^^^ xxvii
and would by no means that they should in any point follow their wyckednes,
unless thereby they should be allured from the true worship of god unto
Idolatry, Why god suffered y^ Jews to swear by him
he gave a commandment to the^, y^ in all matters of controversy, and in
such affairs as should make unto his glory, and the health of their brothers,
they should not call any of those false Gods, whom the Ethnyckes worshypped,
unto witness, nor swear by their names, but call him a witness, and swear
by his name, and so every one to believe another for the reverence and honor
that they owe to his most holy and blyssed name.

What is this to y^ purpose? what refuge can these abominable swearers have
here? This commandment only serves for grave, weyghty, serious and ernest
matters, and they abuse it to cloak and cover their wicked and abominable
custom of swearing. Is this allowable before God? will this go for good
payment? No surely, GOD will not thus be mocked.

God will not suffer his most glorious name so wickedly to be abused. God will
not abide that his worship, honor, renown, glory and magnifice^s should so
be obscured, defaced and blotted. God is a ielous God, and he can not abide
that he should be dishonored by any means. I am y^ Lord, says he, this is
my name. I will give my glory to none other. Here therefore have these swearers
no refuge, but still run hedlongs into everlasting damnacion.

Another company, Esa. xiii
that use swearyng, say, we think no harm, wha^ we swear, and therefore can
it be no great fault. I answer. Yet are ye not so fauteles nor excused. For
the scripture says, that we shall give a straight count at the dredefull day
of judgment for every idle word that we speak. What is than to be thought
of our idle and vain oothes? I pray you? Shall we not give an accountes of
them? Yies we may be sure, and also condemned for them, if we do not repent,
believe and amend Again. Of thy words shalt thou be justified, and of thy
words shall thou be condemned. How gothe it tha^ with our oothes? Sap. i
In what case stond they? The scripture says, the mouth that lies, slays
the soul. Do not vain oothes so in like manner.

And where as it is said, we think no harm. I answer, the scripture says:
Math. xii Luke. vi
Of thabundans of the heart, the mouth speaks. A good man out of the good
tresure of his heart, brings forth good things. And an euel man out of the
evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things. What will we say to
this? Are we not here plainly condemned?

Another sort excuse them selfs and say, few or none will believe us,
except we swear. To this answers Chrysostom on this manner: An ooth makes
not a man worthy to be believed, Hom. vii
but y^ testimony of his life, the integrite and pureness of his conversation,
and a good mind. For many oftentimes have sworn and entangled themselves
greatly, and yet have they not made men to believe them Other have only made as
it were but a beck, and have appeared much more worthy to be believed, tha^
they which have so greatly sworn.

These words declare manifestly that swearyng among faithful and honest men
neadeth not, and for the^ that are unfaithful and regard no honest, surely
all the oaths in y^ world will not make them to be believed of them that are
virtuous and godly disposed. Therefore this can be none excuse for these
swearers. Among the faithful, oothes need not, and among the unfaithful, they
profit not. Dothes among y^ faithful need not, among y^ unfaithful they profyt
not
For he that believes not a man without an oothe, nether will he believe him,
though he swears never so much. But alas for pytie, that ever faith should
be so decayed among Christian men, that one will not believe another, except
they pollute and de^y^e the glorious name of our Lord God yea and that in
trifling matters. It is high time for the world to be at an end, Luke. xviii
when one man trust the not another. Do ye thyncke, says Christ, that the
son of man shall find any faith on the earth, when he shall come?

Thus sewe that al excuses, which are invented to maintain y^ dyuellysh
custom of swering, are nothing worth. Our damnacion abydethe still. The
heat of Gods vengeance toward us is nothing abated. So that if we will be
saved, there is no remedy but to leave our wicked sweryng, Exo. x^ Deuteronomy. v
to reverence the name of God, and thanckefully to use his creatures, ever
setting before our eyes this commandment of GOD. Thou shall not take the
name of thy Lord God in vain. For the Lord will not hold him gyltelesse /
that rakethe his name in vain.

Also the saying of Christ, Math. v
swear not at all, nether by heaven, for it is the throne of God, nether by
earth, for it is the foot stool of his feet, nether by Jerusalem, for it is
the city of the great King, nor yet by thy head shalt thou swear, for you
canste not make one hear nether whyghte, nor black. But your communicacion
shall be, yea, yea, nay, nay. For that is more than this, comes of evil.

Some man paraduenture will here demand and say, are all oothes taken away
from Christen men? Whyther all oothes are taken aw^y from Chri^ten m^n
Yea forsothe all oothes y^ are vain and trifling, false and vnrygh^eous. Is
it not lawful than for a Christian man to swear in no condition? Yies verily.
God forbid that all kind of swearyng should be taken from Christen men, The
error of y^ Anabaptists
as the ungodly Anabaptists hold, which affirm that it is not lawful for a
Christen manne to swear by no means. This will not the scripture. Agenst this
fyghteth the word of God. We are not forbidden to swear, but vaynely, idly,
falsely and vnryghteously to swear. Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord
God in vayn. says the scripture. Mark that it is said ^n ^ayn^ A Christen
man may lawfully swear for the glory of God and for the health both of
himself For what causes a christen man may swear
and of other, so often as it shall make unto the honor and glory of God also.
For the glory of God in all our oaths is most of al to be looked upon and
considered. We ought not to desire any thing, except it makethe unto the
glory of God, mochelesse ought we to swear for it. I will make this matter
more evident and plain by familiare examples.

If a Christen man were among the Jews, Example for the glory of god
Turks, Saracens or any other Infidelles, preaching the word of God purely
unto them, and earnestly labouryng to turn them from their Idolatrye unto the
true seruyse of God, if they would by no means believe him, except he ^ydde
swear by the name of that Lord his God, whom he preached unto them, that all
is truth that he preaches, he may lawfully in this point take the name of God
unto witness, and swear that it is truth that he precheth. For this oothe
thus taken and believed, turns both unto the glory of God, and also unto the
health^ of many souls and therefore is it not vain and idle, but righteous and
godly. On this manner did God the father him self in the old Testament, the
Patriaches and Prophets, in the new Testament Christ and his Apostles swear,
and after this manner may all the saints and faithful of God swear. He that
perceaueth, Sermon. i. de verbis do mini
says S. Auste^, that an oothe ought not to be had in good but in necessary
things, let him refrain him self so moc^e as he can, that he do not use it,
except it be in necessite, when he sees that men are slow to believe that,
which is profitable for them to believe, except it be confirmed with an oothe.

Again, Example for y^ health of our neighbor
if it did so chaunse that two Christian men were at debate for some matter that
is in controversy between them, and the third did know that the one did the
other plain injury, and wrought agenst him contrary unto the rule of equite
and justice, and so made declaracion thereof unto y^ Judge. The Judge in this
behalf may lawfully require an oothe of that wythnes bearer, and he that so
testifyeth may with a right and good conscience swear in this behalf. And this
his oothe is both ryghteous and godly. For by that is peace, amite, concord
and Christen charity brought again between the^ that were at debate, and the
work of the dyuell is destroyed, that is to say, dissensio^ and strife is
taken away. An oothe, says S. Paul, Heb. vi
is y^ end of all controversy.

Moreover if heresy, treason, theft, manslaughter, An example for the (...) of
our selfs
whoredom or any other notable vice were laid to a christian man's charge,
whereof he knows himself gyltlesse and nothing ^auty, he may lawfully take
an oath and swear unto the contrary for y^ defense of his honest name and
godly report. And this hisooth is both ryghteous and godly. For it does not
only defend his own purite and innocence of life, but also it sets forth
the glory of God. For as God is dishonored through the wicked acts of them
that profess him, so is he glorified through the good deeds of them, which do
both profess him and also live according to their profession. In Parenes
(...) D^mon
The Greek Orator Isocrates gives an excellent and very notable commandment
concerning swearynge, which I will here rehearse, that Christen men redyng the
words of an Ethnycke may once be ashamed of their wyckednes. His words are
theyse: Take an oothe y^ is put unto the for two causes, Mark well
either y^ thou may deliver thy self ^ro^ a filthy cause, or y^ thou may
preserve thy fre^des y^ are in perel and danger. But for money look thou
swearest by no God, although thou swearest ryghteously. For to some thou shall
seem to forswear thy self, and to so^e to be desirous of money. What a saying
is this of a Gentile? How little dissente the this from the holy scriptures?
How does this co^de^ne them, which for slender advantage or lytyl money will not
only straight ways swear, but also for swear themselves? Austen for swearyn^
S. Austen says, does not he take y^ name of God in vain, which for the love
of a te^porall thing (that is plain fylthynesse to a Christen man) takes God
for a witness. The law has forbydde^, Exo xx
that thou should once couyt. Doste thou not couit, if thou byndest thy self
with an oothe, that thou may keep thy substance? Every creature is subject
unto vanite. And is not this for vain things? Ergo he swears in vain,
which for creatures calls God a witness. etc. S. Hierome also says, In
Math Cap. v
the Evangelical truth receaueth no oath, seeing every faithful word is for an
oath. Here unto pertayneth y^ saye^g of our golden mouthed Doctor, the cause of
an oath is this, Quaestiv ^an Iuranenti
says he, that every one that swears, swears for this intent, that he may
speak y^ which is truth. And therefore y^ Lord will have no difference between
an ooth and our speech. For as in an oothe it is not convenient that there be
any falshode or breaking of promise, so likewise in our words ought there to
be no lie. Sap. ^
For both perjury and lyeng is condemned with the pain of the divine
judgment, as the scripture says, the mouth that lies, slays the soul.
Who so ever therefore speaks the truth, swearethe. For it is wrytt^n, a
faithful witness will not ^ye.

Finally, The magistrate may lawfully require an oothe
so often as any civil magistrate or head officer requires an oothe of us for
the preseruacion and mayntenaunce of the common weal or any other necessary and
vrge^t cause we ought gladly and wyllyngly for to swear according to this
commandment of Christ, Pay that to Caesar, Math^ xxii
which is due to Caesar. But here are they to be monyshed, which shall require
the ooth of y^ subjects, that it is their duty before the other be sworn to
declare the matter with manifest words unto the^, An admonicion for the^ y^
shall r^quire the oothe
that they may well perceive, that they shall not swear in vain, but for
weyghty and necessary matters concerning either the glory of God or the profyt
of the common weal. For me^ ought not to be called forth to swear for every
light trifle, nor yet to swear as many do, they can not tell what nor
wherefore. The to much customable use of sweryng, has brought it so to pass,
that as many care but lytyl to swear, so forse they not much to forswear the^
selfs. The cause for the which men should swear, ought not only to be
good, but also necessary, and so openly proved unto them, before they be
brought unto their oothe. This should make men to have the name of God in y^
higher reverence, to take an ooth with the godlyer mind, and to have the
office of the head rulars in y^ greater estimacion. For to make me^ swear by
compulsio^, before they know the matter, whyther it be good, lawful, godly,
necessary or otherwise, let other men judge, that be better learnedde than
I, whyther it be agreeable to the word of GOD or not. But this dare I be bold
to say, that an oothe can not be taken with to much reverence and
aduisemente, in as much as by it, God is called upon to be a witness in that
behalf. Therefore ought men not to be compelled rashly to swear, unless by that
means they provoke the ve^geaunce of God both against them selfs, and those
also that cause them so unadvisedly for to swear, but to come unto their oothe
with great sobriety and deliberacion.

Thus lewe for what causes it is lawful for a Christian man to swear, what
soever oothe comes forth out of our mouth, if it be not for one of these
causes aforsayd, it is damnable and plain sin. Therefore let all men take heed. Let no man from henseforthe take the name of our Lord God in vain. for
who so does, shall not surely escape vnponyshed.

Let the rulars of the common weal find some honest remedy, Magistrates
that the name of God be no more blasphemed among their subjects. Let the^
consider how loath they are, that they them selfs should be evil spoken of
and blasphemed. Let them weygh with them selves, how much God excels
them, and how far his dignite does excede their dignite. If any man
defacethe their renown, they are ponyshed streyghtwayes, and not without a
cause. But how chau^seth it, that the Lord of all Lords and King of all
Kings is no more feared? How comes it to pass, that his most holy and
blyssed name is so universally blasphemed, yea and y^ freely and without
punishment? Were it not, thyncke you, convenient, that the civil magistrate
should earnestly provide, that the name of GOD might have his due honor, and
y^ it might no more be abused with abominable and unlawful oothes in their
Realms, but praised and magnified, seeing that by it we obtain all our
health and salvation? God by his holy spirit might vouchesafe to breathe
into the hearts of all Princes, Kings and rulars, that when they be godly
assembled together for matters concerning the glory of god and the public
weal, they may also entreat of this thing in their Sinodes, Congregacions,
Parliamentes, councelles, etc. that God may be glorified, and his most
blyssed name exalted of all nations from the East to the Weaste. By this
means shall they not only expulse vice and make their Realms to flourish with
virtue unto the great glory of God and the high consolacio^ of all the
faithful, but also they shall acquire and get to them selfs a crown of
immortal glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Again, Bishops Parsons, Vicars. etc
let all Bysshoppes, Parsonnes, Vicares, Curates, Paryshe prestes, and so many
as are ministers of Gods word, in all their Sermons and other exhortacions unto
the people, above all things rebuke this abominable sin of swearyng. ^
declare unto them how great an offense it is, (...). xxiii
and how the plage of God and his ve^geaunce shall not depart from the houses
of them, y^ use this most detestable sin of swearing. Let them consider that
they have hene the chief occasion both of this sin and of all other, seeing
they have not according to their office diligently watched upon the Lords
flock, preached Gods word, rebuked the wickedness of the people, told the^
their fautes, exhorted the^ unto repentance, and amendment of life. Pro. xxi^
Math. ix
For wha^ the preaching of gods word fails, says Solomon, tha^ does the
people perysh and go to hanocke. Christ had much pytie on the people, when he
saw that they were destitute and dispersed as sheep, not having a shepparde.
For as sheep, when they be without a shepparde, wander they can not tell
whyther, Mark this comparison
hang on every bushe, are rent with every bryer, and in danger to be denoured
of the rauenyng wolf at all times, even so likewise, those people that are
without a Preacher and teacher of Gods word, run astray without order, hear
the voice of every stranger, faull in all kind of vicious abhominacion, are
rent and torn with wicked spirits, and ready at every hour to be swalowed up
of Satan our old adversary, which sleapeth not, but watches diligently, and
walks about like a roryng Lion 1. Pet. v
seakyng whom he may devour. Surely great is the damnacio^ that hangs over
the hedes of these sluggyshe sheppardes. Christ the high priest said, mar. ^.
iii^
Oportet me euangelizare, n^ in hoc missus sum. I must preach the gospel,
says he, for I am sent for this purpose. What shall the baser sort of
prestis do than I pray you? shall they live in pleasure and idleness? in
delicious fare and sluggyshnes? Does not Oportet also pertayne unto the^^
Certes if they will not meddle with Oportet euangelizare, they are like to have
no part of Miserere. S. Paul also that good Bishop said, Vae mihi, sino^
euangelizauero. i. Cor. ix
Woe unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. And shall our Rabines think to escape
without pouyshment, though they preach nothing at al? I fear that if they will
not meddle with Euangelizare, they are like to cry another day, Vae, Vae, Vae,
quantae sunt tenebrae. Woe, woe, woe, how great are these darkenesses? God the
father, God the son, God the holy Ghost with all the Prophets and Apostles
cry out upon prestes for to preach the holy scriptures, exhortyng the^ to be
diligent in that matter. Cry, says God the father, cease not. Esa. lviii
Lift up thy voice as a tro^pe. Show the people their sins, and declare unto
them their wickedness. Again he says, Esa (...)
O Jerusalem I have set watch men upon thy wan^les, they shall not hold their
peace nether night nor day. Christ said to his Apostles, go through out the
world and preach the gospel to every creature. S. Paul says, take heed to
your selfs and to all y^ flock, upon whom the holy Ghost has made you
ouersears, Luke. xxiiii
to feed the congregation of God, whom he purchased with his blood. Act. x^
For I know y^ after my departure grievous wolfes shall enter in among you not
sparing the flock. And even among your selfs shall there arise men speaking
perverse things, y^ they may led away the disciples after the^. Therefore
watch, and remember that by the space of three whole years I did not cease to
monish every one of you both day and night even with tears. Again he says,
give atte^daunce to thy self and to doctrine, ^. Ti. iiii.
contine we in these. For if thou doste so, y^ shalt both save thy self and
them that hear the. Preach the word, be fervent be it in time or out of
time, reprove, rebuke, Titus. ii.
exhort with all softenes and doctrine. Speak those things that become
wholesome doctrine. S. Peter also says, i. Pet. v
ye Prestes se that ye feed christ's flock, which is among you, taking the
ouersyght of them not as though ye were compelled there to, but wyllyngly, not
for the desire of fylthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as though ye were
Lords over the paryshes, but that ye be an ensample to the flock. And wha^
the chief shepeheard shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible Crown of
glory.

These textes of the holy scripture declare manifestly how fervent, The
preaching of Gods word causes y^ Christen religion to floryshe
busy, studious and dilligent all true prestes ought to be in the preaching of
Gods word. The men godly enspired knew right well, that so long as Gods
word is preached to the people, it must needs go well with the Christen
religion, but if it once cease, than farewell all godliness, farewell all
virtue and goodness. Of this thing, alas for pity, have we had experience
many a year unto our great discomfort, and yet little redress. For many of the
prestes go forth to be as sluggysh as ever they were, neither have they any
godly care for Christ's flock committed unto the^. So they may have the
profytes, they care for no more. Bo nusest odor lucriexre qualiber. So y^ by
this means the sheep are like to dye for meat. But alas how should they
teach other, when they them selves know nothing. They are even as the Prophet
says, ^sa. lvi
dumme dogs not once being able to bark. Many again of them there are,
which are learned, and know their duty, and yet I know not with what spirit
moved they hold their peace, they speak nothing, they se their sheep run
astraye before their faces, walk in all kind of wyckednes, and yet have they
no pity. I wonder with what forheades these men will appear before the high
pressed and great Judge Christ at the dredefull day of judgment. I pray God they
be not Epicures both in living and judgment. But let us hear what the holy
and catholyke Doctors say unto this matter.

S. Jerome says, In Leuit. Did. xxxvi. Ca^. Siquis.
if any man will be a Bishop not only in name but also in deseruynge, let him
follow Moses, and let him follow Aaron. For what is said of them, that they
went not from the tabernacle of the Lord. Ergo Moses was continually in the
tabernacle of the Lord. What business had he there? Verily that either he
should learn somewhat of God, or else teach the people. These are the two
works of a Bishop, The work of a Bishop is to study the holy scriptures,
purely to preach the^ unto the people, and fervently to pray
that he should learn of god by readyng the divine scriptures and by having
his continual meditacion in them, or else teach the people, but yet ought be
to teach those things, that he had learned of god, and not of his own heart
or man's wisdom, but those things that y^ holy Ghost teaches. There is
another work also that Moses does, he goes not unto y^ wars, he fightethe
not against the enemies, but what does he? He prays. And while he prayethe,
his people overcomes, if he do once slake and let down his h^des, tha^ are
his people overcome and chased away. Let y^ priest of the church therefore
pray without ceasyng, Exo. xvii.
that the people, which are under him, may overcome there invisible enemies the
Amalechites, which are dyuels that do impugn and fight against them, that
will live godly in Christ.

O how true, sweet and godly are these words of the holy Doctore? Learn your
duty here o ye Prestes
Here may al Bishops and Prestes lern what their duty is, not to be idle, not
tohsit and hawk, not to dyse and card not to ba^cket and live voluptuously, not
to play the ruflyng gala^tes and to be entangled with worldely busynesses, but
to be continually in the tabernacle of the Lord, that is to say, to study
and to have their perpetual meditacion in the holy scriptures even both day
and night. as David says, Psalm. i.
and with all diligence to teach the people committed to their Spiritual
charge, not men's tradicions, not their own fantasies, but Gods most holy
word, even the holy scriptures, and such things, whereof y^ holy Ghost is the
Author. Let them therefore look well to their office. For if they be true
Bishops and Prestes, this is the work committed unto them, even continually to
study the holy scriptures, and purely to preach the^ unto the people. If they
leave this office undone, and do the worckes prescribed of man, so do they
show the^ selfs to be y^ servants not of god, but of man. Let the^ therefore
look, what answer they will make to the high Judge and great priest Christ at
the terrible day of judgment.

Moreover it is their duty ferue^tly and without ceasyng to pray for the
people, that they may prevail against Satan and his ministers that fight
daily against the^. The prayers of many prestes are cold ^owa d^yes
How cold y^ prayers of many of the^ are, I will not now dispute. For they are
more open to the whole world, than they need here to be rehearsed. Wha^ Moses
held up his hands and prayed his people did overcome. Whyther our Prestes
hold up their hands and pray, as they ought, let other me^ judge. Of this am
I sure, y^ syns the world began, therneuer reigned more sin and abhominacio^
than there does at this day, which is but a sle^der argument that we get the
victory of our enemies. God give al Bishops and Prestes grace once to look
upon their office diligently, y^ they may both earnestly study the holy
scriptures, teach them syncerly unto the people, and continually occupy the^
sel^esin fervent prayers. Than shall it not only be well with Christ's flock, but
also with them selves at the dredefull day of judgment, wha^ they shall
appear before y^ high Bishop Jesus Christ, and give accou^tes unto him of their
behauour in the office that was committed unto them in this world.

S. Austen also says, In Aggeu^ Propheta^
consider that it is the office of prestes, when they be demanded of y^ law,
to answer. If he be a Priest, let him know the law of the Lord, if he knows
not the law of the Lord, he declare the evidently that is he is no priest.
For it pertayneth unto ye Lords priest to know the law, and when he is asked,
to make answer of ye law. Lord be merciful unto us, what will a great number
of our prestes say to these words of S. Austen? I fear much, that if he
were not so ancient a Doctore, and a sayncte all ready approved by the Church,
surely many prestes for madness would nothing fear to accuse him of here^y,
and to affirm that he preaches heretical doctrine, so iopardous a thing at
this time is it to speak against these ignorant Rabines, which although they
know nothing, yet will they be Judges over all men, and ready streyghtewayes
to condemn them. It is not the long robe, the flaryng typpet about the neck,
the annoyntynge of the fyngers, the broad shauynge of the crown, that make the
the Priest, but knowledge and con^ynge in the law of the Lord, and so called
unto prestehode. The Prophet Malachy says, the lyppes of a Priest keep
knowledge, Ma^ac. ii
and at his mouth shall they require the law, for he is the messanger of the
Lord of Hoostes. Prestes ought to be learned in y^ law of god
So says S. Auste^ here that Prestes ought to be so well learned in the holy
scriptures, that wha^ any man demands a question of them concerning the law
of God, they should be able to answer. If he be a priest, says he, let him
know the law of the Lord. If he knows not the law of the Lord, he
declares evidently, that he is no priest. S. Austen here affyrmethe, Who is a
priest aft^r S. Au^^^^ mind
that he only is a priest, which has knowledge in the law of the Lord. If
there want the knowledge, it is an evident argument, says he, y^ there is no
Priest. It is happy that saint Auste^ is gone and a sayncte. For if he were now
alive and a Bishop again, as he was in times paste, and should go on
visitacion through out the dioces, I think surely he would depose a great sort
of Prestes, as me^ more fytte for ye carte than for the church. For S. Austen
measures all presthode by knowledge. It pertaynethe unto the Lords Priest,
says he, to know the law, and when he is demanded, to make answer of y^
law. He may be a Priest of Baal, Obsequiu^ amicos, veritas odiu^ parit.
of the ^omysh Bishop, and of man, but of the Lord he can not be, except he
has knowledge. If any man fealethe him self grieved at this matter, and can
not abide his scalde and scuruy back thus to be rubbed, let him know that they
be not my words, but the words of S. Austen, a man in his time not only godly
enspired, and excellently learned, but also of great authorite before the
world. I only rehearse his and other holy Doctores words, because I would
gladly have men to do truly their office, and to set this saying of the
Psalmograph ever before their eyes, Be not like a horse and a moyle, which
have no understanding. Psa. xxxi
For ignorance in all men is to be abhorred, but in Prestes chefely. If after
the mind of thapostle Paul, says S. Jerome, In Esa^am
Christ is the power of God, and the wysdom of God, it follows well, that he
that knowethe not the scriptures, knows not the power of God and the wisdom
of him. For the ignorance of the scriptures, is the ignorance of Christ^ Leo
the Bishop says, Dis. xxxviii Can. Si in ^a^cis.
if ignorance seems intolerable even in lay me^, how much more is it worthy
nether of excuse nor of forgyuenes in them that bear rule? I therefore desire
all Prestes that be good and virtuous and tender the glory of God, and the
salvation both of their own and other Christen men's souls, that they will
not be moved with these words, which come from a breast, that wysheth well unto
them all, but earnestly look upon their office better, cast away blind
ignorance, study for y^ knowledge of holy scriptures, and labor with all
main to do that, which God requires of them.

Moreover saint Gregory says, Ad venantium Episcopum^
y^ shepparde, which does not rebuke them that offend, without doubt he
sleath them by holdyng his peace Again he says, In Ezech Hom. x^
we that are called Prestes, besides these euels that we have of our own, we
add also other men's deaths. For we slay so many as we se daily go unto
death, and yet are sluggyshe and hold our peace. He^e is terrible saying,
that they, which are appointed to save Christen me^nes souls do cruelly slay
the^ by their negligence and holdyng their peace. Oh that the Bishops of every
diocese would diligently look upon this matter, the easyer much should be
their accountes at the dredefull day of judgment. The holy Ghost might breath
it into their minds.

In concilio t^lerano we read on this manner, Dis. xxxviii Can. Ignoranta.
Ignorance the mother of all errors is most of all to be exchewed in the
Prestes of God, which have taken upon them the office of teaching among the
people of God. Prestes are warned to read the holy scriptures, as Paul
thapostle says unto Timothe, 1. T^. iiii
give attendaunce to readyng, and exhortacio^ and lernyng, and continue always
in these. Let Prestes therefore know y^ holy scriptures and canons, and let
all their work, business and travail consist inpreaching and doctrine, and
let them edify all men so well with the knowledge of faith, as with the good
informacion of works. O godly decree. Here may all prestes learn, that their
work does consist in preaching and doctrine, in edifi^ng the people and in
giving them godly examples of virtuous living. God send us mo such councels.

Bishop Nicolas writes on this manner, Did. xliii. Can. Dispensatio.
the distribucion of the heavenly seed is enjoined us. Woe therefore be unto us,
if we do not spryncle it abroad. Woe be unto us, if we hold our peace. Here is
eternal da^nacion thretened prestes, if they do not sow abroad the heavenly
seed of Gods word in the feldes of christen men's hearts. Let them look
well to their office, for they stond in a perrillous state. Many of them
thyncke it a great pleasure to receive yearly so great profits of their
benefices, Luke. vi
but let them remember the common proverb, sweet meat must have sower sauce.
Woe be to you, says Christ, that laughe now, ^or ye shall mourn and weep. Woe
be to you that are filled, for ye shall honger. Woe be to you rytthe men,
which have your consolacio^. Woe be to you, when all men praise you.

Platina in the life of Bishop Innocentius the syxt, Platina^
writes on this manner: Innocentius the syxt did not give the ecclesiastical
benefices but unto such Prestes, as ware thoroughly proved and tried both in life
and learning. Would god we had^no such Inno centes
And he made a constitucio^ that all prelates and so many as had benefices
should go home to their own Paryshes under pain of cursyng. For he said, that
no hyrelyng but the very own shepparde ought to keep his own sheep. Here was
a wonderful godly co^stitucio^. Would god it were o^serued through out all
Christendom. Than should Christ's ^locke be much better fed than they are at
this time. Than should not y^ Parso^s and Vicars be abse^t from their benefices
as they are now a days. Than should y^ goods of y^ Paryshes be spent among
the Paryshners, and not abroad as they be now a days, no man can tell where
about. Than should the poor people be better looked upon. Than should Prestes
be more diligent to maintain hospitalite. Than should the beneficed me^ more
quietly apply their minds unto the study of holy scriptures and other godly
meditacio^s. Tha^ should seruent love, which is now almoost universally
decayed, spryng up new again between the prestes and the lay men. Than should
prestes be honored as fathers, and lay men count the^ selves as their
children, gyuing them reverence and double honor as the scripture commands.
1. Tim. v
Tha^ should Gods word florysh, and the glory of God he sought of all men. Ah
shall we not once se this joyful day in England? When might it ever be
brought to pass better and more conuenie^tly, than now under this our most
excellent King, which hitherto has so both godly and prosperously like
another Ezechias trauayled in the byldyng again of our Lord Gods temple, in
throwynge down the works of Hypocrisy, supersticion, and Idolatry, and in
setting up again the pure and Christen religion? Lord, grant that it may
come to pass, yea and y^ shortly.

Thus se we both by the holy scriptures, Prestes must both preach syncerly, and
also live godly Luke iiii.
the ancient Doctors, and the godly old councels, how greatly all Bishops
and Prestes ought to be occupied in studye^g and preaching Gods word. But to
this their godly preaching they must also join a virtuous and pure life,
unless they edify not so much with their preaching, as they destroy with
their wicked living. It is a shame for a Phisicio^ to be so spotted and pocky,
that it shall may justly be said to him, Phisicio^ heal thy self. God said
to the sinner, says the Psalmographe, Psalm. xiix
why doste thou preach my laws, and take my Testament in thy mouth: Thou
haste hated to be reformed, and thou haste cast away my words behind the.
If y^ saw a these, thou rannest with him, and with adulterers dyddest thou
lay thy portion. Thy mouth did abound with cursed speaking, and thy tongue
did couple craftily together deceates. Thou dyddest sytte, and speak against
thy brother, and against thy mothers son dyddest thou lay a stomblyng block.
These things haste thou done, and yet have I holde^ my peace. Thou wyckedly
thoghtest, that I would be like unto the, but I will reprove the, and come face
to face against the. O understand these things, ye that forget God, unless
he pluck you away, and there be none y^ can deliver you. Sayncte Paul also
says, Romans ii.
thou that teach another, teach not thy self. Thou that preachest that
men should not steal, stealest thy self. Thou that sayste that whoredom
should not be committed, playest the whoremonger thy self. Thou that abhorrest
Images, robbest God of his honor thy self. Thou that gloryest of the law,
through breakyng of the law, dishonorest God. For ye name of God is evil
spoken of among the Gentiles through you.

Of these things it is evident, y^ it is not sufficient for prestes to preach
Gods word, except they also lead a virtuous and godly life. Math. v.
Who so ever does and teaches, he shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven, says the scripture. Christ does not only call prestes the salt of
the earth, but also the light of y^ world. With their preaching they season
the people, Prestes are not only called the salt of y^ earth, but also the
light of the world
but with their light of godly conversation they show men how they ought
towalke and live. Therefore immediately is it subioyned, let your light so
shine before men, that they may se your good works and glorify your father,
i. Tim. iiii.
which is in heaven. i. Tim. ^
Be an example of the faithful, says Paul, ii. Tim. i^
in word, in conversation, in love, in Spirit, in faith. Keep thy self
pure. Study to show thy self commendable to God, a work man that neadeth not
to be ashamedde. He that preaches Christ, In sermon. deieiunio.
says S. Ambrose, ought to show him self wholly estraunged from all kind of
vices. S. John^ Chrysostom also says, In Math.
it is a great shame for Prestes, and for so many as be of the Clergy, when
lay men be found faythfuller and more ryghteous than they are? How can it
otherwise be than a shame for them to be inferioure to the lay people, whom
to be like unto them, it is also a shame? Age^. S. Gregory says, the light of
the flock is the flame of the shepparde. In Pastora
For it beco^methe the Lords shepehearde and a Priest to ^hyne in manners and
living, that in him as in y^ glass of their light, the people that is
committed unto him may both discern what they should follow, and also se
what they should correct and amend. Hereof is it evident, what great purite
and innocence of life ought to be in prestes, that their life may correspond
and in all points answer to their preaching.

But here is an answer to be made to the unsavory talk of certain men now a
days, which because they se the manners of the Preachers not agreeable in all
points to their sermons, faull at defyaunce with gods word, blaspheme it as
heresy, rail upon the preachers and absent them selfs from the hearing of all
godly exhortacions, warnynges and councils. These parsons hinder no man so
much as them selfs. They may well be compared to a folysshe man, Mark well
which comes unto the market for to bye meat. But wha^ he beholds the
butcher, and perceaueth him to have some deformite in his face, as one of his
eyes to be out, or to be balde, or else to hold his neck awrye, gothe
straight home again, and chosethe rather to dye for honger, than he will bye
meat of such a butcher although the meat be never so pure, Math. xx^^^
clean, commestible and wholesome. But let us hear what the holy scripture
says. In the chayer of Moses sit Scribes and Phareses. All the^fore that they
command you to keep, look that you keep and do, but according to their works
do ye not. For they say, but they do not. Here christ commaundethe us not to
abstain from the hearing of Gods word, though they be never so wicked and
evil, that preach it. For who were more ungodly, and greater enemies to
Christ, than the Scribes and Phareses, yet Christ commaundethe to hear them so
long as they sytte in the chayer of Moses. What it is to sit in the chayer of
(...)
To sit in the chayer of Moses is truly and syncerly to preach those things
that Moses did, to enterpret the law according to the right vain of the holy
scripture, and only to seake the glory of God and the profyt of the faithful.
So long as they that are preachers do this, they are to be heard, though their
life be never so abominable. For it is not the preacher, to whom we must have
pryncipall respect, but to the word of God. Another do we come into the Temple
to gase upon the Preacher, but to hear the holy scriptures declared, and so
learn to lead a godly life. If he were one of the ministers of Satan, yea Satan
himself that preaches, so long as he bryngethe in Scriptum est, so long as
he teaches purely the divine scripture without wreastyng Every man y^
preachethe ye scripture truly is to be heard, be his life never so wicked.
or corruptynge of the same, he is to be heard. We ought not so greatly to
mark the teacher, as that which is taught. If he teachethe well, it is ours,
and we have that we came for, if he lives well, it is his own, and he shall
receive the reward. But let us hear what Chrysostom says to this matter.
In Math Cap. xxiii.
If the preste^ live well says he, it is their advantage, but if they teach
well, it is yours. Be not curious to boul^e out that, which pertayneth unto
another man. For oftentimes good learning comethe forth from an evil manne,
as vile earth brings forth precious gold. Is precious gold despised for the
vile earth? Therefore as the gold is chosen, and the earth forsaken, so
likewise take you the learning, and leave the manners. Again he says, let us
take the doctrine but not the ma^ners. Herbs are not necessary for the bees,
but the flowers are. So you likewise gather the flowers of doctrine, and leave
their fashons of living. Here this holy Doctore wylleth us not to despise y^
word, though the Preacher be evil. Let us take that is ours, and let go
that is his. The doctrine is ours, y^ life is his I had rather have a syncer
preacher of Gods word, which shall declare Christ unto me purely, rebuke my
synful living, conforte me with the sweet promises of GOD, show me how I
ought to institute my life according to y^ will of god. etc although his ma^ners
be somewhat corrupt and dissent from his preaching, tha^ to have a wicked
Papist, a pestilent Pharese and a supersticious Hypocrite, which shall
outwardely like a crafty fox pretend a certain grauite, and a popeholy manner
of living, and yet corrupt the holy scriptures, confound Gods word with
men's tradicions, led the people into supersticious errors, flatter the
herers, preach for lucre, ma^ckle the doctrine of Christ, and obscure the way
of truth. Of such Christ warns us to take heed in the Gospel of Matthew,
Math. vi^
saying, Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in shepes clothyng,
but inwardly they are ravening wolfes. Agenst these Christ in another place
thondereth, Math. xxiii
saying, woe be to you Scribes and Phareses, hypocrites, for ye are like painted
sepulchers, which outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of bones of
dead men and of all fylthynes. So ye likewise appear outwardely ryghteous to
me^, but inwardly ye are full of hypocrisye and wyckednes. Again, ye are they,
that justify your selfs before me^, Luke. xvi. Psalm. i.
but God knows your hearts. For that which seems praise worthy before men,
is abominable before God. Therefore so long as yc preacher sytteth in the
chayer of Moses and not in the chayer of pestilence, he is to be heard for the
words sake, be his life never so wicked and ungodly. Notwythstondyng I exhort
all Christen Preachers, and so many as unfeignedly tender the glory of god, and
the promocio^ of his most b^yssed word, that they do their endeavor not only
to set forth Gods truth in word and tongue, but also in work and verite.
Let them be the same in life, yt they profess in word. For he takethe upon him
the name of a Christen man in vain, says sayncte Austen, Cura esse
quodlube^^er audis.
that followethe not Christ. For what does it profyt the to be called that
thou art not, Lib. de doctrina christiana.
and to usurp a strange name? If you haste a pleasure to be a Christen man, do
those things that pertayne unto Christianite, and than hardely take upon the
the name of a Christian. S. Ambrose also says, In Ser. de Abraham.
it is a shameful lie before any man to call himself a Christen man, and not
to do the works of Christ. Hereto perlaynethe the saying of S. Cypriane, De.
xii. abusionibus,
no man is truly called a Christian, but he which labors, so much as
lygheth in his power, to show himself conformable and like to Christ in his
manners and conversation. He y^ says, y^ he dwells in Christ, i. Joan. ii.
saiths. Ioh^^, ought to walk as he has walked.

Seeing than that so great purite and innocence of life is required of all men
that profess Christ, surely in Prestes and in the^ that are preachers of Gods
word, Math. v.
it ought to excel above all other. Men light not a candle, and put it under a
bushel, but upon a candlestick, and it shyneth to so many as are in the house.
So likewise Prestes are not called unto the office of preaching, that their
conversation should be dark and without light, but that it shuldbe so garnyshed
with godly virtues and good works, that it might light to so many as are in
the house of God.

Christ the high priest and everlasting Bishop grant it may so be.

But as I may return unto our matter of swearynge, let them that be Preachers,
I say, above all things rebuke this abominable sin of swearyng, and declare
unto the people what a great offense it is, and how the plages of God and his
ve^geau^s shall not depart from the houses of them, that use this most
detestable sin of swearyng.

Furthermore let all fathers and mothers give earnest diligence that Fathers
and mothers
their children may from their very cradles learn to worship and honor y^
most blyssed name of god, and never to have it in their mouths without great
reverence done unto it, either by putting of their cappes or else by boweynge
their knees. Let them not be suffered by any means to swear by God or by onye
of his creatures, Math. v Jacob. v
but let your co^municacion be yea, yea, nay, nay. If they at onye time swear,
let them first of all be admonysshed of their fault, and told how great an
offense it is before God wyckedly and vaynely to swear. If they will not so
amend, let the parents ponyshe them sharply. Better were it, that their
bodies in this world should suffer a little pain, than after this life to
have both their bodies and souls cast into hell fire. If all fathers and
mothers will thus diligently watch upon their children, it shall cause them not
only not to be defiled with the most grievous sin of swearing, but also that
the most holy name of GOD shall be had in high reverence, great estimacion and
perpetual honor for ever after so long as they live. But above all things
let the parents them selves be an ensample in this behalf unto their
children, and show evermore such reverence unto the name of God, that the
yonglynges may well perceive, that it is no vain thing, that they are taught.

Let all masters and mastresses and so many as have servants under their
dominion, Masters and mastresses
provide that by no means they suffer their servants at any time to swear
nether by god nor by any of his creatures. Let the^ show unto them what a
great danger it is, Eccle. xxii.
and how that the ve^geau^s of God shall not depart from those houses, where
swearers are, nether can there any thing prosper, but all things must needs go
to havoc. Let them also teach them to have the name of God in so great
honor and reverence, that it never be named among them but honorably and
reverently. Let them at the least put of their cappes so often as they name God,
Christ, or any part of his most precious body. If any of their servants
will not leave their swearynge, and learn to have the name of God in honor,
than let them be put out of their houses, unless they bring the vengeance of
God upon so many as are in their company.

For as the godliness of one man is many times thoccasio^, Nota.
that God is marciful to many, so is the wyckednes of one man oftentimes y^
cause y^ many are ponyshed. Therefore it is not enough that the masters and the
mastresses of the house be virtuous and godly, except the servants be so
likewise. It becomes a master to have Servants like unto his own manners,
unless his goodness profyteth not so much in the right institucion of his
family, as y^ wyckednes of the other destroys. It is well, when one plantethe
and another waterethe, but it is evil, when one planteth and another plucketh
up. Mine eyes are unto the faithful of the earth, that they may dwell with me,
Psalm. ^ What servants christian me^ ought to ^au^
says David, and who so ledeth a godly life shall be my servant.

There shall no disceatfull parsonne dwell in my house, he that tells lies
shall not tarry in my sight.

Would God all masters were of this mind.

Let all me^ of occupacio^ abstain from swearyng in their byinge and selling.
Men of occupacion
For it is a shame, that the man of God should be esteemed among Christen men of
so small price, that for the valor of a little temporal advantage and
worldely lucre, men should abuse it and vaynely take it. Woe be to that man,
which for his own private lucre does blaspheme the name of God, or any of
his creatures. There ought to be so great sincerite and faith among Christen
men, that there should need no oaths in their bargaynes and worldly businesses.
A Christen man's word ought to be better and surer than any obligacio^. God
grant that we may once se this come to pass in England.

Let them that swear, Swearers of custom
because it is the custom so to do, leave their swearyng, and no more follow
the wicked custom, but the truethe of Gods word, which says, swear not at
all. Math. v.
Let your communicacio^ be yea, yea, nay, nay.

Let them that glory and rejoice so much in their swearyng, Swearers for
pride.
that they will take upon them to maintain it by y^ scripture, abstain from
their idle oothes, and wreaste no more the holy scripture, unless they
following the manners of Satan, receive a reward worthy their wickedness.
Math. iiii


Let them that say, though they swear, Swearers meaning no evil.
yet we thyncke no harm, Math. ^iii
leave their swearyng and remember that they shall give accou^tes at the
dredeful day of judgment for every idle word that they have spoken, Swearers
y^ they may be believed.
so that they shall not escape vnponished for their idle oothes.

Let them that say, few or none will believe us, except we swear, rather
meddle with few or none, tha^ they should transgress the commandment of God,
and bring damnacion upon their own heads.

To conclude, let all oothes be taken away from the minds of Christen men,
except they be taken for those causes, which I have expressed before. If we
will thus do, we shall easily exchewe the most detestable vice of perjury, and
frendely live together in all truethe, sincerite and faith, as it become the
saynctes, and so many as profess Christ. For he that will not swear, will not
lyghtelye falsely swear, and be forsworn.

And that we may be the more encouraged to forsake all vain and idle oothes,
The conclusion of the book
let us remember, that God, which is ye everlasting truth, has promised, that
he will glorify them, which honor him and have his name in reverence: Again,
that they shall come unto dishonor and a shameful end, that despise him and
blaspheme his most holy name. Now if we will that God glorify us, God to
glorify us what it is
that is to say, be our good Lord, defend preserve, keep and govern us,
bliss us, lyghten his gracious cou^tena^s upon us, send us all things
necessary for our living in this present world, and after this life give us
eternal glory: than is it convenient that we do not abuse y^ name of god by
our vain and unrighteous oaths, but always laud, praise, commend, magnify
and bliss it, caull upon it, fly unto it as unto an holy anchore in all our
aduersite, and never to have in our mouths, What euylles shall chaunse unto
us, if we vaynly swear?
but with high reverence and great honor. If we do the contrary, yt is to
say, blaspheme his most holy name, than shall we undoubtedly come unto
dishonor and a shameful end. In this world the plage and ve^geau^ce of God
shall not go away from our houses, we shall be stryken with many grievous
diseases in our bodies, our goods and cattle, yea and all that ever we have
shall come to noght, our kind of living shall be despised with all good men,
our death shall be paynefull, miserable and wretched, and after these so great
and manifold plages, we may be sure for our wicked sweryng to be cast into
hell fire, where the flames of it shall never be quenched, where weeping and
gnashyng of tethe shall be, Esa. l^vi.
where the worm yt shall gnawe our consciences shall never dye. Math. xxiii


Therefore I beseech al Christen me^ by the tender marcyes of God and by the
most precious blood of our savior Jesus Christ, whereby alon^ we are redeemed,
made pure, and delivered from al our sins, that they from hensforth leave
their abominable swearyng either by God or by any of his creatures. Let them
never take God to wytnes, except it be in a necessary and earneste matter, I
mean such a matter as makes unto the glory of God. Let their co^municacion
be yea, yea, nay nay. Let so great syncerite, truth, and faith reygne among
the^, that one may believe another without an oothe, even by a word. Let the^
have God in such reverence and honor, and so order their tongues in this
world, unto the glory of God, that after this life through the mercy of God
they may be found worthy to be in the number of those blissed spirits, which
without ceasyng sing perpetual praises to the most holy name of God on this
manner: Great and marvelous are thy works, Apoca. xv.
O Lord God almighty, Apoca. iiii.
ryghteous and true are thy ways, o king of saynctes. Who shall not fear
the, O Lord, and magnifye thy name? For thou art worthy, O Lord, to take the
glory and honor, and power, for thou haste made al things, and for thy will
they are and were made. Apoca. v.
To him that sytteth in the throne, and to the lamb, be blyssynge, and honor,
and glory and power worlds without end.

Ame^.
Say not but that ye are warned. Give the glory to God alone.
Acts against customable swearers made in times past by diverse excellent
Princes, and their honorable council.
King Henry the fyfte.
King Henry the fyste made a statute for swearers in his own Palace,
Vvaldenus in quo dam sermon.
yt if he were a Duke y^ did swear, he should forfyt for every time xl.s^. to
the aydyng of poor people. Would god this statute were observed and kept^ now
adays, not only in the court but also thorowout England
If he were a Lord or Barone. xx.s^ If he were a Knight or an Esquyer x.s^. If
he were a Yeman. xl. d If he were a Page or a Lackey, or a slave, to be
scourged naked either with a rod or else with a whyppe.

King Edmunde.
King Edmu^de made this law, that they, which were proved, once falsely
forsworn, should for ever be separated from Gods co^gregacio^.

Donaldus King of Skottes.
DOnaldus King of Skottes made this act wtin his land, (...) Botius in
historia Scotorum.
that all Periurers and common swearers should have their lips feared with a
burning whot iron.

Sayncte Lodowycke King of France.
This law aforsayd did Saint Lodowycke King of France enacte also, A godly
pr^clamacion god send (...) many (...)
and put it once in execucio^ at Paris upon a Cytezyn there for blasphemyng the
name of Christ unto the example of other, and so caused it to be proclaimed
through out his Realm for a general ponyshement.

Philip King of France.
PHilippe King of France, whom so ever he perceived to blaspheme the name of
God either in Tavern, or any where else, yea although he were a great man of
dignite, Vince^tius in speculo historiali.
commanded, that he should be drowned. And caused a strong act to be made of
it a little before his death, and leafte it unto his successors.

Philippe Earl of Flaunders.
PHilip Earl of Flaunders made this constitucion wythe^n his Iacobus Mayer9 in
chromeis Fla^driae.
Earldom in the year of our Lord M. Clxxviij. that he that did forswear
himself, should loose his life and goods.

Marimilianus the Emperor.
MAximilianus the Emperor made also a decre, In Paralip. reru^ memorabilium.
that who so ever he were, that was a common swearer, should for the first time
loose a mark. And if he were not content with that, he should loose his head,
which act he and the nobility of the Empire commanded to be publyshed four
times in the year, at Easter, Whytsondaye, Assumpcion of our Lady and Christmas.

The council of Josephus.
THe council of Josephus is this that he, Lib* iiiii. Antiq. Cap. vi.
which blasphemeth god and irreverently use his name, should be stoned unto
death, and than hanged up by the space of one day, and so taken down, and
buried wtoute all manner of honor.

Diverse other most noble Princes made diverse other most holy laws, for the
exchewing of customable swearyng and Perjury. Would god that theyse their most
godly acts might either be renewed among christen men, or else some other
devised for the abolyshyng and putting away of the most wicked and
detestable custom of swearynge, every Prince as he shall think most
convenient for the state of his Realm. Laws are made, and penaltees appointed
for diverse mean things, which only concern worldly matges^, why than do not
Christian Princes also make laws, acts and decrees for y^ glory of god, y^ his
name may be had in honor and reverence as most worthy of all it is? Worldly
matters may not so be esteemed, yt things pertaining unto the glory of God
and the salvation of Christen men's souls shall be neglected.

For rulares are appointed of God not only to look upon mundayne and worldly,
but also divine and spiritual matters. And it is their duty no les to tender
the glory of GOD, and to make acts concerning the same, the^ to se that
public tranquilite and all things decent and comely for an honest outward
order be mayntayned, preserved and kept. And as they are the supreme heads
and chief Rulars both of y^ Spiritualte and Te^poralte, so ought they to
travail no less in spiritual tha^ in te^poralmatters. Look what enormities,
wyckednesses, ungodly customs, supersticious unrighteous manners* etc. reygne
in Realms, all these ought to be abolyshed and put away by the terrene
Potentates and earthely Rulars. God grant that we may se it shortly, not
only in this Realm, but in the kyngedomes of so many as profess Christ.

AMEN.
Remedies against swearyng.
IF thou be bent to leave the wicked custom of swearynge, first pray
feruentely unto God, that he will take away that thy heart, which is defiled on
such sort, and so hardened with the customable usage of synnyng, that there
can enter no virtue nor godlynes into it.

Secondly desire him for his great mercies sake to create in the a new heart,
and to pour his spirit so abundantly into thy breast, that by the influence
of it, thou may be able to drink in virtue, and all that ever shall be
plesasit to the divine ma^este.

Thyrdly be so at defyaunce with all vice and sin, that by no means at any
time thou have pleasure either to think, hear or talk of it, so far let it
be from the to meddle any thing at all with it in thought, word or deed.

Fortely set this saying of Christ ever before thine eyes, ^ (...) the third
chapter of S. James ^pistle.
that at the day of judgment acco^ptes shall be given of every idle word,
that is spoken. This shall bring unto thy remembrance, how gre^ous accou^tes
shall be required of them, y^ customably swear, vaynely usurp the name of God,
blaspheme GOD, be falsely forsworn. etc.

Fyftly, that thou may the more easly exchewe swearyng, fly the company of
them, that use customablye to swear, or have a pleasure to enterlase their
talk with blasphemous oothes. And what so ever thou hate in other, look that
by no means thou doste the same.

Syxtely, busy thy self continually in gyuyng praysesvnto God, and in setting
forth the glory of his name. Delyght thou in no thing so much, as in doing
those things, y^ make unto the auaunceme^t of the divine majesty. This shall
not a little make unto y^ deposicio^ of swering, and make the to have a mouth,
which shall be the organ and instrument of the holy Ghost, to set for the
and publysh the glory of God.

Finally, let nothing come forth of thy mouth, until it be thoroughly sodde^
in thy breast, as Epictetus the Greek Philososopher warns, and so order both
thy tongue and thyn acts in all thy conuersacio^, that it never repent the
afterward of onye thing that thou haste done. So shalt thou not only exchew
the damnable custom of swearynge, but also garnysh thy life with all kind of
virtues unto the great glory of God and the health of thy soul. So be it.

TELOS.
A Table wherein thou shall find all the principal things contained in this
book.
THe Inuectyue speaks. Fol^io. i The Preface unto the book. fol. eodem The
Inuecty^e. Folio. viii Vice greatly increased. follo. x Say not but that ye
are warned. fol. xii A comparison between God and man. fol. xiiii Idolatry and
swearynge are the most gr^uous sins. Fol. xvi What it is to take the name of
God in vain. folio. eodem Men of occupacion. Folio. xviii O extreme
abhominacion. fol^ eodem What truth and faith ought to reygne among Christen
men. fol. eod^m Dysers and Carders. Folio. xix Men of law. fol. eodem
Prestes and beneficed men. Folio. xx Reruyng men. folio. xxi An admonicion
for Gentle men. Fol. xxiii Paryshuers. fol. eodem Children. Folio. xxiiii The
world and Gods word judges diversely of sw^arers. folio. xxvi Swearers are
like thieves condemned to be hanged Folio. xxxii Examples of swearyng ponyshed
in our time. Folio eodem Our damnacion is great. Folio. xxxiiii What salt
sign^fyeth. folio. xixv Swea^^rs are enemies to Gods word. Folio xxxvi Of
Per^ury. Folio. xi Who so swearethe by God, that is the truth and
righteousness, and takethe him to wy^nesse to maintain his lyeng disceat and
unrighteous, he is a periure, ill, light, and such one, y^ little
regardethe Gods truth and his commandments. Folio. xii A comparison
between the father and the son. Folio folio. xiiii Perjury thyrsteth innocent
blood. Folio. xiv True men are sometime hanged. fol. eodem An admonicion for
^ues^mongers. Fol. xivi An admonicion for Judges. folio. xlvii Why GOD has
given men two ears. (...) How Judges shall behave them selfs, (...) any
matter is brought before them. Fol. xlviii What men Questmong^^s ought to be.
Folio xlix ^ag^strates. fol. eodem Bishops and Prestes. Folio. l Married
fold. fol eodem Subjects. Folio. ii A demand whyther all oothes, promises
and vows are to be performed. fol. eodem What oothes, promises and vows
ought to be broken. fol. eodem God desyrethe thanckes gyuyng, and not blo^^^s
sacrifices. Folio. iiii ^owes oftentimes in the scripture are taken for praises
and thanckes gyuyng. Folio. liiii A whot zele in deed, but not according to
knowledge. Folio. lv An oothe ought to have three compagnions. Folio lvil What
incommodities rise of perjury. Folio lviii Per^ured persons shall not escape
vnponyshed. folio. li^ Excuses of swearyng. Folio. lx Of the custom, fol.
eodem O bloudsoupers. Folio. l^ii What it is to swear in God. fol. (...) How
swearyng came up first. fol. eodem Why God suffered the Jews to swear by him.
Folio Folio. lciii Dothes among the faythefull need not, among the unfaithful
they profyt not. Folio. l^^ Whyther all oothes are taken away from Christen
men. folio. lxvi The error of the Anabaptists. fol. eodem For what causes a
Christen man may swear. Folio lxvii Example for the glory of God. fol. eodem
Example for the health of our neighbor. Folio lxviii An example for the
health of our selfs. eodem Austen for swearyng. Folio. l^ix The Magistrate
may lawefully require an oothe. folio. l^x An admonicion for them that shall
require the oothe. fol. eodem Magistrates. fol. ixxi Bishops, Parsonnes,
(...) etc. Fol. lcxii Mark this comparison. fol. lcxiii The preaching of
Gods word causethe the Christen ^eligion (...) florysh. fol. lcxvi The
wor^ke of a Bishop is to study the holy scriptures, pur^^ to preach the unto
the people, and ^^ently to pray. fol. lcxvii Learn your duty here O ye
prestes fol. lccviii The prayers of many Prestes are coide now a days. fol.
eodem ^restes ought to be learned in the law of (...) Folio lcx^ Who is a
pr^ste af^^r Sayn^^^ Austens mind Folio eodem Would God we had into such
Iunocentes. Folio l^^^^^^ Prestes must both preach sincerly, and also live
godly. fol. lxxxiiii Pristes are not only called the salt of y^ earth, but
also the light of the world. fol. lcxx^ What it is to sytte in the chayer of
Moses Folio l^xxvii Every man that preachethe the scripture truly, is to be
heard, be his life never so wicked. Folio lxxxviii Fathers and mothers. fol.
xc^ Masters and Mastresses. fol. eodem What servants Christen men ought to
have F^l^o xcii Men of occupacion. folio xciii Swearers of custom. fol eodem
Swearers for pride. fol. eodem Swearers ^^anyng no eueil. fol. eodem Swearers,
that they may be believed. fol. eodem The ron (...) of the book. folio. xciiii
God to glorify us. what it is. fol. eodem What euyls shall chaunse unto us, if
we vaynly swear. fol. eodem Acts against customable swearers made in times
paste by diverse excellent Princes and their hono^^^ble council. folio. x^vi Of
^ynge (...) the fyste. fol. eodem Would God t^^s ^ tatute were observed and
kept now a days, not only in the court, but also through out England.
fol. eodem Of King Edmunde. Folio eode^ Of Donaldus King of Skottes. Folio
xci Saint Lodowycke King of France. Folio eode^ Of Philippe King of France.
A godly Proclamacion, GOD send us man such. Folio. xc^ Of Philippe Earl of
Flaunders. Folio eode^ Of Maximilianus the Emperor. Folio eode^ The council
of Josephus. Folio xcviii Remedies against swearyng. Folio. xc^^ Read the
third Chapter of Sayncte James Epistle. fol. eodem
The end of the Table.

