A Godly Medytacyon of the christen soul Concerning a love toward God and
his Christ, compyled in french by Lady Margarete queen of Nauer^ and aptely
translated into Englysh by the right virtuous lady Elyzabeth daughter to our
late sovereign King Henri the viij



Inclita filia, serenissimi olim Anglorum Regis Henrici octaui Elizabeta, tam
Graece quam latin foeliciter in Christo erudita.

To the right virtuous and christenly learned young lady Elizabeth, the noble
daughter of our late sovereign king Henry the.viij. Johan Bale wysheth health
with daily increace of Godly knowledge.
Diverse and many (most gracious lady) have the opynyons been among the
profane philosophers and christen dyuynes, concerning right Nobylyte, Nobylyte
and no fewar stryues and contencyons for the same. Some autours have vaynely
boasted it to take orygynall o^ the old Gods of the Gentyles as every land
has had his peculyar Saturn, Jupiter, and Hercules. yea our England here and
all. Some has fatt it from the four general monarchies of the Assyrianes,
Perseanes, Greeks, and Romans. Some have attrybuted it, to the bold battayles
and bloudshedynges, in Ninus of Babylon the first inue^tour of polycyes in
war. in our great Albion the Chamesene, Albion.
which first in this regyon suppressed the posterite of Iaphet, usurping Brute.
therein the first monarchy. in Brute that more than six hundred years after
defaced of him the tyrannouse issue. in Ebra^ck and Dunwallo. in Brenne and
Belyne. in great Constantyne, Artoure, Cadwalader, Engist, Egbert, Alphrede
wyllyam co^querour and soch other, for like ^^questes of the Romans, Greeks.
Galls, pyctes, Brytaynes. Saxons, Danc^ Irysh^^^ and Englyshens.

The hawty Romans set not yet a little (...) themselves, that they have ryse^
of (...) and Romulus, Romani.
of whom the one most sh^mefully betrayed his own na^^^^ kyndred and contraye,
and the other most unnaturally slew his own brother (...) worldly domynyo^.
Gwalli.
Like as our walshe(...) England. aduau^cynge their succession or progeny
above the Englysh will needs come of Dardanus and Bute, a fon^dacyo^ not all
unlike to the other. These gloryouse champyons for this far fatched ground
of their Nobylyte, accou^te all other nacyons and peoples, ignoble, profane,
and barbarouse, as is to be seane in the monume^tes of their writers. But in
the mean season, they are not aware that they wndyscretely prefarre cursed
Cham to blessed Iaphet, Iaphet.
by whose posteryte the Isles of the Gentyles were first sorted out in to
speches, kyndredes, and na^yons, Gene 10. and not by Chams ofsprynge, of whom
the Troianes and Romans had their noble beginning. That the Chame senes had
in those Isles, was by cruel vsurpacyon and tyranny, as testyfyeth Berosus the
Caldeane and therefore that ground of Nobylyte is not all the best. Over and
besides all this, some have applied it to renomed birth or succession of
blood, some to the habu^dau^ce of pleasures worldly some to the mayntenau^ce
of great famylyes, kinds of Nobylyte
some to the su^ptuousnesse of notable buyldynges, some to the high stomach and
stature of person, some to valeau^tnesse in marcyall feats, some to semely
manners of courtesye, some to lyberalyte of rewards and gifts, some to the
auncyeninesse of long coutynuaunce, some to wisdom learning and stody for a
co^me^ wealth with soch like. And these are not all to be dysalowed, for we
find them in Abraham, and David with other just fathers.

But now follows, a monstruouse, or whether ye will, a prestygyouse nobylyte
The Romysh clergy ymagenynge to exalte themselves above the lewd layte Clergy.
(as they shame not yet to call the worldly powers) have given it in a far
other kind, to mytars, masses, Cardynall hattes, crosers, cappes, shaven
crowns, oyled thombes, side gowns, furred amyses, monks cowles, and fryres
lowsy coats, beco^mynge thereby po^tyfycall lords, spirytuall sirs, and
ghostly fathers. This kind of Nobylyte dygged out of the dongehyll, have I
seane gorgyously garnyshed with the retoryckes of Porphyry, Sta^bery
Aristotle, Duns, and Raymundus decretals, in the books of Johan Stanbery
bishop of herforde, De superioritate ecclesiastica, De discrimine
iurisdictionum, and De potestate po^tificia. In the books also of Walter hu^te
an ordynary reader su^tyme in Oxforde, Hunte.
De precelle^tia Petri, and De autoritate ecclesie. Yea, and among themselves
they have much contended both by disputacyon and writings, which of their
sects might other excel in the nobylnesse of christen perfection. The monks
in publyque scoles, by a dystynccyon of the actyue and contemplatyue life, have
advanced their ydell mo^kery above the office of a bishop, Fryres.
and the fryres their scalde crauynge beggary, above the degrees of the^ Both.
As is largely seane in the brawling works of Richard Maydeston, Thomas
walden, Wyllyam Byntre and other which have written Contra wicleuistas, and Pro
me^dicatione fratru^,

In the days of king Edward the fourt, Myluerston.
Johan Myluerton prouyncyall of the Carmelytes, was full three years, a
prisoner in the castle of Angel at Rome at the suit of the bishops of
England for the same, and lost so the byshopryck of saint David's, whereunto he
was a little before elected. This matter have I heard, under the tyttle of
Euangelyck perfeccyon, most depely reasoned in their ordynary dysputacions at
their concourses co^uocacyons, and chapters (as they than called them) yea by
those whom I knew most corrupt lyuers, 4. order^^
Heru^to for fournyshynge out the same, the graye fryres added. S. frances
painted wou^des, the, black fryres. S. Domynyckes bold dysputynge with
heretykes, the white fryres our ladies fraternity, and the Augustyne fryres the
great doctrine of their patron. In the vnyuersytees afte much to and fro,
Prestes
has it been concluded, that the order of a pressed have far excelled in
dygnyte the order of a bishop. And this have they left behind them for a most
grave and deep reason thereupon. Mark their more than lucyferyne presumpcyon
therein. Soch power has a pressed (say they) as has neither Angel nor yet Man,
be he of never so great autoryte scye^ce, O Devils i^carnate
or virtue. For a pressed by word may make him again, that by word made heaven
and earth. A pressed may every day both byget him and bear him, where as his
mother Marye bygate him (bear him they would say) but ones. These are their
very words in a book entytled. De origin Nobilitatis. ca. 5. with much more
cyrcumstaunce of matter. Oblasphemouse bellybeastes, and most ydell wytted
sorcerers. How ydolatrously exalte they themselves above the eternal living
God and his Christ?

Johan Chrysostom a man taught and brought up in the christen philosophy,
Nobylyte
defyneth the true Nobylyte after a far other sort, than ded the profane
writers. He calls it not with Aristotle, a worthynesse of progeny, neither
yet with Varro a^ opule^cy of riches, but a famous renome obtained by long
exercysed virtue He is pusaunt, high, and valeaunt (says he) and has Nobylyte
in right course, that dysdayneth to give place to vices and abhors to be
ouercomen of them Doctrine greatly adourneth a man hyghly borne, but a godly
endeavor of christyanyte bewtyfyeth him most of all. By no^ other ways have
the Apostles and Martyrs obtained a noble report, Apostles.
than by the valeaunt force of pure doctrine and faith A ge^tyll heart (says
Seneca) or a stomach that is noble, moves, provoke, and sturreth, only to
things honest. No man which has a noble wit, delyteth in things of small
value, much less in matters of fylthynesse or supperstycyon. Chefely
apperteyneth it to men and women of sincere Nobylyte, to regard the pure
doctrine and faith. Faith.
unto soch has God promised in the scriptures, habundaunce of te^porall
things, long life, fortunate children, a kyngedome durable, with soch other,
Deuteronomy. 28.

A most worthy conqueror is Gedeon noted in the scriptures, Gedeon.
for destroyenge false relygyo^ and rennynge the kyngedome of faith. Asa rex.
Iudi. vj. So is king Asa, for remouynge the male stues from the prelates
abhorrynge marryage, and for putting down ydolles which his forefathers
maynteyned. 3. Reg. 15 So is king Iosaphat, Iosaphat
for being couragyouse in the ways of God, and for putting down the hill
aulters and their sacrifices.2. parali 17. So is king Iehu, Iehu.
for sleynge the ydolatrouse Prestes, and for breaking and burning their
great God Baal, and for making, Ezechias
a Iakes of their holy church 4. Reg. 10 So is king Ezechias for cle^synge
the house of the lord from all fylthynesse, before his time therein occupied 2.
Parali. 29. and for breaking down the brazen serpent and ydolatrouse images
with their aulters and sanctuaryes. 4. Reg. 18 So is king Josias, for
suppressynge relygyouse persons and aulterprestes, Josias.
for co^sumynge their jewels and orname^tes, and for ouerthrowynge their
buggery chambers in the house of the lord 4. Reg. 23. This noble ki^ge also
destroyed all their carved images, he strewed the dust of the^ upon their
graves that had offered to them, Prestes.
and brent the prestes bones upon their aulters, restorynge again the laws of
the lord.2. parali. 34. Jesus Syrach reports of him finally, that he whollye
dyrected his heart to the lord, and took away all abhomynacyons of the
ungodly. Eccle. 49, Besides that is spoken of king David and king Salemon.
Ecclesie 49.


Not I only, but many thousands more which will not from hens fourth bow any
more to Baal, are in full and perfyght hope, that all these most hyghly notable
and pryncely acts, will reuyue and lively florysh in your most noble and
worthy brother king Edward the sixth. Edward vj. rex.
Most excellent and godly are his begynnynges reported of the very foren
nacyo^s calling him for his virtuous, learned, and godly prudent youths sake,
the second Josias Those his wonderful pryncyples in the eyes of the world,
and no less gloryouse before God thus being to his honor, that eternal
living God continue and prospere to the end, that he may have of them as had
these vorthy kings before rehearced, a right noble and famous report. Ignoble
Nobylyte sought by wicked enterpryses and obtained by the same (as in many
before our days, and in some now of late) is not else but a publyque and notable
infamye, and in the end eternal da^pnacyon. Nobylyte won by the ernest
seeking of Gods high honor, is soch a precyouse crown of glory as will never
perysh here nor yet in the world to come

Tyrau^tes
Came after a worldly manner. or among the (...) sort, is holden noble for
slayinge his brother Judas of the prelates (for he received of the^, a noble
reward) for betrayenge Christ, Herod of the Jews for murtherynge the
innoce^tes. And what is there more worthy reproach, dishonor, and shame, than
are these execrable factes? The nature of true Nobylyte (as I have said before)
is not to rise of vice but of virtue, Nobylyte
though many men there seek it. Of the most excellent kind of Nobylyte is he
sure (most virtuous and learned lady) which truly believes and seeks to do the
will of the eternal father. for thereby is he brought forewarde, and promoted
into that heavenly kyndred Ioa^. 1. By that means becomes he the dear
brother, O Noble ^yndred.
sister, and mother of Christ Math. 12. a cytizen of heaven with the Apostles
and Prophets, Ephe. 2. yea the child of adopcyon and heir together with
Christ in the heavenly inherytaunce Roma. 8. No soch children left Socrates
behind him, neither yet Demosthenes Plato, nor Cicero, with all their plesau^t
wisdom and eloquence. No soch heretage could great Alexander the Macedoneane,
Alexa^de^
byqueth to his posteryte neither yet noble Charles, Artoure, nor David.

Of this Nobylyte, have I no doubt (lady most faithfully studyouse) but that
you are, with many other noble women and mayde^s more in this blessed age. If
questyon were axtme, how I know it? my answer would be this. Frutes^
By your godly fruit, as the fertyle tree is non other wise than thereby known,
luce. vi. I received your noble book, right frutefully of you translated out of
the french tunge into Englysh. I received also your golden sentences out of
the sacred scriptures, with no less grace than learning in four noble
la^guages, 4. t^^ge^^
Latyne, Greek, French, and Italyane, most ornately, fynely, and purely
written with your own hand. Wonderfully ioyouse were the learned men of our
city, Men le^^ned.
Murseus, Buscoducius, Bomelius Lithodius and Ima^nus, as I showed unto them
the said sentences in beholdynge (as they than reported) so much virtue. faith,
science, and experye^ce of la^guages and letters, specially in noble youth and
femynyte. Through which occasyon there be of the^ (I know) that cannot
witholde their learned hands from the publyshynge thereof, to the high praise of
God the geuer, neither yet from writing to your worthy grace for studyouse
contynuaunce in the same. Se^te^ces.
Your said se^te^ces, (they say far passes the Apohthegmes of Plutarchus,
the Aphorisms of Theognis, the Stratagemes of Isocrates, the grave golden
counsels of Cato and the manyfolde morals of Johan Goldeston the great
allegoryser, with soche other like.

Your first written clauses in.iiij. speches latyne, french and Italyane, out
of the xiij. The first clause.
Psalm of noble David, me^cyoneth that the unfaithful reckeneth folyshly in
their hearts, there is no God. Whereupon so corrupt they are in their vain
conjectures, and so abhomynable in their daily doings, that not one of their
generacyo^ is godly. By this do your grace unto us sygnyfye, Hypocrytes.
that the baren doctrine and good works without faith of the hypocrytes, which
in their vnco^maunded latyne ceremonies serve their ^ellyes and not Christ, in
gredyly devouring the patrimony of poor wydowes and orphans, are both
execrable in themselves, and abhomynable before God for though those painted
sepulchers have the name of the lord in their mouths, and greatly boast the
good works of the law, yet know they not what belongs to his true honor,
Hate.
but hate in their wicked hearts both his gloryouse name and word. The true
doctrine of faith, and the fear of God, will that wicked sort (whom this
psalm wryngeth) not hear, but still torment the conscyences of miserable
wretched ydyotes for advantage of Masses and momblynges. Happy.
Happy are they of this latter age, that in the Gospel have received the
saving health out of Syon (as your grace has done) being clear from the
stynge of those ^yperouse worms. Tuter^^
Blessed be those faithful tuters and teachers which by their most godly
instruccyons hane thus fashyoned your tender youth into the right image of
Christ and not Antichrist. Ruler^^
Yea most blessed be those godly governors and magistrates, which have
traueled and yet laboryously travail with worthy Moses, to bring Gods people
clearly out of their most wretched captyuyte.

Your latter clause in the Greek, incyteth us to the right worshyppynges of God
in sprete and veryte Ioa^. 4. The latter clause
to honouringe of our pare^tes in the semely offices of natural children.
Ephe. vj. and to the reverent using of our christen equalles in the due
mynystracyons of love.1. pet 2. Monachi
Neither Benedyct nor Bruno, Domynyck nor Frances (which have of long years
been boasted for the pryncypall patrones of relygyon) ever gave to their
superstycyouse brethren, so pure precepts of sincere christyanyte. Neither
yet Peter lombarde in his.iiij. ^o^bardus.
books of sentences, with whose smokye dyuynyte, the lowsy locustes monks,
chanons, prestes, and fryres^ have these.iiij. hundred years darkened the
clear sun, which is the veryte of God, Apoca. 9. If godly wise men would do
no more but confer this learning of yours and of other noble women i^ these
days, Robert. Kylwarby.
with the doctrine of Robert Kylwarby archebyshopp of Canterbury and Cardynall,
which the vnyuersytees of Oxforde and Paris were sworn to, for mayntenaunce of
that christyanyte in the year of our lord.1276, by the consent of all masters
regentes and non regentes, I doubt it not but they should find just cause to
hold up both their hands and A change
praise their lord God for changynge that hell into this heaven. An unsavory
gust thereof shall they find, adjoined of the Paryseanes as necessary dyuynyte,
The book
to the foreseyd sentences of Peter lombarde.

In your forenamed book, composed first of all by the right virtuous lady
Margarete, sister su^tyme to the french king Frances, and queen of Nauerre,
And by your noble grace most dylygently and exactly translated into Englysh,
find I most precyouse treasure concerning the soul, Wherefore I have added
thereunto the title of a Godly medytacyon of the soul, Elizabet
concerning a love toward God and his Christ. Most lively in these and soch
other excellent factes, express ye the natural emphasy of your noble name
Elischabeth in the hebrew, is as much to say in the latyne. as Dei mei
requies, in Englysh, the rest of my God. Who can think God not to rest in that
heart which sends fourth soch godly fruits? I think no^ that has right
dyscressyon Your pe^ne has here plenteouslye uttered the habundan^ce of a
Godly occupied heart, An heart.
like as ded the vyrgynall lyppes of Christ's most blessed mother, when she
said with heavenly rejoice, My soul magnyfyeth the lord and my sprete
rejoices in God my sauer, luce. 1. Many noble women of fresh literature have
been before time in this regyon, whose nome^clature or rehearsal of names I
intend to show in the end of this book, Noble women learned
but non of the^ were ever yet like to those which are in our age. No, neither
Cambra, Martia, Constantia, Agasia, Vodicia, Bunduica, Claudia, Belena^ vrsula^
hilda, nor soch other like. This one coppye of yours have I brought into a
nombre. to thinte^t that many hungry sowles by the inestymable treasure
contained therein, may be swetely refreshed. Co^clusio.
The sprete of the eternal son of God Jesus Christ, be always to your
excellent grace assystent that ye may send fourth more soch wholesome fruits
of soul, and become a noryshynge mother to his dear congregacyon to their
c^nfort and his high glory Amen.

Your bound orator Johan B^le

A Godly Medytacyon of the christen soul, concerning a love toward God and
his Christ, compyled in french by lady Margarete queen of Nauerre, and aptely
translated into Englysh by the right virtuous lady Elyzabeth daughter to our
late sovereign King Henry the.viij.
The preface.
IF thu do thoroughly read this work (dear frynde in the lord) mark rather
the matter than the homely speech thereof, considering it is the stodye of a
woman, which has in her neither co^nynge nor science, but a fervent desire
that yche one may se, Math. 8
what the gift of God the creator does when it pleases him to iustyfye a
heart. For what is the heart of a Man, concerning his own strength, before he
has received the gift of faith? Thereby only has he knowledge of the
goodness, Hebre. 11
wisdom, and power of God. And as soon as he through that faith, knows
pythely the truth his heart is anon full of charity and love So that by the
feruentnesse thereof, he excludes all fleshly fear, 1. Ioa^. 4.
and fyrmely trusts in God unfeignedly. for certaynely the gift, which God
the creator gives freely at the beginning, does never cease till it has made
him godly, which putteh his full trust in God.

O happy and fortunate gift. which causes a Man to possess a grace so
desired Alas no man could this understand, onles by soch gift God had given
it him. Joan. 6.
And great cause he has to doubt of it, o^les God has made him to feale it
in his heart. Therefore ge^tyll reader, with a godly mind I besyche the
pacyently this work to peruse, which is but small in quantyte, and taste
nothing but the fruit thereof Prayenge to God full of all goodness, that in
thy heart he will pla^te the lively faith. Amen.

finit praefatio. liber incipit
WHere is the hell. full of traeuayle, pain, myschefe, and torment? Where is
the pytte of cursednesse, Job. 7.
out of which does spring all desperacyon? Is there any hell so profounde,
that is suffycyent to ponnysh the tenth part of my sins. which are so many in
nombre, that the infynyte swarm of them so shaddoweth my darkened senses that
I can not account them neither yet well se them? I am far entered in
amongst them, and (that much wo^s is) I have not the power to Roma. 7.
obtain the true knowledge of the deep dangers of them. I perfyghtly feel,
that their root is in me. And outwardly I se non other effect but all is
either brau^che leaf, or else fruit that it brings fourth all about me. If I
think to look for better, a bra^che comes and closes mine eyes, and in my
mouth does fall when I would speak, Psalm. 94.
the fruit so bitter to swalowe down. If my sprete be sturred for to harken,
than a great multitude of leaves does enter in mine ears, and my nose is all
stopped with flowers.

Now behold how in pains cryenge and weeping, my poor soul, a slave and
prisoner, does lie without light, having her fete bound through her
concupysce^ce and also both her arms through evil use Yet the power to remedy
it, 2. Cor. ^^
does not lie in me, neither have I power to cry for help. Again, so far
fourth as I can perceive, I have no hope of socour, but through the grace of
God that I can not deserve, which may raise every one from death. By his
bryghtnesse he gives light to darkness. And his power examynynge my fault,
does break all the veil of ignorance, Io^. 12.
and gives me clear understanding, not only that this comes of me, but also
what thing abides in me. Where I am and wherefore I do labor. Who he is whom
I have offended, to whom I ded obey so seldom. Therefore it is co^uenyent that
my pride be suppressyd

And humbly with weeping heart, I do confess that I am much less tha^
nothing, before my birth myer, after a dungehyll, a body prompte to all evil
not willing other stodye, also subject to care, sorrow, and pain. Job. 14.
A short life, and the end uncertain. The which under sin by Adam is sold,
and by the law judged to be damnyd. For I had never the power to observe one
only commandment of God, I do feel the strength of sin in me, therefore is
my sin no whyt the less to be hydden. And the more he is dyssembled
outwardly, so much the more he encreasyth within the heart. That which God
will, Sapi. 9.
I can not will, and what he would not, I often times desire to perform. Which
thing does constrayne me by importable sorrow, to Wyshe the end of this
miserable body through desired death, because of my werye and ragynge life

Who shall be he than, that shall deliver and recover such good for me? Alas
it can not be a mortal man, for his power and strength is not such, Roma. 7.
but it shall be the only good grace of the almighty God which is never slack
to prevent us with his mercy O what a master is that, with our deseruynge any
goodness of him? I served him slouthfully, and without ceasynge offended him
every day, yet is he not slack in helping me. He does se the evil that I
have, what and how much it is, Gene. ^.
and that of my self I can do nothing that good is, but with heart and body so
enclyned am I to the contrary, that I feale no strength in me onles it be for
to do evil. He does not tarry till I humbly pray him, or that (seeing my
hell and da^pnacyon) I do cry upon him. For with his sprete he makes a
waylynge in my heart greatter than I can declare, which asks the gift whereof
the virtue is unknown to my lytele power. Psalm. 37.


And this the same unknown syghte does bring me a new desire, showing the
good that I have lost by my sin, and given me again through his grace and
bou^tye, that which has ouercome^ all sin O my lord what grace and
goodness is this, which does put out so many sins Now may we se that thu
art full of all godly love to make me of a sinner, thy servant and chyelde.
Alas my God, I ded not seek the but I fled and ra^ne away from the. Luce. 19.
And here beneth thu camyst to me which am nothing but a worm of the earth,
all naked What do I say, worm? I do him wrong, that am so naughtye, and
swarm so full of pride, deceyte, malice and treason. The promise which my
fryndes made wha^ I was baptized is such, Collo. 3.
that I always through faith in thy passyo^ should feel the mortyfycacyo^ of
my flesh and dwell always with the i^ the cross where thu were fast nailed
(as I believe) and yielded death dead as I also should yield all sin

This have I often times taken down again, untied, and set at large, I have
broken, denied, and falsyfyed my promise and through pride, I have lift up my
will in such a manner, that through sloth. my duty toward the was
forgoten. And that much more is, as well the profit or value of thy promise,
Man. 16.
which I had of the in the day of my baptysme, as also thy saving love and
promyses following, I have all alyke neglected. What shall I say more? Albeit
that often times thu perceiving me wretched and unhappy have given me so many
warnynges in faith and in sacraments, admonyshynge me by preachynges, and
confortynge me by the recayuynge of thy worthy body and sacred blood, Joan.
6.
promising also to put me in the nombre of them that are now adourned with
perfyght innocencye. Yet have I all these high benefyghtes, thrown into
forgetfullnesse,

Often times have I with the broken couenaunte. And partly for that my poor
soul was to much fed with evil bread or da^pnable doctrine of hypocrytes, I
despised such socoure and ghostly physyck in Gods word, Hiere. 7^
as would have help me And if I had been willing to look for it yet knew I
at that time no teachers co^uenyent. For there is neither man, saint, nor
Angel, for whom the heart of a sinner without thy sprete will change. Alas
good Jesus, thu beholdynge my blyndenesse, and that at my neade I could have
no socour of men, dedyst open the way of my salvation. O how great is the
goodness, Psalm 118.
and how inestymable the swetnesse which thu have showed therein? Is there any
father so natural to the daughter or brother to the sister, which would ever
have done as he has done? For he came into the hell to socour my soul, where
against his will she was, intending to have peryshed, because she ded not love

Alas sweet lord thn have loved her yea, to the very outshedynge of thy most
precyouse blood. 1. Ioa^. 3.
O charity fervent and incomparable. Not slack art thu in love that so love
every sinner, yea, and also thine enemies. not only in forgeuynge their
offenses, but also in geuynge thy self for their salvation, liberty, and
delyueraunce, to the death, cross, travail pain and sufferaunce. When I cast
in mind, what shnlde be the occasyo^ of thy love toward me. I can se
nothing else but a love wonderful, Ioa^. 5.
which moves the to give me that I can not deserve. Than my God as far
fourth as I can se, I ought to give no thanks for my salvation but only unto
the, to whom I owe the praise there of, as to him which is my savior and
creatoure. What a thing is it that thu have done so much for me? Thu art not
only contented to have forgyuen me my sins, Ephe. 3.
but also have given unto me the right fortunate gift of grace.

For it should snffyse me, I coming out of such a danger, to be like a
stranger used. But thu do handle my soul, (if I durst so say it) as a
mother. daughter, sister and wife. I lord, I am the trespaser which am not
worthy to come nere the door of thy right high place to ask bread, where thy
dwelling is. O what grace is this, that so suddenly thu vouchesauyst to draw
my soul in to such highness, Roma. 8.
that she felyth herself ruler of my body. She poor, ignoraunte and lame,
does find her self with the, rich, wise, and strong, because thu have
written in her heart the root of thy sprete, and holy worde^ geuynge her true
faith for to receive it. Which thing made her to conceive thy son, in
beleuynge him to be man, God, savior, and also the true remytter of sins.
Therefore do thu assure her, Math. 12
that she is mother to thy son of whom thu art the only faither.

And farthermore, O my father here is a great love. for thu art not weary of
well doing sith that thy son full of dyuynyte has taken the body of a man,
and ded myngle himself with our ashes, which thing a man can not understand
unless he has a true faith. It has pleased the to put him so near us,
Phil. 2.
that he ded join himself unto our flesh. Than we seeing him to be called
man, we are bold to call him sister and brother. Now the soul which may say
of her self. that she is the sister of God, ought to have her heart assured.
After this do thu declare with great love, how her creacyon is only of the
good will, which it pleases the always to have toward her, geuynge
assurance that before her first day, or time of being provided for her. thu
bestowedest thy love on her, Gene. 1.
and how through love thu have made her (as alone of power thu cannyst well do
it) and also how thu dedyst put her within this body. not for to sleep with
sloth, but that both of them should have non other exercise, but only to
think how to do some service unto the

Than the truth makes her to feale that there is in the, true paternyte. O
what honor. Tren. 2.
what swetnesse, and what glory has the soul, which does always remember
that she is thy daughter, and in calling the fayther, she does thy
commandment? What is there more? Is that all? No, It does please the to give
her an other name, to call her thy wife, and that she again do call the
husband, declarynge how thu have freely manyfested the marryage of her. By the
baptysme thu have made a promise, to give her thy goods and riches, Colos. 2
and thu again to take her sins, for she has nothing else by heritage of
her first father Adam. All her treasures, that she has of nature, ar^ nothing
else but sins, which thu (...)tied upon the, and paid all her (...)debte with
thy goods and^ lands

Thu have made her so rich, and with so great a ioynter endued her, that she
knowing her self to be thy woyd wife, does believe to be quytt of all that she
owes, Roma. 5.
estemynge very little that she has here beneth. She forsakes her old father.
and all the goods that he gives, for her husbands sake. Surely (o my God) my
soul is sore hurt to be fed with such good, and again releued in leaving
the pleasure of this world for that which is eternal, ^. Ioa^. 5.
where peace is without war. I maruayle that she, this remembrynge, does not
lose her wit, countenance, and speech. Father, father, alas what ought I to
think. Shall my sprete be so bold as to take upon him to call the father?
Yea, and also onr Father, for so have thu taught in the Pater noster. But to
call the daughter, have thu so said? I besyche the, Prouer, ^.
tell me. Alas yea, when with great swetnesse, thu saydest daughter, lend me
thy heart.

O my God, instead of lendynge, he is ready to give him self wholly unto the
(...) him than, and do not permyt that (...) creature put him from the, so that
for ever with faithful stedefastnesse he may love the with a daughterly love,
Now my lord if thu be my father, may I think that I can be thy mother? In
deed I cannot well preceyue, Apoca 13
how I should conceive the that createdyst me. But thu dedyst in this matter
satisfye my doubt, when in preaching and in sreatchynge fourth thy hands
dedyst say Those that shall do the will of my father they are my brethren,
also my sister and mother. I believe than, that hearing and reading the words
which thu have taught and uttered by thy holy prophets. the same also which
through thy true preachers, Luc^. 11.
thu do daily declare unto me^ in beleuynge it and stedefastly desyerynge to
fulfill, I co^ceyue the and bear the by love

Therefore without a^ye fear, will I take upon me the name of a mother. What
mother of God? O sweet vyrgyne Marye, I besyche the. be not angry that I take
up such a title. I do neither stele, nor usurp any thing upon thy pryuylege.
For thu only have above all women received of him so great honor, that noma^
can in him self comprehend how he has been willing to take in the our
flesh. Math. 1.
For thu art mother and pefyght vyrgyne before and after, and in his holy
birth. In thy blessed womb thu dedyst bear him and norysh him. Thu dedyst
follow him in his trybulacyons, and also in his teachynges. Now breuely to
conclude. Thu have with God found such grace, as the enemy through m^lyce
and deceyte^ had caused Adam and his posteryte to lose By Eve and him we had
lost it, 1. Cor. 15.
and by thy son has it been yielded unto us again

Therefore have thu been ryghteously called full of grace. Luce. 1,
For thu lackedyst neither grace nor virtue, since that he which is the best
among them that be good, also the spring of all goodness and power which
has created in the so pure innoce^cye that thu art the example of all
uertues) has builded in the his dwelling and temple. Be through love ded
conform himself with the, and thu art transfourmed in him. Therefore if any
man should think to given the greatter praise than God himself has done, it
were a fule blasphemye. Luce. 1.
For there is no such praise, as is the same which comes from God Thu also
have had faith so fyrme and co^staunt. that (by grace) she had the power to
make the godly. Wherefore I will not take upon me, to give the greatter praise
than the hououre which thy sovereign lord has given unto the. Acto. 1^
For thu art his corporal mother, and also thruogh faith his spyrytuall
mother.

And I following thy faith with humbleness, am his spirytuall mother also Alas
my God the brotherlynesse that thu have toward me throngh thy humbleness, in
calling me sister, is great. Dedyst thu ever say i^ it any thing asore? Alas
yea. For thu have broken the kyndred of my old father, Roma. 8.
calling me daughter by adopcyon. Well than, seeing that we have both but one
father, I will not fear to call the my brother. For so have thu reported it by
Solomon in his bellet. Canti. 4.
saying, My sister and spouse thu have wounded my heart with the sweet look of
one of thine eyes, and with one cheyne of thy neck. Alas my brother, I wyshe
for no thing else, but that in wo^^dynge the, I might find my self wounded
with thy love, To that would I give over my self And like wise thu do call
me wife in that place, showing largely that thu lo^yst me, saying by these
words amorouse

Arise my dear dove, Cauti. 2.
and come hytherwarde my dylectable spouse. Therefore shall I say with loving
faith, thu art mine and I am thine. Thu do call me thy love and fair
spouse. If it be so, such have thu made me. Alas, does it please the, to give
me such names? They are truly able to break a mannys heart, and cause it to
burn through love unspeakable. when he thinks upon the honor that thu
do unto him, which is much greatter than he has deserved. A mother, a
mother? Alas but of what child is it? Luce. 8.
Truly of such a son, that my heart does break for love. My God, my son?
O Jesus what speech this is. mother, daughter. O happy kynrede. O what
swetnesse does proceade out of that paternyte. But what doughterly and reverent
fear ought I to have toward him, my father, yea and my creator. my
protctour and sauer? To be thy sister, alas here is a great love.

Canti. 8.
Now do thu break my heart i^ the myddest to make rowme for the same so sweet
a brother. So that no other name be written in the same, but only my brother
Jesus the son of God. Non other man will I give place to, Acto. 4.
for all the scourgynge and bea^ynge, that they ca^ do unto me. Reap my heart
then, my brother and frynde, and let not thy enemy enter in to it. O my
father, child, brother, and spouse, with hands joined, humbly upon my knees I
yield the thanks and praises, that it pleases the to turn thy face toward
me converting my heart, and coueryng me with such grace, that thu do se
no more my euyls and sins. So well have thu hydden them, Ezech 33
that it seems, thu have put the^ in forgetfulness, Yea, and also they seem
to be forgoten of me. which have committed them, For faith and love causes me
to forget them, putting wholly my trust in the alone,

Than my father, in whom lies unfeigned love, whereof can I have fear in my
heart? I confess that I have done all the evil that one creature can do,
Psalm. 31^
and that of my self I am naught. Also that I have offended the as the
prodygall child ded, Luce. 15.
following the folysh trade of the flesh, wherewith I have spente all my
substance, and the habundau^ce of goods which I had received of the. For
pouerte had wetheryd me away even as heye and yielded my sprete dead for
hunger, sea king to eat the releafe of swyne. But I Found very little
sauoure^ in such meats. Than I seeing my life to be so miserable, I ded
return unto the my father again, saying. Ezech 18.
Alas I have sinned in heaven and before the. I am not worthy (I tell it before
euerybodye) to be called thy child. But O bountyfull father, do no worse to
me, than to one of thy howsholde servants.

Alas what love and Zele is this? for thu would not tarry my coming and
prayer but stretchynge out thy hand receyuedyst me, Luce^ 15.
when I ded think that thu would not look upon me. And instead to have
ponnyshed, thu dedyst assure me of my salvation. Where is he the^ that shall
ponnysh me, when my father shall deny him my sin? There is no indge that can
conde^pne any creature, unless God himself would dampne him. I fear not the
want of goodnesse^ sith I have my God for my father. My enemy shall do me no
harm, Esa. 27.
for my father shall take all his strength away. If I owe any thing, he
shall pay it all for me, If I have deserved death, he (as a king) shall
pardon me, and deliver me from prison and ha^gynge.

But here is the worst. What manner of mother have I been? For after that I by
faith, had received the name of a true mother, I became very rude unto the, by
cause that after I had conceived and brought the fourth, Roma. 7.
I left reason, And being subject to my will, not taking heed unto the, I
fell a sleep and gave place to my great enemy, The which i^ the night of
ignorance, I being a sleep ded steal the from me craftily, and in thy
place, she ded put her child which was dead. So ded I lef^ the, which is an
hard sorrow and remorce for me. Now have I lost the by mine owe fault (my
son) because I took no head to keep the. Sensualyte my neighbor (I being in
my beastly sleep) ded steal the from me, 3. Reg. 3.
and gave me, an other child which had no life in him, named sin, whom I
will not have, for I do utterly forsake him.

She affirmed that he was mine own but I knew him to be hers. For as soon as
I came to the light of grace, which thu had given me, tha^ I knew my glory
to be changed, when I saw the dead child not to be mine. For the same which
was alive (whom she had taken away) was mine own. 2. Cor. ^
Between Jesus and sin is the change so apparent. But here is a strange
thing. This old woman causes me to keep him which is dead, whom she
reports to be mine, and so she will maynteyne. O Salomo^, a full true judge,
thu have heard this lamentable process and ordained to content the parties,
that the child should be divided in two parts. The false woman agreyth, it
should be so. ^. Reg. 3
But I remembrynge him to be mine own son, was rather content to lose him,
than to se his body parted in two pieces. For true and pefyght love is never
content with one half of that i^ does love.

I had rather to weep for my whole loss, than to recover but one half. My
mind could not be satysfyed. if I had recovered one half without life. Alas
give her rather the child which is alive Better it is for me to dye, ^. Cor. 4,
than to se Jesus Christ dyuyded. But O my lord, thu dedyst look better to it
than I. For thu seeing the anguysh that I ded suffer, and how I ded rather
forsake my right, than to behold snche cruelnesse Thu saydest, this is the
true mother and so caused them to give me my child again, for whom my heart
was so sorrowful. O sweet Jesus, I found the after, Sapi. 3.
to have proved me if I ded love the. Yea, I which had lost the yet dedyst thu
return unto me, Alas do thu vouche save to come again to her, which being
let with sin could not keep the, my sweet child, my son, my helper, my
norysher, of whom I am a^ryght humble creature. Do not permytt that ever I do
leave the again, for I do repent my self of the time passed. Gene. 6.


Now come my sensualyte with sins of all qualytees, for thu have no power to
make me receive the child which is dead. The same that I have is strong
enough for to defend me, and he shall not permyt that thu take him away from
me, He is already more strong than any man is. Therefore I may sleep and take
rest near him. Esa. 32.
For all things well considered, he shall keep me much better than I could
him. Then as I think I may take rest. O sweet rest of the mother and the
son together, my sweet child. O my God, hononre and praise be unto the only,
so that every creature may se how it has pleased the to call me a mother,
less than nothing. The more that the thing is strange and hard to be done,
the more ought thy goodness to have praise for it. Psalm 118
And also I find my self more bound unto the than ever I ded for this, that
it pleases the to have retained me for thy sister.

I am sister unto the but so naughty a sister, that better it were for me. that
I were without the name, for I forgate the honor of adopcyon in so noble a
kyndred, and also thy so good and brotherly behauer toward me. I with pride
ded rise against the and (not remembrynge my faults, but going a straye from
the, ded agree with my brother Aaron, Nun^. 12.
being in will to give judgment against thy works. Privily I grudged against
the also, which thing causes me to have a great remorce in my conscience.
Alas right bountyfull God, brother and true Moses. which doist all with
goodness and Justice. I have esteemed thy works to be even sin, being so
bold to speak even rashely, saying. Wherefore have thu married a strange
woman? Nume. 12
Thu gyuest us a law, and ponnyshemente if we do not fulfill it. And thu
would not be bound to it, forbyddynge us the thing which thu thy self
doist. Deute. 5.


For thu doist forbid us to kylle any man, and thu doist kylle and sparist non
of three thousand which thu causydest to be flayne. Exo. 32,
Also God gave us in comm^undemente by the, that we should not marry the
daughter of a stranger. Exo. 34.
Yet thu to kest thy wife among them. Alas my dear brother, with a great meany
of soche words (whom I know to be folyshe) with Aaron (which is my own
wit) I imbrayded the, Whereof I door pente. For the lively voice of God,
rebukyngly took me up, before I went out of the place. What would thu than
of my sin? Alas my brother thu would not have me ponnyshed. but rather
would my salvation and health, Ezech. 18
in asking for me, this great benefyght, that it should please God to mytygate
his judgment The which thing thu could not obtain. For I became a lazar,
Nume 12
so that when any body should look upon me, they might well se that I had not
been wise. And so was I put ont from the tents and tabernacles of the people,
because that a sick body may infecte the^ which be in health

Oh, a soul can not have a greatter Po^nyshement, than to be bannyshed our of
the cumpanye of them which are holy and good. But what dedyst thu seeing my
repentance? Ezech 33
Thu prouydedyst that my penance was sone at an end, 1. Ioa^. 2.
and with trne love dedyst make means for me, whereupon I ded return. O what a
brother would. instede to ponnyshe his folysh sister, so naturally cleave unto
her? For iniurye, grudge, and great offense, thu geuyst her grace and love in
reco^pe^ce Alas my brother, how exceeding is this thy love? Much more is it,
than brotherhode is bound to give to so poor and wretched a woman as I am.
Psalm. 50.
I have done the evil, and thu geuyst me good for it, I am thine, and thu
say, thu art mine. Eue^ so I am, and will be so for ever. I fear no more
the great folyshenesse of Aaron, for noma^ may separat me from the. Now that
we are brother and sister together, I care very little for all other men. Thy
lands are mine own inherytaunce.

Let us than keep (if it please the) but one howsholde. Sith it have pleased
the to humble thy self so much, Phil^ 2.
as to join thy heart with mine, in making thy self a leuely man, I do right
heartily thank the And as to do it as I ought, it lies not in my small power.
Take my meaning than, and excuse my ignorance, seeing I am of so great a
kyndred as to be thy sister. O my God, I have good cause, to love, to praise,
and to serve the unfeignedly and not to fear, nor to desire any thing save the
only. Hester. 14
Keep me well than, for I ask no^ other brother nor frynde. If any father
have had any pytie upon his child. If any mother have take any care for her
son. If any brother have hyd the sin of his sister, it is thu. I never
saw (or else it was kept wonders secret) that ever husband would througly
for give his wife. after she had him ones offended, and ded return unto him.

There have been enough of the^ which for to aue^ge their wrongs. have caused
the judges to put them to death. Nero^
Other beholdynge their sins, ded not spare their own hands, suddenly to
kylle them. Other also seeing their faults to apere, ded send the^ home
again to their own fryndes. Some perceiving their evil dysposycyons, have
shut them up fast in a prison. Now breuely to conclude upon their diverse
complexyons, The end of their pretense is ponnyshment, and the least harm
that ever I could perceive in po^nyshynge the^^ is this, Deuteronomy. 24.
that they would never se the^ again. Thu should rather make the sky to
turn tha^, so to forsake thy wife for her mysdoynge. Wherefore my God, I can
find noma^ to be compared unto the. For of love thu art the perfect example.
Now my God, more than eue^ I ded, I confess that I have broken my oath and
promise.

Alas thu haddyst chosen me for thy wife, and dedyst set me up in great state
and honor. Joan. 15.
For what greatter honor may one have, than to be in the place of thy wife,
which swetely takes her rest so nere the. Of all thy goods queen, mastres.
and lady, and also in surety both of body and soul. Of great favor is it,
that I so vile a creature, am so ennoblyshed by the. Now to speak it breuely.
I have more, and better than any man mortal can desire. Wherefore my heart has
cause to sygh always, Luce. 6.
and with habundaunce of tears, mine eyes to come out of my head. My mouth
can not make to many exclamacyons. For there is neither new nor ancient
writings, that can show so pytiefull a case, as the same is which I will tell
now. Shall, or dare I tell it? May I pronounce it without shame? Alas yea. For
my confusyon is it not to show the great love of my husband. Therefore I care
not, if for his worship I do declare my fault. Psalm. 50.


O my sauer, which dyed and was crucyfyed on the cross for my sins. This
deed is not such, as a father to leave his son, or as a child to offe^de
his mother or else as a sister to grudge and chyde. Ala^ this is worse. For the
offense is greatter where more love and knowledge is. For the more famylyaryte
we have with God and the more benefytes we receive of him the greatter is our
offense when we with him dyssemble. Esa. 5.
Specially that I should so do, which am called his spouse, and loved of the as
thine own soul. Shall I tell the truth? Yea. I have left the, forgoten the,
and ran away from the. I ded leave the forto go at my vain pleasure. I
forsook the and chose other. Yea, I refused the, the welsprynge of all
goodness and faithful promise. I ded leave the. But whyther went I? Into a
place where nothing was but cursednesse. Job. 10.


I have left the my trusty frynde and lover, worthy to be loved above all
other I have put the aside. o welsprynge of all health somnesse, by mine own
wretched will. Yea, I have forsaken the, full of beauty, goodness, wysdom, and
power, and sought to withdraw me from thy love. I have accepted thy great
enemies, that is the devil, the world, and the flesh, against who^e thu
faughtest so sore on the cross, Hebre. 12
to overcome for my sake, to set me at lyberte, which was by the^ of long time
a prisoner slave. And so bound, that no man could cause me to humble my felfe
And as for the love and charity that I should have had toward the, they ded
que^che it so that the name of Jesus my husband, which before I had found so
sweet, was to me tedyouse and hateful. So that often times I ded jest at it.
And if any man (I hearing a sermon) had said unto me, Luce. 8.
the preacher says well. I would afferme it but the word went away from me,
as a fether does in the wind.

I went never yet to the preaching, but for manner only. All my deeds were
plain hypocresye, for my mind was in other places. I was anoyed when I heard
speak of the, for I was more willing to go at my pleasure. Now breuely to
conclude, All that thu dedyst forbid me, I fulfilled and all that thu
co^mau^dedyst me to do, I ded eschew. And this was the cause (my God) I ded
not love the. ^^ere. 2.
But yet lord, for all this that I ded hate the and forsake the, ran away
from the, and betrayed the, should I give thy place to an other? Or have thu
suffered that I should be mocked, either yet beaten or killed? Have thu put me
in dark prison, or bannyshed me for ever, setting naught by me? Have thu
taken away thy gifts again from me, and precyouse jewels, to ponnysh me for
my unfaithful fruits? Have I lost my ioynter which thu promysedyst me, Math. 2^
through my offense against the? Am I accused by the before the eternal father,
for a naughty woman? Yea, have thu forbid me thy presence (as I deserved) and
that I should never apere in thy house?

O most true husband, and pure perfyght frynde, the most loving yet among
all good lovers. Alas thu have done otherwise. For thu soughtest for me
dylygenly, Luce. 15.
when I was going into the most deep place of hell, where all the euyls are
done. When I was fardest from the both in heart and mind, and clerlye out of
the true way. Than dedyst thu louynglye call me back, saying. My dear
daughter harken, and se, and bow thy hearing toward me. Psalm. 4
Forget that strange nacyon to whom thu dedyst run away and also the house
of thine old father, where thu have dwelled so long Than shall the king full
of all faythfulnesse, desire thy beauty. But when thu saw that thy sweet and
gracious calling. ded not profyteme. than be gannyst thu to cry louder.
Math. 11
Come unto me all you which are wearyly laden with labor. for I am he that
shall plenteously refreshe you and feade you with my bread of life. Alas unto
all these sweet words would I not harken.

For I doubted whether it were thu, or else a fabyllouse writynge that so said.
For I was so folyshe, that without love I ded read thy word. Esa. 5.
I considered not well the comparyson of the vyneyearde which brought fourth
thorns and briars instead of good fruit, that it sygnyfyed me which had so
done. I know it well enough, that when thu dedyst call the baren wife, saying.
Return Sulamyte. All this dedyst thu speak that I. Canti, 6.
should forsake my sin. And of all these words ded I, as though I had
understand never a whytt. But when I ded peruse Hieremy the prophet, I
confess that I had in there adynge thereof, fear in my heart and bashefulnesse
in my face. I will tell it, yea with tears in mine eyes, and all for thy
honor, and to suppress my pride. Thu have said by that holy prophet, if a
woman has offended her husband. Hiere. ^.
and is so left of him for going a straye with other. Namely if he thereupon
refuses her for ever. is she not to be esteemed poluted and of no value?

The law does consent to put her in the hands of justice, or to drive her
away and so never to se her or to take her again. Thu have made the sepracyon
from my bed (says he unto me) and placed foren lovers in my room,
committing with them fornycacyon. Ezech. 18
Yet for all this thu maystreturne unto me again. For I will not always be
a^grye against the. Lift up thine eyes, and look about the on every side.
Tha^ shalt thu well se, i^to what place thy sin has led the, and how thou
lie down in the earth. O poor soul, look where thy sin has put the.
Even upon the high ways, where thu dedyst wait, and tarrye for to begyle the^
that came by, even as a these does which is hydden in the wilderness. Hiere. 3^
Therefore thu in fulfyllynge thy wicked pleasure, have with fornycacyon infected
all the earth which was about the. Thine eye, thy fore head, and thy face
have lost all their honest good manner. For they were such as an harlot has,
and yet thu had no shame of thy sin.

And the surplus that Hieremy says, constrayneth me to know my wretched life,
and to wyshe with sorrowful syghes, the hour, the day, the month, the time
and the year, Job. 10.
that I ded leave it, yeldynge my self condemned, and worthy to be for ever
in the everlasting fire. The same fear which does not of me but of the
proceed, and ex^^adeth many of thy other gifts, put me rather in hope than
dyspayre, as often as I ded remember my sin. For as soon as thu knew my
will bowynge under thy obedyence, than putting in me a lively faith, thu
dedyst use great clemencye. So that after I knew the to be that lord, master,
and king whom I ought to have feared. Hebre. 11
Than found I my fear not quenched, but mixed with love, beleuynge that thu
were so gracious, gentle, and sweet, and so pytiefull an husband, that I
which should rather have hid me, than to have showed my self, was not than
in fear to go fourth and to look for the. And in so seeking I found the.

But what dedyst thu than? Have thu refused me? Alas my God, no, but rather
have excused me. Have thu turned thy face from me? Psalm. ^
No, for thine eye so sweet ded penetrate my heart, wou^dynge it almost to the
death, and geuynge me remorse of my sins. Canti. ^.
Thu have not put me back with thy hand, but with both thy arms and with a
sweet, and ma^ly heart thu dedyst mete with me by the way, and not ones
reprouynge my faults, enbrasydest me. I could not se in beholdynge thy
countenance, that ever thu dedyst ones perceive mine offense. For thu have
done as much for me, as though I had beue good and honest. For thu dedyst hyde
my fault from every body, Roma. ^^
in geuynge me again the part of thy bed, and also in showing that the
multitude of my sins are so hydde^ and overcome by thy great vyctorye that
thu will never remember the^. So that now thu seyst nothing in me, but the
graces, gifts and virtues which it has pleased thy fre goodness to give m^

O charity most precyouse. Esa. 43
I do se well that thy goodness does consume my lewdenesse, and makes me a
new godly and bewtyfull creature. The evil that was mine, thu have destroyed,
and made me so perfyght a creature, that all the good which a husband can do
unto his wife thu have done it to me, in geuynge me, a faithful Hope in thy
promyses. Now have I through thy good grace recovered the place of thy wife. O
happy and desyered place, gracious bed, trone right honorable, Math. 11
s^ate of peace, rest from all war, high step of honor, separate from the
earth. So^st thu receive this unworthy creature, geuynge her the scepture and
crown of thy empire and gloryouse realm? who ded ever hear speak of such a
storye? as to raise up one so high, which of her self was nothing and makes
of great value, that of it self was naught.

Alas what is this? for I casting mine eyes on high, Joan. 3.
ded se thy goodness, so unknown grace, and love so incomprehe^syble that my
sight is wonderful. Than am I constrained to look down, and in so lokynge
downewarde, I do se what I am, and what I was willing to be. Alas I do se in
it, the lewdenesse, darkness, and extreme depenesse of my evil, My death
which by ha^blenesse closes mine eye The admyrable goodness of the, and the
vnspeakcable evil which is in me, Thy right hyghnes and pure majesty, Sapi.
14.
my right fragyle and mortal nature, Thy gifts, goods, and beatytude, my
malice and great unkindness. O how good thu art unto me, and how unkind am I
to the? This that thu will, and this that I pursue. Which things considered,
causes me to maruele, how it pleasyth the to join thy self to me, seeing
there is no comparyson between us both.

Thu art my God, and I am thy work, thu my creator, and I thy creature Now to
speak breuely, Esa. 64.
though I can not defyne what it is to be of the, yet know I my self to be
the least thing that may be compared unto the. O love, thu madyst this
agrement^ when thu dedyst join life, and death together. But the union has
made alive death. Life dyenge, and life without end, have made one death a
life. Death has given unto life a guyckenesse, Through such death I being
dead, Colos. 2.
received life, and by death I am ranyshed with him which is alive. I live in
the, and as for me, of my self I am dead. And as concerning the bodyly
death, it is nothing else unto me, but a coming out of prison. Death is
life unto me. For through death. I am alive. This mortal life fylleth me full
of care, and sorrow, and death yeldeth me content.

O what a goodly thing it is to dye, which causes my soul to live. Apoca 14
In delyuerynge her from this mortal death, it exe^pteth her from the death
miserable, and matcheth her with a most mighty lover. and unless she thus
dies, she la^guyssheth always. Is not tha^ the soul blameles, which would
feign dye for to have such life? Yes truly, and she ought to call death her
well beloved frynde. O sweet death, plesaunt sorrow, mighty keye delyuerynge
from all wickedness. Those which trusted in the (o lord) and in thy death,
Roma. 8
were mortyfyed, because they ded trust in the, and in thy passion. For with a
sweet sleep thu dedyst put them out of that death which causes many to
lamente. O how happy is the same sleep unto him, which when he awaketh, does
find through thy death, the life everlasting. For the death is no other
thing to a christen man, but a lyberte or delyueraunce from his mortal band.

And the death which is, Roma. 7^
fearful to the wicked, is plesaunt and acceptable to them that are good. Than
is death through thy death destroyed. Therefore my God, if I were ryghtly
taught, I should call the death life, and this life death, end of labor,
and beginning of everlasting joy. For I know that the long life does let
me from thy sight. O death, come, and break the same obstacle of life. Psalm.
3^^
Or else love, do a miracle now, sith that I can not yet se my spouse
Transfourme me with him both body and soul, and than shall I the better tarry
for the cummynge of death. Let me dye that I may live with him. For there is
no^ that can help me, onles it be thu only. O my sauer, John. 15^
through faith I am planted, and joined with the. O what union is this, sith
that through faith I am sure of the. And I may call the, father brother,
son, and husband. O what gifts thu do give, by the goodenesse of those
names.

O my father, what paternyte, O my brother what fraternity, O my child what
dylectyon, O my spouse, what coniunctyon is this? Father full of humylyte
Brother having our symylytude, Apoca 12
Son engendered through faith. and love, Husband loving, and releuynge in
allextr^myte. But whom doist thu love? Alas is is she whom thu have with drawn
from the snare, wherein, through malice she was bound, and put her in place,
name and office of a daughter, sister, mother, and wife. O my sauer, the same
is a great sauoure of swetnesse, right plesau^t, and dylectable, Luce. 8.
when a man, after the hearing of thy word, shall call the without fear, his
father, brother, child, and spouse. I in hearing that word, do perceive my
self to be called there thy mother, sister, daughter, and spouse. Alas the
soul which does find such swetnesse, may consume, and burn for love.

Is there any love, onles it be this, bnt it has some evil condycyon? Is
there any pleasure to be herto esteemed? Is there any honor, bu^ may be
accounted shame, to this compared? Yea, is there any profit equal to this?
Joan. 14
More over to conclude it breuely. Is there any thing that I could more
ernestly love? Alas no. For he that unfeignedly loves God, reputeth all these
things worldly, of less value than the d^^ge hylle. Pleasure profit, honor
of this world, are all but vain tryfles unto him which has found God. Such
love is so profitable honorable, and abundaunt, that (I dare say) she only
suffyseth the heart of a godly man, 2. Cor. 3^
and yeldeth him so content, that he never desires or would have other. For
who so ever has God, as we ought to have him, accounts all other things
superfluouse or vain.

Now thanked by the lord, through faith have I gote^ the same love, wherefore.
I ought to be satysfyed and content. Now have I the my father, for defense of
my long youth from wanton folyshnesse. Now have I the my brother, Phil. 2.
for to socoure my sorrows wherein I find non end. Now have I the my fonne.
for my feeble age as an only stay. Now have I the a true, and faithful
husband, for the satisfyenge of my whole heart. Now sith that I have the, I do
forsake all them that are in the world. Sith I hold the, thu shalt escape me
no more. Seeing that I se the, I wyllloke upon non other thing that might keep
me back from the beholdynge of thy dyuynyte. Esa. 55.
Seeing that I do hear the, Ioa^. 10.
I will hear nothing that lets me from the fruycyo^ of thy voice. Sith
that I may freely talk with the, I will common with non other. Seeing it
pleases the to put me so nere the, I will rather dye than to touch any other
Seeing that I serve the, I will serve non other master.

Seeing that thu have joined thy hart^ with mine, if he depart from thine, let
him be ponnyshed for ever. For the departing from thy love is harder, 2. these.
2.
than is any dampnacyon. I do not fear the pain of ten thousand helles, so
much as I do fear the ones losing of the. Alas my God, my father, and
creator, do not fuffer that the enemy, inuentor of all sin, have such power,
that he make me to lose thy presence. For who so ever has ones felt the loss
of thy love, he shall say that he would rather be bound for ever in hell,
Exo. 15.
than to feale the pain that one shall have by the loss of the same thy love
one momente of time. O my sauer, do not permytt that ever I depart from the.
But if it please the, put me in such a place, that my soul through
wantonness of sin be never separated from thy love.

In this world I can not have perfyghtly this my desire. Which thing
considered makes me fervently and with all my heart, to desire the departing
from this body of sin, Roma. 7.
not fearing the death nor yet any of her instruments. For what fear ought
I to have of my God, Hebre 9.
which through love offered himself and suffered death not of dett or duty,
bur because he would for my only sake undo the power that mortal death had.
Nowis Jesus dead, in whom we are all dead, and through his death he causes
every man to live again. I mean those which through faith are partakers of
his Passion. For even as the death before the great mystery of the cross, was
hard to every body, and there was no man but was feared therewith.
considering the copulacyon of the body and the soul, Eccle. 4^
their order, love, and agreement, so were their sorrows extreme in the
departing of the one from the other.

But sens it has pleased the sweet la^^ded offer himself upon the cross, his
great love has kyndeled a fire within the heart so vehement, that every true
beleuer estemeth the passage of death but a play or pastyme, and so provoke
other constauntly in his truth to dye. Sapi. 3.
And eue^ as the fear of death ded retarde us, so ought love to give us a
desire to dye. For if true love be unfeignedly within the heart of a man, he can
feel non other thing, because that love is so strong of it self, that she
kepith all the room, and puts out all other desires, not sufferynge any
thing there but God only. 1. Ioa^. 4.
For whersoeuer true and perfyght love is, we do neither remember fear nor yet
sorrow

If our own pride for to attain honor, makes us to seek death so many
strange ways. As if for to have a folysh pleasure, a man puts him felfe in
ieopardye of life. If a merchau^te to obtain riches, does danger himself,
sometime for the value of a shyllynge. If the first co^ceyuynge of robery or
murder, cruelty or deceyte, Deute. 16
does so blind a man, that he doubts nothing the danger of death, neither
yet mysfortune when he seeks to aue^ge himself or does any other ^uyll. If
the fury of sykenesse or the rankenesse of Mel^ncholy causes a creature
fearcely to wyshe for death, and often times to drown, ha^ge, or kylle
themselves. For such euyls are somtymes so great that they cause their payned
pacyentes to chose death for lyberte. If it so be than that these pains full
of evil, Ecels. 1.
and imperfectyons, causes them not to fear the hasarde of death, but rather
to think that death tarryeth to long.

Alas what ought true and laudable love to do? What ought the love of the
eternal creator to wyshe? Should she stir a heart such wise, that he
being transported with such affectyon, should feel non other thing in him?
Alas yea. For death is a plesaunt thing to the soul. Roma. 8.
which is in love with God, and estemeth the passage easy, through the which
she commyth out of prison. For the hard way, wherthrough she comes, can not
wearye her for to enbrace her husband. O my sauer, how good is the same
death, through whom we shall have the end of all sorrows? By whom I shall
enjoy thy sight without impedyment, 2. Cor. 3.
and be transfourmed into the likeness of thy majesty?

O death, through thy deed I trust to have such honor, as upon my knees with
cryenge and weeping I do daily desire. Therefore come quyckely, and make an end
of my sorrows. O happy daughters, right holy sowles joined to the city
jerusalem, Canti. 5.
open your eyes and with pytye look upon my desolacyon. I beseech you that in
my name ye do show unto my best beloue, my God, frynde and king, how at
every hour of the day, I do languysh for his love. O sweet death, through
such love come unto me, and with love bring me unto my lord God. O death
where is thy stynge and darte Alas they are bannyshed from mine eyes, 1. Cor.
15.
for rygour is changed into swetnesse seeing that my frynde ded suffer death
upon the cross for my sake. His death does so encourage my heart, that thu
were wonders gentle to me, if I might follow him.

O death, I beseech the come to put the frynde with his love, Now sith that
death is so plesaunt a life, that she pleasith me more than fears me, Io^. 1.
than ought I to fear nothing but the right judgment of God, All my sins
with his just balau^ce shall be wayed and showed openly. Apoca 2^
This that I have done. also my thought and word shall be better known, than
if they were written in a roll. And we may not think that charity would
offe^de justice and truth. For whosoever ever does live unfaithfully, shall be
ponnyshed in everlasting pain. God is just and his judgment is ryghteouse.
Psalm. 118
All that he does is perfyght in all things. Alas what am I considering my
ryghtousnesse, I wretched and poor creature?

I know that all the works of just me^ are so full of imperfectyon, that
before God they are more filthy than myer or any other vileness. Efa. 64
What will it be than concerning the sins which I do commit, whereof I feale
the burden importable? I can say nothing else but that I have won by them
dampnacyon. Is this the end? Shall dyspayre than be the conforte of my great
ignorance? Alas my God no. Hebre. 18
For the inuysyble faith causes me to believe, that all things which are
impossyble to men, Luce. 18.
are possible unto the. So that thu do convert my work, which is nothing,
into some good work of thine in me, which is specially faith. Joan. ^^
Than my lord, who shall condemn me, and what judge will da^pne me, sith
that he which is given me for a judge, is my spouse, my father, and refuge?
Alas what father? Such as does never condemn his chy^lde, but always does
excuse and defend him.

Than I perceive to have non other accuser but Jesus Christ, which is my
redemer, whose death has restored us our lost inherytaunce. 1. Ioa. 2
For he made him self our man of law, showing his so worthy merytes before
God, wherewith my great debte is so habundauntly reco^penced, that in judgment
it is accounted for nothing. O redemer, here is a great love? We find but
few such me^ of law. Sweet Jesus Christ, it is unto the that I am a detter,
yet do thu both pray, and speak for me. Math. 18
And moreover when thu do se that I am poor, with the abu^dau^ce of thy
goods thu do pay my debte O incomprehensyble see of all goodness. O my
father, do thu vouchesaue to be my judge, not willing the death of a
sinner? O Jesus Christ, true fysher, and sauer of the soul, frynde above all
fryndes. Fo thu being my man of law dedyst excuse and speak for me. where
thu could justly have accused me. Colo^. 2.


I fear no more to be undone by any man for the law is satisfied by the for
all. My sweet spouse has made the payment so habundaunt, that the law can
ask nothing of me but is paid of him. For as I believe, Esa. 5^^
he has taken all my sins upon him, and has given me in place of them his
own goods in habundaunce. O my sauer, presentynge thy ver^ues, thu do
content the law. When she will reproach me of my sins, thu do show he^
how willyngly in thine owue flesh, thu have taken the dyscharge of the^,
through the coniunctyon of our marryage. Also upon the cross through thy
passion, thu have made satisfactyon for it. 1. Pet. 2.
Moreover thy only charity has given me this, 1. Ioa^. 4.
that thu have for me deserved. Therefore seeing thy merit to be mine, the law
can ask nothing of me. Than will I fear no more the judgment, but with
desire rather than parforce. I do tarry for the time that I shall se my judge,
and hear a just judgment of him.

Yet I know that thy iudgeme^te (...) so just, Psalm. 11^
that there is no fault therein, and that my infydelyte is worthy to suffer
the cruelnesse of hell. For if I do only consydre my deseruynge. I can se
nothing in it that can keape me from the fire of hell. True it is, that the
torment of hell was never prepared but for the devil, and not for reasonable
men. Nevertheless if any man have set in his mind to be like to the devil,
Math. 25
than ought he as the devil to be paid with a like reward. But if a man
through co^templacyon of the soul, do hold of the, his Angel of counsel,
virtue, goodness and perfectyo^, he is sure to obtain heaven, which is a
place of thy deseruynge for him. Than shall ^he vycyouse be ponnyshed with the
same, Luce. 13
to whom they joined themselves. For since that they followed Satan, they must
hold such place as is for him and his angels prepared.

Now I considering the dyuersyte of both the sorts, am little conforted in
spre^t by this. For I can not deny but I am more like the devil than the
Angel of light, wherefore I fear and tremble. For the life of the Angel is so
pure and myn^ so vnpure, Hebre. 1.
that I am nothing like unto him, this do I confess. But to the other I am so
like in my doings, and so accustomed in his ways, that of his pain and
tormente I ought to be partaker. For the cruel sin which has bound me in
hell, is so great and his force so strong, that it leteth nothing to come
from it, neither fears it the contrary assault of any man. Luce. 22.31.32
But he which is in this kind strong, knows not how his strength goth
away, when a stronger than he co^myth. Sin is strong which brings us to
hell.

And I could never yet se, that any man by merit or pain taking, could
ever yet vanquyshe that hell, save only he which ded the great assault
throngh his unspeakable charity, Phil. 2.
when he humbled him self to the cross. 1. Cor. 13
Whereby he has ouercomen his enemy, broken hell and his power so that it
has no farther strength to keape any soul prisoner, that has put her trust
in God. Than be leuynge in the great strength that he has, I do not set by
hell and sin, No not so much as a straw. So that sin can never have
hold of me, unless it be for to show how my God is merciful, strong, Roma.
^
myghtie, and a pusau^t vanquysher of all the euyls which were within my heart.
If my sin forgyue^, is the glory of my most loving sauer, I ought also to
believe, that my glory is increased therewith, seeing that I am planted or
engrafted in him.

His honor only does honor all his, and his riches does replenysh every one
of his with his goods. Than death hell and sin are overcome by hym^ Apoca.
5.
O glottonouse hell, where is thy defense? Thu cruel vyllayne sin, 1. Cor.
15.
where is thy tyrannouse power? O death where is thy stynge and vyctorye,
which are so much spoken of? In stead of death, thu death geuyst us life,
and so do thu contrary to thy will. Also thu sin which coueryst to draw
yche creature to da^pnacyon thu geuest us a ladder to reach thereby that goodly
city Jerusalem. Apoca. ^1.
Yet would thu of thy cursed nature that our eternal maker should lose his
creature. But through his love and grace, the sorye remembrance of thy
vncomelynesse, does cause her by repentance to come again, and submyt her
self unto God more than ever she did. His inest^mable goodness causes the to
lose the whole labor which thu take all the weke.

Therefore hell has not had all the number that he did pretend to have. Osee.
^^.
because that the solacyouse shaddowe and power of his passion, is such a
mighty protectyon to the soul, that she thereby needs neither to doubt
death, sin, nor hell Is there any thing can pull me back if God be
willing through his gift of faith to draw me to him? Joan. 6.44
I mean such faith as we must needs have to obtain the high graces from
above, and also such faith as through charity does join the humble servant
to his maker. I being joined unto him, ought to have no fear of travail,
pain, nor sorrow, For who so ever does wyllyngly suffer any manner of death
or sorrow for the truth, as ded Christ, he does feale in such torment great
consolacyon for his soul, knowing that as for my self, Math. ^
I am weak, and with God I am rygh^ strong.

Through his confort I may do all things. For his love is so co^stau^t and
permane^t that it varyeth not for any worldly thing. Who can th^^ withdraw
me from his grace? Surely the great heyth of heaven, Roma. 8.
nor the deapenesse of hell, nor the breadeth of the whole earth, neither
death nor sin, which does wary every day against me, can separate me one
mynute from the great love and charity, that my heavenly father through Jesus
Christ has unto me. His goodness is such, that he loves me which have not
at all times loved him. And if I now love him, than shall I feale his love to
increase in me. But because that my love is not worthy to love him, Ioa^. 4
I desire his love to be mine the which I feale such as though it were mine
own, His desire is to love. and through his love he causith my heart to be
inflamyd with love.

And through such love he fyndeth him self so well-beloved, that his own deed
yeldeth him well content, and not my love or strength. Joan. 13.
Contenting his self, his love does increase more in me, than I can of him
desire, O true lover, fountain, or welsprynge of all charity, and only purse
of the heavenly treasure. Ought I to think, or dare I say what thu art? May
I write it, or can any mortal man comprehend this goodness and love? And if
thu pre^te in any ma^nys heart, ca^ he express it? Roma. 11
No surely. For the capacyte of no man can comprehend the unmeasurable
goodnesses which are in the, for natural reason does show us how there is no
co^paryson betwyne an eternal and a mortal thing But when through love the
mortal is joined with the eternal, the mortal thing is so fulfilled with
the eternal, that it can not find the end thereof. Ephe. 1.
For it has in it more good thereby, than it can contain or hold.

Therefore does a man think, which has the love of God, that he has all the
goods in the world therewith. Roma. 8.
Even as we se the su^ne with one only sparcle of his light does blind the
eye, and yet does she witholde her great light. But ask the eye what he has
seane, and he will say that he has beholden the whole bryghtnesse of the
sun. But that is a great lie. For he being dymmed with a little sparcle,
could not se the whole cleartye thereof. Ecc^. 10.
And nevertheless he is so content, that it semith unto him as though he had so
much light as the sun contains. Yet if he had more than the seyde sparcle,
he were not able to suffer it. Even so the soul which through faith does feel
one sparcle of the love of God, does find therewith the heat so great and
maruelouse, so sweet and delycyouse, that it is impossyble to her to declare
what thing the same love is. Psalm. 118


For a little threof that she has felt does yield her mind satisfied and
desyerynge of more whereof she has enough. So does she live languishing and
syghynge. The heart does felewele, that he has received to much, but he has
conceived such desire in this to much, that he always desyerith to receive
the thing which he can not have, Phil. 1.
neither is he worthy to receive it. He knows the good that he has already
to be unspeakable, and yet would he have more of that whereof he can not
skylle. Truly he can not feel or think the good which is in him. 1 Ioa^. 4.
Then lies it not in my power, to tell what thing the love of God is, since
that I have no knowledge of the feruentnesse thereof. He that thinks to have
all this love withyn his heart, can not truly declare what thing it is. Happy
is he wych has such abundau^ce of this love, that he may say, My God, I
have enough of it.

He which has this love within him, Iaco. ^^
dare no^ much boaste thereof, least in much speaking he lose it unless it be
to edyfye his neybour unto salvation. The impossybylyte than of the declaracyon
of this love shall make me to hold my peace^ For th^re is no Saint so
perfyght, if he will speak of the love of the high God, of his goodness,
swetnesse, graces, and of all things else which pertayneth to him, Apoca 3^
but lokynge a low shall find himself unworthy, and so stop his mouth. I
than a worm of the earth, less than nothing, ought to cease and not to
speak of the incomparable highness of this love. Yet were it to much
unkindness to be noted in me, if I had written nothing, having that done
unto me which would satisfye a much better wit than mine is. Math. 2^
For he that would hyde the goodness of God, so good a mastre, should commytt
a sin worthy to be ponnyshed with the everlasting pain.

Therefore come. O happy Paul, which have ^asted so much of the same sweet
honye, being blinded for the space of three days, 2. Cor. ^^
and rapte up unto the third haue^. Now I beseech the, satisfye my ignorance
and fault, and tell me what in such vysyon thu have seane. Roma. 11 33.
Harke^ tha^ what he says O the unspeakable highness of the abu^daunt riches
or treasure both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Sapi. 17
How incomprehe^syble are his judgments and how unsearchable his ways unto
our weak wits? O holy Paul, thy words causes us much to maruayle, that
thu having knowledge of so heavenly secrets, would speak no further in
them At the least yet tell us, what thing we may hope to have one day
through such godly love. Give ear and ponder the words that he says.

^. Cor. 2.9.
Neither has the eye seane, nor yet the ear heard, neither yet has it ever
entered into the heart of any man, what God has prepared for them that love
him. Esa. 64. ^.
And would he sp^ake it no farther? No truly. Yet all this that he says here,
is for non other purpose, but to provoke us ernestly to love. He wylleth us
also therein to esteem, that he neither can declare nor yet name it, and so to
give forth our hearts to pacye^ce and hope of that thing which never man yet
could se, ^oma. 8.
neither yet dyscerne, what though many through love for it has dyed. O
excellent gift of faith whereof so much good co^myth, that it can since man to
possede the thing which he can not co^prehende. Faith joined with the truth
brings fourth hope, whereby perfyght charity is enge^dered^ And charity is
God, as thu knowist. 1, Ioa^. 4.
If we have charity, tha^ we have also God therewith.

Than is God in us, and we are in him And all this comes through the benefyte
of faith. For he dwellith in all men which have true fayhe^ Ioa^. 1^^
Thus have we a greatter treasure tha^ we ca^ tell of, or yet any man express
unto us. Now to conclude. Sith that so great an Apostle as saint Paul is, will
speak no further of God and his inestymable love, according to his ryghtouse
example and doctrine, Roma. 1^
I will hold my peace and bestylle, following nevertheless his teachynges.
Not withsta^dynge yet though herin I acknowledge my self but earth and duste,
yet may I not fail to yield thanks unto my eternal living God, for such
great graces, and benefytes, as it has pleased him to give me. Unto that
everlasting king of heaven immortal, 1. Timo 1^
inuysyble inco^prehensyble, mighty, and wise only, be all honor, praise,
glory, magnyfycence, and love for ever and ever. Amen

Textes of the scripture.
These.iiii. clauses of the sacred scripture added my lady Helisabeth unto the
beginning and end of her book, and therefore I have here regestred the^ in the
end.

Eccle. 25. There is not a more wicked head, than the head of the serpente,
And there is no wrath above the wrath of a woman.

Eccle. 25. But he that has gotten a virtuous woman, has gotten a goodly
possessyon. She is unto him an help and pyller, whereupon he restith.

Eccle. 25. It were better to dwell with a lion and dragon. than to keep house
wlth a wicked wife.

Eccle. 7. Yet depart not from a dyscrete and good woman, that is fallen unto
the for thy porcyon in the fear of the lord, For the gift of her honesty is
above gold.

The Conclusyon.
Certain, and sure am I (most gentle reader) that all they which shall peruse
this godly book, shall not therewith be pleased. For among feaders are always
sundry appetytes, Appetytes.
and in great assemblyes of people, diverse, and varyaunt judgments, As the
saying, is, so many heads, so many wits, Neither fine painted speech,
wisdom of this world, nor yet relygyouse hypocresye (which for pryuate
commodyte many men seeks) are herin to be looked for, And a reason why, For he
that is here famylyarly commoned with, regards no curyosyte, but playnesse
and truth. He refuses no sinner, Sinner.
but is well contented at all times to hear his hombly tale. Hyde not thy
self from me (says he) when thu have done amys, but come boldly face to
face, and commen the matter with me, If thy sins be so red as scarlet, I
shall make the^ whyter than snow. And though thy factes be as the purple, yet
shall they apere so white as the wolle. Esa. 1, The lord
For as truly as I live (says he) no pleasure have I in the death of a
sinner, but will much ^^ther that he turn and be saved. Eze. 33.11.

If the hombly speech here do to much effe^de co^sydre it to be the work of a
woman, as she in the bygynnynge thereof, have most mekely desyered. And yet of
no^ other woman, than was most godly minded. Mark David in the psalter, David.
which was a man both wise and learned, and ye shall find his manner in
speaking not all unlike to this. Faith (saint Paul says) stands not in
floryshynge eloquence, neither yet in mannys polytyque wisdom, but in the
grace and power of God. 1. Cor. 2.1 If the often repetynge of some one sentence,
engendereth a tedyouse werynesse to the reader, let him well peruse the holy
works of S. Johan the Eua^gelyst, S. Ioha^
and I doubt it not but he shall find there the same manner of writynge And his
occasyon is (as all the chief writers afferme) the necessary markynge of the
precepts of health, or of matter chefely concerning the sowles salvation. For
a thing twyse or thryse spoken, enters much more depely into the
remembrance than that is uttered but ones.

And as touching the porcyon that my lady Helisabeth, the kings most noble
sister has therein, Lady helisabeth.
which is her tra^slacyon. ^hefely have she done it for her own exercise in
the french tunge, besides the spirytuall exercise of her innar soul with God.
As a dylygent and profitable be, have she gathered of this flower swetnesse
both ways, and of this book consolacyon in sprete. And thinking that other
might do the same, of a most fre christen heart, she makes it here common unto
them, not being a nigarde over the treasure of God. Her first fruit.
Math, 25. The first fruit is it of her young, tender, and innocent labors.
For I think she was not full out xiiii. Years of age, at the fynyshynge
thereof. She have not done herin, as ded the relygyouse and anointed hypocrytes
in monasteryes, Lybrare^
coue^tes and colleges, in spearynge their lybraryes from men studyouse, and in
reserving the treasure contained in their books, to most vile dust and worms.
But like as God has gracyously given it, so do she again most freely
dystrybute it,

Soth noble begynnynges are neither to be reckened chyldysh nor babysh, though
she were a babe in years, that has here given them. The ages
Seldom find we them that in the closing up of their wythere^ age, The aged
do mynystre like fruits of virtue. An infynyte swarm behold we of old
dottynge bawdes and beasts, that with co^scyences leaden with sin (as S.
Pauie reports them) takes every painted stock and stone for their God,
besides the small breades that their lecherouse chaplaynes has blown upon.
They shall not be unwise, that shall mark herin what commodyte it is. or what
profyght might grow to a christen common welt he if youth were thus brought up
in virtue and good letters. Youth.
If soch fruits come forewarde in chyldehode, what will follow and apere when
dyscressyon and years shall be more ripe and ancient? A most manifest sign
of Godliness is it in the fryndes, where youth is thus instytute and a token
of wonderfully faithful dylygence, Tuters,
in the studyouse teachers, tuters and daily lokers on.

Nobylyte which she has gote^ of blood in the highest degree, having a most
vyctoryouse king to her father, and a most virtuous, and learned king again
to her brother, is not in the early spring dystayned with wanton ignorance,
neither yet blemyshed with the commen vices of dyssolute youth, Learned.
But most Plenteously adourned with all kinds of languages, lernynges, and
virtues, to hold it still in right course, The translacyon of this work, were
euydence strong enough, if I had not else to lay for the matter. But mark yet
an other much more effectual and clear, at the which not a few learned men in
Germany have wondered. In.iiij. noble languages, Latyne, Greek French, and
Italyane, wrote she unto me these clauses following. Clause^ added.
Which I have added to this book, not only in commendacyon of her learned youth,
but also as an example to be followed of other noble men and women, concerning
their children. The written clauses are these, which she wrote first with her
own hand, much more fynely than I could with any prentynge letter set the^
fourth.

Stultus dixit in cord suo, non est Deus. Latyne.
Illi corrupti sunt, and abhominabiles in sua impietate, nullus est qui aliquid
boni facit.

Le foldisoit en so^ coeur, French^^
il n'anul Dieu. Ilae sont corumpus and sont abhominables en leur impiete, il
n'a null qui faic^, bien.

Italiane.
Is stulto disse uel suo core, non v^e alcuno Dio. Corrutti sono and
abhominabile nella loro impieta, nissuno e^ buono.

Greek.
Ton thean ^phobou^, tous de goneis tima, tous de Philous aeschynou.

The first clause in three la^guages, latyne^ French, and Italyane,
comprehe^deth this only sentence, as I showed before in the Epistle dedycatory.

Antichrist His clergy.
The fool says in his heart, there is no God. Corrupt they are, and abominable
in their wickedness (or blasphemies against God) not one of them does good.

The Greek clause is thus to be Englyshed.

Christian.
Fear God, honor thy parents, and reverence thy fryndes.

Thus have she given us counsel, both to go and to come, to leave and to take.
To declyne from the evil, The pope
and to do that is good Psalm. 36. To flee from the Antichrist and his great
body of sin or blasphemouse cruel clergy, and to return to God by a
perfyght fear, honor. and love. So lively Apothegmes, or brene and quycek
se^tences, respectynge christyanyte, have seldom come from women. Writers.
I have serched Pintarchus. Boccatius, Bergomas, Textor, and Lander of Bonony.
which all wrote of the virtues and worthy acres of women. But among them all
have I found no counsels so necessary to the common welthe of our
christyanyte. I deny it not, but excellent things they uttered, Women.
and matters of wisdom wonderful, concerning moral virtues. But these most
hyghly respects the kyngedome of faith and regyme^t of the soul, which Jesus
Christ the eternal son of God, from heaven by his doctrine and death so
busyly sought to clear. Many grave sentences had they concerning pryuate
causes. All sorts
But universally these are for all sorts of people, high, low, hayle, sick,
rich, poor, learned, and unlearned, that myndeth to have fredome by Christ's
deadly sufferynges, or to be delivered from hell, sin, death, and the
devil, by the price of his precyouse blood.

No realm under the s^ye has had more noble women, nor of more excellent
graces, than have this realm of England, both in the days of the Brytaynes,
and sens the Englysh Saxons obtained it by valeaunt conquest, Guendolena.
Guendolena the wife of Locrinus the second king of Brytayne, being
unlawfully dyuorced from him for the pleasure of an whore whom he long before
had kept, tried it with him by dynte of the sword, had the vyctory, and
reigned after him asking the space of.xv. years. till her son Maddan come
to laufull age. Cordilla.
Cordilla the daughter of king Leyer, and least of all her systers. as her
father was deposed, and exyled out of his land, she received, conforted, and
restored him again to his princely honou^re, and reigned alone after his
death, for Cambra.
the space of.v. years Cambra the daughter of king Belyne, and wife to Antenes
than King of France, ded not only excede in beauty, but also in wisdom. In so
much that she first instructed the noble men how to build cities, castles, and
other strong holds, the co^me^ people more comely manners, and the women a
most semely deckynge of their heads. She made their cyuyle laws, Laws.
which upon her name were called. Leges S^cambrorum. She taught them to sow
flax and hemp, to watter it, dry it, dress it spynne it, weaue it, whyten
it, and fashyon it, to all manner of use for the body.

Martia the wife of king Guythelyne, a lady excedyngly fair, Martia.
wise, and learned in all the lyberall scyences, invented things wonderful by
the high practyse of her wytt. After the death of her husband she reigned.vij.
years as king, till Sicilius her son came to age. She reredressed the
commen welthe, reformed the gross manners of the people, and made most honest
laws / called of her name, Leges Martiane. So delyghted the French king
Nicanor in the wisdom, Constantia.
learning, and comely manners of his wife Constantia, the daughter of king
Eliodorus, that he not only help her brother Geruntius in see battle against
the king of Orchades, but also sent his most dear son Priamus into Brytayne
to have the same self bringing up. The Scottysh king Finnanus. thought his
pryncely honor most gloryously increased, Agasia
as he had obtained Agasia the daughter of king Blegabridus, to be coupled in
marriage with Sorstus his son, for the manyfolde graces that he beheld in
her. What though the said ungracious Sorstus, in spyght of the Brytaynes, ded
afterward use her most wyckedly. Bundwyca a woman both high of stature,
Bu^dwyca.
and stomach, also of mist noble lynage among the Brytaynes, perceiving the
hauoke which the Romans daily made in the land, with great pusaunce of worthy
warryours she invaded them, slew them, hynge up their captains, and followed
the remnaunt of them to the very Alps of Italy. Where at the lattre by reason
of daily labors, she syckened and so dyed, even the uery glory of women, says
Ponticus Virunnius.

Voada.
Voada the first wife of king Aruiragus, a woman of wonderful force and heart
strongly armed her self. her.ij. daughters, and.v. thousand women more of the
Britannysh blood / in battle against the furyouse fearce Romans, to
suppress their tyranny and execrable fylthynesse in abusing maids, wives,
and wydowes. But as she beheld the vyctory upon their sides because she would
not come under their captyuyte, she poysened her self, and so dyed. Voadicia
her younger daughter, Voadicia
afterward escapynge the hands of the said Romans, with a mighty power of
the Brytanes entered into the isle of Maene, and in a night battle, there
slew the^ in a wonderful nombre, destroyenge their fortalyces, and holds
Notwithstanding at the latire being taken, she was byheaded, her eldar sister
being married to king Marius. Athildis
Athildis the daughter of the said king Marius, was also a most noble woman,
whom the French king Marcomerus married for the only natural gifts and
seyences which she had above other women, and had.vii. sons by her. Claudia
Rufina, Claudia Rufina.
a noble Brytayne, wyttye and learned both in Greek and Latyne, hanynge to
husband one Aulus Rufus a learned knight, a poet of Bonony and a philosopher
of the Stoycall sort, is much co^me^ded of Martialis the poet, for the
Epygrammes and poemes which she than compyled in both those dunges.

Emerita the sister of king Lucius, Emerit^
which is called the first christened king, a lady most virtuous and
faithful for co^stauntly affermynge the veryte of Christ, suffered most
tyrannouse death and was brent in the fire. Helena Faluia, Helena Flauia.
the daughter of king Coelus, and mother to great Constantyne the Emprour, was
a woman of incomparable beauty and learning. Non could be found like her in
the arts lyberall, neither yet in the fine handelynge of all instruments of
musyke. She excelled all other in the diverse speches of nacyons, specially in
the Latyne, Greek, and Hebrew. She made a book of the prouydence of God, an
other of the immortalyte of the soul, with serten Greek poemes, epystles, and
diverse other treatyses, Constantia her daughter, Co^sta^tia.
was also a woman of most excellent gifts, had she not in the end declyned to
the detestable sect of the Arryanes, by serten hypocrytysh prestes. Vrsula
Cynosura, Vrsula.
the floryshynge dauter of Sionothus the duke of Cornewale, was so nobylly
brought up in all lyberall dyscyplyne, that Conanus the king of little Brytayne
desired her to wife, and as she went thydrewarde with.xi. thousand Brytaynes
wives more, by chance of wether and vyolence of see rouer^ both she and they
peryshed by the way.

Annae duae
Anna the sister of Aurelius Ambrosius which was afterward married to Lotho the
king of Pycres, and Anna the twynne sister of king Arthure, are of writers
magnyfyed, for their diverse and excellent graces. Morganis.
Morganis a woman of incomparable love toward her parents, and contraye, so
secretly and wisely conuayed the body of king Arthure, the most worthy
governor of the Brytaynes, that the Englysh Saxons could never come to it, to
do their vyole^ce thereon. Hermelinda, Hermelinda.
rysynge of the Englysh Saxons blood, for her excellent beauty and noble
behauer became the wife of Cunibertus the king of Lombardy. Hylda, a noble
woman, both godly, Hylda.
wise, and learned, not only dysputed in the open Synod at Streneshalce in the
North contraye against the prelates, concerning their newly found out
celebracyon of Eastre, and their crown shauynge, with other ceremonies, but
also wrote a treatise against bishop Agilbert a French man, the busyest
among them. The three daughters of king Alphrede, Tres filiae
Elfleda, Elfritha, and Ethelgora, were wonderfully expert in the lyberall
scyences Alenor the wife of king Henry the second, Alenora.
was learned also, and wrote diverse epystles to pope Celestyne the third, and
also to king Johan her youngest son.

Ioa^na the youngest daughter of the said king Henry, Ioanna.
so much delyghted in good letters, that before she should be married to king
wyllyam of Cycyll, she caused her father to send over.ii. learned men of
England. walther and Richard with a French doctor called Petrus Blesensis to
instruct him in them, specially in the art of versyfyenge. And at her coming
thydre, the one of those Englysh men was made archebyshop of Panorme, and the
other bishop of Siracusa, in recompense of their labors. Margareta.
Margarete the noble mother of king Henry the.vii. so plenteously minded the
preferment of scyences and going forewarde of lernynges, that she builded in
Cambryge for the same porpose, the colleges of Christ and of S. Johan the
Eua^gelyst, and gave lands for their mayntenaunce, as queen Helisabeth ded
before, Elisabeth
to the queen's college there. Long were it to rehearce the exceeding nombre of
noble women, which in this land of Brytayne or realm of England, have
excelled in beauty, wit, wisdom, science, la^guages, lyberalyte, polycyes,
heroycall force, and soch other notable virtues, and by reason of them done
feats wonderful. Either yet to sort out their Names and regestre them one by
one, Names
which have been married out of the same, to Emprours, kings, dukes, earls,
worthy captains, Philosophers, phesycyanes astronomers, poets, and other of
renomed fame and letters, only for their most rare graces and gifts.

Though non in this land have yet done as ded among the Greeks Plutarchus,
Writer^
and among the Latynes Boccatius with other authors before named, that is to
say, left behind them Cataloges or Nomenclatures of famous and honorable
women, yet have it not at any time been barrayne of them. No, not in the days
of most popysh darkness. As apereth by Alenor Cobham, Alenor^ Cobham.
the wife of good duke Vinfrey of Glocestre, brother to king Henry the fifth.
Whom Antichrists grande captains, the bishops than of England, in hate of
her name and believe, accused of sorcerouse in chauntmentes and experymentes of
Necromancy against their holy horned whorysh church. And at the last slew her
noble husband in a false parliament at Bury, by their own hired slaughter man
Pole, as they never are without soch. If they were worthy praise, which had
these aforenamed virtues syngle, or after a bodyly sort only, we must of
congruence grant them worthy double honor, Double honor.
which have them most ple^teously doubled. As now sens Christ's Gospel has
risen, we have beholden them, and yet se them still to this day in many noble
women, not rysynge of flesh and blood as in the other, but of that mighty
living sprete of his, which vanquyshed death, hell, and the devil.

Anne Askewe.
Consydre yet how strongly that sprete in Anne Askewe, set them all at naught
with all their artyllery and mynysters of myschefe both upon the rack and also
in the fire. Whose memory is now in benedyccyon (as Jesus Syrach reports of
Moses) and shall never be forgotten of the ryghteouse. She as Christ's mighty
membre, has strongly trodden down the head of the serpent, and gone hence with
most noble vyctory over the pestyferouse seed of that vyperouse worm of Rome,
the gates of hell not preuaylynge against her. What other noble women have,
Noble^ Women.
it does now, and will yet herafter apere more largely by their godly doctrine
and deeds of faith. Mark this present book for one, whose translacyon was the
work of her. which was but a babe at the doing thereof. Mark also the grave
sentences, which she gives fourth to the world and laud that living father
of our lord Jesus Christ, which has thus taken his heavenly wisdom from the
great grave senyours, that only are wise in their own consaytes, and given it
so largely to children, Math. 11. Prayer.
That heavenly lord grant her and other noble women long contynuau^ce in the
same to his high pleasure. That like as they are become gloryouse to the world
by the stody of good letters, so may they also apere gloryouse i^ his sight by
dayle exercise in his dyuyne scriptures, Whose nature is in process of time to
kyndle their minds and inflame their hearts in the love of Christ their
eternal spouse, as this present book requires, So be it.

Thus ends this godly Medytacyon of the christen soul concerning a love
toward God and his Christ, aptely translated into Englysh by the right
virtuous lady Elyzabeth daughter to our late souerayn^ King Henry the.viij.
The.xiii. Psalm of David, called, Dixit insipiens. touched before of my lady
Elizabeth.
Fools that true faith, yet never had,
Says in their hearts, there is no God.
Fylthy they are, in their practyse,
Of them not one, is godly wise.
From heaven the lord, on man ded look,
The know what ways, he undertook,
All they were vain. and went a straye,
Not one he found, in the right way,
In heart and tunge, have they deceyte,
Their lyppes throw fourth, a poysened beyte.
Their minds are mad, their mouths are wode.
And swyft they be, in shedynge blood.
So blind they are, no truth they known
No fear of God, in them will grow.
How can that cruel sort be good?
Of Gods dear folcke, which suck the blood?
On him ryghtly, shall they not call,
dyspayre will so, their hearts appall.
At all times God. is with the just /
Because they put, in him their trust.
Who shall therefore, from Syon give,
That health which ha^geth, in our beleue^
When God shall take, from his the smart,
Than will Jacob, rejoice in heart.
Praise to God.

Imprented in the year of our lords 1548. in Apryll,


