TIMOTHIES TASK: OR A CHRISTIAN SEA-CARD, guiding through the coasts of a
peaceable conscience to a peace constant, and a Crown immortal. Wherein I.
Pastors are put in mind of their double duty, and how to discharge it. 1.
Personal, as watchful men. 2. Pastoral, as faithful watchmen. II. True
doctrine is advanced. III. Traditions discountenanced, and their rancour
discovered. In two Synodoll assemblies at Carliell, out of two several, but
suitable Scriptures. This of 1 Timoth. 4. 16. and that of Acts 20. 28. Since
concorporate, and couched with augmentation under their prime Head:

BY ROBERT MANDEVILL, sometimes of Queens College in Oxford, and Preacher of
Gods word at Abbey-holme in Cumberland.

2 TIMOTHY 4. 5. (...).

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and JAMES SHORT. An. Dom. 1619.

CELEBERRIMAE ACADEMIAE OXONIENSI, MATRI SVAE, AC PATRONAE (AMORE DVCTVS, NEC
NON MORE) IN PERPETVVM OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIVM, OPVSCVLVM HOC DICAT,
CONSECRATQVE

ROB. MAGNADEVILLA.

INSIGNISSIMO VIRO DD. GOODWIN Aedis Christi Decano and Academiae Oxoniensis
Vicecancellario long dignissimo.
QUod ego homo tibi forsitan ignotus and ex antro nescio quo obscurus erepens,
Dignitatem Tuam in vestibulo statim hujusce operis Epistolio quodam ausim
compellare; hujus fiduciae afferenda est nonnulla excusatio, ne temeritatis
simul and imprudentiae macula merito me inustum iri quispiam existimet. Duae
autem sunt inter caeteras potissimae rations, quae me hoc tempore impulerunt,
ut lucubrationem hanc tuo nomini dicarem; Tum quod patrono opus haberet, tum
quod talem patronum merebatur. Patrono certe opus est, cum ipse pater qui
foetum hunc aleret and foveret praematura morte absorptus sit. De quo quid
attinet singula quae noverim hic infarcire? quam impense opus Evangelistae
peregerit fidelis Christi servus cum veritatem propugnando, tum contradicentes
impugnando; quantis ingenij, artis, gratiae dotibus ad miraculum fere excultus
fuerit; quam in sermon potens in vita pius, ut non modo sacrisiculos
Missaticos and superstitiosos id genus homulos gladio spiritus fuderit,
profligaverit; verum etiam and parochianos suos, Christianos, ne quid asperius
dicam, parum probos negotia emporetica and nundinationes solennes, quas sine
omni conscientiae scrupulo diebus Dominicis exercere solebant vniuersas, die
Saturni peragere prudenti zelo et suaui cumprimis eloquio fecerit, coegerit.
Haec inquam and multa alia de authore ipso, quae sciens praetereo (...), quia
illius lauds una non capit pagina, quid attinet hic commemorare? Illud unum
adjiciam, studia, vigilias, sermones, quorum nunc gustum praebemus, animum in
divino opere plane indefessum, conatusque illius admodum foelices, quam vere
magnus vir f^erat, liquido demonstrare. Nam vt Atticus ille orator apposite,
(...). Ejusmodi dubio procul terris invident (...) ingrati populi peccata,
quae, si conjectura non sum vanus, effecerunt, ut hic veluti Phoebus alter,
(...), summo quasiaetatis ver^ice and puncto meridionali positus, Oceano
immersus occideret. Certe in scelere Jacob omne istud and in peccatis domus
Israel. Cujus obitum heu nimis (si Deo allter visum fuisset) praematurum ut
patria illius lugebat tota, ita neillum lugeat sent^atve liber iste posthumus,
potes Tu, vir clarissime, pro singulari humanitate and authoritate tua effectum
dare. Orphanus hic infans est and fari vix potest quae sentiat, inter spem
curamque timores inter and i^ as modesti patris germanus partus in lucem
prodire subverebatur. Quare me rogatum habuit and facundia balbutienti
postulavit, ut (...) cuidam doctissimo pariter and dignissimo eum velim
commendare, sub cujus tutela and patrocinio tanquam sub Ajacis clypeo ab
invidorum and malevolorum quibus haec aeta^ scatet, morsibus tutus
delitesceret. Ego aute^ tam honestae petitioni, quantum in me est, obsecundare
obni xe studens, (quod ex philosophoru^ coryphaeo didicerim parentum and
praeceptorum beneficia aequis non posse rependi officijs) quamvis to gatorum
unus sim tantum non infimi subsellij, and oratorum long pessimus, verum
enimvero, cum Aristides ille mihi consulat moneatque (...): non potui meipsum
temperare, quin ad te ista scriberem, peteremque ut in clientelam tuam hunc
libellum, qui talem omnino meretur patronum, recipere non dedigneris, qui
tantum habes authoritatis, ut possis; tantum prudentiae, ut no veris; tantum
denique humanitatis, ut cupias studio soru^ hominum conatibus patrocinari.
Idque feci eo lubentius, quod gravislimus hic author, dum in vivis esset, Tibi
totique literatorum cohorti numerosae satis and nobilissimae, quam Dignitas Tua
non sine maxima laud moderatur, tanquam amoris and observantiae suae (...), ob
vicariam quandam apud suos Brigantes illi ab Academia matre nostra concessam,
hanc opellam suam ipse etiam Academiae hujus florentissimae alumnus
consecraverat. Vale vir claris^. scitoque me unum esse ex ijs, qui pium
affectum tuum in deum, charitate^ propensam in fratres, and merita in ecclesiam
suspicit and miratur. In Coll: Regin: scribebam 8. Idus Julij, anno reparatae
salutis (...) DCXIX.

Dignitatis tuae Observantissimus THO: VICARS.

AD LECTOREM.
CArmina praefantur tali rarissima libro:
Haec praeter morem carminae, Lector, habes.
Defuncto, praeter morem, praestemus amorem,
Non est vulgaris, credito, talis amor.
Officium signare opus est, laudarier ipsum
Authorem, aut opus hoc, non opus esse scio.
C. R. R.

AD MAGISTRVM ROBERTVM de magna villa Apostrophe.
MAgna sonas, and magna facis, (vir maxim) rebus
Quam been convenient nomina saepe suis!
Terrae parva haec villa dedit sed non nisi parva,
Coeli villa potest praemia magna dare.
(...) T. V. M. A. C. R. O. S.

TIMOTHY HIS TASK: OR A CHRISTIAN SEA-CARD.
1 TIMOTH. 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto learning, continue
therein. etc.
THey are the words of a spiritual Father, 1 Timothy 1. ^.
to his son, in the faith; Paul now aged to young Timothy, whom he
instructs in things that concern his function as a Teacher, his conversation
as a Christian. The former he does from the 6 to the 12 verse. The latter,
from the 12 unto the 16. In which he coucheth and combines both. Let no man
now think admonition unnecessary (not though he be the best of many.) For
Timothy is here exhorted to follow that which by the Apostles own
testimony, Verse 6.
he had followed constantly. Let no man despise youth in a Minister if it be
authorized with competent gifts, Wisd. 4. 9.
for wisdom is the gray hairs, and an undefiled life is the old age.

This Scripture does branch it self into two parts. 1. An advice or
exhortation. Take heed etc. 2. A motive, or inducement enforcing the same. For
in so doing, etc. opus imponere* enjoyne a task of attention or Christian
watchfulness, and that solicit with a care and circumspection, Cave, Take
heed or attend. An other points at the immediate object whereat this watch must
begin, and that ordinate, orderly and answereable to the rule of Charity which
begins at home. Cave tibi, take heed to thy self. onus apponere, annexe a
further charge of feeding others, inferred by a necessary particle of
connection, and doctrinae, and to learning.

Permane in istis, continue therein. Thus Timothy is stirred up and set on his
way as Elias was four times by the spirit. 1 Kings 14.
First to a diligent warynesse, and wary diligence, lest while the husbandman
sleeps, Mark 13. 25.
the enemy come and sow tares amongst the wheat. 2. To an eminent and more
then ordinary sanctity of life, for seeds prima, and vitaima, the best place,
and basest life sort not well together. 3. To the care of a pastoral cure,
whereof Paul says, Quis idoneus ad haec? who is fit for these things? 4. To
perseverance in the good begun, for he begins ill, that goes not on;
therefore having put thy hand to the plough, Genesis 19. 26.
look not back, behind thee stands a pillar of salt.

The first thing is the care which Timothy must take, ^. Take heed.
or the watch, he is to set. The word imports in the original a bent of mind,
an intention of will, joined with a care and contention of the whole man, that
his works war not with his words, and his deeds disgrace not his doctrine,
whence this collection may be made, That vigilancie or heedfulnesse is a
necessary companion to all such as seriously commence a spiritual course,
chiefly to Pastors and Superintendents as Timothy was. A doctrine which wants
not the commendation of a threefold commodity. 1. It is a gracious
preservative against sin, deceiving us. 2. It is an antidote against troubles
and cross occurrences, lest they unsettle us. 3. It instills strength and pith
into all other duties, and parts of Gods worship; without which, they be either
wholly omitted, or but hoverly done, by which they are quickened, cheered, and
well ouerseene. These three things in their order handled, you have my purpose
in this first head.

First it preserues against the deceits of sin.
Watch, Math. 26. ^1.
and pray, to begin (with Christ's own speech) lest you enter into temptation.
What other is the drift of the Prophets demand (directing the whole Church in
one man's person) wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? Psalm. 119^
by taking heed thereto according to thy word; this seed is rife, and many
whers rank sown, yet grows reformation but thin and rare, because little
or no heed is taken of the stony, Math. 13 4. 5 6 7.
thornie, and highway hearers. How often is attention commanded and commended
unto us by our Savior against intemperancy and worldly cares? Luke 21. 34.
by Saint Peter, 1 Pe^. 5. 8.
that the life break not out into licenciousnes? By the Author to the
Hebrews, Heb. 3. 12.
that the heart with the several affections, may from time to time be held in
awe? What was Paul's counsel to the Corinthians? 1 Cor. 10. 12.
he that stands, let him take heed lest he fall: either it was the Apostles
purpose to bring men into a needless fear, or too much heed cannot be had.
But good men have fallen, Patriarchs, Prophets, Jude 5. 6.
Apostles, yea (better once then the best of men) the Angels kept not their
first estate. This Apostle writing to the same people, 1 Cor. 16. 13.
wills them to watch, and he puts on the Thessalonians in the former Epistle,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 6.
lest they sleep as others do, who were rockt in a cradle of deep security.
By immoderate sleep, the humors of man's body are so dissolved, that natural
heat is thereby much abated, and in time quenched. So fares it with the
drowsy and slothful soul, wherein wicked thoughts being bred and
multiplied, quench the heat of holy affections, and so separate man from God.
Wisd. 1. 3.


Christ does check his heauy-headed Apostles, Math. 26. 40. Math. ^5. 12.
And those foolish girls fore-shewing the time of their preparation, leave a
caveat to all, that they spend not these hours in idle adoes, which God has
given to gain their bliss. Of vapors that arise from the stomach or heart,
(say Physicians of the body) and ascend up into the the brain, proceeds
sleep: so the vapors foaming and reaking out of the secure and carnal heart,
send a spiritual slumber over the whole man, as the Physician of our soul
infallibly defines, Verse 19.
Math. 15. Against which the wise man gives this prescription, Prove. 4. 23.
Keep thine heart with all diligence, for from thence comes life. Whereunto
add that of Paul in the latter to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 4.
and it will add great strength unto our ward. Evigila t^ i^ omnibus, watch
thou (says he) not in some few only, giving way to other, nor in many,
omitting some, nor in most, passing by the rest; but in all watch thou in all
things. A hard saying, who can hear it? What action is here excluded? What
occasion is not meant? What place can be exempt? Or who are the persons for
whose presence we ought discontinue or break off our watch? But to whom
speaks the Apostle this? A man merely? If so, then watch in some things had
been enough, and scarcely allowable, but Timothy was more, a man of God. To
whom speaks the Apostle this? a Christian? if so, then watch in most things
had been enough, and hardly tolerable, but Timothy was more, a guide to
such: to whom speaks the Apostle this? some Angel? if so, then watch in all
things were charge enough. A task best fitting those pure spirits, which most
approximate God in dignity. To Timothy then a keeper and teacher of his
brethren, in him to us, in us, to others is this precept given. Let us first
amend in ourselves the contrary security, and so commend this duty to others.
Reasons of heed* fulness drawn from Christ's t^ing the hour whereof is imminent
but not* known


But they must be motives of no small moment that fasten such strictness on
us, or them. Take heed (says our Mark. 13. 33.
Be sober and watch (faith S. Peter) the reason follows, for your adversary
the Devil as a roaringly on walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Satan
is an enemy, and such an enemy as admits neither truce, nor atonement. The
hour of Christ's coming is uncertain, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
and From the nature of our adversary. Who is.
as is the onset of the thief: is it not then high time to take heed either
that Lion devour us, or this hour come upon us unawares?

Epaminondas (a renowned captain) having found one of Sedulo^^.
and being chid for so severe a fact, replied: Talem^ eumreliqui, qualeminvent.
I left him right such a one as I found him. Mark. 13. 37.
That which Christ our Captain said unto his Disciples he says un to all
that lie in this field of christian combat, watch. Sure we are that he will
come (as did Epaminondas) in his own person to search and see how we keep
our watch. We must therefore attend and look to our stand, least coming
suddenly, he find us sleeping, which if he do, relinquet tales, quales
invenit, he will leave us such as he finds us. Since he h^th threatened to cut
such in sunder, Luke 12. 46.
and to appoint them a portion with the unbelievers. Were the adversary only
sedulous in pacing this earth and had no power, or strength to hurt, our case
were Powerful.
but he is like that Leviathan whom Job describes, Job. 41. 17.
when the sword touches him he will not rise up, nor for the spear, dart, nor
habergeon. Had he force only and no Politic.
or power without policy, we need the less suspect him: but he is as
politic, as powerful, being that old serpent, whose wisdom is perfected by
long experience; could he be satisfied with some small revenge, or were the
body alone, to bear the smart of all, it were another matter, such wariness
were less needful, but as he was a murderer (as well of soul as body) from
the beginning: so his inveterate rage keeps him in continual motion, causing
him not only to prey on such as he usually meets, which lions Malicious
and seeks out of rage toward God to tear his image. What made the Romans so
careful and circumspect waging wars in Italy against Hanniball? the nature
and disposition of the enemy: for in him was courage and boldness to
undertake dangers, much counsel and policy in the midst of perils: he had a
body indefatigable by labor, a stomach invincible, the foremest in conflict,
the last in retreat, there was in him an inhumane cruelty, more then Punicall
perfidiousnesse, no truth, no holiness, no fear of the Gods, no respect of
oath, Job. 7. 1.
no religion. Our life is a warfare on earth: the masterie for which we
contend, and strive in this warfare, is a matter of more moment then was
theirs* the things where with their enemy was furnished, are much more found
in this hellish and infernal Hanniball, who for his power, is not to be
matched, for his wisdom, not to be sounded, for his malice not to be appeased,
and unweariable in all his Hannibal had of them: Wanting no war like advantage,
nor will. to use it to his best furtherance.
First Personal, we being flesh and therefore weak, he, and his accomplices,
more for number, since a legion possesses one; more mighty, being powers more
maliciously bent, because spiritual wickednesses, they invisibly repair,
Mark. 5.
and retire at pleasure, having personal access unto our spirits; Ephel. 12.
we sensible, and sensuallie always open to their assaults. 2. Real he
profers so fair howsoever he perform, pleasures, profits, preferment, and
what not? all these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.
Mat. 4. 9*
3. Formal as better discipline, and order of fight, no mutinous sound is ever
heard in Satan's camp, Math. 12.
for he is not divided against himself. In ours the frogge contends with the
mouse till the kite himself become vmpire, we being not only at ods with our
fellow soldiers, Romans 7.
but fostering dissentio^ within our own bowels. The manner of his fight is
secret, and manifold, such as no man thoroughly can unfold generally with the
Polypus (that to compass his prey) carries a semblance of the rock near which
he lies, he applies his temptations to the state, temper, and inclination of
every man. With the Panther he hides his deformed head till the sweet sent have
drawn other beasts into his danger; I mean he allures men with the sweetness
of pleasures, masking the monstrous and deformed head (1) the end thereof under
some gilded show of goodness, Genesis 3. 5.
or some disguised shape of sin. Clothing vice with a vi^grd of virtue (...)
drunkenness with brothe^ly fellowship, covetousness with christian
providence, etc.
Sometimes he assaults us fiercely, 2. Cor. 11. 14.
as a lion in the open field, other whiles he seems to sooth us in our good
intents, John. 2. 16.
transforming himself as the Apostle says. When his (...) is to frustrate
that intention, and deprave our good purpose by perverting the manner,
corrupting the means or altering some circumstance to mar the whole work
and make it worthless.
If he cannot conquer Attalanta by speed of foot he will go about to give her
with golden fetters, casting out three bals of gold (the lust of the eye, the
lust of the flesh, and the pride of life,) for her to gather, whilst he gains
the prize, and depriues her of the garland of eternal happiness. This cursed
Chameleon turns himself into all colors, to the end he may infin^ate under
some. 4. Accidental, as place, time, sun, wind. They are above us in the high
places, we beneath and fair under them: they assault us when we are solitary,
secure and (which bewraies greatest cowardlinesse) when we are asleep. In the
sunshine of prosperity, who sees not how subject man is to pride, presumption
of Gods love, looseness, coldness in profession, contempt of others,
confidence in outward things, and hope of too much assurance? If any adverse
wind blow cold on his patience by crosses, on his continuance by tribulation,
or on his peace of conscience by inward guiltiness, Ephesians. 6. 12.
as prone he is on their side to doubt of Gods favor, 2. Sam. 12.
distrust his providence, grudge at his designs, Psalm. 30. 7.
and seek redress by unlawful means. Ion. 4. 4.


Besides the world is on his side, 1. Sam. 28. 5. 7. 8.
and there lie vires and virus, much both power, and poison to infect some
Acham, Balaam, From the world which is 1. deceitful.
and withdraw Demas from the work of the Lord. Who walks in this
wilderness, and wanders not? Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus, the most
watchful, Josh. 1. 21.
sleep and slip sometimes. 2. Pet. 2. 15.
A whole navy of ships may surrow the Ocean, 2. Tim. 4. 10.
and scarce one be endangered, Dangerous.
hardly one can make escape in this desert, we are beset on every side. On the
right with fair faced shows fit to allure; on the left, with cares, and
crosses, of force to dismay; before with example, strong to seduce; behind by
censure eagerly pursuing, he that is not puf^ up with her favors, nor danted
with her frowns, that can pick good out of the evil of example, and burye
her censures in a christian contempt, so that no one of these, nor all these
tear his sail, or turn his helm; Hunc dignum spectatu arbitramur. That he
shrowdes a great wonder in a little world, and may safely bear a pea^elesse
treasure through perilous paths.

From the flesh which is false and frail.
might both be borne, if a domestical and inward friend, with whom we repast
daily, and nightly repose our selves, the flesh I mean, wherewith we are
clothed, and clogged, did not conspire, and partake with them against us. This
is the Delilah which reveals Sampsons secret to the Philistines. It is not an
open enemy that does us this dishonor, Ps. 55. 12. 13.
for then we could the better bear it, neither is it a professed adversary
that does magnify himself against us, for then peradventures we could hide our
selves from him, as looking for nothing from such, but adverse and enemie^ like
dealing. But it is a companion, a guide, a familiar friend, with whom we take
sweet counsel together, and repair to the house of God as friends: one nearer
and dearer, then alter idem, a second self, now a kingdom, or house, that is
divided against it self, cannot possibly stand. Who more mortified then he who
chastned his own body? etc. 1. Cor. 9. 27.
Notwithstanding with diligence he vehemently exclaimes, O wretched man that I
am who shall deliver me from this body of sin? so hot is the skirmish, so
fierce the conflict, between the flesh and the spirit.

If then we have such an adversary as is for power, unmatchable, for wisdom
vnsoundable, for malice implacable, and unweariable in his endeavors. If
besides the siege of foreign enemies, we bear a Sinon in our bosom, that
opens the gates of our senses, for troops of temptations to enter in* the
counsel of our Apostle here seems (I had almost said) more then necessary
that good heed be taken, to decline such mischiefs as they meet withal, who
take not heed. This lesson we might learn in natures school did we but mark
the face, and fashion of brutish creatures, which have this engraven and given
of god, to beware of mischeife, and defend themselves from annoyance. What
prudence is showen in civil government? What policye or success in Martial
exploits? What foresight or prudence, in secular dealing? What progress in the
affairs of faith without heed? what man is he that desires life, and loves
long days for to see good, that (to attain a taste and experience of such
things, as may make his days delightful, and his delight good) would
discharge duty to God aright, and carry himself upright before men? Let him
with that princely and royal Prophet, invre himself to take heed unto his
ways. Such wariness is good wisdom though it be as manicles upon their right
hand, Psalm. 39. 1.
to the worldly wise. Can a man touch pitch without defilement? walk in the
world without worldly affections? Live in the flesh and war against the
flesh, except he attend and take good heed? Hand facile est, tribulos and
spinas inter euntem,
Illaesos habuisse pedes, illaesaque crura.
It is hard for a man walking amongst thistles and thorns to safeguard himself
from sharp gratulations.

Imagine two men fraught with some known treasure, were to pass through as
dangerous and suspected a place, as our border has sometimes bin, would they
not, if they were circumspect, look warily to their way, and cast their eyes
on each side, least suddenly they were surprised? would they not prepare
themselves, sometimes by fight, other whiles by flight, to escape danger? Vita
haec via est, our life is the way whereunto we are to look, the soul is the
treasure, then which (of all things that are had in price) what is more
precious? Here Devils lie in ambush by legions, to bereave us, and disordered
appetites give many onsets at times, R^sist the Devil Iam. 4. 7. Fly
fornication.
we must purchase safety by resistance, sometimes by giving ground we gain
our peace.

That thing would surely be had in great request which could either prevent
sickness, 1. Cor. 6. 18.
or remove it with least danger, yet cannot that secure (which rescues for a
tin) the body from death. But the prevention of sin, b^^ore it ceaze, or the
abandoning thereof before it come to perfection, causes not only a momentany
health, but a perpetual safety of the soul. And yet see how our corruption
misplaceth our care. Ier. 6. 20.
To save the one, men will seek remedy be it never so rare, never so dear,
were it to be fetched with incense from Sheba, Vt corpus redimas ferrum. etc.
arida nec sitiens ora etc.
or sweet Calamus from a far country. They will sustain, and abstain:
Sustain what lancing, searing, mangling, and mutilating of their bodies? They
abstain from that they most desire. But for the health or safeguard of their
souls, Take heed
men think it a bondage to take heed. We will not conquer our patien^e to
digest two syllables though the receipt promise as happy an effect, as is the
salvation of our selves and others. Must it not needs be a special good thing,
whose contrary (to wit carelessness, or security) is such a mother of mischief?
Genesis 19. 33.
Solomon's wisdom, Lots integrity, Genesis 9. 21.
and Noah's sobriety felt the smart of this Serpents sting. The first was
seduced, the second stumbled, the third fell, whiles the eye of watchfulness
was fallen a sleep. Sed cur is it a dicimus, cum mayor a noverimus? Heaven and
earth, and (sometimes a heaven on earth) Paradise, can all record, what want of
attention has wrought in them, transforming Angels, disparadising our
Parents, and gleaning Judas from amongst his fellows. If any calling
whatsoever could privilege, Judas was billed amongst the twelve, If inward
perfection, or original excellency, Adam was armed with the righteousness of
his creation. If any place or presence could secure, then heaven, the throne of
God, his presence there, whose brightness they beheld, had kept those aspiring
spirits in their first, and best estate, but Nusquam est securitas, fratres,
nec in eoel^, (...) in paradiso, multo minus in mundo, in coelo enim cecidit
Angelus sub praesentia divinitatis, in paradiso Adam, de loco voluptatis, in
mundo Judas, de schola salvatoris; Security (my brethren) is found no where,
neither in heaven, nor paradise, much less on earth. Satan fell as lightning
from heaven, the deity on looking; Adam out of Paradise, the place engrossing
all earthly pleasures, and Judas slipped out of our Saviors school into Satan's
cell. I could tell you here why Sampson so strong, Judge. 16.
became so weak, as to be inveigled with a woman. Mat. 26. 6^.
Peter so confident, proved such a coward as to be shaken with the breath of a
Damsells mouth. 2. Sam. 11. ^.
Why David so holy slid so unhappily, Whilst his eye bewrayed his heart, and
his heart gave ear to that hasty message. Nemo securus esse debet in vita,
quae tota tentatio nominatur. No man must be secure in this life where
temptations bid perpetual battle, le^t that inversion prove subversion, vt qui
fieri potuit ex deteriori melior, non fiat etiam ex meliore deterior, that he
who of worse might become better, do not fall from better to worse. We must
not be like to Agrippa's dormouse which would not awake, till being boiled in
lead, the heat caused her to unseal her eyes; but rather we ought to resemble
those who were wont to sleep with brazen balls in their hands, which falling
on vessels purposely set at their bed sides, the noise did dissuade immoderate
sleep: So, and more watchful then. was he, Ps. 119. 148.
who (to keep his heart in ure with God) made the Commandments his
meditation; Psalm. 5. 3.
not in the morning only, and that early, and all day long too, but (when he
should have taken his rest, as others do) his eyes prevented the night
watches: yea his manner was to rise at midnight (when others slept) for to give
thanks. Psalm. 119. 62.


It is storied of Sampson, that when Delilah was set on work by his enemies,
Judge. 16. from the 5. verse to the 22.
to know how he might be bound to do him hurt, he dallied a while first with
seven withs, then with new ropes which he brake as threads, etc. In the end
importunity made her mistress of his mind, and him miserable: for when she
had caused the seven locks of his head to be shaven, he was afraid, and
troubled at the voice, which said; The Philistines be upon thee Sampson. Then
awaking out of sleep, and thinking to go out, and shake himself, as at other
times, he could not do as he had done, therefore they took him, and put out
his eyes, bound him with fetters, and set him to grind in the prison house.
Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. Change but the name, and each christian is
the man whose strength lies in the locks of heed-taking and attention, which
so long as they are preserved and kept in ure, the Philistines, his forenamed
enemies, cannot prevail, but if a rasor of security come over his head, and
shave his hair, (the Devil I mean secretly stealing his heart from his true
treasure, and set it on other strange delights) then Sampson like, he becomes
weak as other men, the voice of pleasure allures him, the voice of profit
intangles him, hearing that voice, Verse. 17.
in the 6 of Jeremy, which says; take heed to the sound of the trumpet; he
answers as they say there. I will not take heed. Then the enemy of the soul
takes him captive, puts out, or bleres at least, for some space, 1. Ioh. 2. 16.
his eyes, his affections are then fettered, and grind he must to that lust of
the flesh, that lust of the eye, and pride of life, which he before had in
subjection. Satan sent a Delilah to lull Paul in her lap, and bind him with
withs of green delights, ^. Cor. 12. 7.
but his watchful soul displeased deeply with that flesh-pleasing force
complained thereof, shaked himself, and so found ease. Lot so long as his
soul was kept waking by the city of Sodom, brake with ease those ropes of
vanity, which drew destruction on the city. Sed qui in ipsa ciuitate
peruersa i^stus fuit, in monte peeca^it, he that walked uprightly in the midst
of that perverse, and forlorn place, fell down right in the mountain. Sin
is that to the soul, Joel 2. ^0.
which putrefaction is to the natural bodies, as in nature three things
preserve therefrom, heat, cold, and motion: so the same through heedfulnesse
preserve the soul from corruption. First, intensiue ^ Math. 26. 41.
that if we watch and pray, we shall not enter into temptation. 2. Cold that is
outward is another let, or preservative, because it resists extrinsecall, or
outward heat, which has the chief stroke in the work. The air of affliction
is cold, and causet^ many to fall away. yet warily drawn in, Math. 43. 21.
and wisely referred to the right end, it breeds good blood in distempered
bodies, causing them with diligence to seek the Lord. Again, Hosea 5. 15.
the neighborhood of cold Christians, and cohabitation of lukewarm
professors (by a spiritual antiperistasis) warm some the more. Lot was the
forwarder amidst the Genesis 5. 19.
frozen Sodomites: Enoch walked with God alone, Genesis 5. 22.
when others went from him. Noah in his generation sought the Lord, by the
practice of faith and repentance, when all the world forsook him, and made way
by their wicked practice third preservative in nature, and natural things, is
motion, which has the like effect in our soul affairs. For this cause the
Apostle exhorts us not to be weary of well-doing, Gal. 6. 9.
wherein also this text requires continuance; the air does ever move in his
Region, so ought we in our several stations, always be exercised in the
course of godliness. No moss sticks to the rolling stone, which if it laid
still, would be ouergrowen: standing ponds gather skumme, whilst murmuring
brooks run filth-free. The neglected plant, (be it of the best) either dies,
or frustrates hope. An untilled field (be it of the fertillest) brings forth
weeds, briers, thistles. You wot why Aegistus became an adulterer; Desidiosus
^rat, he was entombed before his time, Otium viv^ hominissepultura.
for idleness is the grave of a living man. The crabfish is desirous of
Oysters, but because she cannot perforce open them, she watches the time when
they open themselves, and then thrusting in her claws she speedes her self.
There is a time when man's heart is shut up, and kept so close, that sin
cannot ceaze thereon, nor enter therein, a time when it is more open, and apt
to receive the infectious impressions of lust, anger, envy and the like; Which
Satan observing by his diligent attendance, ^ Sam. 11.
ensnares the soul, as he did David's, who first slept securely on his bed,
then paced it idly on the roof of his palace, when he should have gone forth
to the battle, and displayed his banner against the enemy. He that looks to
his feet, and numbers his steps in a slipperie path shall set the surer,
whereas he that sets he looks not where, must needes-slip, and fall the oftener.

Prove. 9. 17.
the fruit of sin, as Moses makes them, Deuteronomy. 28. Where the curse of GOD
^aunts the wicked (as it were a fury) in all his wa^es. If he be in the City
it attends him there, in the field it hovers over him, coming in, it
accompanies him, going forth, it follows him at the heels, and in travel it
is his commorade. If it destaste not his doughe, or empty his basket, yet will
it fill his store with strife, or swallow the wrath of God with his sweetest
morsels. It is a mothe in his wardrobe, murraine amongst his cattle, mildew in
his field, rot amongst his sheep, and ofttimes makes the fruit of his loi^es
his greatest ^eart^break.
Stolen waters are counted sweet, and hid bread is pleasant, but this
pleasantness ends in painful accusations, and secret checkes of conscience,
those waters cool love, quench the spirit, and both may breed that distress
of mind, Prove. 18. 14.
wherewith no worldly cross may compare. Prove. 14. 17.
For the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, 2 Samuel 2. 23.
but a wounded spirit (a burden importable) who can bear it? Prove. 13. 10.
Verse. 16. 17. etc.
To proceed from inward troubles which are less seen to those which are
outward and better discerned; Some find that true in proof, which Solomon
speaks by way of Proverb, he that is hasty to anger, commits folly, and
folly sometimes commits him to be cooled within the prison walls, and the
busie-bodie is hated. Can Elyes education but breed ill blood in his
prosperity? Is not pride the Mother of contention? contention of
coffeehouse? and shall not he that loves pastime be a poor man? What
dilapidations and alienating of states, do prodigal and intemperate Heirs
make, causing ancient houses to spew out their owners, and teaching their
lands to deny their names? Hell should have no suburbs on earth, if rash and
and unripe contracts did not maintain marriage broils. The malefactor on the
ladder, taking his farewell of the world, leaves this Cave for the best Legacy
he can bestow, take heed (says he) of this or that vice (naming some) whereon
he lays the guilt of his untimely death. To whom is woe? Prove. 23. 29. 30.
to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds
without cause? search and see if these bitter fruits do not follow such as
delight in drunkenness, the beggars burden. If David had been as circumspect
at that one time, walking on the roof of his house, as he was at other, he
might have walked free from that anguish and reproach, Psalm. 51. 3. 8.
which afterward did find him out. It must needs be seen by this time, that
by heed-taking, some escape the crosses which enormous demeanor draw on
others. The Saints in this life have no supersed^as against all encumbrance;
for sometimes troubles come toward them in troops, Psalm. 34. 18.
multae tribulationes iustorum, many are the troubles, Were these troubles not
many, or that many, no troubles, 1. fewer, or more affecting nature, they
should distract the less; but many troubles may perplexe a weak mind,
possess a wicked with opinion of being a good thing, not to be a good man,
therefore the spirit elsewhere appeaseth the one, and spites the other. The
righteous shall escape out of trouble, an^ the wicked shall come in his stead.
Prove, 11. 8. If then troubles dismay, yet may hope of deliverance bearten, 2
Deliverance more certain, that from the Lord. 3 From the Lord more acceptable,
that out of favor. 4 Favor more grateful, that finds riddance out of all.
And 5 (which graceth all the more) the wicked shall come in his stead.
of the righteous; but the right manner of taking, and entertaining them, and
how wisely to manage them to our best advantage, is a mystery worthy light
and labor, a privilege enjoyed by them alone. Evil tidings throng upon Job,
Job 1. 14. 15.
as if they had striuen which should come first. Whilst one was speaking of the
stealth and slaughter of the Shabeans, Verse 16.
an other Messenger, hotter then he comes, the fire of God is fallen from
Heaven, and has burnt up thy sheep, and servants, and has devoured them etc.
Neither had the third ended his rueful relation, Verse 17.
till the most mournful accident dispatched the fourth. Verse 18. 19.
Thy sons and thy daughters were eating, and drinking wine in their eldest
brothers house, and behold there came a great wind from beyond the wilderness,
and smote the ^oure corners of the house, which fell upon thy children, and
they are dead etc. See what a table of evil tidings was prepared for a
righteous man. A single cross lesser then the least of this kind, has
disquieted, yea even amazed some; imagine then (in my silence) what one more
then tripled, and without respit would work with the strongest patient. How
was Baltazar daunted, when in the height of his royalty, and amidst his mirth,
that fearful hand writing was seen of him? was not the Kings countenance
changed? Dan. 5. 6.
did not his thoughts trouble him, so that his joints were loosed, and his
knees smote one against the other? What if an inferior, nay no true, but a
fained affliction be found of force to disorder the rank of unarmed passions?
Esth. 3. 5.
Though Haman be promoted by Ahashuerosh, and placed above all the Princes that
be with him, though all the Kings servants bow their knees, and do reverence
to the man whom the King will honor, yet cannot all this honor, and promotion
please and content him; if Mordecai, but one, a mean one, and a stranger, deny
him homage. 1 Samuel 25. 37.
If Nabal but hear of his wife Abigail, how nigh death he was, and near to
have left all, his heart will dye within him after the retreat of death, his
fear will transform him into a stone. Contrary, the forewarning of Agabus did
forea^me Paul, I am ready (says he) not to be bound only, (for these being
as soon digested by him as named by the other, he singled out in his own
conceit, Act. 21. 11. 13.
and there hearing a harder, and more terrible encounter, to wit death) but
also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. See you not that some
one disturbance dasheth all other delights and makes their life i^ksome,
perhaps loathsome? witness Achitophel inferring that cursed conclusion upon
crossed premises when he hanged himself. 2 Samuel 17. 23.
Again attention, and expectation of change dulls the edge, abates the force,
and allayes the tartness of sudden vexation. Affliction we ^ffect not (for
there is no taste in the white of an egg) yet do our affections increase our
afflictions, throu^h security in not preueting, whilst we may, way^ wardnes in
not entertaining them as we ought, or want of wisdom (...) not entertaining
the as we might do only the watchful are wise, and the wise watchful, to
p^event some before they fal^, Math. 28. to welcome other by preparation Luke.
23. to reap a joyful harvest after a teary seede^ime, by taking thankfully,
disges^ing patiently, and burying all in the hope of a good issue.
Let here retire your attention, and my speech to visit Job, in those sharp
visitations of his, we shall neither find him a Stoicke so much as to feel
vacancy of passions; (for he rent his garments, shaued his head, and fell upon
the ground,) nor so little a christian, as to entertain deiection of mind, in
so sore trialls. Job. 1. 20.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, even as it pleases the Lord, so
come all things to pass, blessed be the Name of the Lord. It wrought
stupiditie in secure Nabal, which wrung praise and patience from watchful Job.

To all these things there is an appointed time, and one thing must be in
request at all times, to wit, that one which is necessary; the former as men
we gather by observation of things naturally accomplished, voluntarily done,
or necessarily endured; the other we must believe as Christians. In a quiet
state we forget God. In a troubled, we think God has forgotten us, Psalm.
77. In a calm, we are too prone to presume, in a storm, too too abject to
despair. He that said; In my prosperity I shall never be moved, was presently
troubled upon the change, Psalm. 30. not unlike the bladder, that is forthwith
swollen with a puff* but incontinently shrunk with a prick; how needful now
is heed-taking, and circumspection in all estates? in adversity against
vnsettling, and backsliding. in prosperity against looseness, and too much
hope of assurance. There can be no stabilitie in our affections, no stayednesse
in any state of life, no constancy kept in a Christian course, before we have
learned this brief sum, and summarie abridgement of all duty, Heb. 3. 12.
to take heed.

Thirdly, this heedfulnesse puts life and strength as has been said, into all
other parts of Gods worship. The skillful Pilote beholds all the parts of
Heaven continually, that so he may at all times accordingly, guide, and direct
his ship; so ought the careful and wise Christian, give diligent Eccle: 4. 17.
when thou enterest into the House of God. Our Savior gives further direction
for our carriage, and abode there, when he says, Take heed how you hear.
Luke 8. 13.
Men wear Gods threshold, without looking to their feet, that is, what
affections they come withal, they weary him with their idle presence, not
caring how they demean themselves. The proud enters, and profits not, because
he takes not heed to his feet; for God resists the proud, Iam. 4. 6.
and gives grace to the humble. The malicious and wrathful enter too, but
without fruit; for the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of
God. Iam. 1. 20.
Unbelievers join themselves to others, in the exercises of Religion, but with
so ill success, that the word which they hear, profits them not, because it
is not mingled in their hearts with faith. Heb. 4. 2.
The conceited Laodicean (being full aforehand) enters here, and is no more
edified then the other, Luke 1. 53.
for God fills the hungry with good things, as for the rich and opinatiuely
righteous, he sends them empty away. Psalm. 42. 12. and 84. 2.
Few come with that good thirst, and holy hunger which David had; few with
Mary's care, to lay up in their hearts. Luke 2. 19. 51.
Many banish attention out of their ears, most bring no purpose to practice
ought. What marvel therefore though such depart as empty of heavenly wisdom,
as they came void of holy desire. Sobriety is a commendable, and serviceable
virtue in the life of man, to order and keep the same in frame; yet this
without attendance, and looking to, may be lost, Gen 9. 21.
or at least depart for a time, 1 Pet. 5.
as it did from Noah. Therefore Saint Peter, to back and strengthen the
moderation of affection, and conversation, requires the attention of the mind,
that so the enemy, through his vigilancie, neither withdraw us from the good
which we would, and he impugnes; nor draw us to the evil we would not, ^phes.
6. 13.
and which he importunes us to. Paul's Panoplie or Christian armor, is so
necessary a furniture, as no man can with safety want this; Notwithstanding
when we have put on, not a part, but the whole, and have had proof thereof,
Verse 28.
by withstanding the enemy, yet are we warned to watch withal, that we may
stand fast: So necessary is vigilancie, even to an armed and weaponed
Christian, that without it, he may be driven from his stand, as were our first
Parents, in that state wherein they were likest to have with stood. Prayer is
the highest link in that golden chain, Romans 10. 13.
coupling salvation to the soul of man, yet will prayers be few, and those
frozen too, where no heed is given to our selves; Math. 26.
therefore does Christ join invocation, and attention together, 1 Pet. 4. 7.
saying, Watch and pray. And his Apostle exhorts to be watchful unto prayer.
Wandering thoughts fly rife, at such times chiefly, and distract the mind,
Genesis 15. 11.
as the fowls did hinder Abraham's sacrifice, these, attention must restrain.
There are times wherein we are more willing, yea desirous to talk with God,
then at other, those oportunities must attention take; the force of invocation
is much abated, if it be not accompanied with attention, Alterius sie altera
posci^ open, etc.
and the eye of attention would close oft-times, and steal a nap, if it were
not kept waking by the voice of prayer.

In the principal parts of Gods worship, either he speaks to us; as in the
holy assemblies, or we to him, in the language of prayer. We must avoid
Hypocrisy, as the bane of both. In our conference with God, lest the fault of
these ancient hypocrites, and hypocritical Pharisees, be laid at our door
(whose mouths and minds, Isa. 29. 13.
went sundry ways) we must take heed, to join these two together, the lips
nigh, Ier. 38.
and the heart far off, and then the King will deny us nothing. 1 John 5. 14.
Concerning the latter, Gods speech to us, lest that complaint of the Prophet,
or the Lord rather by his Prophet, (my people sit before thee, and hear thy
words, but they will not do them) Ezekiel. 33. 31.
rise in record against us, we must be careful to join obedience to our
audience. If ye know these things, John 13. 17.
happy are you if you do them,

Hitherto have I showed a threefold use of Christian heedfulnesse or attention.
The first, that it keeps us from sin, viz. gross and enormous, such as
David calls the great offense, Eccl. 27. ^.
otherwise there is no man just in the earth, that does good, and sins not;
and this is a blessed thing, as the Prophet affirms in the first Psalm.
Verse 1.
Secondly, it prevents many troubles, wherewith others meet, and teaches
cheerfully to undergo such as God shall see meet for our exercise, 1 Pet. 1.
6.
the way whereby we come to the Crown of life, and this can be no less then a
blessed way, for it leads to Canaan, though it lie through the wilderness.
Thirdly, Act. 14. 22.
that it has the tuition and ouer-sight of all other means, to set and keep
them on foot, that which Christ himself pronounces to be the true happiness.
Luke 11. 28.
Seeing then there is no division of languages, in this triplicitie, but each
does severally promise bliss; I may (to close the whole point) seal up all
with that saying of the Spirit; Blessed is he that Reu. 16. 15.
He shall weane his heart from unlawful liberties;


Our Apostle having exhorted his Scholar Timothy in the 12 verse, Thy self.
to the practice of particulars, he does here imply no less in this one
word, Tibi, then was expressed in those many. Hence, to set consideration on
work, Romans 2. 23.
they who teach others, ought first to take out the Lesson themselves. Thou
that gloriest in the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? Some
man is witty, and has instructed many, but is unprofitable unto himself, as
Balaams Ass rebuked the foolishness of the Prophet, nothing bettered himself
thereby. Pulcherrimus est ordo, and saluberrimus (says one) vt enus quod alijs
portandum imponis, tu ports prior. It is the most comely and meet method a
preacher can use, Math* ^3. 4.
first to bear the burden himself which he lays upon another. Christ taxes
those ^s too hard impositors, and immoderate commanders, who would lay burdens
on other men's shoulders, from which they withdraw their own. His Apostle
counts those wise men who take heed to themselves Ephesians. 5. 15.
and whose lives are circumspect. Who can commend Noah his shipwrights, who
made an arc for the safety of others but were not themselves preserved by it?
What wisdom is it to send others to the promised land, and build Tabernacles
in this wilderness for our selves? What charity to open the kingdom of
heaven to others, and to bear keys to shut out our selves? He can never (be
said what can, to contradict) he I say, can never seriously seek, not
earnestly thirst after the salvation of others, who has no care to work out
his own. Qui sibinequam, cui bonus? The charge Paul ga^e to Titus was, Tit. 2.
7. 8.
in all things to show himself an example of good works with incorrupt
doctrine, etc. Me^ are sooner persuaded by works, then words, eyesight, then
hearsay to well doing. Non sic inflectere sensus
H^manos edicta valent, quam vita docentis.
Practice will set an edge on the bluntest precept, and actio^ is the best rule
in our Rhetoric, to move men to put a good lesson in ure. The Pharisees had
tongues which spoke by the tal^egrave;et, but their hands scarce wrought by the
ounce. Therefore no time shall wear out the stain wherewith our Savior
Christ did blemish them in his time, Mat. 23. 3.
they say, With their tongues men profess that they are Christians, when by
their deed; they control the truth of their profession. Those (...) for thew,
these witness against them, their tongues are partiallin this plea and speak
out of the information of a deceitful heart, Ier. 17. Their deeds give
evidence according to truth, for the kingdom of God (...) not in words, but in
power and practice. He is a miserable and unhappy man, who has his (...) to
countenance his christianity, in an unchristian carriage, and course of life.
For (...) pretends in natures corrupt court of common pleas, where many men
boast every one of his (...) P^ov. 20 6: Yet is he sure to speed ill in the
Kings bench where judgment is already and (...) gone out against him. Not
every one that says Lord, Lord shall enter into the kingdom of (...) he that
does the will, etc. Mat. 7.
and do not. Their breast plate was all composed of Vrim without ^hummim, they
had knowledge, void of holiness, resembling the coin, which being in it self
white, notwithstanding draws a black line. Or water in great men's kitchins
which having purged, and cleansed other things is it self cast into the sink,
and such are all they who Grecian-like know what is good, but with the
Lacedaemonian forbear to practice the good they know. It is said of our
Savior Christ, Mark. 7. 37.
that he spoke as never man spoke, that he did all things well. Ioh. 5. 35.
Our Savior says of John Baptist, that he was a burning and shining candle,
It may be a candle that has neither warmth nor light, but John had both a
shining heat, and a burning light, his light did show others the way, his heart
did inflame them with desire of it. That precept of Christ's was not given in
vain, and if it ought to be practiced by any, then of such chiefly who should
resemble the things allotted to the Temples service; which were double to those
of ordinary use. Let your light so shine, Mat. 5. 16.
etc. shine we must, not so, that we be like the Lyzards which make prints
with their feet, and dash them out with their tails, but so, that saying and
doing we adorn the doctrine of our Savior Christ: not so, that Lapwing-like
we cry there, as if our affections were fixed above, when yet they are fastened
here below. But so that in heart and affection we aspire whence we speak as
Paul did and his like; Phil. 3. 20.
not so, that we show miserable penury, in unfruitful plenty; penury of
conscience, in plenty of knowledge, but so, that by the light of life, and
learning as two bright lamps we may go before, and guide others, through this
region of darkness, into the land of light. The words of the Apostles slew as
sparkles out of the furnace of zealous hearts, and their hearts were kindled
with the fire of faith. 2. Cor. 4. 13.
We also believe and therefore speak, etc. They make the best harmony, and
the most shall dance to their pipes, whose tongues and hearts are tied
together, whose precept and practice kiss each other. Good trees bring forth
more then leaves, by their fruits ye shall know th^e, if we have a voice, to
say, this is the way, and like Plinie's (...) want feet to walk in it, trees
we may be, I say not good ones, but like that withered one in the Gospel,
which was cursed by the breath of Gods own mouth. The doves eye is an ornament
to the Serpents head. Mat. 21. 19.
We must therefore be innocent as well, Mat. 10. 16.
as wise, for as wise innocence foresees, and shunnes dangers: so innocent
wisdom fits us to do, and suffer the will of our maker. Ministers are sembled
by stars which affect (as some say) those inferior things three ways, Rev.
1. 20.
by motion, light, and influence; so they as fixed stars in the Churches
firmament, must by the influence of their lips, Feed; By the regular motion of
their lives, Confirm; And by the light of both, Inlighten many. Those that
give precepts of military discipline, require three things in a worthy leader,
skill, virtue, and authority. 1. He must be skillful not from report, or reading
only, as some tongue-tall captains are, but such a one as knows well
himself to order his army, to protract and lengthen the war, or draw on the
enemy. 2. He must have virtue, that like a true leader, he may say of
himself, my soldiers I would have you follow my deeds, not my words: the
former of these fits him for direction, the latter for execution, and both
jointly cast a reverend, and awful opinion upon his person. So in the manage
of spiritual wars, the Captains must be men of skill, Mal. 2. 7.
because the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, this knowledge must utter it
self by practice, for whosoever has not virtue is blind, and where the blind
lead the blind, 2. Pet. 1. 9.
leader and follower, both fall into the ditch; Mat. 15.
whereas knowledge followed with practice, procures an authority, and reverend
esteem amongst men, which I will make my first motive, to induce this point.

How did S. Paul and his fellows procure authority to themselves, Motive.
we (says he) give no offense in any thing; 2. Cor. 6. 3.
that our Ministry should not be reprehended. Loquendi authoritas perditur,
Ioh. 1. 20.
quando vox opere non adiuvatur. John the Baptist was had in such esteem that
some thought he was the Christ. What great things did John to purchase such
appla^se? happi^ by some miracles he wrought amongst them; but Nullum signum
fecit, Ioh. 10. 41.
John did no such things whereby to draw the wonder of men on him, it was
only his mortified and sober course of life, which gained him this respect.
Holiness of conversation concurring with the measure of his understanding.
Timothy was a young man to whom the Apostle writes that no man should despise
his youth, this may seem not to have layne in his own power, but the Apostle
tells him how it may be brought about, even by covering greenness of years
with gravitie of carriage, 1. Tim. 4. 12.
be unto the^ that believe, an ensample, in word in conversation in love, in
spirit, in faith, and in pureness. Thus, if his speech be gracious, and
powdered with salt, if his life teach religion, as well as his learning, if out
of love he do all good offices to all men, if besides the use of an edifying
lenity, he have spiritual fortitude, to further Gods business, if through
faith he can conquer such difficulties as otherwise would weary him of well
doing, if an habitual purity accompany, and adorn the rest: Timothy though
young, shall neither expose his profession to contumely, nor his own person to
contempt.

The growth of the Gospel is much hindered by our evil conversation, 2 Motive.
because hereby we shut up the kingdom of heaven against men, Mat. 23. 13.
for we neither go in our selves, nor suffer we them that are entering to go
in. Frustra al^os in^itabit adpie vivendum qui nullum prae se fert pietatis
studiu^. The labor seems lost, and the pains to perish of such as would
plant piety in others, and make the law of unrighteousness his own rule.
Man's affection by nature gives more credit to the eye, Genesis 30. 37.
then ear, and the eyes of his understanding, like Jacobs sheep, too firmly
fixed on such party colored objects, as say well, and do ill, cause their
affections to bring forth spotted fruits. The Prophet brings in God to demand
disdainfully in the Psalm, with what face men of uncircumcised lips, and
lives, dare presume to meddle with his mysteries. But unto the ungodly, says
God, Psalm. 50. 16.
why do thou preach my laws, and take my covenant in thy mouth, whereas
thou harest to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? He speaks not
by way of advise, or instruction, it is not meet that the ungodly should meddle
with my ordinances, etc. Nor uses he a simple prohibition, let no ungodly man
preach my law, etc. but with words of increpation, and sharp reproof he
shakes them, saying, Cur? Why do thou preach my laws? etc. He that steeps
his tongue in religion, and stains his life with gross transgressions, that
publishes Gods law with his mouth and preaches lewdness by his manners, is
like the Physician that should minister at once two contrary potions to his
patient, the one being sovereign to prevent death, the other deadly to take
away life; whereof the latter and worser has this advantage, that the eyes
fasten more firmly, and stirringly on things seen; then the ear of what we
hear: Segnius irritant animos impressa pe^ aures, etc.
and men are far more aptly and lively led by practice, then precept;
examples, then edicts. Thou therefore that teach another, teach thou not
thy self? Qui negligit recta facere, desinat and recta docere. Let him cease
(says Isidor) to teach well, Romans 2. 21.
that cares not to live well. A spot in the face, does more blemish the body
then does elsewhere a bile. Our moates are beams, our beams put out the eyes
of others, as well as our own, our moles, are mole-hils, our mole-hills,
mountains, Cum pastor per abrupta graditur ad praecipitium grex. sequitur*
Ier. 2. 7.
from the hight whereof some throw themselves headlong, as if no evil were to
be feared where we go before. The thief may with as easy censure steal the
horse, as he that says thou shall not steal look over the hedge. The Lord
expostulating with his people for their ingratitude, says thus. I brought you
into a plentiful country etc. but when you entered, you defiled my land. etc.
A great and foul fault indeed and deserving reproof, Verse. 8.
but far overgone in greatness by that which follows. The Priests said not,
where is the Lord, and they that handle my law knew me not etc.

Christ called Peter, Mat. 16. 2^.
Satan, when if carnal reason might rule a case divine, he gave no ill
counsel. Master pity thy self, etc. Now whether it be that others
indifferences be our faults, or lesser faults in us breed greater offenses,
both which have their truth and place, though no place here to lessen Peter's
rashness, yet that for which Peter is so roundly come over by our Savior with
get thee behind me, Verse. 23.
Satan, the Pope would easily have pardoned, or not so sharply censured for the
intents sake. The number of the twelve Apostles was singularly and specially
chosen amongst who^ Judas stood as a cipher in Algorisme to fill up room, or
as Satan amongst the sons of God. Have I not chosen you twelve, Job. 1. 6.
and one of you is a Devil? Such piety and faithfulness, above others, John.
6. 70.
had not been required of Judas, if he had not been chosen before others to
the office and dignity of Apostleship, nor had he ever been clothed with so
hateful and odious a title, if the prophaners of so honorable a sanction, so
sacred a function, were not most cursed of other creatures, and to be counted
the worst of all. A man of great science, and little conscience, whereto shall
I compare him? he is like an image which has the head of gold, Humano capiti
cervicem pictor equinam, etc.
the body of brass, or baser metal, yea he is more monstrous the^ the Poets
picture, which has a man's head, a horses neck, with variety of other forms,
and feathers. Spectatum admissi. fletum teneatis? Can any eye but tear, any
heart but break, can our bones but shake at the sight of such? better it were
for others, they had not been Prophets, for themselves, they ha^ never been.
Will men be moved so much with words, which they see confuted with contrary
deeds? Hands are stronger to ruinate, then tongues to renew; The one to
scatter, then the other to gather, those to pull down, then these to build up.
Will they not say secretly within themselves, whilst our words sound in their
ears, Cur ergo quae dicit, ipse non facit? If there were such danger in sin,
why would not he himself shun it? would he do otherwise then he says? Thus
we strengthen the hands of the wicked that none can return from his
wickedness. (...). 23. 14.


Our open reprehensions of them are so many secret and sealed condemnations of
our selves. Comfort we other? we cast down our selves. Threaten we other? we
deceive and send our selves to hell. Evil words corrupt good manners, but
evil manners corrupt more, of Ministers chiefly. Others examples, if they be
not less evil, yet are they less dangerous. But theirs are Basilisks which
by their sight infect deadly. Mat. 6. ^2.
The light of the body is the eye, etc. The candle gives light to them which
are in the house, Mat. 5. 15.
but going out, men grope after the walls, like blind men, and the snuff is
offensive and unsavory: so if these eyes be darkened, these candles be dimmed
by some gross offense, Qui ducunt, seducunt.
the loss of their light misleads, Isa. 3. 12.
their sent is unsavory, and both quenches many good purposes and breeds
abortiue births in the hearts and minds of the beholders. Let your light
therefore shine with such an ocular demonstration of your faith, that men may
see to imitation, what by voice is uttered for instruction. Otherwise (as in
too many) if ill life quench the light of good learning, as by profitable
doctrine we hew timber out of thick trees, Psalm. 74. 6. 1.
so by dissonant condition, and contrary practice we break down all the
carved work. Whereas if both hands were set to the Lords building,
uprightness in living well, and diligence by teaching well, we should be
known to bring it to an excellent work. Salt is good, other things though
they degenerate may notwithstanding by some means become profitable, after
their corruption; Luke 14. 34. 35.
but if the salt have lost his favor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is
neither meet for the land, nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast it out: that
goodness is in such as have salt in themselves; this contempt abides those that
loose their savor.

Thirdly, 3 Motive
the Gospel is hereby scandalized. For as others faults are oftentimes laid at
our doors: so ours reflect after a special manner upon our profession; the
very reason that the Apostle gives in the person of all, why they forbear to
give offense. 2. Cor. 6. Servants are enjoined to count their Masters worthy of
all honor, 1. Tim. 6. 1.
and that for this end, that the name of God and his doctrine, be not evil
spoken of. This which he requires at the hands of servants, how much more
ought it to be performed of such as are employed in the best service, of the
best master? Least the wickedness of Elie his sons, 1. Sam. 2. 17.
cause men to abhor the Lords offering. Woe be to that man by whom offense
comes, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
were cast into the bottom of the sea, the^ to swim in that sea of sorrows
(wherein he should sink infinitely, and never find bottom) which remains unto
him in the world to come. If any man believe not the woe here denounced, what
has he to glory in more, then the outside of a Christian? If believing, he be
not moved there with, his heart is as strong as a stone, and as hard as the
nether millstone. I^b. 41. 15.
Seeing then our enormities impeach that authority we should bear, and the
Majesty of that message which we bring, since they open the mouth of wickedness
not against our selves alone, but our Gospel, which is greater then our
selves, yea the name of God, greater then the Gospel; it behoues Timothy to
walk more warily the^ other men, and never to think that he has taken heed
enough till he has beheaded sin, if it be possible in the conception, and
held under every shadow, and show (so far as frailty may obtain) of outward
evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
How many eyes are upon us? Who can be attended with more, or more sharply
sighted? Spectaculum facti sumus, we are made a gazing stock unto the world,
which hates us, 1. Cor. 4. 1. 9.
and to the Angels, which joy in man's reformation, and to men, who if we slip,
Psalm. 38. 16.
rejoice against us. The world with a malicious eye, Genesis 9. 22. 23.
looks abroad on our least blemishes; as the eye of wicked Ham with delight
beheld that from which his brethren did avert theirs. Angels look on with
gracious eyes of tuition, to guard us in our ways: men, if some behold, and
not the best of us, with single eyes, like that Egyptian bird which picks
wholesome food out of the serpents eggs; yet to other, and those the greater
part, we must restore the things we never took, as we know who did; and
though our penny too be good silver, Psalm. ^9. 4.
bearing both the stamp of profession and metal of true sanctification, yet
nobis non licet esse bonis, we go not for current with them who have taught
their tongues to deprave, and depresse what is well done, and they themselves
cannot do, applauding all contrary appea^ance, Psalm. 35. 25.
with there, there so would we have it. To what in offensiuenesse of life
should this call, that such a multitude of monitors, be above, and about us?
What wariness, reverence, and strictness of carriage should this wring from
them, on whom heaven, and earth seem to pore, as on their proper and peculiar
object? Re^. 4. 8.
They should be like those beasts mentioned in the Revelation, which were full
of eyes. Because more then usual vigilance is required, to the discharge of so
reverent, and high a charge. They should be Quercus i^stiti^. so rooted in
righteousness, that they bow not with every blast, but bear out the force of
all temptations. When others limpe, we must go upright. If they go, we must
run. Be it they be fashionable in profession, profit not by affliction,
joined in league with their corruption; for fruit, be as grass growing on the
house top, whereof the mower fills not his hand, Psalm 1. 29. 6 7.
and in time of temptation fall away; Psalm. 92. 12. and 1. 3.
yet must we resemble David's Palm. In

The Quality of our site, or the soil we affect, Gaudet regius, etc.
desirously meeting God in his appointed means. Isay. 12. 3.

The temper of our nature, A fimo laedi putant quida^. Plin.
which must be so renewed, that dung annoy it not, (i.) it sort not with
delight in sin. Prove. 8. 13. Innititur oneri.


Our proof in affliction, whilst we grow under the cross. Exodus 1, 12. Semper
illi pomum est subna^cente alio.


Our fruitfulnes, faith working by a lively love. Gal. 5. 6.

The seasonablenesse thereof, being neither untimely As in such who are soon
ripe in their own conceit, and therefore too well conceited of themselves, and
too censorious of their brethren.
, nor too late It is a timely endeavor that intitles us to heaven: for albeit
none enter but such as strive, yet all that strive, shall not enter. Luke. 13.
24.
.

Huius folia germina and ^ortexin medicinam.
The virtue of our leaves which must be medicinal, whilst our lips give
counsel, our lives good example unto others.

Semper viret and non dejicit folia post decerptum fruetum.
Their lastingnesse^, whilst they neither decay in color, nor fall from the
tree. We being as green Olive trees, fresh and fruitful in the house of God.
Psalm. 52. 8.

To conclude this point, two things are carefully to be eyed of us, a good
name, and a good conscience more; this for our selves, that for others; this to
secure at h me, against secret accusations, subtle suggestions of sin and
Satan, that, to war abroad against evil surmises, false suspicions,
slanderous tongues. care of conscience, with neglect of name, is a selfe-done
wrong, mixed with a kind of cruelty; care of name with neglect of conscience,
is mere vainglory. Cloathe not a good intention with an evil appearance, a
misshapen coat may blemish a well shaped body, never was there evil so
evil, that won not approbation, never goodness so good that escaped
detraction. Not David's, the man after Gods own heart, Not John's the Baptist,
then whom, there arose not a greater amongst men: Not Christ's, the worlds
renowned Savior, whose shoes latchet, John thought himself not worthy to
unloose. Is the Disciple above his Lord? or the Servant greater then his
Master? then in reason not to exspect a better condition. It has bin done to
the green, in all times, that have been ever of old; what then shall become of
the dry? Sibonum quod de nobis dicitur, in mente non invenitur, magnam debet in
nobis tristitiam generare; and e contra, si malum quod de nobis dicitur, in
nobis non invenitur, in magnam debemus laetitiam prosilire. If the good which
men report of us, be not found in us, we ought to be sorry; therefore on the
other side, if the evil spoken of us, be not in us, we ought thereat to
rejoice: Math. 5. 12.
rejoice and be glad (says Christ) for great is your reward in Heaven.

The third general Head and Doctrine.
THis particle of connection ( And) stands not here idle, but coupleth and
joins those things together, which if we love not our lives so ill, as to
loose them; we must not unloose, Ezekiel. 3. 17. 18.
and do asunder. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman, etc. When I shall
say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die and thou give him not warning, nor
speak to admonish the wicked of his wicked way, that he may live; the same
wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy
hand. Here therefore is another head, and a chief point, whereunto we are
exhorted, and in which our care must (as the next words import) grow
gray headed, the very same in effect with that exhortation which the Apostle in
the Miletaine Council, Act. 20. 28.
gave unto the Ministers of Ephesus. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and
to all the flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has made you ouer-seers, to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with that his own blood. Ministers
are, as Christians, so Christ's Ambassadors, Christians, for their own good
chiefly, Ambassadors for their brethrens. As Christians they must reconcile
themselves to God, as Ambassadors, seek the atonement of others. No Timothy
has done sufficient in taking heed to himself, if he neglect his doctrine. We
must duly he Quercus institiae, oaks o^ righteousness, or righteous our
selves, but we must be Quercus in a derivatiue sense, that is, such as are to
be sought after for spiritual sustenance, and relief Nihil ei sua i^stitia
suffragatur, de cuius manu anima pereuntis exigitur. Christ compares us to
householders, Math. 13. 52. The provident householder, does not provide for a day
only, but stores up, to the end he may bring forth, out of his treasure, both
new and old as need requires, so ought we by study, reading, hearing,
conference, meditation, and all good means, enrich our brains, and breasts,
that as faithful and good Stewards of the Lords household, we may provide, and
bring things forth to the benefit of the family. If either we be ignorant of
this practice of providing, or negligent to dispose of our provision, then
Paul's vae, 1 Cor. 9.
or Ieremies curse, falls soul on us. It is opus Domini, the Lords work we
have in hand, which must neither be left undone, Ier. 48. 10.
nor yet done without due regard. Who shall rebuke the obstinate, comfort the
feeble bind up the broken hearted, seek what is lost, bring again what is
driven away, and reduce a despairing soul from hell, if the Priests lips
preserve not knowledge? how shall the ruder know falsehood to fly it, the
truth, and how to try it, tried, to retain it, retained, to confer their
practice therewith, if the blind lead the blind? how (I pray you) shall the
vulgar see sin, and the means to subdue it, wrath, and the way to shunn it,
death, to avoid it, and life to secure it, if the Master in Israel know not
these things?

The discreet householder makes a difference betwixt his family, and him that
tarryeth but for a day, betwixt his familiars and strangers, in the matter, and
manner of his entertainment. Neither does he give the like usage to all. The
like must be done in doctrine, the diet of men's souls, we must have milk for
some, for others stronger meat, ignorance craves instruction; if affected,
obiurgation; straglers must be corrected, lingerers exhorted, contumacy
threatened, and mourners comforted. We must know when to mourn with Christ,
and when to pipe with John the Baptist. We must be the sons of thunder
sometimes, as well as consolation. The vinegar of the Law, and oil of the
Gospel must be so wisely tempered, and wrought together, that proud and
haughty spirits presume not, that bruised reeds break not, smoking flax fall
not into pangs of despair. 1 Cor. 9. 22.
We must learn to become all things to all men, that by all means we may
save some; we must not therefore only care to be wise our selves, but dispose
the wisdom of God to others: Ezekiel. 34. 2.
should not the sheepheards feed their flocks? Let the^ answer the Prophet,
that think otherwise. The Lion has roared (says Amos) who will not be
afraid? Amos 3. 8.
The roaring of this Lion, Motive 1.
made the Apostle roar for fear: 1 Cor. 9. 16.
Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, and he will one day tear all idle
and dumb dogs in pieces, for reward of their silence, and sinful
negligence. If the terror of God, which I, or rather the Prophet persuades,
cannot persuade us to prevent our own danger. The like necessity of others
does solicit us, who cannot be saved except they believe, nor believe,
unless they hear, R^v. 10.
nor hear, except we speak. Take heed unto your selves, is but one half of
the Apostles counsel; and to all the flock, there is the whole. Are we
obliged, or bound hereto? whereof (says he) neither Satan in malice, aliance
by friendship, nor corrupt patrons by Simonaicall co^pact, but the Holy Ghost
has made you overseers. not to fleece, but feed, Psalm. 84. 10.
the end of your vocation, The Church of God, no mean honor in David's
esteem, which he has purchased with his own blood, such a price as cannot be
valued to the worth. 1. Lo hear the deity of the Patron. 2. The dignity of
our commission. 3. The purpose of our election. 4. The price of the thing
committed to our charge, there is no one of these which might not, much more
ought they all, to stir up our diligence, and awake our care. May any man
without danger attend a flock, which he has more will to fleece, then skill
to feed? can he without breach of duty, (I dare say sacrilege) neglect his
duty to such a Mother, as the Church of God? Dare he deny his service to such
a Master as has set him over her? can he without treachery, suffer that to
perish through his negligence, which Christ has bought at so dear a rate. 2
Cor. 5. 14.
The love of Christ constraines us heereto. No man can adorn

Let us further see, and consider (the last inducement to take heed to
doctrine) whether the reason here used by our Apostle, to enforce his precept,
can convince our reason, and confine our affections, to their right channel,
in so doing, etc. Behold an honor and utility, such as the world cannot
paralele, utility, that in so doing we save our selves; honor, that not our
selves alone, but those that hear us.

One profit we reap by a faithful discharge of our place, and calling is
increase of gifts, and growth of grace. It is his manner who gives, because he
has given, to requite the godly use of his gifts, with his latter and larger
graces, so that five talents employed gain five, two other two, and one will
multiply, so it be not hid.

Another benefit we have hereby, is, that which is better then the Empire of
Alexander, the riches of Croesus, the topaze of Ethiopia, the Emeraude, the
Jasper, the Hyacinth, and all the gold of Ophir, even the peace of conscience,
which Timothy may, (if it be not otherwise through his own default) enjoy
more constantly, and more plentifully

If the tenure of a man's land, or property of his goods come in question,
Iustian may besteed him. If his body be diseased, Aesculapius can ease him. It
his state be bare, or next to beggerie, friends may enrich or relieve him. The
being we have, is from the parents of our bodies. If a man be put in fear of
life, or other loss, Caesar, or his substitute may command the peace. Man's
mind is naturally fraught with ignorance, and full or rudeness, therefore
schools are founded for education. But what are the goods of this world,
compared to the life of man? what is man's life, without Gods mercy rightly
felt? what is soundness of body; Psalm. 63. 4.
to the health of soul? a worldly and outward peace with men, to that
unspeakable, and glorious peace which man has with God? What is humane
science, The work of the ministeri^ the Worthiest Work. In want whereof
the best ornament of the natural man, compared to the saving and sanctifying
doctrine, which gives assurance of man's redemption? suppose a being, (and it is
not impossible for a man so to be) stripped of the rest, 1. man's life is Worse
then death.
whereof Jobs story is a rich record, but without the knowledge of our
salvation in Christ, and reconciliation with God, I may say of the rest, as Job
of his three friends: 2. his health hurtful
Miserable comforters are see all. Job. 16, 2. Two potent Princes, 3 His peace
the strong man's possession.
lay claim to both thy soul and body; the Prince of Peace, and duke of
darkness. It highly concerns thee to know, vtriregno, to whether kingdom thou
do belong. 4 His learning like Vriahs letters.
Repair to some Timothy, and he will clear this case of conscience. Revel.
3. 8. Thou art naturally poor, blind, and naked, 5 His nature polluted in her
purest natural^.
embrace that truth which Timothy teaches, and it wili enrich thee as gold
does, adorn thee as Robes do, and as eye-salue cure thy spiritual
blindness. The expert Physician, turns thy sickness into health; but he is
an odd man, and one of a thousand, Job 3. 23.
who in the bitterest pangs of a distressed mind, can cover thy sins, and
recover thy soul. The natural Parents beget, 6 The Prerogative of his birth a
bankarisme in grace.
and bring forth, but to mortality, yea misery immortal, except
regeneration, which thou have by Timothies help, come between. The
Magistrate, procures thy peace with man, whose breath is in his nostrils, whose
wrath is mortal as himself. Or if he live so long, that thou see the grave
before him, yet thy goods or body bears the smart, thy soul is not
endangered, but Timothy draws up conclusions of peace twixt God and man,
whose wrath works both on soul and body, Math. 25.
even to the casting of both into that place where the tormenters are spirits
created of vengeance, the torment, fire, the manner, burning, and the measure,
enternitie. We read of Prometheus, that when he had framed man of the earth,
but senseless without life, being by Minerua's help lift up to Heaven, he
took thence fire from the Suns wheel, which applied to that earthly Mass
of man's body, gave life to it. That which is fabled of Prometheus, is truly
verified of our Timothy, who elevated in affection, and conversation, to
Heaven, to him who is the true Minerva, the lively Image of his Fathers
wisdom, thence as it were a solis rota from Mal^ch his son of
righteousness, the fountain of light and life, he brings the fire of sacred
doctrine, which laid, and by him applied to the hearts of men dead in
trespasses and sins, 1 Cor. 9. 1.
does quicken and make them his work in the Lord. Many daughters have done
virtuously, but thou surmountest them all (says S^lomon) describing a good
huswife. Prove. 31. 29.
So may I say, that many commodities come to man by the help, and hand of man,
but Timothies part excels them all. Since other benefits but better our
outward state only, which makes many worse then otherwise they would be, For
case and prosocritie slay the foolish.
or procure the welbeing of the body, which is but the outward rind of man;
Prove. 1. 32.
or purchase a better being of the mind by knowledge which is vain, without
the knowledge of Christ crucified, or give a being in this life, by which,
though we have a name we live, yet we are dead; or long being, 1 Timothy 4. 6.
which makes the end more bitter, and loathsome, unless we be in Christ, new
creatures. Since Timothy by his doctrine adornes the soul, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
our nobler part, with the noblest quality, making it partaker of the divine
nature. If men would rightly consider Timothy, and Timothy, himself, and
them: they him as the Minister of Christ, and their salvation, he himself as
one, them, as over whom the Holy Ghost has set him; as they would be more
swift to hear, that they might be saved, so could not he be slow to speak,
that they might hear. So from the utility, to the honor, 1. From the honor.
the other branch of this Motive. It was an honorable place which Joseph held
in Pharaohs court, yet Da^id himself a King, prefers the basest office in the
Church of God, to the greatest glory that worldly Kings without the Church can
either enjoy themselves, or confer upon others. I had rather be a doore-keeper
in the house of God, Psalm. 84. 10.
then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness. To be a controwler steward, or
treasurer in a Christian kings court, or a keeper of the great seal, i^ a
room of more respect and honor* then the other: but to be a steward,
treasurer and disposer of his mysteries, on whose thigh that name is written,
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is such an honor as kings themselves
have therewith beautified their scepters, Witness David a Prophet and Sal^mo^
a pr^^^cher.
and enobled their crowns. To be the servants, friends, and sons of God, the
heirs of his kingdom, and coheires with Christ, is a prerogative, and that
such as many Kings and Princes, have never attained, and yet this honor have
all Gods Saints. But to be Gods messenger to his people, and as it were the
peoples mediator to him again to open and shut the gate of life, to have
ratified in heaven what he does on earth, to succed the son of God in that
ministry and function, which he exercised himself in the days of his
flesh; to be a fellow laborer in the blessed work of the more blessed Trinity,
the salvation of souls, is such an honor, as none may take unto him, but he
that is called of God, Heb. 5 4.
as was Aaron. Good men shall receive crowns, their pilgrimage finished, but
good Ministers, not only receive themselves, Heb. 2. 4.
but by their labors purchase crowns to others. The just man (as says the
Prophet) shall live by his faith, but the man of Gods mercy, as he lives
himself, so he begets other to the life of faith. Righteous men shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12. 3.
but they that turn many to righteousness (Righteous Ministers) shall shine
as the stars for ever and ever.

Our Savior Christ spared no pains on his tender body to train up souls in
his fathers school, John. 4. 34.
he was so wholly taken up with the excellency and execution of such things,
that he quite forgot to eat his meat. Act. 20.
Paul's imploiment this way was as well private as public, by night as day, not
without testimony of his tears. What is the charge which Paul gives to his
pupil Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1. ^.
is it not to preach the word? But how? With a holy importunity, be instant,
in what measure, or quantity might Timothy say? so seldom, as all shall think
it done in season? No, but such and so much as some will think, and not stick
to say (as too often they both say and think) that it is out of season, In
season and out of season, wherein if he fail, both is duty broken, and danger
incurred, whereof he is one day to hear with terror and confusion of face.
The Church is a garden which we must weed: a fountain which we must keep both
sweet and clear: she is her husbands jewel, we must watch for her safeguard:
she is his best beloved, he therefore that loves God, must spare no pains to
keep her chaste. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning, my pulses beating, Psalm. 137. 5. 6.
my lungs breathing, and let his tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth, who
preferres not Jerusalem in him mirth, that is, the welfare of Christ's flock,
before all other joys in the world besides. This glory of ours (my brethren)
so David calls it, and all other the instruments God has lent us, of his
glory, and our husbandry, if they be not kept in use they will become
unserviceable, and shall be eaten up with the rust. We are called by God into
his vineyard, which if we dress not with diligence, prune uot with care, and
wisely underprop by our good example, the Master will come, pull us out by the
poles of our heads and put us to tread the great wine press of the wrath of
God. R^v. 14. 19.
Christ compared his Disciples to a city that is set on a hill, Math. 5. 14.
we may also compare them to the hill, or mount whereon the city stands. 1.
Montes are eminentiores terrae parts, more seen and object to man's eye, then
plains and lower places, so in that height of place wherein they were set to
be seen of all, more integrity, and piety was required, then in the
ordinary rank of professors. 2. The grass springs purer, and more wholesome
for pasture on those tops and heights of hills; so the Lords flock, and sheep
of his pasture feed better, and fat sooner by Pastors examples, then by private
persons.

Tum demum exempla probantur,
Quando rex aliis quod inbet, ipse facit.
Thirdly, the dew and moisture, which falls from heaven upon Hermon, Psalm. 65.
descends from thence upon the plain of Bashan, clothing her valleys so thick
with grass, that they laugh and sing, Cant. 4. 6.
so from those mountains of Mir^h, and Incense drop and distill the dew of
heavenly doctrine, godly consolation, and saving grace, such as causes the
Saints to rejoice for their glory, Psalm. 149. 5.
and to sing loud upon their beds. This was prefigured in the law by the golden
bell, and pomegranate placed about the skirts of Aarons robe. Exodus 28. 34.
The pomegranate signified the sweet savor of Christ's death: the golden bell
the Gospel preached; the joint mixture of them both did intimate thus much,
that God would make manifest the savor of his knowledge, 2 Cor. 2. 14.
and the saving knowledge of his sons sufferings by his Aarons and preachers
in every place.

Now what is the doctrine which Timothy must teach, and take heed unto? for
matter, Tit. 2. 7.
the truth of God, without tradition, for measure, fully, keeping naught back,
for manner, in a holy boldness, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
discreet roundnesse, in love with diligence, Act. 20. 20. 27.
applying himself to the hearers capacity, with desire of Gods glory and
their good. Ier 17. 27.
His words thus guided by knowledge, 1 Cor. 13. 1. 2.
backed by truth, tempered with love, applied with discretion, Prove. 25. 11.
and forced from a known watch over his own ways, Eccles. 12. 11.
shall be like apples of gold in pictures of silver; like the words of the wise,
which are as goads, and nails fastened by the Masters of the assemblies. As
goades they shall rowse them out of the sleep of sin, as nails fasten, and
join them close to Christ their head. He shall be unto them the sweet savor
of God unto salvation, they an acceptable sacrifice unto Christ, by his
admonition. But where is this truth found? in the Turks Alcoron, or Popes
Canon? John. 14. 16.
No, but with him alone, who says of himself, I am the way, wherein walking we
stray not: the truth, which embracing, we err not: and the life without which
we die, although we live, a spiritual death, in a natural life. To this
Christ, all both Prophets and Apostles send us, as the welspring of life; John.
5. 39.
and Christ to the Scriptures, search the Scriptures for in them ye think to
have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me. Where he is so far
from impeaching that authority, and sufficiency which the Jews gave unto the
Scriptures, that he does not only, as it were countenance and covertly commend
that their opinion, but openly argue and reason therefrom. Notwithstanding the
Church of Rome does not only wrest, corrupt, misconstrue, contradict, and
disanull these Scriptures, but teach for doctrines, Math. 15. 9.
men's precepts. Rome was sometimes a famous Church, Romans 1. 8.
her faith was published throughout the whole world; -- sed quantum mutatur ab
illa? How far is she fallen from her first love? for her children have
committed two evils. They have forsaken the fountain of living waters, Ier.
2. 13.
which refreshed the Saints hearts in their necessity with sound comfort, Romans
1. 7.
and dug them pits, that ca^ hold no water to comfort her now revolted brood
withal.

S. Paul taught and Rome received it: Romans 3. 28.
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law. Four
diff^rences, de^ated betwixt, Rome, and Rome, that was and is.


The Romanists maintain a justification by works, The first about the
efficient cause of our insti^ication and salvation.
and a merit of the same, without the faith The faith which Paul meant implies
^ confident boldness and firm persuasion. Heb. 3. 6. Ephesians. 3. 12. Romans 4. 20.
which respecting the word relies thereon without a (...), finding in God a safe
harbor as in the bosom and neck of rest it self. Ps. 11. 1. Repairing to
the Master of heavenly requests, uses (...), liberty of speech in asking as
his will, and our wan^s direct, or otherwise as her state requires, being in
the mean time supported and possessed (...) with assurance of obtaining her
suit. Secondly it appropriats and applies the promise of salvation personally
as it does also other the treasures of Gods Church, Act. 15. 11. David by this
faith praises God for the forgiveness of his particular sins. Ps. 103. 3.
Paul assures himself of Gods favor and love in this life, and of his
vndoubtable salvation in the next. Gal. 2. 20. Job comfort himself with the
assurance of his redemption and r^surrection to life, Job. 19. 25 26. 27. I
know, etc. This Christ justified in Thomas, crying my God and my Lord, when he
reioyned, thou have believed Thomas. Mary of her self, when her soul rejoiced
in God her Savior. This kind of belief our adversaries utterly renounce and
revile which yet makes the difference betwixt Christian obedience and godly
honesty, and civil carriage and honest in^ideli^ie, and without which it is
impossible for to please God. Heb. 11. 6.
which Paul meant.

1 Against the professed and profound disputes of our Apostle there, and
elsewhere.

2. Against the end of good works; supreme, which is Gods glory. 1. Cor. 1,
21. subordinate, being ordained for us to walk in. Ephesians. 2. 10. By walking
therein to win others. 1. Cor. 7. 14, witness our faith, I am. 2. 18.
Testify our thankfulness. Luke 1. 74. 75. and settle us in the assurance of
our salvation. 2. Pet. 1. 10.

3 Against the law and Prophets. Moses proposing a reward of mercy not merit to
them, that love God and keep his Commandments. Exodus 20. 6. David deriving
expressly all reward therefrom. Psalm. 62. 12. and pronouncing him a happy man to
whom the Lord imputes righteousness, without works, as one interprets, who
could neither mistake his meaning, misconstrue his scope, nor err in right
conference of the Scriptures. Romans 4. 6.

4 Against the tenor and title, by which the state of salvation is firmly
holden, which is the adoption of sons, no earned hire of man's service, since
the seed of the bondwoman cannot inherit, with the freeborn. Gal. 4. 30.

5 Against the light of reformed reason, since we afford, 1. nothing undue,
for he made us and not we our selves, yea and made us again, both in our
redemption and renovation. Psalm. 100. 2. Nothing proper, he working in us, as
subjects, by us, as instruments, both will and work. Phil. 2. 13. 3. Nothing
profitable for what can we do, so well as to deserve of him, to whom our
weldoing does not extend, Psalm. 16. 4. Nothing proportionable to Gods bounty
whether we do or suffer, obey or bear, for what is a light and momentary
affliction to that glory which for, first, weight cannot be countervailed by a
world of woes, 2, Cor. 4. 17. Secondly, for eternity admits, neither
abateme^t, limit, nor intermission. Romans 8. 18. Thirdly, for excellency
surpasses all, that eye has seen, ear has heard, or any heart of man can
conceive. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Fourthly, so far, as no speech can utter because it
is unspeakable.

6 Against the drift and maine scope of the Gospel. 1. Manifesting that
righteousness in Christ alone, by which the law is fulfilled, Gods justice
satisfied, and life obtained so absolutely, that if righteousness be by the
law, etc. So plainly as not of works, least any man should boast himself* so
peremptorily, as ye are abolished from Christ whosoever are justified by the
law, Gal. 2. 21.
ye are fallen from grace; Ephesians. 2. 9.
distinctly, Gal. 5. 4.
with direct exception to our righteous deeds. 2. Tit. 3. 5.
Speaking of the never enough admired means of our salvation, Heb. 10. 14.
as of a thing already done not to be done, perfectly, not in part, by another
for us, not by our selves, or any work of God in us. Ephesians. 2. 5.
Freely without merit or motive on our part. Romans 5. 6. 8.
Fully without our furtherance, in our incogitancy without knowledge. Having
neither will to affect our spiritual welfare, Romans 5. 10.
we being dead in such desires; nor goodness to deserve well, Romans 5* 6.
being ungodly sinners; nor reason to expect such good, being enemies, nor
power to do for our selves, Heb. 5. 9.
because we were of no strength. 3. Pointing out Christ's person for the author,
1. P^t. 1. 18. 19.
his blood for the price, his passion for the mean, Heb. 9. 22.
his glory as the final cause, the riches of his goodness as the efficient
and impulsive, Ephesians. 1. 6.
so that the true Christian need neither buy it in the royal exchange of the
Romish merchants, Ephesians. 2. 7.
nor seek it by intercession of Saint or Angel, nor can challenge it for the
worthiness of his own works, or think to purchase it by the overplus of other
men's.

7 Against all grounds of Christian confidence and consolation. 1. The mercy of
God which is less magnified by man's merit. Romans 11. 6.
2. The merit of Christ which is mangled and made insufficient without supply
of theirs. 3. Grace which is disclaimed, Romans 5. 1.
for if it be of works then is grace no more grace. 4. Gal. 2. 21.
Peace of conscience which is discarded, for being justified by faith we have
peace with God. Rom 4. 16.
5* Christ's death which is frustrated. 6. The assurance of Gods favor which is
forfeited, therefore it is of faith that the promise might be sure to all the
seed. 7. Which is yet the fittest mean to set f^rth the grace of God as the
Apostle himself there imports.
Faith. 8. And the promise, which are made void and of none effect.

8 Against our Saviors application of the example drawn from the husbandma^.
^uk* 17. 8. 10. God owes us no thanks though we do all things commanded,
because we ought to do the. Where or what is our desert then, who do not all?
If an earthly master owe not so much as thanks to his servant for his good
service, on whose head he made not the worst hair black or white, into whose
hands he put no pith, neither infuseth the least force into any other part,
much less is the heavenly master and maker of mankind, bound, or beholden to
such for their broken service, as he fashioneth secretly in their mothers
womb, supports by his providence each moment of their time, 1. Ioh. 4. 19.
and begets to the hope of better things. Such as he loves first, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
or they could not re-loue. Such as he gives to, or they could not re-giue.
Phil. 1. 6.
Such as he begins it in, or they could do no good. 1. Cor. 15. 10.
Such as he goes on with, or they could not persist in the good begun. They
therefore that extenuate grace, to apparel nature with her stolen plumes, that
obscure Gods glory to leave matter of glorying in themselves, never learned
that language of the spirit, when they have done all they can to say they are
unprofitable servants. If servants, then out of duty they ought to do what
possibly they can do; if unprofitable, what so great virtue can spring thence
of power to turn duty on man's part toward God into debt on Gods side toward
man? Which were in some sort to make the creator inferior or subject to the
work of his own hands, and to advance the clay above the Potter.

9 Against the Papists confine Gods kindness in Christ to this present life,
averring Christ to have merited gra^^ for them, by the right use whereof they
truly and properly merit for themselves, and are fully worthy of everlasting
life, after that insolent assertion of the Rhem. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Hereby 1. they
make Chri^^s merit a remote and inchoating cause in this businesse^, their own
the complete and immediate. 2. Christ's infinite worth of finite efficacy, their
own sorged, finite and defiled works of infinite force. 3. the sure^y to pay
a debt, not for the discharge of the debtor, but to the end that the debtor
should more fully and sufficiently discharge it himself. 4. Men more beholden
to themselves then they are bound to God, sithence he only enables them by
grace to do well, they are thenceforth to depend upon their own deeds, by
which they deserve that life, to the attainement whereof all that ever Christ
did serves but as an introduction or disposition which they can accept of, or
reject at their pleasure. 5. They set up too arrogantly man's ri^hteousnesse
against the righteousness of God. Romans 10. 3. 6. So should works merit which
are 1 too due to deserve, as Christ: Luke 17. 2. Too impure and void of
proportion with eternity, as Ferus grounding on Isa 4. and Romans 8. 18. 3. Not
our own but his works in us, as Paul. Ephesians, 4. Then good habits and deeds
which God has enabled us to do binds him in justice to give us more, so that
he should be unjust if he gave it not. Against Durands unanswerable reason that
no man's free gift can bind him to give more. 7. Then should that grace either
make our works perfect; o^ man's imperfect works should thereby become
meritorious. If the first, whence come the complaint^ of men in the state of
grace* yea of highest stature in that state. Romans 7. Psalm. 130. If the latter,
the^ must God, who is perfectly just, change this righteous sentence of his law
that every transgressor is c^r^sed, and only the perfect keeper thereof
blessed. Gal. 3. 10. 12.
extent of Gods mercy, and full effect of Christ's merit whose meares they pitch
in this life only. Ioh. 3. 16.
dishonorably to God whose bounty in giving his beloved son to the end etc.
should so less bestead then his own intention, and the Evangelists relation
bear us in hand. Discomfortably to man whom they desperately expose to that
curse whereto all are liable, Gal. 3. 10.
who for life rely upon their own performance of the law. 2 Timothy 1. 18.
Dissonantly to that which the Gospel gives thereto, Heb. 9. ^8.
as well at that as this day. Detractingly to that righteousness which is
shouldered out of its proper place, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
that redemption whereof we partake not fully, Luk 21. 28.
and in each respect, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
till after dissolution, Heb. 10 19.
and then only through him, Ioh. 14. 2.
who was therefore given, Ephesians. 3. 6.
that blood and obedience which is the proper, complete, and meritorious means
of our entrance that ascentio^ which is the immediate cause of our session in
the heave^liest places.

10 Against the nature of God himself, who is ^ merciful, gracious, and
bounteous not through obligation, as indebted to any, but by a voluntary
communication of his gifts and graces flowing originally from his good pleasure
as the fountain and first motive, Ephesians. 1. 5.
exhibitiuely from Christ, Ephesians. 2. 7.
whose death and passion are the only meritorious cause, and (to unfold the
effect of an impatible nature after an humane manner of speech) are impulsiuely
occasioned upon the exigence of man's misery. Ps. 103 13. 14.
2. Whose pleasure and purpose is absolute within himself, Romans 9. 11.
and whatsoever he delights in, 1. Sam. 12. 22.
or does good to without himself, is for that which is in, Isa. 43. 25.
and from himself. Ezekiel. 36. 22.
3. Whose indulgence is nether deserved, Romans 9. 11.
nor desired, but he promises and performs freely out of an inward and
essential property, without all external prevention or provocation. Romans 11.
35.
4. Who delights in showing mercy, not urged, allured, or outwardly set on
work, but out of a liberal and self inclination, a gratuitall and
independent propension of nature, does he pleasure us, Mi^. 7. 18. 19.
because mercy pleases him. 5. Whose kindness toward us in Christ Jesus is
much disgraced and disparaged by the pretended worth of man's works, since no
created virtue is so powerful, or power of virtue, to bind, and bring the
creator within a compass of a debtor.

11 Against the scope of that parable, Mat. 20. each part whereof speaks
pithely against all ability in man to merit. Do the laborers offer their
service, or the householder goes forth to seek the laborers? Lo mercy
preventing by invitation, Isa. 65. 1.
I am found of those that seek me not. Come they upon their call? It is mercy
and that moving by attraction, John 6. 44.
no man can come to me, except the father draw him. Labor they being come?
They are enabled thereto by influence of grace. Phil. 2. 13.
It is God that works in us both will and deed. Recea^e they the penny their
labors ended? Behold mercy rewarding out of a benevole^t disposition, Is thine
eye evil, because mine is good? does he stop the murmurers mouths by an
impeacheable power and preroga^iue, that it was lawful for him to do as he
lifted with his own? then if his work had earned, and not his larges given
the hire, he could not rightly call that his own, which was alienated, and
become another, nor (which was more) assume the liberty of giving equal
recompense to unequal labors, with a due reservation of that justice which
gives to every one his own. nay then their eyes had not been evil and
envious (as was objected) but Gods distribution in giving to them their pence
too, who came in the last hour. had been partial and unrighteous If nature
the^ pride her self of any inb^ed virtue and pro^er power of so much as
assenting to her first call, cut her in the mouth with that negation, Not unto
us O Lord: if of strength to concur and cooperate with grace assisting, curb
her again with Not unto us. If yet borne up with her borrowed plumes she soar
so high as to claim heaven by merit, for her habitation, convince her of pride
and pr^sum^tuous intrusion by warrant from him, unto whose name we give all the
glory of our pre^ention, employment, compensation.
.

12 Against the truest touchstone of the truth of doctrine: for if the glory
of God cannot be communicated to any creature without a curse. Isa. 45. 8.
compared with Ierem. 17. 5. then the point wherein they differ from St Paul, is
a Popish device, hewn out of the invention of man's brain, since it diuides
Gods honor, and imparts the inco^municable glory of the Creator to the
creature.

13 Against the experience and profession of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and other the men of God, who never stood on like terms with their Maker. I
am not worthy (said Jacob) of the least of all the mercies, (...). 3^. 10.
etc. much less did he think himself worthy, fully worthy, (as the Romish
Pharisees are opinioned of themselves) of everlasting life. David the man after
Gods own heart, appeals from the justice of God, Psalm. 143. 2.
to his mercy: Enter not etc. Job who had letters of commendation from God
himself, not only debarrerh himself of the plea of innocence before Gods
Throne: Job. 9. 20.
If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me. If I say I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse; but debaseth and beats down all
imagination thereof in others, Verse 2. 3.
how should man be just with God? if he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a thousand. 2 Cor. 12.
That privileged Apostle, so abundant in labors, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
so much in perils, and more then a conqueror in all, 2 Cor. 11.
yet out of himself (a regenerate person) to be found in Christ, Phil. 3. 9.
renounceth his own righteousness, to be invested with the rich mantle of
Christ's merit.

14 Against their own forces affronting them: Papists act their opposite part
on the Popes own theater.
for, suis and ipsa Romaviribus ruit, the division of languages is the
confusion of Babel. Decet parabola gratiam non debitum esse, etc. the Parable
teaches us, that whatsoever God gives us, it is of grace, not of debt, says
a devout Friar Ferus upon the Parable. Math. 20. In his judgment 1 life
eternal is a reward of mercy, no recompense of man's merit. 2. He draws the
reasons from the imperfection and disproportion of the reward, and our works
alleging for proof. Isa. 64. Romans 8. 18. 3. Touching the word Merces he
gives this caveat, Quod si audis mercedem polliceri, scias non ob aliud esse
debitum quam ex promissione divina. Gratis promisit, gratis reddit. 4. of merit
he overthrows all imagination, and disalloweth the very name. If therefore
thou think to attain and retain the favor of God, let no mention of merit
walk through thy lips.

Their Angelical Aquinas upon Tit. 3. 5. seconds him thus.

Ponit rationem salutis, excluditur ratio praesumpta, includitur v^ra,
praesumpta quod propter merita nostra simus saluati, quam excludit cum dicit
non ex operibus, etc. Romans 11. 5. Deuteronomy. 9. non propter iustitias etc. vera
ratio ^st sola miserati^ dei. Iam. 3. 22. Luc. 1. Didacus Stella, Stell in Lue.
7. page 215.
a star which sometimes beautified the Romish firmament, subscribes to this
truth. Non me aspicias, etc.
when he desires not to be looked on in himself, without the respect and
reflection of Christ's righteousness. Look not on me, but first behold thy only
Son. If thy eyes look angerly on our sins, and behold me at the first
fight, Moriar, peri^.
I shall die, I am undone; but if thy eyes behold thy Son, and through him,
me at his back, I shall be safe, the beams of thy eyes passing by thy Son,
shall be meekned and made gentle in him, and so modified, come unto me; place
therefore between thee and me, him thy Son, his cross, his blood, his
passion, his merits, that so thy justice passing through his blood and merits,
when it comes to me it may be gentle and full of mercy.

Lastly. Against Gods open reiection and resolute ^oome passed upon all such
works as want warrant for their matter out of his word, The defect whereof
caused God in jealousy as ho^e as fire, to renounce the ordinances of his own
lips, the sacrific^s and other services of the jews.
right form for manner which is faith working by a lowly love, and aim not at
Gods glory (the Sphere which gives motion to all godly actions) as their
principal end. Seeing then the Papists exercise themselves chiefly in matters
not commanded, or if at any time they so do, yet is not done after the mind
and prescript of the Commander, since the end whereat they aim, is a mistaken
mark of their own setting up, to wit, desert of Gods favor, and their own
justification: Isa. 1. 12. 15.
seeing all, or some, or one of these dead flies is always found to corrupt
the ointtment of the Popish Apothecaries, God will not in mercy crown, Romans 3.
27.
much less in justice admit the merit of any such as not only disrobe him of
a part of that glory, Isa* 42. 8. and 48. 11.
which is solely and wholly due unto him, and which he will not give to any
other, Romans 4. 16.
but make him withal a chief recepter of their theft and robbery. The second
difference about the assurance of salvation.


Secondly, Saint Paul preached the certainty of man's salvation, making it the
end of our free justification by faith. They call this a devilish faith. Conc.
^rid. Sess 6 c^p. 3. (...). 15.
clothing them with curses as with a raiment, that subscribe unto it. The
pulses of Popery beat so One reason why the Church of Rome cannot attain this
assurance, lies pa^tly in the change, partly in the corruption of that seed
and food whereof she should ^e b^^d and brought up. For where the right seed
is rightly sown, where the true bread of life is faithfully broken without
m^xt^re of man's leaven, and the milk of the word s^^cerely sucked in, there it
attaines the end for which it was dispatched, by causin^ the faithful soul to
put off, in the Apostles sense, fear of death, and love of life. to assront
Angels, withstand principalities, and contest with powers, to dispense with
things present. for passing things to come, for suspend^ng with the
affrightment of height, and discouragement of depth, as unable any, or all of
them (backed with the countenance of any other creature) to separate it from
the love of God which (...) in Christ Jesus. Romans 838. 39.
doubtfully about the assurance of God^ favor, and particular certainty of
salvation (whereof yet St Peter would have us to be persuaded, and with all
diligence to seek certificate) that she descries her self, to be not
diseased only, but dead, dead through distrust and infidelity. The pens and
tongues of her champions cross so palpablely the maine drift and scope of the
Scriptures in this head point, that they proclaim the things wherein they are
exercised to be no ^a^^ers of true godliness, because men are not built up
the^eby in the knowledge of their own salvation (the confirmation whereof is
one subordinate end of weldoing, 2 Pet. 1. 10.) as Paul's hearers were, when he
grounded the defense and trial of his doctrine, upon their experience, and
proficiency in this very point; which if they had not attained so certainly,
as they could not therein be deceived, then had his preaching done them no
good, his provocation had been frivolous, and to no purpose, examine your
selves, etc. to countervaile or out-countenance this truth of particular
assurance they have excogitated, a numberless number of toys and untruths, to
turn men out of the way, to peace and tranquillity of mind, they have traced
out by paths tending to destruction, and discruciation of men's souls, and the
multiplication of their sorrows. Such are Purgatory pardons, pilgrimages,
sale of superfluous works, Beads, Granes. Rosaries, Medals, with the like
hallowed things, things of great value, and rare virtue in their fancies, who
sit in Popish darkness, and the Roman cell of death. But why do our
adversaries so traduce this doctrine, to induce their doubtfulnesse and
distrust? The children of this world are wise in their generation, amongst whom
none have been found more wise, more worldly, then the Romish crew, to support
and prosper their avaritious and ambitious hopes. Demetrius and the
siluer-smiths have gotten their goods by this craft, Act. 19. 25. 28.
therefore Diana of the Ephesians must be great. Act. 16. 18. 19.
If the maid at Philippi be dispossessed of her divining spirit, then farewell
the hope of her Masters gains. Should not they then cover the light which
otherwise would discover them? Is it reason they abjure such charms as have
been, and still are of power to conjure wavering and unstable spirits, within
the bounds of their Churches circle, and cause them stoop to the lure of their
insatiable lucre? -- Quis nisimentis inops? Were they not reasonlesse if they
should not (I say not only willingly recept and receive) but (as they do)
e^xtort and steal such golden oblations?

Accipe nunc Danaum insidias and crimine ab vno,
Disce ^m^es: --
See here the deceitful dealing of these treacherous Graecians, and by this
one we may discern the rest. St Paul taught godliness to be great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6.
but the Paul's and Popes of Rome have since reversed, or at least inverted
that sentence, by making gain godliness, and godliness a pretense under the
covert and color whereof, they might with less suspicion, or if it were
possible, general consent and conniuencie aspire to Satan's style, Ephesians. 2. 2.
that as D^us mundi, supreme god of this world, they might reign and rule the
same at O. a^u^o vocis mundi mode^aris habenas, (...) merito in terris diceris
esse deus. If the several points of Popish doctrine, with the means of
planting and supporting them, be thoroughly weighed, Popery will appear to be
but a wittily contrived policy, engrossing prioritie, wealth and worldly
pleasures.
will. The third difference touching man's perfection in this morta^l life.
Thirdly, he by an instance drawn from his own person, proves man's obedience
to labor with defect in this life, and his perfection to be imperfect, whom
yet I suppose to have been perfecter then their lord god the Pope is. Romans 7.
15. 18. 19. 21.
They on the other side do, and ouer-doe; they do all commanded, and that
perfectly to satisfaction, they ouer-doe so far, as to spare superfluities,
and overplus of oil to supply the wants of such foolish Virgins as will buy at
their rate, of five kinds of righteousness that reign in the world. 1. The
imaginary justice of some conceited ones. 2. The civil carriage of men
morally good. 3. The glorious show of counterfeite Israelites. 4. The fained
perfection of Popish professors. 5. The sincere endeavor of true
Nathanaelites. the first in opinion is last in Gods acceptance, and the last
first: but who they? Avaunt selfe-soothing just ones, Prove. 26. 12.
the wings of your hopes are clipped, which letts you to soar, you are not they.
Repent civil worldlings, they were as honest as so, who were but corrupt
branches, Act. 17. 12.
before they believed. Howl ye hypocrites, though you shine like glowormes,
yet have you not that holiness, without which no man can see the Lord. Purge
you, Heb. 12. 14.
purge you Roman Catharists, the sounder and purer you seem opinatiuely,
Math. 9. 12.
and in your own conceit, the more impure, Paul.
and dangerously sick you are. He was purer and perfecter then so, who was
pained, and complained, Miser homo, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man, etc. His ways were likewise directer then yours, David's.
yet not so direct as was deservedly wished, Psalm. 119. 5.
that he could fully and perfectly keep, Psalm. 130. 3.
(whereof you notwithstanding falsely boast) Gods righteous judgments. God
alone is that light which admits no mixture of darkness, but if any man say
that he has no sin, he sins so saying, deceiues himself, depriues his
soul of pardon, his conscience of true peace and turns the truth of God into
a lie, which says that in many things we offend all, the most renewed in
many, the unregenerate in all. For your ouer-deeds they exile you by an
Ostracisme from the commonweal and welfare of Gods Israel. They are
therefore but fig-leaues, wherewith you labor to cover your own and others
nakedness; and the more you cover, the more you discover the guides which have
misled you, namely, nature and tradition. Math. 19. 26.
It is a carnal conceit bred and brought up in the womb of our corruption, I
have observed all these things from my youth. And where humane edicts, stand
for divine statutes, men may easily ouer-weene* The gate is strait that leads
to life, Math. 7. 14.
whereat tradition can not enter, it is so fraught with that, which God
requires not; John 3. 7.
the way likewise thereto is narrow, which nature through blindness cannot
find; for except a man be borne again, etc. Rejoice true Christians, though
you cannot do (through frailty) that good which ye would, through Gods grace
your defects are covered, your desires shall be accepted, the good ye would do
shall be imputed, the evil you have, and through strength of corruption, or
violence of temptation are haled to, shall be discharged, seeing there is no
condemnation to them (though the relics of sin remain in them) that are in
Christ. Romans 8. ^.


St Paul commanded every soul to be subject unto the higher powers: The fourth
difference about subjection to temporal sowers which they discl^i^e
themselves, and dispense with in others.
the reason? because there is no power but of God. They arm subjects against
their lawful Sovereigns. They command the slaughter of Christian Kings as
an act meritorious, and Canonize the agents for Saints. such seed they cast
into the Lords field, such tares are sown by the man of sin, and his
Emissaries. Such is the salt wherewith the falsely surmised Peter of Rome, or
rather the Saltpeter wherewith wrought to the temper of their sierie passions,
Romans 13. 1.
they have attempted to blow up States. How is the faithful City become an
harlot? Isa. 1. 2^.
it was full of judgment, and justice lodged therein, but now they are
murderers. Her faith is turned into infidelity, her piety into aspiring
policy, her profession into faction, her godliness into ga^ne, so that where the
seed was vncorrupt, and the soil once good, Infaelix lolium and steriles
domina^tur avenae. By reason hereof, 1 Timothy ^. ^.
that they consent not to the wholesome words of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to
the The bl^^s^d Tri^i^ie, w^^h which the true Church and her children only
have fellowship, 1 John 1. 3. i^yneth with such (...) ^^^taine and keep
Christ's doctrine. The Father will have the Son heard. Math. 17. 5. the (...)
the Son is an essential mark and sure of sign Christ's sheep. John 10. 27
and the (...) the promised Tutor and teacher of the Church for ever John 14.
26. subscribes to that truth (...) Christ has tau^ht, inspiring us with the
true effects thereof. so that they who ^bey the F^th^rial ^^ring his Son, the
Son, in harkening to such as he sends. Luke 10. 16. and where the inward
w^^k^ of Gods spirit concurres with the outward word of reconciliation, there
men increase with the (...) of God. Col. 2. 19. whereas they who practice their
own devices, placing great (...) in their use, whilst they despise Gods own
device, and spurn against his appointed means, have neither promise from the
Father of spiritual thrift, who teaches, but by the Son, nor furtherance
from the Son, who cleanses but by his w^rd. Job. 15. 3. nor assurance or
assistance from that spirit which (...) and prospers such only, as the
Father has planted, and the Son purged with his heavenly du^.
doctrine which is according unto godliness. What for want of good seed, the
word partly taught, what for excess of darnell, their own additions, so many
monstrous births are brought forth by the whore of Babylon, the purple harlot,
which opens her quiver to every arrow. Add to her wresting and misconstruction
of Scriptures, this further that she does, -- Noua pascua quaerere, and amnes,
Gadd after, The Papacy is a hotch potch, composed of the shreddes of other
heresies.
and guide her lovers to other pastures, and streams, then that green
pasture, wherein David fed: those still waters which refreshed him, choosing
rather to bathe in the puddle of her own inventions, then to wash in Bethesda,
Gods poole: delighting more to defile her self with the one, ^. King. 5.
then with the Syrian Leper to be cleansed by the other. Whose impudency is
such, that out of Luciferian pride of spirit (incident to none but the
Antichrist) she challenges to be heard before the Scriptures: whose impiety is
so great, Rev 22. 18.
that she dare speak where they command silence, Tradition discountenanced.
and that upon pain of the greatest pain that God can impose. Why did St Paul
send this Epistle to Timothy left at Ephesus about the Lords business, since
it contains the same things which he received from his mouth? Had Timothy so
^iven a head, that Paul began so soon after his departure, to distrust his
memory? could he so soon be carried away with error or worldly cares, 2.
Tim. 3. 15.
who had dedicated his childhood to devotio^? Might not Timothy his
asseveration, whom they well knew to have been taught by Paul, and left to
that end for some space amongst them, might not the bare affirmatio^, I say, of
his doctrine, to be Apostolical, and sucked (as it were) from Paul's teat, have
supplied the place of an Epistle, to authorize his person, and stablish his
doctrine, as well for after, as present times? Certes the Apostle might have
spared his pen, and pains, if he had been Iesuited in this point, touching
the authority of unwritten traditions. Did the Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, Romans 15. 4
(all guided by one spirit) propose to themselves the same end in writing, that
they had in preaching the message of life? it is more then plain that they
did. If man's perfection in this life, Ioh. 20. 31.
and eternal salvation in the next, was the mark whereat they aimed in both,
2. Pet. 1. 12. 13.
then why should some only of things necessary, 2. Pet. 1. 2.
be registered, and other of the same nature, 1. Cor. 15. 2.
and like necessity be exposed to neglect, oblivion, Luke 1. 1. 2. 3. 4.
corruption and discountenance of times, Gal. 1. 6. 7.
the moathes which bred in the Apostles own traditions, and encumbred them,
upon the absence of their persons? Rash and inconsiderate actions are incident,
to man's weak and improvident spirit; the omniscient spirit of God does naught
in vain, naught but upon deliberate grounds. If then the will and word of God
could have been kept purer and more entire, or alike entire and pure by
tradition as writing, why was it written? Or if any part thereof (my speech
keeps still within compass of things necessary) why not the whole? Was God so
forgetful, as when he had purchased and promised life to his Church, There is
no likelihood that God would have so many things of greatest necessity
reserved to the publication of the putatuie deity of the Pope which he has
not revealed by his son.
not to prescribe the way to it? Or so ignorant that man can devise a nearer,
better, and safer mean to save himself by, than God has done? Was it out of
good providence and discretion to omit things necessary, and commend unto us
matters of less importance? Was it out of envy, that he would not have his
mind fully known to man? Or impotency that he could not as well have revealed
it wholly, as by halfes? Or out of exception, that fi^^er pen-me^ should record
the rest then his Evangelists and Apostles were? When, or where does God cancel
that seal, and call it the commission which alone was authentical? Wills he
the end without the means, or such a mean as wars with it self, and
disappoints of the end it should attain? Did Moses or any of the Prophets in
the old? Did the Evangelists or any of the Apostles in the new so mince the
matter, as some do? alter, and add to the Testators mind: allow or disallow
(as some presume) what they thought meet? Can God be charged with such
blasphemies, or his actuaries, and penmen justly challenged for such
treachery? The law of the Lord is perfect. Can ought be added to that is
perfect? May addit, ^o be made without marring it? Dare any mar where addition
is as dangerous as it is needless? Does the spirit delude us calling that
perfect wherein so many things lack and those of necessary use? How much safer
were it to fasten on the written truth which suffices to salvation then to
forge untrue writings, and vnwritter* truths to the destruction of (...)
souls. Therefore they alone richly and fully afford things needful to bring
us there to. Mat. 10. 19.
May not this perfection be comparatively taken, that a fuller and clearer
knowledge of God is had in the lesser book of his law, then in that larger
volume of his creatures? But the Prophet attributes such a perfection thereto,
as can imply no defect, unless the vigor, and force of the cause be inferior
to the virtue of the effect, converting the soul. Esaias examines both faith and
life of Priest and people by the law and testimony. If they speak not
according to this word, it is because (being but blind leaders of the blind)
there is no light in them. The Apostles preached no other things then those
which the Prophets and Moses said should come. The doctrine which Timothy is
here charged to look unto, and touching which he was to charge others that
they taught no other, was not contrary but consonant to those Scriptures,
wherein Timothy was trained from his youth; and those Scriptures were able to
make him wise unto salvation. what may we think of S Paul? was not he a good
Christian? How does he prove that and approve himself? But this I confess,
etc. Act. 24. 14. These words Paul spoke. When? accused by Tertullus, and other
Jews, before whom? Foelix a governor. In what cause, and particular case? The
rule of right worship. Who did suggest the words he used? The spirit of God,
for such was the promise, To what end and purpose were they uttered? To prove
the truth of his religion, piety and profession, where of God was author,
antiquity an ornament, the Prophets witnesses, and their records did contain
the tenor: which tenor is here made the touchstone of Gods truth and trial
of his sincerity. Now either did Saint Paul fail in his proof, the spirit
notwithstanding prompting him, or God failed in performance of his promise; or
the Scriptures suffice to make a true and perfect Christian, such as Paul was
in this life, and an inheritour of salvation (as we doubt not but he now is) in
the next. If it were otherwise, the Apostle would never have undergone the
burden of so bold an assertion, as elsewhere he does. But The same things for
substance being penned which were preached. 1. Papists preaching the Pope and
his decretaline doctrine which is besides and contrary to S. P. Gospel cannot
keep without compass of the cu^se 2. Their Romanu^ Evangelium, a Gospel framd
on the Popes own anvile A^ 1592. ascribes to certain holy beads, and the like
trumperies, with the use of some Ave Mary's, Pater nosters, or our Ladies
Psalter. as much as P. Gospel gives to the blood of Christ. viz. remission of
sins to all men in every place. Can any Christi is heart but abominate such
blasphemies, and yet behold more abominations then these. 3. A Jesuits Gospel
broaching such blasphemies, as neither earth nor heaven can hear without
trembling and astonishment. Here Mary's milk is mingled with Christ's blood, as
the Soveraignst salve for a sick soul, and which yet is more horrible and
hellish (if ought can be) the milk is pr^ferred as more precious. Vbera
dextra, vulnera prensabo leva.
though that we (chose^ by God to do the work of Evangelists) (to whom yet he
restraines not his speech, but goes further and ascends higher) Or an Angel,
meaning no evil one (as Satan when he does transform himself) but an Angel
from heaven, pretending he were sent from God. If an Angel from heaven preach,
etc. And that no man think these words of execration to have fallen from him
unawares, or less advisedly, he touches the same string again, saying as he
said before, and leaving his latter supposall as a thing not possible, that
such contradiction should come from heaven, he iterates thus. If any man
preach any other, etc. As holy men of God spoke, Ver. 9.
so they wrote by divine instigation, For first the Scripture the writing
surpasses all other writings. 2. Pet. 1. 21.
2. The whole Scripture as well the law which is the Gospel fore^told, 2. Tim.
3. 16. 17.
as the Gospel which is the law fulfilled, is not a Rabbinicall fancy,
Anabaptistical revelation, popish fiction, or any other humane suggestion. But
thirdly, inspiration given of God. 4. The use whereof is manifold, as, 1. to
arm against error in opinion which it improoueth. 2. Corruption of life, by
correcting iniquity, and to furnish with a contrary ability of holding. 3.
That truth in judgment which it teaches. 4. That righteousness of life,
wherein it instructs. Some admitting the vtility of the Scriptures, gainsay
their sufficiency, but amongst other errors it refells this convincing the
authors for gainesayers of Gods spirit and purpose, seeing it is not merely
said to be profitable, but so profitable as naught is wanting therein to make 5
absolute, perhaps the people or laity in whom so great ^urniture of knowledge
is not required; not those only, but the Pastor too the man of God. And if an
Angel from heaven, much less Antichrist regreet, we ought not to be troubled
thereat, sithence the spirit of God does not content himself with so plain an
affirmation thereof, but to beat the absoluteness, and all sufficiency of
Scripture into men's brains, and breasts, he repeateth the thing again more
fully then before, being made perfect, or thoroughly furnished. May not the
matter for all this be yet minced and this perfection, or through furniture
meant of most good works? To all good works required of man to do. Have the
Scriptures God their author? Afford they all things necessary to soundness of
faith and sincerity of life, in their use? Is the end of their transmission to
posterity by writing, to make me^ absolute, so absolute that there is no good
work wherewith God is pleased, and which he requires in those whom he will
save, but they instruct him in it, and how to do it? Then we are content that
this error of the Scriptures perfection should close our eyes, desiring no
other, no safer conduct then they reveal, to that celestial Elysium, Seeds
vbi fata quietas
-- ostendunt.
Where the rich man saw Abraham and Lazarus in his bosom. Let all such as
cannot be content with the Scriptures direction, go as far as they can, (Non
equidem invideo, miror magis.) Beyond all perfection, for the further they go,
the fuller assurance of Gods favor they forfeit, Psalm. 63. 4.
the more frequent feeling of that love and kindness, which is better then
life it self, they forgo, because they go from God. We seek not, we wish
not to be wise or perfect above the folly and imperfection of that which is
written: that is for higher wisdom, or perfection, then that which leads to
life, and it rightly so called, life eternal.

Thy word (says David) is a lantern unto my feet, 1. Scriptures prescribe
fully and precisely both what for matter we are to ^oe, and decline.
and a light unto my path. Ps. 119. 105. The light of the lantern descries
the evil we are to decline. By the guidance of this light we may be led
forward to the practice of all good. Tit. 2. 11. 12.
What thought is there of man's heart which may not hence be established if
doubtful? Prove. 2. 9.
subdued if headstro^g? What words idle, Prou. 10. 18.
or evil are not here reproved, and may not be reformed? 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5.
And wherewithal shall a young man (in whom affections most rage, Col. 4. 6.
and reign) cleanse his way? What sorrow so great, Ephesians. 5. 3. 4.
or malady of mind, Psalm. 119. 9.
which the tongue of the learned may not hence allay? Isa. 50. 4.
what infirmity bodily, No man can rightly praise or prize this pearl, who is
not acquainted with David's practice Ps. 119. Solomon's direction and our Saviors
search. John, 5. His preparation must be reverence, humiliti^ his insinuation,
attention his companion, industry his guide, and prayer the spokesman and the
commentary.
or affliction worldly, may not man's spirit be taught hence to sustain? Here
is the season of salt, the force of fire, the defense of armor, the
nourishment of meat, the solace of marriage, of spoils the profit, of victory
the pleasure, of light the direction, of music the delight, the sweetness of
honey, and the honey comb. In heaviness it cheares us, in wanderings recalls us,
giving health to our bones, peace to our lives, and content to our souls. The
faithfullest cou^seller, strongest supporter, best interpreter of strange
eve^ts, and heavenliest moderatour of cross occurrents. By this seacard may
every wise Christian so guide and stere his own vessel whether in slorm or
calm, as to awake with god in the morning, to walk all day long under his
protection, to ly down in peace and common, with him in the night season.
Prove. 22. Deuteronomy. 33. 12.


Further since the matter of our practice without the right manner of
performance, is but a carcass of religion without a quickening spirit: the
Scriptures make known unto us that man's deed in Gods matters, is but a desire,
at most an endeavor, which endeavor must be thus conditioned. 1. Sincere,
for he with whom we have to do, requres truth in the inward parts. 2. Serious,
or earnest, for heaven is the hold which none surprise, save such as will take
no nay. 3. Settled or constant, because he that is holy must be holy still. 4.
Universal or entire, for whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all. Now what more sit rule or perfect square can
be found to frame the Lords building by, then that which lays the foundation
in sincerity, reares up the walls in fervency, covers the whole by constancy,
and keeps it holy by entire obedience. Their madness hereby appears the more,
who accuse the scriptures of want and imperfection, to the end they may piece
and patch them up with their unwritten verities, indeed lying vanities,
traditions, or rather ( Sad. advers. Monach. Butdeg.
as a complete and a most acute divine calls them) contradictions. Which first
Prejudice, yea frustrate Gods purpose in penning the Scriptures. These things
are written that your joy may be full. 1. Ioh. 1. 4.
Again these things, etc. Joy is the companion, and salvation the end of
faith. Ioh. 20. 31.
No ground of sollid peace, and true joy can be wanting, Mischiefs accompany
traditions and their Patrons.
where fulness thereof is found to spring, and the mean is not imperfect which
begets a perfect faith, nor does that faith frustrate which brings salvation.
The Evangelist S. Luke Luke 1. 1. 2. 3. ^.
wrote not of some only but all things, which he had searched out perfectly,
yet no other, then the Apostles were witnesses, and Ministers of, to
Theophilus, that he might know the certainty of those things wherein he had
been instructed. 1. Lukes diligence, which was not perfunctorie. 2. The
success, that perfectly. 3. The extent, that all. 4. Their authority, that no
other then the Apostles themselves delivered. 5. The estate of the person to
whom they were dedicated, Theophilus who before had heard and been instructed
in them. 6. The state of the time wherein Theophilus lived, having himself
heard, and been taught of the Apostles. 7. The end of committing these things
to writing, which was to confirm him in the things he knew; convince plainly
1. That not only that which the Apostles taught as necessary to salvation is
written. 2. But also that the writing of such things is more necessary on our
parts who heard not the Apostles preachings and instructions as he did. 3. And
to believe and embrace nothing of things necessary, as Apostolical, which has
not Scriptures the sole, and sufficient guide to heaven. therefore they but
weary their bodies, and spend their spirits who walk in by paths, and the
faster they run the farther they are out of the way, since they run not so as
they that obtain.
scriptu^ est for the best warrant.

They falsify such attributes as confirm the same. Secondly,
Is not grace an infallible earnest of glory? By the word we are brought and
stablished in this happy state, Act. 14. 3.
else why is it called the word of grace? Seek we more then life? By the light
of this Lantern we are led thereto. Phil. 2. 16.
Else were it mis^earmed the word of life. Act. 13. 26.
Desire we better things the^ such as do accompany salvation? it reveals the
same and how to attain them. Else should the spirit delude the Church. Need we
more or other food then that which nourishes to life, Heb. 5. 18.
and it eternal? And if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the death of his son, Romans 5. 10.
much more being reconciled (by the ministers of the word) we shall be saved
by his life. Either these titles are untruths, or the Scriptures contain all
necessary truth for reformation of life and sincerity of belief.

Admitting them, we cannot believe the scriptures which purposely and
peremptorily forbid all additions of men. Thirdly.
Ad thou not unto his words least he reprove thee and thou be found a liar,
which trade of lying and making of their own, if with the popish crew, it were
not rise, they could not sell so cheap as they do; nor so cause their volumes
swell, but, Quid Romae faciant, simentiri nesciant? What should they do at
Rome if they could not overreach?

They load the spirit of God with blasphemous imputations of falsehood, Fourthly,
and co^trariety* The first, because it averres so pregnantly the sufficiency
of the scriptures. Papists a peremptory blood they dare give God the lie.
The latter, because many things are fathered thereon contrary to that which is
revealed; 1. Tim. 4. 1 3.
as adoring of images, calling on Saints, worshipping their breaden God,
massing, communicating in one kind, with those which S. Paul calls the
doctrine not of Divines but Devils.

They raze the old foundation, Fifthly.
and erect a new Canon. The foundation personal is rased. 1. In deifying, and
adoring a man, the man of sin, as the son of man. 2. In doing no less to a
piece of paist. 3. In adoring the creatures As Ancells and Saints with
invocation, Images with adoration, Beads and other hallowed toys with a power
that is proper to faith and repentance. The blessed mother of our Savior, with
1. prayers. 2. A power over her son to command him. 3. In matters of mercy to
manage them. And. 4. The milk of her breast with (...) equal virtue and
efficacy to Christ's blood.
with the spoils of their maker. They destroy the foundation doctrinall, Stap.
in praes. (...) rel. princ. doct. The papacy is pitched upon the sand of man's
fancy since it finds no sure footing in the word
or erect a new Canon in being wise above that which is written. We have says
(a Rhemish ringleader, and master builder of the Babilonish Synagogue) another
foundation of Christian religion, diverse from the Apostolical and
prophetical scriptures. Therefore a new, another rule.

They take the wall on Gods word. The Counsel of Trent embrace this trash of
Apostolical (as they style the^) indeed Apostaticall traditions pari pietatis
affectu and reverentia, Sixthly.
with the like reverence and pious affection that they do the Scriptures.
Sess. 6. Decr. 1. Non minus meretur inter Ethnicos, etc. St. in Luc. 10. 16.
He does no less deserve to be counted an Ethnic, who refuses
Ecclesiastical traditions, then he that reiects the Gospel, says Stolla.
Papists in their Practice and punishments outrun this opinion fortifying
tradition with fire and sword, Cap. de eccl. porro si plus vivere (...) etc.
whilst they trample Gods edicts under foot. Eckius does not obscurely intimate
that me^ must live more according to the authority of the Church, then after
the Scripture. Luth. in Gal. 1. 7. and 4. 6.
The laws and rules of their irreligious orders are, and have been strictly
kept in the omission and contempt of Gods commandemen^s. God indeed does
dignifie and privi^edge his Church but with such caution and reservation that
be e^pects and enacts of her the authority of a lawgiver.
The contempt of their idolatrous and adulterous Mass, the eating of a piece
of flesh upon a friday, is more abhorred and rigorously entreated then the
horrible guilt of Homicide, theft, avarice, uncleanness, or cursing of parents.
Whither tends the pretended authority of the Church above the scriptures, if
not to prefer the darkness of her traditions before the light of David's
Lantern? To make Abanah and Pharpar rivers of the Italian Damascus more
sovereign then all the waters in Gods Israel? lam. 4. The subiectio of aspouse
Ps. 40. 10. 11. 12. The homage belonging to a Lord. Mal. 1. 6. The honor and
power that pertaines a head. Ephesians. 4. 15.
What other thing is meant by that blasphemous and unchristian Made by Bristow
in his Motives.
challenge, provoking Protestants out of the weak and false castle of only
scriptures into the plain field of Traditions? Whereby more strength and
authority is given to tradition for confirmation of truth, and confutation of
heresy, then to Scripture. What speaks their immoderate praises of tradition?
those disgraceful reproaches cast on the Scriptures? Set out by Gregory the
thirteth.
The Canon Law strikes it dead, affirming the Apostolical See of Rome to be
respected with such reverence that men rather desire to know the ancient
institution of Christian Religion from the Popes mouth, then from the holy
Scriptures; and they only enquire what is his pleasure, and according to it
they order their life and conversation. wherein three grievous crimes are
combined with one breath. Arrogancy, defection and Antichristianisme. It is
pride intolerable for the^ to ascribe, or the Pope to assume an authority and
power of enacting Laws in Gods kingdom. Plain Apostasy to take heed to
Popish fables and commandments of men that turn away from the truth. Tit. 1.
14.
Undoubted Antichristianisme to challenge hearing before Scriptures, and
instead of searching them to enforce subscription to the Popes pleasures. The
Ass finding the Lions skin, puts it on to domineere over other beasts, but
when his Master found him, (whether his long ears bewrayed him, happening to be
seen, or his braying betrayed him, fortuning to be heard) though he deceived
others, yet him he could not gull. The Italian beast has clothed himself
with the Lions skin, even the skin of the Lion of the tribe of Judah, I mean
the power and authority of God, whereby he Lords it over all Fathers, Councils,
Church and Scriptures. His Sycophants see and publish with applause; but to
such Masters in Gods Israel as examine his title by the touchstone of truth
his long ears, which from far, suckes in such unjust aspersions, his brayes
and brags of two swords, his concealment, and putting of Gods Candle under a
bushel, that he might with less reluctation do his fears in the dark, his
traducing of Scriptures for obscurity and insufficiency, his impeaching of
their authority, his suiting of their sense to the complexion of times, his
changing of the very articles of faith, Articulos fidei soluit Pontifex maximus
Episcopus vniversalis, Caput Ecclesiae, Dominus Deus noster Papa.
and founding of new, his silencing of that breath in cases controversed, which
must consume him, his preferring of chafe to wheat, of that which is worse
then water to the wine of Gods Cellar, his supercilious and superlatiue styles,
with other like, bewray him to be the Ass, the Antichrist, who was to sit in
the Temple of God, as God. 2. Thessal. 2. 4.

There is but one Lawgiver, Seventhly.
whose 1 allowance they lack, Iam. 4. 12.
whose 2 Laws they disanull. Could God more plainly reject such service,
Whatsoever des^^nds from the lines of man's brain is monsbane in Gods business.
reprove such practice then he does by that censure, which yet they contemn?
Math. 15. 9. In which kind^ none have so much pes^ered the Church as they whose
traditions are 1. dissonant to the truth. 2. for variety infinite. 3. in use
fruitles. 4. in effect dangerous. 1. impeaching the authority. 2. implying an
insufficiency and 3. shouldring out of the exercise of Gods word.
In vain they etc. wherein our Savior covertly proposing his will and word
for the alone rule of all acceptable service, and opposing men's precepts to
that doctrine which is divine, utterly and universally condemns all such rules
of his worship, as are contrary to, or besides the Scriptures. And all works
grounded upon such rules as are not learned out of the word, though for wisdom
they make a show as if they came from Heaven, for humility they seem to
proceed from a mortified mind, and for austerity do not spare the body, yet
(take it upon the word of an Apostle) do they neither please God, nor profit
us, since they are things of no value. Now Christ we know to be truth it self,
and Paul we acknowledge to have lighted his torch at our Saviors lamp, Mark
7. 8.
but who are these that presume to lay the commandments of God apart, Romans 10.
2.
so were they whose zeal notwithstanding the Apostle reproues, Verse 13.
because it was not vshred with knowledge. The secret of the Lord is amongst
them that fear him.
2. Such are ouerawed with a fear, not privileged and spiritual fear,
whereof the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 25. but such as is taxed by another Prophet,
because taught by the precepts of men. Isa. 29. 13. 3. Such as are wearied with
pilgring, The true service of God consists not in bodily exercises, which
profit not, but in the exercises of godliues, the practice whereof is most hard,
and burdensome, and in truth impossib^e to the natural man. Romans 7. 8 Such is
the curbing of our irregular wills, and breaking the clods of our untowardness.
pined with fasting, and clogged with imposts of voluntary service: the
Pharisees did likewise furrow sea and land, fast often, sting themselves with
thorns, lie upon planks, beat their heads against walls, till blood sprung, yet
never a whit more liked or allowed of God. Math. 5. 20, who requires not
mangled but mortified members. Col. 3. 5. a living sacrifice, a reasonable
service. Romans 12. 1. And Baals Priests, who went further (lancing their flesh
with knives. 1. King. 18. 29.) were far enough from Gods kingdom. 4. Such as
are wary and heedfull, but in the service of the worst Master, whilst they
observe their own ordinances. 5. Such as run in the course they use, but with
more haste then good speed, since they walk not in the rode-way wherein David
safely ran, Psalm. 119. 32. but run in those ways wherein God suffered the
Gentiles for to walk (1.) their own ways. 6. Such as believe in Christ's
merits; A voluntary and cheerful resignation of our selves to Gods usage.
Luke 9. 23. bow ever it standwith our temporal comfort. a delight in holy
exercises, which by nature we cannot relish. Psalm. 119. 97. a keeping of the
heart in such plight as may command good motions, and have dominion over unruly
passions, which Chirst calls a kingdom. Luk 17. Salomons conquest, and a great
one too Prove. 16 32. a daily fostering of says, with a constant fruition of
her fruits and attenda^is. Joy* peace, love, thanksgiving, equabiliue of mind
in estates, a propension and willingness to dopart hence at Gods pleasure,
breaking out sometimes into a desire of dissolution. Phil 1. 23. a forsaking of
the world, not locally in habitation (as they do who confine themselves to some
Frierie) but spiritually in affection, as they who re^ouace that corruption
which is in the world through lust, using it as though they used it not. 2 Pet.
^. 4. 1 Cor. 7. 31.
but not as true Christians ought to do, seeing their trust in Christ's merit
is, that he has purchased grace for them, to merit for themselves Heaven by
free will if they list, thereby to be just before God in themselves, and fully
worthy of Gods kingdom, by which kind of belie^e they are abolished from
Christ, Rhem. upon 2 Timothy 4. 8.
fallen from grace, and bereft of the benefits of his merit, Gal. 3. 1. and 5.
4.
as were the bewitched Galathians in the Apostles days.

Again, Papists pretending blasphemously that they fulfill the Law, do
disanull the law by their superstitious devices.
when they draw men from the wholesome pasture Davus like) disturbes all. In
the first which is Domesticke prohibiting mutual offices of love, Papa
perturbat omnia.
obedience, hereditary succession, and due benevolence twixt Master and
servant, Popery out of a transcendent prerogative can godly transgress all
bounds of nature, religion, humanity, and civil society, forbidding the
performance of promises, covenants, oaths, declaration of truth upon oath, to
these who worship the God of their fathers after the manner which they call
heresy.
father and son, husband and wife. In the second dispencing with allegea^ce,
disposing of scepters, deposing Caesar, and crowning of murtherous atte^pts
against his person with a Laurel of new-sprung martyrdom. Touching the third,
Diruit, aedificat, mutat diuina prophanis. He destroys and pulls down what God
has built, and with those Nimrodian rebels in the tower Babel seeks to raise
the walls of Babylon higher then any mischance can soar, Maio^su^, etc.
as Niobe sometime said of her self. He changes divine precepts into profane
and blasphemous fictions; I sit as a Queen and shall see no mourning. Rev. 8. 7.
whilst in every commandment and branch of the Law, the word is made of no
authority by the traditions which he has ordained. By this time I doubt not
but we see good reason of observing that Apostolical rule. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
He that speaks, etc. The Prophets are Gods factors, sent to negotiate in
these remote Regio^s. There traffic is the reconciliatio^ and gain of souls.
the Church is the ship wherein they imbarke, the world the sea whereo^ she
floates, the word the card that directs her course. Timothy as Pilot keeps
the stern. Tradition is the rock which he must shun. The place of arrival is
the promised Land, that celestial Canaan which is above. His exchange there
the richest for commodity, See Gualter on Mat. 15. 19. and Mar. 7. 7.
and rarest for perpetuity, even the salvation of himself, and those that
sail with him. Let Timothy then take heed to himself, that his life be
unreprovable touching the gross offense, to doctrine, that it be pure and
profitable, to perseverance, lest beginning in Leo he end in Cancer. 1 Cor. 9.
16.
Let him look to saying, because a necessity is laid upon him, Woe is, etc.
to doing, because such as say and do, shall be counted great in the kingdom of
God, Math. 5. 19.
as well this of grace as that of glory. continuance, because not he that runs
fast for a spurt, and setls before he come at the goal, but he that endures
and not that for a time, neither till the sun of tribulation begin to scoarch,
but he that endures the heats and sweats of this holy Climate, and that to the
end he I say, or rather Christ says it, and he alone shall be saved. Judas shone
for a space, and gave a flash as if he had bin a fixed star amongst the twelve,
but time discovering his false faith, he proved a Comet or shooting star, being
drawn down, and withdrawn with a Quid dabitis? what will ye give me and I will
deliver him unto you? Math. 26. 15.
St Paul on the other side approved himself to be a fixed star in the Churches
firmament. 1. by his own heedf^lnes, since he knew nothing by himself. 2. by
his industry in teaching, whilst as a candle he spent himself to give others
light. 1 Cor. 4. 4.
3. by continuance in holding out unto the end, Act. 20. 20 24.
witness that Swan-like song, I have fought, 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.
etc. that love that his appearing. Against which appearance the Lord prepare
us by a care so circumspect, as may keep us unspotted of the world, a
diligence so succesfull, as may gain others, and by such a continuance in
both, as may be entreated with that approbation. Euge bone serve. It is well
done good servant and faithful, Math. 25. 21.
etc. Blessed is that servant, Math. 24. 46. 47.
whom when his master comes, he shall sinde so doing.

Soli DEO gloria. ConfIrMet qVoD In nobIs operatVs est JehoVah.
FINIS.

