POLITICAL OBSERVATIONS Upon the fall of SEIANVS.

Written in Italian by GIO. BAPTISTA MANZINI. And translated into English by
Sr. T. H.

JUVENAL. -- Descendunt statuae, restemque sequuntur.
printer's device?

LONDON, Printed by Anne Griffin, for Godfrey Emondson. 1634.

THE AUTHOR to the Reader.
THe two first Books of the Life of Sejanus, distinguished into three, were
casually taken from me; as if Fortune likewise persecuting him on paper, would
not suffer any memory of him to survive, but ruin. I could have gathered them
together again, had I not feared some might have imagined me ambitious to
stand in competition with him, who already has labored on the same life.
There live many Gentlemen in Florence, who saw mine, before that other passed
the Mountains. Notwithstanding I have not proceeded in this undertaking, as
well because the work was then the birth of too green an age in me, as for
that I supposed this sole remainder (the picture of a perfect Courtier) figured
in the fall of this Unhappy Man, might suffice to entertain thee with
contentment. Live free, and prejudicate not what my heart conceives of Fortune,
for no sooner shall you have led your eyes along to the end of this Book, but
will confess, that of this disease of the world, my opinion has been very
sound.

POLITICAL OBSERVATIONS Upon the fall of SEJANVS.
MOre cannot a man receive, nor more Fortune give. If she raised not Sejanus
to Regalitie, it was because she thought it a less matter to afford a head
for Empire, than to resign the head of Empire over as a prey to one who should
tyrannize it. Here either weary, or repentant, she began to forsake Sejanus.
Health, Wit, Riches, Incense, and Scepters, were gifts to have impoverished the
giver her self, had she not even whilst she gave them, with a covetous hand,
snatched them back again.

He borne at Vulsinium, (at that time a rich Town of Tuscanie, which was
afterward consumed by lightning, heaven always aiming to thunder-strike, where
any pretend above humane condition) was advanced by Fortune to Courts, offices,
dignities, trust of a Prince, supereminencie over all, and lastly to Altars and
Incense. He had derogated from the condition of man, and not been tyrannized,
but the tyrant of Fate, if he had with equality of fortune concluded the
beginning of so ample fortunes. Earthly felicities are not unlike the Ephimera,
they die the same day they are borne.

Many years are required to give growth and height to a great tree, and a
short time suffices to pull it up. Let Jupiter boast his thunder bolts, Juno
her serenes, Thetis her calmes, but Fortune in her kingdom has things more
unstable than any of these. The politic threads spunne by Sejanus, to weave
the royal purple to himself at this time, are sooner practiced than numbered.
The tragical story of his end, (become the fable of the multitude) shall now
be rehearsed, rather for example than delight. Sejanus is unworthy of
compassion, because unjust, but he notwithstanding is to be looked on with an
eye of pity, by such as penetrate the misery of humane condition, which has
nothing certain, but the uncertainty of it self, and for amplest matter of
its loss, the greatest heap of its gains.

He rises to purchase either precipices or thunders from heaven, who without
sure foundation of merit, endeavors to raise for himself that mountain of
fortune which is to be aimed at by sole virtue, and guided by the only power of
that heaven, which has reserved to it self the authority of giving and taking
away kingdoms.

Heaven threatened the sinister events of Sejanus, with sinister predictions,
willing thereby (as it were) either to sound a retreit to Fortune, or rather to
advise Sejanus how little he should confide in these our frail felicities.
Ravens observed, Cats enraged, the Bench whereon the Court-waiters sat thrown
down, servitors by misfortune precipitated from the Caudine stairs, were
horrid prodigies, and Portentous presages of future calamities. Yet was there
none, who on these things durst make any evil construction, because the
present state considered, it was no easy matter to believe an equal mutation
might be made. Sejanus was greater than his betters, less only than his own
thoughts, and the world conceived that Fortune could do nothing more in him,
or that there was no other Fortune but Sejanus himself. Dion writes, that
such were the foundations of this man's greatness, that had God himself
foretold his ruin, he would scarcely have been believed.

The Citizens so infinitely honored, observed, reverenced, feared, adored the
name of Sejanus, that Tiberius, whose eyes imminent peril had unvailed, began
to be jealous of himself, as well as of his Kingdom. The name of that subject
is ever perilous to a Prince, who is more often named than himself.

To ruin so vast a frame in an instant, was to stand in danger to be
oppressed: to suffer the increase thereof, was to oppress ones self. Behold
to what condition this unfortunate Prince is brought, who forgetting what he
himself is, wholly resignes himself to the trust of one man, who being raised
to greatness, (the precipice of the greatest) has no other fidelity, but that
wherewith he is trusted.

Among the people he saw himself despised, but which is more, he knew
himself despicable, as he who too basely had suffered all his functions to be
possessed by Sejanus, equally favored and suspected. He began to fear the
loss of that authority, which (as the soul) guides, and governs all, and
which as a huge pile eminenet above the rest, falls not, but to ruin the
Kingdom.

Combated by a thousand thoughts, nay mastered by unspeakable fear, it behoved
him rather to endeavor the meannes how to recover his Empire, then preserve it.
He was not ignorant, that Sejanus ascribed the Empire to himself, the
government of Capreae to Tiberius. Behold how Fortune had hoodwinked this
miserable man, teaching him to dally with death. Tiberius knew it was neither
time to sleep, nor run. Great remedies were needful in so pregnant
suspicions; dissimulation was necessary with a man so powerful, but first he
must seek for safety, then revenge: Most times the true remedy of treachery,
is, to seem not to know it.

To understand the mind of the one and other, Caesar began with strange art to
plie both Sejanus and the Senate with Letters, in one day varying a thousand
things concerhimselfe; sometimes by declaring to them he had nothing now alive
in him but infirmity, he confessed an impotencie, which secured Sejanus to lay
more lively colors upon his designs; and then with his own hand certifying
the Senate of his health recovered, made them sacrifice despite to modesty. By
which means the one had a large field to negotiate, the other to fear. One
while he praised Sejanus in his letters, and yet sometime writing back he
blamed him, magnified other of his favorites, and depressed others: To
conclude, the whole Court depended on the uncertainty of his practices, which
had nothing regal in them, but doubleness.

Sejanus was sometime suddenly puffed up with fresh favors, and as suddenly
stupefied with these unaccustomed proceedings. Conscience assailed him with
suspicion; The memory of predictions surcharged his soul with impressions of
horror. It fell not into his thought to fear, beholding himself so powerful,
yet dared he as little to confide in his power, hearing such novelties.

Conscience (the scourge of the wicked) permitted not he should know that hour
to become, wherein he must either conquer or die. He with all his might
vapoured forth the smoke of his greatness. He knew his practices were not
unknown to Tiberius, he was therefore to attempt the issue with violence, not
expected, though doubted: For great actions should rather be speedily executed,
than consulted on. Death was the head of the way, fly it he could not, well
might he ennoble it. It was therefore better to meet it than expect it, sell it
than suffer it. Who knew, whether Fortune would not (as heretofore) favor
sudden Counsels.

He must seal the conclusion with an act, if not eminent for virtue, yet
memorable for hardiness^, Dangers many times by encountering them, are avoided.
Good Councels from delay, wicked from violence take force. But who understands
not, that heaven corrupts the councels of him, to whom the revolution of
Fortune is destined.

In the mean time the multitude (amongst which nothing is more easy than
change of affections) perceiving in so short a time, so great alteration of
affairs, began to waver.

They failed not to spread rumors of innovation into the ears of the people,
to whom the power of Sejanus was either hateful or suspected. Each motion
serves for reason to just fear; with long expectation every occasion finds
favor.

Offenses heretofore tolerated, or dissembled, began to be unmasked. Woe to
him who has fulfilled his felicity. There wanted not those who attributed to
Sejanus the blame of all Tiberius his exorbitances, compassionately deploring
the memory of Caius Sillius, of Titus Sabinus, and Cremutius Cordus, so
unjustly deprived of life.

He that governs another, walks on a rope, which though made of golden
threads, is not the more stable, not understanding how well to use the
counterpoise of justice; If he put one foot out of the right place, the
ordinary success is to remain hanged.

Many, not to contradict, rather than not to be silent, added probability to
truth. Others hoping change of fortune, with alteration of government, seconded
the beginning of his ruin, whom themselves acknowledged for their raiser.

It is very likely he could not have been advanced, without an infinite
number of men obliged by his benefits, and yet amongst so many public
invectives, there was not any one that defended him. But what! Small benefits
are easily forgotten; great, ordinarily surcharge. Some cannot requite a good
turn, other know not how. Of the ungrateful, some neglect it, other abhor
it. The world is come to that pass, that good turns are thought dangerous.
The ungrateful man, loath to repay a benefit, would not there likewise should
be any, to whom he may account himself a debtor. Thus hapend it to poor
Sejanus. The end of the obligation, and of the obliger was esteemed an
advantageous exchange. Good, as evil equally concurreth to the oppression of
that unhappy man, who once begins to be distasted.

All the motions of Sejanus breathed forth sadness. He who heretofore haughty
and proud, accustomed arrogantly to vaunt supereminencie, now wholly mortified,
showed how much he was burdened with weighty cares. His eyes reconcentred with
his imaginations, manifested in their wanness what anxieties tormented him. At
which time oppressed with grief, or through distracted thoughts, not rendering
salutes, he seemed to despise those who saluted him, so that his proper hurts
unhappily conspiring with fortune, he increased the number of the malevolent,
and lessened the troops of partial followers.

Tiberius thus judiciously spinning the web, honored both Sejanus and his
son with the dignity of Priesthood, as it were advising him to stand prepared
to sacrifice a victim to Fortune. To these honors he added the Proconsular
dignity, rather to augment doubt in the people, than titles for Sejanus; yet
much would he have promised himself by his dexterous wit and Genius, if he
could have found means to present himself before Caesar, whereupon under
pretext to visit a beloved feminine singer of his, afflicted with a certain
infirmity, having sought to come to Capreae, he was suspended by Tiberius,
who would not admit his presence, more for fear of his force, than that he
refused the shortest and safest way to give an end to such dangers, affording
access for once, to bereave him of it for ever. So, many times it is better to
tolerate by dissembling, than precipitate those councels, which by delay are
not wasted, but fortified. In infirmity, there is not any thing more mortal,
than unseasonable medicines.

His eyes were darkened with horror, and mind with terror, seeing upon one side
the occasions of bounty taken away, on the other side, those to whom he had
been bounteous, now to pay him with ingratitude. The errors committed in
prosperous fortune, threatened him with adverse. Those that adhered to him, told
him many things variously related from the people, but almost ever against him:
Whereupon astonished he lost courage: But hope, which never fails whilst life
lasts, comforted him; these fears were rather objects of conscience, than
incentives of prudence. Tiberius by him unburdened from the greater toils of
Empire, secured from his greatest enemies, entertained and nousled in his
chiefest delights: Tiberius, who found no quiet, but in the bosom of his
vigilance, would not so soon (said she) precipitate him, whom he so much had
heretofore professed to affect. The number of allies, obliged friends,
affectionare soldiers, people, who (as yet) adored him, ministered rather
matter to lessen sorrow, than fear.

This verily was the beginning of the knowledge and apprehension that Sejanus
had of the instability of those things, which are subject to Fortune. Here
began he discoursing with himself, to derive consequences from seeing, that
Tiberius hitherto an impenetrable hider of his thoughts, honored Caius with
Priestly dignity, and praised him as one who should succeed him. Here
desperation began wholly to tyrannize over those reasons, which in the mind of
Sejanus were fed by that most tormenting desire of rule. The certainty of the
succession of a Prince, is the oppression of his hopes, who pretends to
principality.

Here, as Sejanus openly lost courage, so fortune partial to animosity, began
manifestly to presecute him. A powerful enemy of his (Prefect of Spain) was
freed from the heavy blame of exorbitant offenses, whether they were real, or
objected by Sejanus. The exaltation of enemies, is the beginning of proper
depresssion. One scale of the balance goes not up, but the other sinks down.
Tiberius wrote of the death of Nero to the Senate, and naming Sejanus, did it
without usual attributes. He forbade that any man should hereafter dare to
sacrifice to a man. Poor is the Godhead, whose Deity rests upon an edict.

By these ways Tiberius lessened the reputation of the Favorite with the
people, which uses to be the first and most grounded foundation of greatness.
The troop of attendants to wait on him from his house, was not so frequent,
because some, not to be suspected by Tiberius, (whose sly practices were now
discovered) certified Sejanus of their leaving him, rather jealous of their
own good, than of another. The smokes, as well of sacrifices on Altars, as of
Pride and Ambition in the head of Sejanus, began to decline.

His favorites were no longer honored, and were they, it was rather in respect
of dignity than person. Injustice dispoyled of the mantle of his authority,
walked no longer through Rome, for Fortune having put guives upon it, it could
not freely stir up and down without danger. To these turmoyles, so much
weighty as they were new, cross omens of predictions were added. A statue of
Sejanus smoking, the head taken off, to discover the cause of it, a great
serpent was seen suddenly to issue forth, and the head set on again, there
was a knot found about the neck of it. A while after he sacrificing to a
statue of Fortune, she either not to see him, or because she could not endure
him, turned her head away, showing this wretched Courtier how little he should
confide in the vanity of that Fortune, which knows not how to be stable, even
in marble.

Among such hateful prodigies, a thousand torments vexed the soul of unhappy
Sejanus. Vain, and frustrate was now the thought of commotion, he
understanding the aversion of the people from his affairs, and knowing the
Senates love toward Caius. Great attempts are achieved in the increase, not
diminution of fortune. We must not hope for stability from this inconstant
Lady, whose favors are allwaies so much the more pernicious, by how much the
more they render us secure and confident. He watched whole nights with his
pains, which could show him naught else but Chymaeras: He knew no other
repose, but that alone, which the want of it in the bosom of toylesome
weariness begat. The morning air that awakened him were his sighs, which
invited him to toil. He thought every day the last, every last would have
been dear to him, so it were not delayed; For much more painful is the fear
of death, than to die. (Poor Sejanus) the heap of so many crimes never came
to deserve, that the punishment should so long be deferred.

A generous affection (understanding it was n^cessary either to vanquish evils,
or end them) awakned in his soul a purpose to withdraw himself from danger by
death; to tell the world, Fortune had been able to exalt, not depresse him.
But the blind warrioresse, who would not bereave herself of the glory to have
ruined him, in such his sad agonies, courted him with news, that Tiberius
spoke of conferring the Tribunitiall power upon him, whereupon afflicting and
comforting him at one and the same instant, she armed him with hope,
peradventure, because it should not be thought a small glory to her to have
cast down a vanquished man, and overcome one who begged mercy. Tiberius
nothing ignorant of public affection, and private suspicion, began (not
despairing) to have the people and Senate on his part, to manage the
conclusion of this affair, which carried in it self as much necessity, as
peril. His design was to level the most grounded Fortress of the Empire,
and to pluck up the best rooted Plant the Earth has nourished. The pretorian
Cohorts honored, preferred, united, countenanced, fortified, by him, depended
all on his least commands. The greatest men, who governed in the Empire, as
Prefects, Questors, Tribunes, Captains, and infinite other officers, all
raised by him owed their service, and estate to him. The most inward and
nearest servants of Tiberius had been by his means deputed to that service,
and intimacy. The principal of the Nobility, enriched with the best places,
either as his servants or Allies, were tied to him. Of the multitude some were
maintained in his house, some were dependant, some interessed; so that many
respectively, and almost all by adherence waited on him. Well might his ruin
be commanded by Tiberius, but not expected. Princes are the heart, Subjects the
hands. To confide was dangerous, yet necessary. Strangers were nothing fit for
so great an affair, which required much knowledge of the fact, and persons.
Familiars were to be suspected, as well for the reasons mentioned before, as
for that the most and best trusted servants, are those, who soonest sell their
master. Few were not sufficient for so great a business, in many, secrecy was
unsafe. To do it in Rome where Sejanus had the pulse of his power, was to
subject himself to sudden commotion of people, which is in prudence, so much
to be avoided. To do it out of Rome was impossible, or most difficult. If he
should call him to Capreae he would not come, but upon sure conditions,
bringing along with him more peril for others, than for himself. Every thing
was dangerous, and laying private interest aside, no other affection would have
advised it. In the end Tiberius excited, put forward, and enraged, peradventure
more by Sejanus his unhappiness, than out of his own wisdom, called Nervius
Sertorius Macro, and secretly constituting him Captain of his Guard, he gave
him the manage of the whole matter, advising him what he was to doubt, what
to avoid, what to accelerate, or ponder. He commanded him to confer with
Memmius Regulus, whose fidelity was free from suspicion, he being an ancient
rival of Sejanus, and showed him the necessity of secrecy with the other
Consul, as being one of his enemies faction. Then, that he should ensnare, and
assault minds with a thousand sorts of hopes, and fears, awaking the anger of
the offended, the hatred of the reconciled, that he should fight with gold,
promise dignities, remove soldiers, secure the army from tumults, and finally
the matter not succeeding well, at the first stirs which should oppose their
designs, he should introduce Drusus into the Senate for Emperor, by him so
declared and pronounced.

Macro departing with these instructions, Tiberius, to whom amongst so many
vices pusillanimity was not wanting; not trusting to the number of his people,
to the situation, and straightness of that Island, easy to be defended for a
first assault by the soldiers of his guard, nothing maintaining the majesty of
his place, but having prepared many ships, timerously stood expecting
opportunity of escape from the first notice, that Sejanus foreknowing his
designs might not prevent and oppress him. A bad Conscience is the Mother of
Fear, Fear the Father of those ignoble acts, whose indignity is the Tomb of
R^putation.

These were the afflictions of Tiberius, the perils of Sejanus, the endevors
of Macro, who with Tiberius his letters entering full of cares by night into
Rome, began the designed practice with Memmius Regulus, and Gracilius Laco.

The next day the morning being come, to show the last Sun to Sejanus, whilst
the Senate sat in the Temple of Apollo, Macro en^ring in^o the Palace met
Seianus, whose soul, (which felt the stroke of Fate at hand) sad, that
Tiberius had not written to him, presaged evil events. He was comforted by
Macro's whispering in his ear, that he had brought him the Tribunitiall
dignity; whereat joyful, he entered into the Senate house, by his friends
(amongst whom this word quickly ran) honored, reverenced, saluted, as much as
by the malevolent he was feared and flattered.

Behold how poor mortals are taken in a snare by Fortune, unhappy he, who
trusts her; but more unhappy, who to her commits those treasures that are
enriched with naught else, but others wants. Sejanus, could neither enter, nor
be received into the Senate with greater applause. Suspicions, doubts passed,
were ridiculous entertainements of present alacrity, as if it were humane
Condition, that a little sweet should be repayed with much acerbity.

Those enemies who most hated him, doubtful least they might be discovered,
treated amongst themselves, with a soft murmur, (but which they notwithstanding
desired might be heard) to confer some new honor upon him, cloking their
malignity, with seeming courteous; secretly negotiating it, as if they did it
not for ostentation; but love. So many times dissimulation uses to walk
shamefast, and reserved, not to hide her self, but that the novelty of habit
may be of force to turn the eyes of such as are present, upon her.

Macro having published the authority received from Tiberius, removed from
about the Senate and Sejanus, those praetorian soldiers which were for a guard,
and showing certain letters, in which Tiberius expressed he would reward
them, leaving here a good number of soldiers of Cesar's guard faithful by
ancient service, and encouraged with greater hopes, he led the Praetorians to
their stations, that no innovation might be made. In the mean time Tiberius
his letter was read, brought by him to the Senate, which verily was long, as
being stuffed with a thousand cunning policies. In the beginning it contained
diversity of affairs, afterward with a short complaint of Sejanus as with a
slight inquisition, he prepared minds to greater matters. Then passing to other
affairs, he in a while returned to complain of hi^ and commanding that two
Senators, the most intimate with Sejanus, should be punished, ordained in the
manner of an entreaty, grounded and necessitated upon suspicions, and
State-rules, that Sejanus himself should be undercustody. Requiring that one
of the Consuls should be assigned to wait on himself, that he might come to
Rome in safety.

Let him measure and argue upon the endeavor of this letter, who from the
things said before, understands the suspicion of Tiberius. Let that poor
Courtier penetrate the sudden effect of it, who knows how headlong Fortune is
to throw one down from greatness. The descent from height, has no lesser
steps then a leap. Most times no distinction may be made between the
supremest, and lowest fortune. It is impossible that the pen should abstain
from flattering the eyes, whilst it bewailes humane infelicity on these papers.
No sooner was the Letter read, but those Senators hastily rose up, who most
faithful, most dear sat about Sejanus, detesting him, whom hitherto they had
soothed, served, and adored. When Fortune departs, she carries friends away
with her. They, who once were of his faction, strove to be the first to forsake
him, boasting to be the foremost in seconding the will of Caesar. Out alas, that
friends fly the place, where they are tried. Profit and delight are those
interests, which gain love: Friendship is that son, who is allwaies buried
with his Father. By that which his dearest friends did, may be argued what his
enemies endeavored. They emulously rose up to accuse, calumniate, reproach him,
and all the exorbitant excesses, not only of Tiberius, but of the most abject
creatures (unknown to Sejanus) were ascribed to him. There was not any, who
was silent in his cause, and if there were, it was either to give time, that
the multitude of accusations might not be lost, or to recommend themselves to
the goddess Memory, to suggest new causes of complaints. The Pretors, and
Tribunes encompassed him round about, doubtful, least he might get out to stir
the people to commotion: A wary diligence, but needles, because fear (the
sergeant that waitson conscience) had before any other tied up his senses in
such knots of dejection, that I suppose lesser were not necessary to hold a
proud soul from abandoning manhood in so sudden a change.

Who will vaunt himself of those greatnesses which as they may be acquired, may
consequently be lost. Regulus, and Laco dragged him as guilty out of the
Senate, at whose feet justice, and fortune had so long lain prostrate. The
people, lovers of novelties, ran together crying out a loud, and cursing
Sejanus, to whose house (calling him the companion of Caesar) they but half an
hour before hastened to wait on him.

The soldiers, who heretofore used to glory in his service, bosted themselves
and grew proud at his captivity. They who before had adored him for a god, and
honored him as a priest, haled him as a victim to sacrifice. And so grievous,
and certain was the ignominy imminent over the present peril, that it was
rashness to envy one of those Oxen, which were sacrificed to him in the former
flourish of Fortune. Oh how little is the affection of the people to be
trusted, who so easily adore and murder men, that they cannot learn to pardon
their own gods, not reverenced for the power of their thunderbolts; but made,
and deified by their proper hands.

The name of the unfortunate Sejanus, was not only the sport of fortune, but
of the people likewise; the souls by him deprived the benefit of this precious
light ran up and down, with a thousand whippes to excite, and enrage as well
his own Conscience, as the multitude, against him. Every one agreed to mock
him for those his elevated thoughts, which were to sink at the foot of the
Gemonian stayres. His statues were the Center of Spears and Swords. Let not
the Lodestone boast to attract Iron with greater force, then did the marbles
inscribed with the name of Sejanus.

This is that memorable day, wherein the impious barbarism of the people
taught him to die, who had never lived. Brazen modells were no longer melted
with fire, but with wounds, for in the forge of Rome no other fuel burnt, but
of indignation, nor any other bellows were blown, but of Anger.

For no other cause had fortune raised so many statues to him, but to multiply
an infinity of Sejanns'es which should at this instant be the miserable prey of
a thousand torments, as though Sejanus were not capable enough of so many
punishments, who only sufficed to commit so many crimes. There was not any one
who sought not to get some relic of him, to preserve it as the miracle of
Fortune.

Exorbitancies of cruelty reflecting from the eye to the mind, afflicted the
poor Sejanus; his soul oppressed with so insupportable accidents, languished,
for the grief of dying, yet would death have been the last of all evils, had
it not drawn along with it so much ignominy. For finally to go out of life is
necessary, but to be driven from it is shameful.

What may we believe, was the passage of this unhappy man from the Senate to
the prison? He endeavored to cover his head, to desend himself, I know not
whether from shame or injury, but as he could not hide himself from his own
conscience, so they discoverd him to the eyes of others. Fortune scorned to
triumph over a man masked, and heaven thought it not a punishment equal for
demerit, to hide him from those who had bin spectators of his crimes, and were
the remainders of his fury.

They all cried out, stormed, and exclaimed to have him killed; that he should
be precipitated, who was the death and ruin of the Empire. The weakest cowards
learnt courage, from the example of the strongest, the strongest envied the
horror of the weakest, finding themselves unable to maintain that fury, which
stirred them up to revenge. The breast of Sejanus would have been the sepulcher
of a thousand swords, nor would the soldiers who environed him have sufficed
to preserve him, had it not bin for fortune, who was desirous also to enjoy
this last delight, to see a Hangman envied by a hundred Senators; every step
was a death, every death was so much the more grievous, as it had the more of
life. The passage of dying is a moment; and that which is dispatched in a
moment, is no great evil; but this was so much the greater an evil, by how
much the more they delayed him that death, which might take him from the
ignominy which the eyes saw, and from the torments which sense feared.

Being come to the prison, either the frozen heart denied passage to the soul,
or else the soul oppressed with so many objects, of stupifying pain, found
not out the way to liberty, otherwise, if we think how little experienced, he
was of sinister fortune, or if we weigh the sorrow of loss, by the value, by
the horror of death, and by the fear of conscience, it had been impossible
he should have lived a moment.

Let him not compassionate the misery of this wretched Courtier, who is not
exposed to misfortune: And who knows not, that the most wretched manner of
unhappiness, is, to have once bin happy. If he deserve not pity as Sejanus, he
deserves it as a man become miserable. Every occasion should serve the just man
to exercise his virtue. Courtefie, benefits, and clemency, are the three means
wherewith he who governs, ought to oblige the minds and affections of the
people, without which, Empire is naught else but a perilous servitude. It is
true, that discretion ought to be the distributresse of these treasures; That
overmuch courtesy begets contempt; That benefits rather scattered, than placed
oblige not, and indulgence not limited is a security in sinning, it being
ordinarily the condition of men not to know how to bear all slavery, nor all
liberty. The neglect of these bounds, not known or not observed, afflicted the
poor Sejanus, the infelicity of whose policy had found more greatness, than
safety. Never was that power either stable, or lasting, which was gained by
wickedness.

An Idaea cannot be framed in the mind of any mortal man of a more exact
statesman, then that, which then in a Chymaera presented it self to the mind
of Sejanus, made wise by the unhappiness of his fortune. He abhorred his
former pride; it vexed him he had set himself as the scope of Envy. The
Ostentation of Tiberius his favor, the violence of emulators, his having
arrogated to himself Empire over that world that now refused to support him,
were such punishments, as they were not only preambles, but lively touches of
the Torments of hell, affording no space either for hope or amendment. Now
(although late) he saw how dangerous it was to play with the Lion, who
concludes his daliances with his paws. Affections so long felt, or to say
better, suffered, made themselves understood to be liars. They a little before
had the face of hopes, and now were known to be dotages. But what knew he not?
Unhappiness taught the miserable man, that which prudence has written in her
books: not at this time to make him cautious, but rather so much the more sad.
From matters whence felicity draws good, misery derives evil, nor can a
greater mischief afflict a miserable man, than to be reduced to that point,
that even prudence it self concurreth to render him unhappy.

In the mean space the Senate seeing none of the innovations, then feared
either from the soldiers, who with hopes had been brought by Macro to the
Legions, or from the people that followed his misery, to whose Fortune they had
tied themselves by an inviolable oath, assembling together in the Temple of
Concord, that they might not be reduced to such straights, as to desire that
which now the people expected from them, they condemned the miserable Sejanus
to punishment.

Ah poor condition of man, Bears, and Lions are fed for Gladiators, and men
are fatned for the sith of death. Tiberius, durst not command the death of
Sejanus, and his servants durst execute it. The people stormed at retardation,
finding more punishment in delay, then the delinquent was to feel in the
execution. Every thing submits to fortune, which never embraces man, but to
strangle him.

One sole hour sufficed to accuse, arraigne, condemn, and execute a monarch
so much greater than others, by how much they had commanded over an Empire, he
over the Emperor.

Among so many his allies, friends, soldiers, followers, dependents, ministers,
there was not one stirred a foot for him, nay, there was not one who stirred
not against him. Every one runs for wood to the tree, which the wind or
hatchet has laid along. At this time there could be no greater offense, nor
peril, then fidelity; He was a true servant, who most speedily hastened the
death of his Master, to free him from those miseries, which were not to moove
mercy in any other Deity, then death.

Concord was ashamed to be at ods with Fortune, and lent her, her own Temple
to be a Theater, where the Sentence of this man's death should be pronounced,
and consequently the monitory of humane infelicity. Between the condemnation,
and execution, nothing interposed, but the distance, which was betwixt the
prison, and those stairs, from whence the condemned must dismount in a leap,
from supremest exaltation, to the lowest misery. He was taken from prison with
such fury, that we may rather say he flew thence. They dragged him to the
precipice, and threw him headlong from the top. Let him imagine the manner, who
has the heart to think of it. No injury, or possible cruelty was omitted to
be used, nay rather, that was made possible, which was not; for to see the
ally, the obliged, the servant, the friend to lead triumphantly to death, his
greater, his benefactor, his Lord, is a spectacle more true than likely. They
that were nearest were ambitious to have the opportunity to abuse him, the most
distant followed him, sorry they could not have a hand in this action. Some
cursed him, some upbraided him with his acts, and both the one and the other
showed him his punishment, to increase the sorrow with the terror, and augment
the manner, although not the numbers of his death. Oh people, alike cruel in
punishing, and in having so long deferred the chastisement.

Behold to what this man is reduced, whose favor men no longer desired, to
whom stars afforded no gracious influences, nor Fortune gave blessings. That
man, with whose revenges hell was increased, and to whose statues the gods
envied the best sacrifices. Oh how much more secure is the poverty of Irus,
than the riches of Cressus. That Engine, which more than other is raised toward
Heaven, more than the rest approaches thunders. Let him avoid the ascent, who
fears the precicipice. He that will enjoy the Court, let him not pretend to
greatness with a Prince. He, who would know what greatness with a Prince is,
let him make his last Will, for it is naught else but sudden ruin.

These are Aphorisms subscribed by a caytive, whose body could never find
repose, not so much as in the bosom of death. The earth denied burial to the
corpse of him who had filled so many Sepulchers with his cruelty. Friends
defrauded it of that sepulture, to which for the sakes of the living, rather
than of the dead, enemies themselves use to be courteous. Poor Sejanus, for an
eternal refuge, found not two yards of that land, whose vast Continent he had
both commanded and governed.

Scarcely arrived he to the end of the last leap, rent, torn, and dismembered,
but that the people for three whole days dragged him thorowout Rome, bathing
the stones with his blood, who had stained them with the blood of poor
Citizens. After this, they on the fourth day threw him into the River, either
that he should not return to infect Rome, or that Tiber might begin to be more
fertile in monsters than the Sea. Behold the continued course of Fate, water
was ever the Supulcher of Icarus'es and Phaetons.

Fortune permitted not it should come into the peoples minds, to waste the
remainders of this miserable carcass with fire, because having exposed it to
the cruelty of men, she would likewise reserve it to the shames of nature, to
exercise its corruptions upon him. He, who had been fed with the blood and
wealth of poor Citizens, was reserved to feed fishes in the water, worms in
the earth, and birds in the air. Oh never enough adored divine Providence!

The funerals celebrated for this unhappy creature, ought rather to be
abbreviated, than enlarged for writing them, there is not any one will believe
them, and to credit them is hardly in man, for the impiety thereof surpassed
the inhumanity of man.

The Orators were curses and reproaches. The sacrificers, cruelty and fury. The
children and friends of Sejanus were the victims. The houses of the dead were
purged from crimes with fire; The fires were quenched with the blood of his
faction. The diversity of times made it equally dangerous to have offended, and
to have loved Sejanus. There is not any sacrifice of a worse condition, then
that of envy.

Mercy appeared not in the Palace that day, for innocence was a crime, and he
was not without crime, who became not an enemy to Sejanus. Behold how unsound
is the friendship of an unjust Favorite.

There burnt nothing of pity to the soul of that unhappy man, but some fire of
revenge, since under the title of Sejanus his friends, private enemies were
pursued. In popular commotion, it is always the surest way to retire. The
Praetorian soldiers mutined, that the night-guards were preferred before them
in matter of fidelity. Many Citizens were accused and condemned for his
friendship, some of which (Marcus Terentius excepted, whom Courage, Justice,
and Fortune assisted) unfortunately stood upon their defense, which naught
availed them, unless it were to give time, that the other Accomplices might be
thrown headlong from the Capitol; and because one kind of death could not
serve so great a number of proscribed, many slew themselves.

Tiberius not confiscating the goods of him who prevented the Hangman (to avoid
the imputation of cruelty, which others executed) barbarously enforced men, who
were desirous to leave rich heirs, to kill themselves.

Behold death reduced to be the utmost, not of things terrible, but of men's
goods; wherein so much was gained in an instant, as was possessed through the
whole course of life. See how true it is, that among mortal things there is
not any more fading, than that power, which has not support from it self.
Thus was the whole day spent in wickednesses, the last of which was the
general joy that was made. This was a day dedicated to cruelty, in which the
miserable Sejanus saw, nay felt the setting of his greatness, to be the
chastisement of his crimes.

Unhappy he who confides in his own greatness. Poor is that power which rests
in the breast of one man. Unfortunate is that man who depends on another. Let
the Courtier learn true politic arts, from the History of this wretched
forlorn creature. Happy he, who studieth prudence on another books.

Let the Favorite of a Prince fly violence, as a thing which cannot continue.
Let him fly Envy, against which none can long persist. Let him not raise his
greatness on terror and cruelty, for they afford a great man more fear than
power, more peril than safety. Let him rule with a slack hand, who would be
loved; but yet with that temper, without which virtue concludes in vice. Terror
and fear are too weak bands to tie minds; when once they are loose, who leave
to fear thee, they will begin to hate thee. Fly ostentation, as the mother of
Envy, as the daughter of Vanity. He who cannot in himself contain the favor
of his Lord, shows himself to be incapable, and consequently undeserving. Let
him suffer himself to be honored, as enforced, not as pretending it,
ascribing honors to his office, not to merit. Let him carry himself toward a
Prince with reverence, and this is a flattery without vice. These are the
Brokers of favor, because the common defects of great ones is pride, as those
who measure themselves by their fortune, not by their merit. Let him esteem
the favor of a Prince, as a thing which may be lost. Let him not run to
honors, but expect them, not as one who seeks them, but deserves them; not as
a necessary servant, but as a good. Of every thing that succeeds well with him,
acknowledging none from proper prudence, let him ascribe all to the virtue, to
merit, to the fortune of the Prince. Let him not labor for vanity, but
justice, for merit consists not in well dissembling, but well doing. Very ill
can vice cloak it self with the habits of virtue, neither does the Ass dance
to the Harp, nor the Lyon's skin teach us to rore.

Let him not abuse the favor of his Patron, which would be either to despise
it, or not to know it. Let him acknowledge it, as a gift, not as a reward: so
doing, other will endeavor to deserve it that they may obtain it, and he will
likewise deserve it, whilst he obtaines it. In the affairs of a Prince let
him use diligence, solicitude, and counsel; In Counsels, sincerity, and
secrecy. No less is secrecy necessary, than good counsel.

Let him not be perpetually by his Lords side for profit, and riches. With
many to have heaped riches, has not been the end of evils, but the mutation.
When the Prince has given all, and the Favorite can desire no more, they
quickly grow weary one of another. Let him rather beg modestly, than
importunately. Let him rest satisfied with convenience, and not pretend to
overmuch; for he knows not how to begin to enjoy, who cannot tell where to
make an end of having. Vomiting is the Physician of Repletion. Let the
Favorite be content with what he may have, for when the Prince has given
all he has, to take it back again, it is necessary he should resume that
which he before gave, and because to resume is shameful, many times he is
taken out of his sight, who makes him ashamed.

Let Papinian, Let Seneca speak, for whom it was a thing impossible to avoid
riches, because they showred upon them; It was not lawful to refuse them, for
they were the gifts of a Prince. What Felicity then is this, where he who has
it, fears, who would have it, is unsafe, and who would refuse it, cannot?

Let him profess himself to be less with his equals, To be courteous, and
affable: for they who are such, have had of their enemies greater friends, than
the other of their Citizens. Sometimes let him participate the favors of his
lord with them, not as a man who gives them, but begs them. To go about to
give them, is a profession of superiority; a matter odious among equals: Proud
favors reap contempt, and ingratitude in stead of thanks. In the manage of
State-affaires, where secrecy is not enjoined, let him communicate with them,
as well to avoid the note of one who arrogateth all to his own authority, as
to err, rather with the opinion of many, than by himself alone. The success
of an affair provideth protectors for him, who consulteth it with others. To
ask counsel, is to honor him of whom it is required, yet is not liberty
taken away from a man to do as he pleases. It is true, the quality of the
person is to be observed. For to ask counsel of ones better, is to be tied
to performance. In a business whereon thou have consulted, good success will
be thy glory, evil thy excuse, having followed the advice of others.

Profess equality with inferiors, not of manners, that it become not
baseness, but of pretentions. In commands be discreet, for be who, seldom or
never commands, is always obeyed. Let the manner of commanding be by way of
entreaty, for although his entreaty who has authority to command contain
violence, let him notwithstanding do it, for he shall be obeyed with
promptness, which he may make use of for good manners, not obligation. Let him
be mild, that too much severity keep not inferiors so distant that he cannot
afterward employ them in his need. Let him be liberal in words, for the gifts
of poor Princes are favors, which cost nothing. Let him be free of his deeds,
if he be able, for a benefit is the father of a benefit, and love is a
fortress to defend greatness.

Let him use a lenitive with detractors of his honor, and the malevolent to
his person. Let his scope be the end of the ill will, not of the ill willer.
Exercising power against him, no place will remain to exercise virtue. There
is no enemy whom benefits will not gain. Thou may have great hopes of his
friendship, whose enmity has found thee doing favors. To kill a competitor in
State-affaires, is too full of danger. Suddenly the Prince begins to suspect
an excess of imaginations in thy mind. Little can the head confide in him, who
has not borne respect to its members. The people begin to fear, and hate thy
greatness; and for that virtue borders near upon vice, thy solicitous care is
judged interest, reverence, adulation, and justice, severity: Besides, power
grounded upon mischief, was never long. Let him fly affairs odious to the
people, for there is no force against hatred, which can avail: If he cannot
decline them, let him show himself to be the servant, not the superior, a
disswader, not a counselor. Let him be the first to stand exposed to hurt.
Let him execute his office with charity, not predominancie. Let him give time,
expect time, comfort, encourage, assist; for promptness overcommeth every
difficulty, and the glory will not be unworthy the danger.

Let him remember, that the life of great men is naught else but a perpetual
censure, and where censure is in continual use, greatness is not lasting.

Finally, let him be that within himself, which he would be accounted by
other. Let him endeavor to be virtuous, for virtue is it is own reward.

Every man can envy the prosperity of fortune; in virtue even fortune her
self finds what to envy. This alone adds a strain of immortality to him,
who is mortal. He is not happy on whom treasures shower; but that man whose
good rests in the mind. Well may fortune prick him, not wound him; strike him,
not overthrow him. Adversity, losses, injuries; can do that against virtue,
which clouds may against the Sun. It is true, that the Courtier (being
perfectly such) will come to be (as it were) no Courtier; for the Court is the
receptacle of all fraud and vice; Let him therefore seek to accoast the best
what he may; for the virtuous man knows how to tread the paths of vice with
an upright foot, and verily honest men can, and understand how to live, even
under bad Princes. There is no other means to overcome Fortune, but by sole
virtue; and although the just man is not free from the effects, yet is he
exempt from the occasions; For if he be afflicted, he is afflicted as a man,
not as wicked, nay rather he is exercised, as virtuous. Attalus the Stoicke
said, I rather choose Fortune should entertain me in her toiles than in her
delights. I am tormented, but I bear it courageously; I am killed, but I die
valiantly. This goes well; unhappiness is the fire which purifieth this gold.
Fortune trusts no man more than him who despises her, none despise her but
the virtuous, and although every fortune fail us, it is no mean fortune to be
virtuous.

But what said I of Fortune? Man has no other fortune but himself. Who is so
simple as not to know it, who so wicked as to deny it.

That Sejanus was in one instant adored and precipitated; raised to eminent
height, depressed to lowest abjectnesse; environed by so many friends, besieged
by so many enemies; not defended by any, persecuted by all, I confess to be no
small matter, yea such, that not injuriously men sought to cover it with
supernatural power, constituting an imaginary Deity, to predominate over these
exorbitances of motion.

But what should a Prince do, (speaking naturally) seeing himself oppressed,
betrayed, entrapped by a force, which takes all force from his favor; which in
stead of gratefully acknowledging him, seeks perfidiously to ruin him? If the
chastisement of so great a disorder be committed to fortune, what assuredness
of strength defends him? If a great one depose not a lesser, who offends him,
what is this greatness? And if this be not natural, to what purpose did
nature put into us, that motion of anger toward revenge?

That friends in these calamities abandon the deposed, is not accidental, but
necessary. The preservation of the Individuum, is the most principal among all
the effects of nature. Who sees not, that a private man following the
adherence to a Rebel against a Prince, of necessity is a companion of his
crimes and fortune? He wrongs no man, who virtuously makes use of his Reason;
It is the natural reason of every one who is borne, what he can to aid,
preserve, and defend his own life; and even thus much is granted, which
sometimes has happened, that to preserve it without any fault, men have been
killed; and this thelawes admit (under the care of which is the preservation of
each mortal) how much more lawful then is it, without offense to any for a
good Courtier to abandon a friend, not friendship; and to retire from peril,
not from love?

That in one and the same time a thousand are discovered to be enemies, who
have flattered thee, is no wonder; man being promptly disposed to arrive by
what meanssoever to his own ends. The place, thou emptiest has need to be
replenished. That the subject flatters his Prince, is not against nature. That
revenge expects occasion, is not unusual. They, who now are thy enemies, were
never thy friends; Virtue admits no change. That enemies offend thee, is no
mervell, it were strange if they help thee. That Sejanus was precipitated from
so exalted a Condition of felicity into so deep a dungeon of misery, is not to
be called an effect of fortune; for if the causes (as we saw before) be of
nature, how can the effects be supernatural? Man is that silk worm, which
has woven a prison, and bands for it self, and when crimes cometo incorrigible
terms, they incur by divine permission those chasticeme^ts, which naturally
follow bad beginnings. Who sees not, that ruin waits on him, who plays over
it. Every Autumn concludes in Winter. Mirth ends in tears. The Soldier is
reserved to the Sword, the Mariner to the waves. It is not ascribed to
Fortune, that a Butterfly, bold to dally with the fire, at last is wasted in
the flame, and is it to be called an accident of fortune, that that man, who is
not able to govern himself, falls oppressed under the weight of the government
of a whole world, and that which is more considerable, of another man's world?
As if it were less natural to return back, then to depart from, to descend
than to climb.

Fortunate is that Courtier, who to gain the favor of his Lord, makes virtue
the instrument. Happy he, who having obtained it, retires, that he may not lose
it. The end attained, he who further pretends, provokes misery. He commits
himself to aerie vanity, to gain the certainty of a Center, who descends
from a height, not expecting to be thrown headlong. The measure of the foot
is more safe than of the eye. Favor is not inaccessible, but to preserve it is
impossible, or difficult. The prize is gotten at the end, not at the beginning
of the race. The end of good events, is the beginning of bad. He who trusts
to himself is rash, who confideth in the favor of another, is merely mad.
The last day of servitude, is the first of liberty. Liberty in a generous and
virtuous mind, is a pledge which assures thee that such shall be thy fortune,
as thou can make it or desire it.

This is as much as I can say to thee (O Courtier.) The favor of great men is
an alluring Siren, which has poison on the tongue, and a sword in hand. Let
Sejanus be thy master, not thy guide, for very fond is he, who walks on
ruins, and remembers not he may fall.

IUVENAL. -- Qui nimios optabat honores
Etnimias poscebat opes, numero sa parabat
Excelsae turris tabulata, unde altior esset
Casus, and impulsae praeceps immane ruinae.

FINIS:

