THE DIAL OF Destiny. A BOOK VERY DELECTABLE AND Pleasant: wherein may be
seen the continual and customable course, disposition, qualities, effects,
and influence of the Seven Planets over all kinds of Creatures here below:
also the several and sundry situation of Countries and Kingdoms.

Compiled and discussed Briefly, as well Astrologically, as Poetically, and
Philosophically By John Maplet Master of Art.

IMPRINTED AT London in Fleestreat near unto Saint Dunstones Church By Thomas
Marshe. 1581.

Psalm 136.
O Praise the Lord of Heaven which by his excellent wisdom made the heavens:
which made great Lights, the Sun to rule the day: the Moon and the Stars to
Govern the night.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR CHRISTOPHER HATTON, Knight, one of the Queens
Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, and Captain of her Graces Guard.
OENOPIDES Chius (most honorable Sir) dedicated at the Tryumphes hold in
Greece to the honor of Jupiter Olympus (or as others write) to Hercules, a
Book of his own framing and making all of Brass: the Method and matter
whereof was nothing else but a summary Discourse collected out of Plato as
concerning the continuance, circuit, and course of the seven Planets. Which
business so carefully, and costly performed by the aforesaid Chius, is here
peradventure in another sort with other necessary sequel thereof, and with
less a do also and less cost scanned and debated. Which small treatise of
mine, neither craving Jupiter, nor Hercules, but requires rather your honors
present Patrocynie, and favorable protection: Your Honor being now in these
days to our most renowned Prince, and the Weal Public eue^ the same that
PHOCION a most renowned Captain was to the Athenians: And as EPAMINONDAS was
to the Thebanes. Three rare and royal virtues there are which AGESILAVS
(speaking it upon good trial and proof thereof) requires to be in a
Captain set over the Princes Guard: the first he says, is fidelity to his
Soueraygne, whose person he is most carefully to safegarde and defend: the
second (he says) is an hawty heart and valiancy of Mind, friend^y affected
toward his friends, and little esteming the force of his foes: and the last he
reposeth in ripeness of Judgment and dexterity of VVisdome in giving of
common wealth council. All which three Ormame^ts and Jewels, and the same
three (I dare utter it) thrice doubled and trebled, shine and show forth in
your Honor very resple^ dishingly. Insomuch that if I were (as I am nothing fit
thereto) to determyn as the Orator DEMADES did, of Noble Personages and most
worthy VVyghtes even eyes of the Realm, as he calls them: the consideration
of your honors so Infinite and inestimable virtues, even of very right
deserving the same, required (I should say very worthily) your Honors accoumpt
(as it also has already) among ye chiefest Senators and Sages of this Land.
And whereas many other Nations being governed only as it were Cyclopycally,
(that is to say) with might and bodily force, therewith only defeng
themselves, being without their wise Council, as it were without their Eyes
(as the Poets say the great Gyaunte CYCLOPS is) do yet nevertheless for want
of the same run oftentimes to much ruin, subjection, and subversion. This
our Country and Nation (the Lord be hyghly thanked therefore) having such
their Eyes and eysight, as it has in deed very clear, perfect, and precious,
whereby as well all the whole body of the Realm: as also every part thereof is
most happily dyrected in all kind of safety: how greatly we and the same is
to glorify GOD therefore, though I should say nothing thereof but be silent
therein, the very force of such a rich blessinge and Benefit, it self would
burst forth and speak it. Now the cause that only moved me at this time, to
crave your Honores Countenauncinge of this Little Treatise, was chiefly, the
hearesay of your Honors accustomed Clemency, and Curtesy in like behalf
toward others. Which being any thing accepted at your Honors hands, shall
encourage me hereafter to other Trauayles and endeavors. In the mean time I
shall not cease to pray to the governor of all, the Lord of Lords, for the
prosperous and long preservation of your Honor, and for the continuance of
your honors estate and good lyking, to the glory of GOD, the contentation of
the Prince, and commodity of the Country.

From Northall The last of December. 1581. Your Honors humble and daily Orator.
John Maplet.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
TYRESIAS King the Thebanes being in that foolish mind, and so persuaded with
him self that the Stars had no such Pryuiledge or rule in Man's body, or else,
as the Astrologians did plainly affirm, was (as the Poets Imagine) with the advice and consent of the all (not suffering such speech) stricken stark blind
and quite bereued of his sense of seeing. And in deed those ignorant men or
unadvised sort which are in a manner come to the same pass that COTTA the
Epicure with CICERO, and DEMOCRITVS were at, that all things here below come
to pass by chance, mere Casually, or at a venture, accordingly as they hap
well or ill, they are either blind in knowledge, or else are wedded to much to
their own Wits and Wills, dealing with the caelestiall powers
preposterously. For PTOLOMY plainly proves an especial kind of Influence
from them all, which disposes all bodies here beneath according to every ones
especial and natural propriety. In so much that BALBVS the Stoycke is rather
to be borne withal, then these kind of Men, which upon three Principal
causes, and considerations was enforced and driven to grant some superior
kinds of fatal providence. And the first reason and cause thereunto moouinge
him was the view of such sundry Varietyes, and such plentiful stoare of
Commodities, as which do daily arise both in the Earth as in the Sea and Air,
through the contemperature, and variable disposition of the heavenly powers.
The second occasion that brought him hereto was, the perceyuinge of the
wonderful differences and contrary propertyes both of mind as of body in all
things almost, that he could not chose but think and Imagine a sundry
cause for every one. Thirdly the distinct order and placinge of each thing to
the better co^tinuation of the same in his kind, provoked and enforced him for
to rest and ground upon some Superior workemansters or Authors above. Moreover
a pattern of the Planets, property, and Influence does in this respect offer it
self to be seen apparently, even in the frame and Workmanship of Man kind,
whereas every person almost has his several and sundry Inclination: some to
virtue, some again to vice: some also having good hap, and other some having
sinister fortune. And whereas wicked men for the most port ruffle in the
world, fortune alwais laughing on the^: as MARIUS, SYLLA, DYONISIVS the cruel
Tyrant, PYSISTRATVS, POLYCRATES, and PHALARIS, And co^trariwyse it is here
with goodme^ for the most part, as it was with PAVLVS AEMILIVS a valyaunte
Vanquisher, and a good man, yet through cruel fate murdered and slain with
his whole army at a skyrmishe fought at Canna. It was also Aphricanus his hap
to be banished his country and to dye in exile. It was CATVLVS his chance to
be slain of his mortal enemy MARIUS. The two valiaunte SCYPIOES lost their
lives in Spain. Yea and we see daily the suddayne rising of many men from
their low Estate to the highest degrees of dignity: as IPHICRATES a Cobblers
son, advanced to be a Captain under ARTAXERZES king of Persia. RVMENES
CARDIANVS borne in Peloponesus a Carters son, afterward made Co^usay lor to
ALEXANDER the great. AGATHOCLES a Potters son, afterward chief of Syracusa.
JULIUS LICINIVS a Husband man's son afterward Governor of Dacia. Yea, and many
contrariwise being Royally and nobly borne by fatal destiny have fell from
aloft: as ALCIBIADES, POMPEYE, yea and PTOLOMEVS the Egyptian king which in
his ruff and youthful days, banquetted and feasted daily a Thousand Guestes
ordinarely, seruinge them all in their Golden Plate, and yet he himself
afterward as he grevve old was driven to that extremity, that he was
feign to be sustained and relieved at other men's hands very barely and
coursly. Yea, and besides this many have such cruel destinye that as soon as
they be borne they are subject to be swallowed and soopt up straightwais of
some one danger or other: as was SEMIRAMIS borne of a noble blood: and
PYRRHVS, afterward King of the Epirotet. Which both were thrown out and cast
from their friends being Sucklings and Infants, and yet by fate of Fortune and
by great providence preserved even at the very dent and brym of present and
Imminent destruction. By such means also was CYRUS so hurled of from his
friends, sustained and nourished by the means of a Bitche: so was TELEPHVS by
a Heart: PELIAS Son to NEPTVNVS by a Mare: PARIS by a she Bear: AEGYSTVS by a
she Goat: ROMULUS, and REMVS by a she Woulfe. In the wonderful delivery and
dealing whereof what kind of Fate and Providence this and an Infinite number
such like was, I refer the same (gentle reader) to thine own determination.
Whereof this Treatise (if thou vouchsafest the thorough Readinge thereof) does
show forth both in proof and in example more abundantly. The name also
which I have gieuen to this book calling it the Dyall of Destiny, does well
enough as I think agree to the purpose. For Dyall vyise it goes from point
and point, and from Degree to Degree showing the subjection of every each
kind to his sundry and several Superior Planet. Which labos of mine such as
it is, receive thou thankfully: And the^ have I that Recompense that I do
require.

Fare well.
To the scornful sort of Scycophantes.
POLLIO play not the POLYPRAGMON or Busy body: I wys it becomes you not.
The Parrat and Popiniaye play such parts for Pray sake, rather then of
property: but the Cornish Choughs and Carrenly Crovves have it of custom. If
your wont be such it is worse then I wyshe it were. And then I perceive this
Proverb is plain.

Si Coruus posset tacitus pasci, haberet plus dapis. But like Lyps like
Lettice. Dayneties surely desire or look you for none till that your manners be
mended.

OF THE CONcord or common fellowship of the seven Planets, as also of their
breadefull debate and discord.
IT is manifest and approved by arguments of force, and reasons of more secret
and hid philosophy, likewise by demonstration and conclusions Mathematical, yt
all Creatures whatsoever which have their being essence, and preservation upon
the face of the whole Earth, or else be contained within the Regions or Precinct
of the Air above, and subjected under ye circle or Sphere of ye Moon, have
and receive their influence of the higher and more Celestial hodies or
Planets: and after a certain sort (says Proclus) they resi and depend of
them. And heerem his saying seemed not to be amiss, for that experience
plainly teaches us, and we also see yt there is nothing here below so able,
strong, or rich of it self, that being void or destitute of the favor or
furtheraunce of the celestial bodies above, can be well pleased and contented
with it self. Agrippa is in that opinion that at the former constitution or
first breedinge of every each thing, both that which lives, as also that which
is deuoyde of life (as likewise at the committure or composition of the
Clements for ye morease of any baser kinds) the bountifulnes of certain
planets is such oftentimes, that besides the beneficialnesse of the own nature
of the things themselves (which works always liberally) there is a further
free gift bestowed upon every ye said things, and kinds by the Planets
themselves: and the same more rightly or preciously when as they meet together
in more happy sign, or be in higher Horoscope or Ascendent. Plato with his
Consectaryes do affirm, that all these Daughters or progeny of Dame Nature,
are every one of them first sealed and (as it were) marked of the stars and
Planets above, whereby in every thing they have to challenge their own. And
even as by God the greatest and mightiest of all, and the first and principal
cause of all things, all creatures are disposed generally to a like frame and
customable order of the self same kind: so in like sort by the second
causes the Planets although inferiors yet working causes, all things here
vnderueath are in more special sort sealed and ensampled. Easy it is to see
that there is no one part in all the whole proportion and workmanship of man's
body, that is not ruled or disposed by some one Planet or other, to affectate
that most of all other things which ye superior force does frame them and
enclyne them unto: so that unto me all the whole body of man, as also the
bodies of all other creatures here below, seem to be possessed, busied, and as
it were incensed and set on work by them. As for example. To begin with Sol or
the Sun, it is apparent how he holds, governs, and has in possession ye
Brains and forepart of the head, the heart, the marrow, the right Eye, the
vital Spirit or breath of life: likewise ye Mouth, ye tongue, and all other
the Organes or instruments of sense, or feeling: besides this, he chalengeth
the hands, the feet, the Synewes, the Imagination, and whole operation of the
power fantastical. The Moon likewise has in her subjection and ordreth
after a certain sort all the whole body, in such wise as both the humors and
moisture both natural, and accidental: does either abound in them or
dyminishe and lessen, according to her prime and wane. And whereas she thus
works generally in all sorts according to her own variation, so in the
special members and parts of the body, she especially rules in the Lunges,
and deals also with a great portion of ye Brain. Hers is also the Marrow of
ye Backbone, as also the stomach, the lest Eye, with all the other parts that
yield forth and avoid the excrementes, and superfluities of ye body, with the
power and virtue increasinge. Saturn is lord over the Liver, and has to do
with the bottom or lowest part of the stomach. Jupiter chalengeth a right
in the Belly, as likewise in the Navel: in so much that in ye Temple of
Jupiter Hammon in Lybia, the figure or likeness of a Man's Navel was hanged
up, to fignifie thereby that the thorough closing and fastening together of the
Belly belongs only to Jupiter himself. Likewise he holds the Ribs, and
the place about the priuities, as also the Bowels, and Entrails within.
Moreover the best and more principal blood is his, as also both ye arms, and
both the hands, as well the right as the left, with all the whole power and
virtue Nutritive, whereby ye whole body is nourished and maynteyned. To Mars
appertains and belongs the second and more base Blood, as also the
Veins, the Ridney, the Celles or placinges of the Chest, the Back, the
Buttockes, the Corse and abundaunce of Seed, as also all that full power of
the Stomach wherein Choler is engendered. Proper to Mercury is the Spleen, the
Mylte, the Bladder, the Matrix, and all those places within the Body which are
naturally appointed to the only use and office of nourishing. Venus rules the
Secret parts, and orders ye natural Seed, and also causes and prounketh
to the Lust and Appetite of things. It may be perceived also that in some one
part of the body, they will all seven bear a sway.

Hermes says, that in ye head of man there are seven Pores or holes, allotted
to diverse and sundry offices, of the which every one of them is subject to a
sundry Planet. As that Pore or hole which is in ye right Ear apperteineth to
Saturn: that in the left to Jupiter: Mars also has the government of that
which is in the right side of ye nose: Venus the contrary: Sol is master over
that which holds the stringes of the Eye: Luna over the other in the left
Eye: and all the whole workmanship of ye mouth is proper alone to Mercury.
Great and graciouse also are all such Benefits of Mankind, as also the other
baser kinds do estsoones receive of the Planets, especially when as those of
like condition, nature, and quality do meet together in gracious signs of
like house. And contrariwise heavy and heard is their hap, fortune, and
chance, which have and obtain any thing of them as they be in battlement,
strife, and contencion among them selves. Wherefore I shall not greatly do
amysse, if in this place I briefly touch, which of them with other are in
friendly league and likance, and in like sort, which of them with other are at
deadly discord, and disagreement.

Friends to Saturn and his welwillers are Jupiter. Mercury, Sol, and Luna: his
enemies are Mars, and Vonus. Jupiters friends are all the other, only Mars
excepted. Mars is despised and detested of all ye other, except only of Venus.
Sol is in great friendship with Jupiter and Venus, and in greathatred with
Mars, Mercury, and Luna. Venus has the love of all the rest save only of
Saturn. In friendship with Mercury, are Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn: his
enemies are Sol, Luna, and Mars. Friends to Luna, are Jupiter, Venus, and
Saturn: her enemies are Mars, and Mercury. Great contencion also is amongst
them as they be placed in contrary house: as between Saturn, and Venus. And a
much more great debate or strife is between the^ as they be in Opposite,
lofte, or degree in Exaltation. Which thing is often showed forth between
Saturn, and Sol: Jupiter, and Mars: Venus, and Mercury. And further their
atonement, or agreement is in like Nature, Quality, Substance, might, or
power: as is of Mars, and Sol: Venus, and Luna: Jupiter, and Venus. In so much
that it was not without just cause and occast in that Heraclitus said, that al
things were persited and made by a proportion fetched from frie^dship and
discord. By these Planets also happens better chance and fortune, as also
mischaunce and misfortune. Insomuch that some of them are termed the Gods of
grace and fortune: as is Jupiter whom they name Fortuna mayor, the greater or
more gracious. Likewise Venus, who in the rules of Astrology is named Fortuna
minor, as if you would say less gracious, and yet a Lady of grace. The other
are called the Gods of mishap or casual chance, of the which sort is Saturn,
whom they name Infortuna mayor: As also Mars which is called Infortuna minor.
And Mercury, which is called the God of indifferency, who is for all companies,
for with the good, he is good, and with the bad, he is as bad. Sol by his
shyning Sun beams, and amiable aspecte or countenance, is cheareful to al
things: but being in conjunction with other or eclypsed, both hinders much for
the present time, and prognosticateth, and threatens more for the future time
coming. The moon is sent in message from one to another, and has her
recourse and passage by them all: so that she hurts or benefiteth as occasion
serves by them, and from them. By Astrology also they have all their
determynate kind: As Venus and Luna are feminyne or of the woman kind: And
all the other are accounted Masculine, or after men. They are also divided into
Planets of the day, and Planets of the night. The day Planets are Saturn,
Jupiter, Sol, and Mercury. The night Planets are Mars, Venus and Luna. Again
they be so divided as that certain of them be holden for heavy and Massy, of
the which sort are Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars: other are as subtle and light,
as are Venus, Mercury, and Luna. But Sol or the sun is partaker of neither of
both these properties. Amongst the elements these do also contend for the
superiority. For Jupiter deals with that commixture which partly is of the
air, and partly of the Water. Luna or ye Moon exacteth that which consysteth
and comes of the Water alone.

Sol also helps forwards the means, or manner in doing or acco^plishing of
things. Luna or the Moon, as it were ministers matter in such behalfes. Mars,
and Mercury, labor their proceeding and going forward, and do give them
speedy and quick expedition: the first by the means of his force, and might,
and the other by his aptness and Dexterity in deliverance. The plenty and
store of matter comes from Venus, and the continuation or wayght of any
business whatsoever, is proper alone to Saturn. Moreover all the Signs in ye
Zodiacall Circle do participate, and enjoy the qualities of the seven Planets.
As Taurus, and Capricornus, be Saturnine: Virgo, and Libra, are after Jupiter:
Aries, and Scorpio, be after Mars: Cancer, and Leo, be after Sol or the Sun:
Gemini, and Sagittarius, be after Venus: Aquarius, and Pisces, be after the
Moon. And according to the course of the Sun, Aries, Taurus, and Gemini,
do procure a warm and moist Spring time, very good for the Sanguine
Complexion, and for tender age. Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, likewise cause a hot
Summer and a dry: very good for the Choleric complexion and men of middle
age. Likewise Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius, cause a cold and moist Autumn,
agreeable to the Phlegmatic complexion, and young age. And Capricornus, A
quarius, and Pisces, cause the Winter naturally to be cold and dry, aunswerable
to the Melancholicke complexion, and to old Age. But of these things we are
to speak of, as Occasion shall serve more particulerly, as hereafter follows.

Of LVNA, or the Moon,
AS Sol or the Sun is the Beauty, Grace, and Countenance of ye day: so in
like sort is Luna, or the Moon the comforter, light geuer, and glory of the
night. And they both have for this such their Graciousnes and goodness, the
greatest pre-eminence and accoumpte of all other Planets. Whereupon it was not
wont good cause, and consideration that in old and ancient time, both of
these when at any time they were Depictures or drawn forth by any Artificer,
Engrauer, or Paynter, they were then chiefly set out in ye fashion, seemlinesse
or Habit of a Virgin: and in both their hands were placed and put fine and
feate Arrows, or darts, to signify thereby that the light which proceeded
from these two, was only clear, undefiled, and without spot: and that these
were the only Planets which threw as it were, and cast from them the
glistering beams of clear and comfortable light, as Arrows or Darts:
whereby all things cheared, and continued the better in their Estate, with well
lyking. LVNA how called.
This same Luna therefore is with the Poets called Lucina the Governor or
Goddess of the night. And for that she does not only appear or shine in the
night time, but is seen oftentimes over our head in our Horizon in the day
time. It is grown to a custom, and brought now among us to this pass and
effect, yt she is also of some called Diana (as if you would say Duana) for
her through presence both in ye day and night: or as Tully better reasons, for
that she with her bright look oftentimes causes ye night to appear as
though it were day. This of al ye other planets is placed lowest, and is
nighest to ye Earth, for which cause she shows forth and seems unto our
eyesight to be so great: her figure or fashion of body is round, and of her
own nature she is fiery, although casually intermedling with vapors, water, and
so forth, she appears to be in color watery, which much troubles her:
whereupon it is reported yt (were it not for such lettes, and hinderaunces, as
by this means it is subject unto) she would shine forth as fully as does the
Sun, The Hebrews call it. TSAR, or LECANNATH: the Greeks (...). She gives
her chiefest light on yt side or part which is opposite against the Sun, and is
ever darkened on yt side which is turned away from the Sun. In ye Moon be 3.
states or conditions to be observed and waighed: yt is to say, Three stares in
the Moo^e to be noted.
either as she is in coniu^ction with the Sun: or else as she is on some of his
sides, or else as she departs and goes back further of from ye Sun. When the
is in this last of 3. point, she will appear end wise, with her horns
reaching toward ye East. Secondly as she is in oppositio^ with the sun and
draws nighe to that point, she appears all over a like round with the
Su^ne, but her revolution then is most toward the West. And lastly as on
either side she turns more or less toward the Sun, so is she the more
obscured or lightened. Marcianus says that there is a certain Stayne or Spot
ever seen in the Moon, which blemisheth her brightness greatly: especially
the^, when as some matter of Mystes, or of any other Metecre is troublesome
unto her. Her house is only in Cancer, Her exaltacion is in the fourth of
Taurus, Her qualies are cold and moiste. As likewise her effects or workinge
is to make cold and moist. Where she colors she gives a saffron color:
and in tastes or sauoures she works and makes the saltest. Her course or
race is of all other Planets most swift: her course
for in 28. days she passes through all and singular Signs of the Zodiac.
And for such her swiftnes or haste it happens somewhiles yt she is under ye
Sun, another while above: one while she is before, another while behind. And
when as the Sun is in his course or circuit by the nethermost circles of ye
south, and the Moon contrariwise in the highest circle of ye North, then the
top of ye Moon appears like a Cockbote or small ship, and her horns are
upward. But when as she is under the Su^ne, her horns give downewarde
toward the earth. From ye Moon are gathered and coniectured certain
probable signs, Certain prognostications from the Moon.
whereby we prognosticate and foreshewe of the alteration of times and
mutability of the weather to come. As when the Moon by and by after her
change does appear red, she prognosticateth wyndes and tempestuous weather,
the most part of the said Moons continuance. Again if upon her change she
incontinently at her Top or highest part looks black, or be there darckened
she foresheweth rain, and a wet and moist first quarter. But if she be
only obscured about ye middle of her, she prognosticateth a fair full Moon
and last quarter of the same. The Eclypse of the Moon is generally caused
through the interposition of ye earth between the Moon and our eyesight: The
Moons Eclypse.
but then especially is she Eclipsed when as the bodies both of the Sun,
Moon, and Earth are right oppositly set one over another, in one and the self
same contrary line: so that by such occasion, one darckeneth and obscureth
another. Her change, increase, and decrease, has much troubled the wits of ye
Astronomers. As hardly also can they render a reason and give forth the cause
why one while she croketh in to horns, why another while she wexeth all
round, why one while she shyneth in one part of her, why another she gives
light al over why now she is seen all night, why now but a piece of ye night:
why now leaving ye night time, she shows her self only in ye day time:
why now she is clear and radiant, why anon blotted and blemished: why now
carried Northwarde, why anon mooninge directly Southward. Which al and other
such like meruaylons and strange effects and properties (are reported by
Pliny in his second book and eight chapter to have been best observed by
Endymion being as is there said, ravished and in great love for such her
astonishme^t, fell so to affectionate her, that accomptinge more of her then of
all the other Supercoelestiall powers, she to requite him like love again, is
said to have descended on a time and to have kissed the said Endymion as he lay
a sleep upon Latmus, and Mountain in Caria, Pliny in his fourtenth chapter
of the aforesaid book does report, yt always at the Moons increase, her
horns are turned from the Sun: as contrariwise as she decreaseth she
turns her horns toward the Sun. Many Moons at once.
There have appeared Many Moons at once, but never more the^ three at one
time. And three appeared at one time manifestly: as in the second book of the
said Pliny and xxxii. chapter is recorded: that is to say, in ye time of the
prehemine^ce or consulship of Cneius Domitius, Three moons seen at one time.
and Lucius Annius: which were called of some then, the night Suns. Likewise it
has been seen and ye same Author does affirm it to be true, lib. 2. cap. 32.
that there has appeared such lights in ye night, as that it has been in a
manner all one with the day light. As for example: In the time of Caius
Cecilius and Cneius Papirius, they being consuls, Lights in the Night like the
day, when,
such lights were seen in the night, as that the brightness thereof could not
be discerned from the brightness of the noone day. And at diverse other times in
ages and years since, such strange sights there have been seen, such sightes
in the Night, as men have supposed it to have been day. There have been also
Bucklers of fire seen glisteryng from the West to the East, Bucklers of fire.
and of all these the most grievous of others to behold, and which bred greatest
wonder happened in the time of the Consulship of Lucius Valerius and Cneius
Marius. Fiery flames
There has also ben seen and be often as yet in ye night, fiery flames or
burninges in the element or air, which have showed forth diverse and sundry
likenesses: so that some of the^ have be^ thought to have resembled and to be
like unto a Candle or Torch burning: Torches. Fiery beams. Fiery spears.
Swords. Fery darts
some like unto fiery beams: some like unto pillars set on fire: some are
after ye fashion of spears: some showing forth the likeness of swords: some not
much unlike horses manes: some showing forth the likeness of horns: some as it
were fiery darts. And al these and such other like apparitio^s in ye air which
in Greek by a general and more common name are called Eupicaumata, do appear
for ye most part in the calm and clear night, although somewhile some of
these are seen in ye day time. And all these arise ever under the globe or
circle of the Moon. The proof whereof herein is manifest, for that they
continue not in one and the self same place long, but move with a swift
passage, and are carried away with the violence of ye moons motion. We shall
not therefore greatly go astray if we gieue forth ye cause of these
apparitions and sights, and do declare the manner and matter of their engendring.

Causes hereof.
The efficient cause of these fiery impressions bred and engendered through heat,
is the sun, and the rest of the bodies celestial: which in their motions as
they labor in their course, cast from them excessyue heat upon these bodies,
and places below here subjected: Which heat catches and carries up into the
air all such exhalatio^s (which of themselves also be hot and dry) as are
ready for such receipt. Then the material cause is nothing else but such kind
of Exhalation: even as wodde is the matter of fire, and oil of the flame. Now
their generation is after this sort: The Earth being thoroughly warmed through
ye sun and the other stars, does thereupon cast from her and send forth, a
double kind of spiration of breathyng: one kind very dry according as the
places from which it is sent forth, be dry: and this kind of exhalation
being naturally hoate and dry is much like unto that fume or smoke which
proceeds from sticks or wood set on fire and kyndled. Secondly by such heat
raised from the Sun and Stars, aforesaid, there is fetched from such
places as be moist, an other more gross, kind of fume, hot and moist, which is
called a vapor like unto that manner of euaporation which comes from the
seething water. These two caught up into the air, and being there diversely
placed and set on work, by the element of the sire (unto which, the first sort
called exhalations do eftsoon approach and come near) do cause strange
sightes in the Regions of the Air, for the exhalations being both ayry and
fyery, are sone kyndled and set on fire, and become flames, and fierye
impressions: even as the dry snast of a candel, or as the fare and ^lunge
stick is soon set on flame. For the flame of any thing is nothing else, but
the fume of the same already kindled: and it is so soon kindled because it is
of a dry and fyery nature. Now the fashion and form of the fiery flames seen
often times burning in the element, do vary and differ one from another, as
they have more abundance of such matter of exhalation or less, as they are
placed also in other and contrary order. Burning lamps.
For when such exhalation is dispersed in breadth, and discontinued, there
appear as it were burning lamps: and when the same is fy^red round, and
casts from it sparcles, then such impression is after a goat, and is so
called: when that does not sparcle, but burns great above and small below, it
is called a fyrebrande. Firebrand
And that kind of exhalation which burns both in breadth and length, and
moves apace in ye air, leaving after it some steps of his burning, and as it
were marking the way as it goes, is called a flying star, Flying stars.
which is wont to appear on a sudden: and forthwith to vanish out of sight.
These exhalations as they come nigh to the Elemente of the fire, or as they be
in the highest region of the air, which is next to the fire, be as it were
gunpowder nighe the match, or as brymstone, or towgh put hard to the fire:
which, what expedition is in them, to consume all along, it is evident by
experience and common sense. But these and al other impressions have their
names of those things which they most figurate, and represent. And as in the
clear night by such matter of exhalation hot and dry, carried up to the
highest region of the air, and the^ kindled, such burning flames do eftsoons
appear: so somewhile through the light only of the sun and stars, the
element only appears colored: And these colors there seen are called
Phantasmata. For when the light stayed in any mist cannot go forth abroad,
Colors seen in the air.
or proceed directly, but is feign to harbor there only, and to disperse it
self into the sides, and next parts thereof: then does there show forth
colors of all sorts: somewhiles white, somewhiles black: but most often a
saffro^ color, and next to that a sanguine or bloody color. For these colors
for this cause causes such diversity, as white nighe and next unto black or
intermedled therewith: or as the flame seems oftentimes most strange through
the straungenes of the fumes thereof. Gaspings and gapings in the air
So the cause of gaspynges gapynges and gulphes seen oftentimes in the air
rises upon the same occasion, partly that the fiery impressions or flames of
fire before rehearsed do, and partly upon ye occasion of the colors seen in
the air, and last spoken of. There is seen oftentimes also in the starlight
nights under ye moon (as somewhiles also under the sun and stars) as it
were a garland called of the Greeks Halon, in Latin Corona, Halon or garland
of the moon
which is engendered through a refraction of the sight in watery Clouds, as
diverse other apparitions are. But then specially does this garland show about
the Moon, When it shows chiefly
when some uniform cloud be^ow which is on all sides alike thick or thin, is
placed directly under the moon: so that her beams coveting to perse and go
through ye same, are there still kept and retained, or else are beaten back by
the force of the cloud: and so she being let therein to go any further
directly, disperseth her beams alonge by the outmost sides of the cloud: by
which refractio^ there appears either right under her or under some star, a
great circle, greatly illumined or lightened in a manner of a white garla^d This
sight also is sometimes under the sun, and the other planets: but most often
under the Moon. For the sun through his extreme and fervent heat does disperse
and sunder ye matter of such a cloud, and does not suffer it long to abide
under him: but ye moon has not such force of dispersing, and therefore this
appartio^ stays the more easily under her.

So like wise son^whyles we shall see this halon or garlande about same
stars* Halo, or garland of the stars.
but that is, when between those stars and us, there is oppositely set some
harren and weak cloud, which is vnfytt to the generation of wynd or rain.
For if the clouds were thick and warry, it were not possible for us (as
daily experience approves it) almost to have sight of, or to behold the
stars themselves.

Now as the poets also make mention, there is besides all these strange sightes
in the element which do appear most in the night time, a piece or part of the
Sky, keeping away all a long in color milk white, of the Gretians called
Galaxia, and latined via lactea. Galaxia, or milky way.
Which part of the Sky (as they say) was once burnt by the indiscreet dealinge
of Phaeton: Paethon.
who desiring to take upon him an enter prise which was very unfit for him, and
whereof he had no skill, that is, to rule hie father Phoebus charyots and
horses, by not keeping ye due order and way in dryuing of them, ascended and
went up so hie, nigh to the pallaice of Jupiter, yt he had like to have set ye
same on fire with the Sun: but as it happened (say they) that matter being
espied and prevented in time, the most misfortune yt then befell, was that this
Phaeton burnt a piece of the Sky, which appears unto us, to he as it were a
whole street. But what this ymaginatio^ of the poet herein purporteth, that I
pass and pretermit: only the truth of this white colored, milkye, and
streetlyke sight of the air, is through this occasion. There is vndonbtedly a
certain part or portion of heaven, in which the light of many stars jointly
lodged, and received by a refraction from them all do cause this white colored
appearaunce. Aristotle says, that it proceeds, or rather shows forth by
the means of some receyp^ of light, happening upon an exhalation, yt is hot,
and dry, ^^d thin withal. The cause why these nightly sights, as also why
the stars themselves are not seen of us to skyne in the day time, is for
that ye Sun lets the same, by whose great light, the lesser light of the
stars and other ayriall sightes are obscured and darkened, eue^ as the quick
cole be it never so little, yet in ye night time is seen of us in his full
shine, but being grease, and shyping out withal and thoroughly quick, and alive
yet in ye broad day light being put in an open place, does rather seem dead
the^ alive, and does neither give light norshine unto us, and al is because it
lies as it were and yields it self to the Sunsmore noble light, and most
glorious shine: eue^ so does the stars and al other impressions in the air,
abse^t and keep them selves from our sight, all the time that ye sun is here
co^uersant among us in her such superexcelle^t glory. But let us return to the
effect of ye Moan in the other creatures here below: and first let us begin to
consider a little unto what disposition she frames those me^ which be
subjected and borne under her constellatio^. The Lunists how disposed.
Touching the inclination of all such parties which be borne under Luna, or ye
Moon, they be naturally mutable and mouable, without fidelity and constancy,
given to provoke much anger and and discord between friends: they be also very
enuyous, agreeued with the prosperity and good fortune of others: they be also
full of hatred, and in their conversation and manner of life they be very
childish. The colbure of these commonly is a pale or white color, although
now and then they have therwtal a little red intermedled Their face is round,
their stature indifferent their eyes black, and their brows wrinkled. And as
in man ye chiefest creature, ye Moon has this scope or sway: so likewise it
has as great force in the bodies of brute Beasts, and in them woorketh at
her own will such strange effects as be no less to be meruayled at. The
proof whereof the Panther gives forth, whose body is altogether ordered by the
Moons dyrection: Panther
for (as Agrippa says) he caryeth, or wears the very badge or pattern of
the moon upon his shoulder: which continues and vanishes every moon
accordingly as the Moon her self does either increase or decrease.

The like argument is of Cynocephalus, Cynoce. phalus.
(whom some make one of the kinds of Apes) other some English ye the Babyon.
Of this Horus APOLLO writes, that he pisseth twelve times in the Day, and
twelve times urthe night. And that in the wane of the Moon (during all the
time that she is darkened) he coutinually lamenteth never eating any thing
at all: Whereby he plainly pronounces what part and rule the Moon has in
him, over his whole hodye: under ye government of the Moon is also the
cha^geable Cameleon, which turns her self into what color she lysteth:
Cameleo^.
Under her are also the Badger, the Otter, and whatsoever kinds which live and
do engender monstruously. Cat.
The Catte also whose eyes do wexe either greater or less at the continuance
and change of the Moon, does manifestly declare what right the Moon has in
the same. Likewise waspes which arise of the dead carcases of horses: and Bees
which do breed of the dead bodies of beasts or Kyne: Betell.
Betels which come of the flesh of Asses, do al in their being and continuance
depend upon the Moon: And especially that kind of Betse which has as it were
two Horns, and which is also made and proportioned in the eucke like a bull:
whose property is such that at the be ginng of every new moon in the summer
and spring time chiefly, she seeks after and gets certain shells wherein
she bestows some of her seed, which done, she hydeth and burieth the same in
ye earth and so leaves the same there 28. days (in which time the Moon goes
through the whole zodiac, and finisheth her full course) and the 29. day
which is the pryme of the Moon again, she retourneth to ye place where those
shells were buried, and takes them forth: and carries them to the water, where
they afterward take and receive life, and come to the perfection of their
kind. The Heart also and the Swine, the Dog and the Goat, be all seruiable
unto the Moon. Amongst fowls subjected to the Moon, are the Crane, ye Gose,
the Duck, Cormorat
the Cormorant, whose property is to diue under the water to take fish, and by
often diuing perceiving Signs of Tempests to come, she suddenly with a great
noise and cry gets her away from ye water, and seeks where to hide her.
Belonging also to the Moon amongst fishes are, ye Creuis or Crabsish: The fysh
Torpedo or the Torpede which makes the takers hands number or dead for a time:
Likewise Oysters, Torpede
and all shaled fysh: Moreover the fish Echeneis which has prickels in stead
of sins and feet, and neither swimmeth nor goes, but rubleth. Likewise
Aelurus whose ^yen alter after the alteration of the Moon amongst Plants.
And first of Trees, in her hold is the Palm tree, which at every change
shoots forth a new slip: likewise rosemarye, the Olive tree, and such like.

There is also a certain Plant, or Herb called of the Greeks Selenotropion,
Selenotropion.
that turns round with the Moon, as Heliotropion, likewise turns round
with ye Sun. Chinostares an Herb also, does not only varye in her taste,
goodness, and virtue, according to the dispositione of the Moon, but gets
and loses more or less, of her substance and number of leaves, as the moon
gets, or loses of her light. Proper to her also amongst Precious stones
or gemmes, is the Crystal, the sylner Marcasite, and all those whose color is
white or green. Moreover the precious Selenite, Selenite.
which for like qualities with the Move, has with her almost one, and the
self same name: whose color is much like honey, and which lesseneth and waxes
byg, according to the pryme, and wane of the Moon. Hers is also the Magaryte,
and all other perles, which engender by a certain heavenly dew, within the
enclosure of certain shelfishes. In this state also is the Berill: and
amongst metalles, only Silver: and amongst tastes and savors that which is
saltest or most fulsome: amongst the superfluities, or excrements of the body,
sweat, fleume, Countries subject to Luna.
and grosnes or fatnes. Amongst the Elements the water with all fountaynes,
floods and such like. provinces also and kingdoms under her dominion and rule
are Bythinia, Phrigia, Colchos, Numidia, Aphrick, and all Carthage.

OF MERCVRY. the second Planet
NExt above Luna or the Moon is Mercury, which always goes with the sun, and
is never away from the sun more then 30. degrees. This planet is accounted the
father, workman, or procurer of eloquence and good wit: and causes the senses
of those bodies which are subjected to him to be dextere and pregnaunt. So
that those which be borne under his constellation, as he governs alone: are
lightly and for the most part rethoricall, well spoken, and very wise, Mercury
his disposition.
applying their wisdom to good and honest ends. But as he is joined with
Saturn or Mars, he procures an abuse of the same good and commendable
gifts, and conuerteth them to bestow both their eloquence and wits to the hurt
and harm of others: as also to stir up stryfes, discord, quareling,
tumultes, scisnies, heresies, and such like. Of such perverse natured men, ye
world (alas) in these days is to full of, almost every where abounding: which
as they are endued with right excellent gifts both of eloquence, and wisdom,
do nothing else therewith (but as the Poet says well) make things that be
straight crooked: such as be perfect, and whole, crackte, and broken: darkening
that which is manifest, and thrusting truth out of place: wexe and become
shameless scholemasters of errors. Contrariwise if this Mercury be joined with
Jupiter he causes in the Mercurists a clean contrary effect. As wholly to apply
and refer the aforesated precious gifts to the inquisition and finding forth of
truth, and to the defense of the same: as also to contend in nothing so much as
in the advancement of Religion and virtue. The Poets faygne that this Mercury
now a Planet in heaven, was sometimes Neauy to Atlas, who (as they say)
vnderproppeth heaven: and sometimes he is named of the^ Hermes, that is an
Interpretour, which both gives plenty of words, as also liberty of speech:
whereby we utter the Imagination and conceit of our minds. Again he is
called Trismegistus for that he first found out the knowledge or use of the
liverall Sciences. Marchaunts use to have this Planet in high price, of whom
many have supposed them selves to have obtained a thorough knowledge and great
dexterity in accoumpting and numbering: upon him therefore they were wont to
call in their affairs and business of Marchaundize. And as Mercury when he
was depaynted or drawn forth in any kind of sort, he was chiefly painted
out with Wings, and with a Cock set hard by him, signifying thereby both his
celerity and swyftnes in all his business, as also his Uigilancy and
watchfulness: So many painful Merchants in their dangerous and painful
passages do continue still this property and practice. Ptolomy says that his
house or manston is in Gemini, and Virgo: and his exaltation or ascendent is in
ye 15. of Virgo. The qualities which he disposes unto are diverse, according
to the first and principal qualities of the other Planets, with whom he is in
conjunction. The colors which he works are brown, and a dark or dusky
color. He also fathereth all sharp sauoures.

Those that be borne under Mercury are Lusty, and lyking, and valiant of body:
but of slippery and chaungeable minds. Mercuryalists.
The color of their Face is after a brown, between white and black: their
Face is also somewhat long: they are also of a high and broad foreheade:
their eyes comely, and rolling: their Nose flat: their Beard, thin, and their
Fyngers long.

This Mercury (for seeming to strive with Venus his next neighbor in place,
above him, to communicate in certain qualities of right belonging unto her)
is imagined of the Poets to have forced and rauyshed her. The Hebrews calls
him MACID: The Greeks (...). He runs over ye zodiac in 336. days.
Subjected to Mercury are all those kinds of Beasts which be of sharp sense,
and which be witty, strong, and lusty: and which be also of a chaungeable
nature and of swifte pace, and which covet to be conversant among men: as the
Ape, the Fox, the Scurrell, the Weasel, the sheep, the Cony, and the Heart:
likewise all such as be of a confused nature and kind: Among Birds and
Foweles of the air. He has in his Domynion all such as be most subtle and
wily, as also those that be of shyrll voice and of pleasant note, as ye Lark,
the Lynnet, the Bird Ficedula which lives and feeds chiefly upon Figs and
grapes: also ye Blackmacke, the Manys or Thrust, the Parret, the Popiniay, and
the Bird Ibis: among fishes he chalengeth the fish called Trochus which is of
one only kind, Troch^
and conceyueth and engendered of it self alone, through which occasion it is
called Masculofaeminina, that is, both Male, and Female: likewise the wyly and
crafty Polypus which is so crafty that it is seldom taken.

Among Planets, and chiefly among Trees, the Hasell, and Filburd tree be his:
And among herbs, Cinkfoyl or five leaued hearve: as also the herb Mercury,
Fumitory, Pimpernell, Maioram, Parcely, and all such herbs as bear a small
and fine lease, and which be also delectably and diversely colored. Among
Precious stones his is the Emeralde, the Smaragde, the Achate, the Porphyrite,
the Topaze, and al those which be of a chaungable color. Among Mettalls is his
principally Silver, and Tin. Among Humors the thickest and most mixed. Lastly
among ye Elements he claymeth the water in diverse points of service to be
his own proper. This Mercury with Gemini (one of the Signs or housen wherein
he is placed) does hold and possess Hircania, Countries subject to Mercury.
and Armenia, with ye Regions and Provinces of Marmaricke, and Cyrenaica, as
also the lowermost Egypt. And with Virgo (his other Sign) he possesses these
Kingdoms and Countries, Assyria, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Achaia, Greec, Creet,
or Candy, and Elam, of whom ye Inahbitants are called Elamytes. In every
attempt or business of weight he both hasteneth and sets forward ye means
thereof: as also helps forth to a good effect or success of the same.
Volateranus says, that he was begotten of Jupiter, Philologiae. lib. 3
and Maia, whose Nephewe S. Augustine says was Trismegistus ye Egyptian,
which has writ so Profoundly, and deeply of Philosophy. Which Mercury as he
is the God of Marchaunts and Rethoritians: so is he also of Thieves and
Iuglers, which work upon deceit and sleights: he is also a Messenger of the
heavenly powers above: his Sons were Eudorus, whom he had by Polymia as Homer
witnesses: and Myrtilus, which drove the Horssiter, or Coche of Oenomaus the
King: Hermaphroditus, which was both Man and Woman: Daphnis the Sheephearde,
Aethalis.
and Aethalis ye Cryar, or Beadell, which when he was dead could revive
himself again as they say: Argon.
which is also Justified of Apollonius.

Of VENUS the third Planet.
VENUS is a faeminin Planet very placable and pleasant: a pacifier of Mars in
his great fury, and malice, and fiery feruency, quieting him with friendly and
amiable Aspect, in such wise, as a beautiful and louinge Woman does appease
and still the rage, and anger of her Husband being incensed. She always
accompanies the Sun: and when she goes before him, and shows in our
Horizon before the Sun she is called Lucifer the bright morning light or day
star: Venus her names.
but when she follows the Sun, and is seen of us after the Su^ne set she
is called Hesperus the star of the night: and so howsoever or whensoever she
does appear she is the Suns Messenger, either that he is already coming,
or that he is already gone. Whereof this verse of Virgil well witnesses,
whereas he says:

Ite domum saturae venit Hesperus, Ite capellae.

Ye Goats I say with Bellies full that long have harbored here,

Go get ye home for Hesper now begins to appear.

THis VENUS is of a bright shyning color, being therein of al other stars
most acceptable and pleasant to the eyesight: and she is called Venus for
venustie and beautiful countenance: or (as some ymagine) for yt through those
qualities and contemperature, which she naturally planteth in ye body (that is
to say) heat and moisture, she causes burninge Love, and provoke to
tickling Lust.

The Hebrews call her NEGAHHOTH: The Greeks (...), which signifies the Fat
or Foam of flesh: for that (as the Poets imagine) she breeds the Fatness of
flesh and Massynesse, or grosenesse of blood. And they have it also in
opinion that this Venus was bred first and came of the froth or blood that
flowed forth from ye Priuities of Coelus whom Saturn gelt, and cut of, and
threw them into the sea.

They also married her to Vulcane and made her his Wife, signifying thereby yt
pleasure and delighte is as it were wrought and kindled by fire and hear.
Martianus says, Her coler.
that her color glittereth after the manner of silver: and that she only
shows her self unto us in the Winter time, for in the Summer she is
conuersaunt and present about ye Pole Antarticke. Her Mansion or place of abode
is in ye Signs Taurus and Libra, her Exaltation or Ascende^t is in the 26. of
Pisces. Those that be borne under Venus are amiable, Borne under Venus how
affected.
and of merry and sinylinge Look or countenance, great laughters, very
wanton, and such as do greatly delight in Music: they have also a very
perfect smell and taste, and their voice is very sweet or defectable. They are
also given much to the composing and making of sweet Ointments and Odoures:
Their bodies are well set, and be of proper features: their Faces and vysages
are round: their hair yealow, their Eyes glittering and rolling. In conditions
they be gentle. courteous, fair spoken, mild, and modest, meet for all
companies: whereupon for such her deserving toward Mankind, they of old time
pictured Venus after these sorts following. First they drew her out in the
similitude or likeness of a Woman, upon whose head stood a Byrd, which
purported Love his force: and her Feet were after Aegles feet, signifying the
swyftnes of the same: and this woman held in her hand an Arrowe or Darte,
noting forth the forcible stroke or persifenes thereof. Another Image of her
they were wont to engraue in the Precious stone Lazulus, which represented a
fair and beautiful maid all uncovered and naked, whose hair hunge down a
long all over her body, who also had a lookinge Glass in her hand, and a
Chain tied or fastened to her Neck, by whom stood a fair, young stripling
and beautiful, who with his left hand held her fast by the said chain, and
with his right hand held her by the hair: herein peradventure noting forth the
circumstaunce of Suitors and Wooers, and so forth. She had also another manner
of Image other where is: for there were that drew her forth in the habit of an
Handmayden or Damsel, whose hair lay scattering about her neck, and whose
garment hung down to her shoe, which were all white and milky colored: who
held in her right hand a Laurel branch, and sometimes an Apple, or else a
Posie of sweet and fresh flowers, in her lefthand she held a Comb, whereby is
signified that al such as are borne under her, are naturally given to be
lovers of ciuiluesse and cleanliness, and to delight much in pleasant smells
and smeete Odours. Under her government or rule are al such brute beasts
which are delicate and leacherous, and which are given to excess of lust: as
the Cony, the lesser kind of Dogs, the Goat and Goatebucke, the bull and al
other which are of like set and disposition. Over birds of fowls she has ye
rule of ye Swan, the Wagtayle, the Swallowe, the Sparrow, the Partrich, ye
Bergander, ye Crow, all kinds of Doves, likewise the she Eagle, which is of
such immoderate lust that being trod xiii. times in a day, Eagle.
yet at ye call of her Mate is ready to take it again. Among fishes Venus
rules over the gylthead or Goldeney, ye Merling, ye Whiting, and the fish
Cancharus which is Ielous over her Mate, Cancha^^^.
and strives often for him. Among Plants or Herbs subject to her is the
Violet, the Malow, the herb Venus hair or goldy locks, ye Lylly, likewise
the herb Lada or Ledum whose Gum is called Ladanum and most commonly Labdanum
and is used in Pomanders: furthermore al and every odoriferous thing as is
Ambra, which is englished Ambergrise: it is found on the sea shore by a
country called Zingi in ye East part of ye world, and is for his gray color
commonly called of the Apothecaries Ambergrisia, hereof are made very precious
and Cordial medicines: hitherto belongs also the sweet smelling Time, and
the spice Saunders: furdermore all such fruits as are pleasant, and of good
taste, as ye Apple the Hare, ye fig, ye current, the date, ye Pomgranet, etc.
Among Precious stones she chalengeth the Beril, ye Chrusolyte, ye Saphyr, ye
Jasper, ye Cornellys, ye precious Aetites the stone Lazulus, ye Coral and al
such as be beautiful, and of milk white or grassy green color: among
Mettalls she requires a right in Copper and brass, and partly in silver: and
among savors yt which is sweetest, delicious, and vuctuous is hers: and among
humors a part of blood, as also the whole course of natural seed is at her
disposicion: among the Elements she holds a portion in the air and also in
the water.

Over Provinces, and Kingdoms. First she rayghneth (as she is coupled) with
Taurus, over Cyprus, Parthia, Mede, and Persis, the Cyclades or the fifty Isles
in the Sea called Aegeum: And secondly as she is joined with Libra, she rules
over Bactriana wherein were sometimes very many cities: likewise over the
People Caspij a people in Tartaria dwelling next unto the sea Caspium: likewise
over Serica, Thebais, Oasis, and Troglodytis, Agrippa says that Venus, in all
kinds of Creatures purchases and procures Love betwixt Mate and Mate: and
that she labors chiefly the multiplicatio^ and increase of seed, to the
continuance, and preservation of the whole kind, coveting always as nigh as
she can, and thereto with might and main labouringe, to abandon and remove
Barraynnesse out of the way, which coueteth to cut of ye Race and continuance
of all. This Venus passes through the Zodiac in 348. days.

Of SOL, or the Sun, the fourth Planet.
SOL, or the Sun is the fourth in place and pre-eminence among these seven,
and is among them as it were a Ringe in the midst of his Throne, Train, and
Guard. For under him he has Luna or ye Moon, Mercurius, and Venus of whom we
have already spoken: and above him in position and place he has as many, that
is toweete Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. And as it should seem it was not
without great cause and consideration that the Mighty JEHOVAH, the Maker of
Heaven and Earth placed the Sun in such a proportioned equality among them
all: Sun placed in the midst among the 7. Planets Wherefore
notwithstanding through his excellency he deserves ye highest room of
prerogative and dignity. For if the Sun which is the most universal cause,
and the very beginning and fountain of light and influence, and also of vital
heat, to his intemperate heat of heart, makes them in stomach to be rather
wild and savage, rather then properly Puissant: and more venturouse rash, and
bold, then co^siderate and Polliticke. For it is ye excess of heat, which
burning and boiling within a man that brings boldness and rashness, when as
the blood about the heart is immoderately and to much set on fire.

There is nothing almost gloriously mentioned in the sacred Scriptures, but ye
glory thereof is likened and resembled to the Sun: Cap. 17. Apoc. 1.
as ye Transfiguration of Christ, in which Matthew says, his Face did shine as
the Sun. Sun chau^geth color.
So Ihon in his Revelation says that he saw the Face of the Son of man
shyning as the Sun in his greatest glory. (But to end with these:) This Sol
was fabled of the Poets to have been Jupiter, and Latonaes Son, who for that
he is as it were every day newly borne, is painted out in likeness of a young
child, noting forth thereby that he is every day newly rysinge. His property
is never to show us all the day long, one and the self same look: for in ye
morning when he rises he shows red, at noone he shows more white, at his
going down or set, he somewhat shows wan and pale, but often he appears
also red. Wheruppon for such diversity the Poets imagine that he has four
horses, which do daily at their appointed times and seasons, one after an
other, help to draw the Sun about the zodiac. And the first of these they
name Pyrois, the second Eous, the third Aetho^, and the fourth Phlegon.

The Sun, if so be he show at his rising and seem clowdye or dark, and
looks wan, he causes upon this more then wonted warmth: he foresheweth
rain, if he looks red: he betokens tempests to be at hand, if he
shyneth forth clear: or casts his beams toward the South, he
prognosticateth more moderate and seasonable weather.

Martianus says, that the Sun as he is in the midedest of the zodiac,
beats back from him twelve several lights, or more broad Sunbeams: which
reflectate themselves and remain upon the twelve signs. The same Author also
affyrmeth that there is nothing so occult or deeply contained within the
entrayls and body of the earth but that it is manifestly seen of ye. It is
said that ye Indians, or men of Inde had Sol or the Sun to a banquet, and the
ba^quetting place was in the Ocean Sea: Whereupon now they say, that before any
fore rain, or showers discending, we feel a terrayne heat going before. His
house or mansion is only in Leo: his exaltation or ascendent in ye 19 of Aries
Agrippa says, that the Sun is in ye world, the same that the heart is in man.
This is as Pliny says, in his 2 book, ye Lord and prince of time: and as
Prolome says, the very spirit or well of life in all living things. The
Hebrews call him IPHNATH, the Greeks (...). To utter forth his exceeding
benefits, they used in old time to draw him forth after diverse likenesses: as
somwhiles after the attire and ryal robes of a king, wearing a crown of gold
on his head, and sitting in his chair of state, having under his footea round
globe or bowl meaning to utter forth thee by ye Sol made many such parties as
were under him, honorable, tryumphant and invincible. Orpheus calls the Sun,
the glory and face of heaven, and the sufferaygne ey sight or right eye of the
world. It fortuneth oftentimes yt this Sun notwtstandinge his great and
wonderful light is obscured, darkened, Eclips of the Sun.
and as it were bereued thereof, which is called ye eclipse of ye Sun, Which so
often as he is in coniunctio^ with the Moon, especially if such conjunction be
Diameter wise under ye Ecliptical line, in ye head or tail of ye Dragon, by
some interposition of ye Moon between the Sun and our eysight: When there is a
general eclipse of the Sun
and this never happens that the Sun is whollye eclipsed, but when as there is
such Diameterlyke co^iunctio^ of the Moon and Sun under the Ecliptical line in
ye head or tail of ye dragon as they both meet together, either in ye head or
tail, so diametewise opposite, as that ye self same diameter passes by the
center of them both. A particu^^^ eclipse of the Sun.
But there may be a particular eclipse of the Sun, then, when as ye moon is in
Coniunetion almost under the Eclipticall line very nigh within the head or
tail of the Dragon, and within the bonds and borders of the general eclipse,
of which we have spoken above. Between the general and particular eclipse of
ye Sun there is this difference: for yt in the first al ye while yt ye
coniunctio^ is directly in ye head or tail of the Dragon all ye whole body of
the Sun, is shadowed and darkened, whereby there happens such an eclipse, as
that a man can see nothing of the globe of ye Sun. But in the particular
eclipse, when the conjunction is only nigh to one of the foresaid points,
then is not the whole body of the Sun darkened, but only some part: and there,
where it happens ye Moon is placed betwixt the Sun and our eyesight. And
this kind of Eclipse is oftentimes so small, as that it is scant perceived, but
supposed to be (as it were) some spotte in the body of the Sun. it is
therefore manifest, that there can he no Eclipse of ye Sun but in the time of
such Conjunction, as is above said: as likewise in the new of the Moon: as
there cannot neither be any eclipse of the Moon, but in the time of
Opposition and full Moon: because that other wise the Moon can not be
objected between the Sun and our eyesight.

Now a little to speak of both their differences (which is much) I recke^ yt to
be right necessary. Sun and Moons eclipse. how they differ.
First they differ in this, that the Eclipse of the Sun requires Conjunction
in the same point, or very nigh ye same point: but the Eclipse of the Moon
requires Opposition in opposite points. Secondly the Sun must be eclipsed in
ye time of the new Moon: but the Moon in ye time of the full Moon. In the
first the Moon is interplaced between the Sun, and the Earth: In this last
the earth is obieceed between the Sun and Moon. In the first the shadow of
the Moon does darken the earth: in the second the shadow of ye earth does
obfuscate the body of the Moon. In the first there is only a substraction of
the light from our eyesight. In the last there is a deprivation of real light.
There are besides these more especial differences, most worthy to be noted:
whereof the first is this, that the eclipse of the Moon (whether it be to
tall, or in part) is ever universal in all places of the Earth: but the
Eclipse of the Sun is never so general, which is thus proved: because that
the Sun is not at any time every where eclipsed: but whiles here we lack
thereby the Suns light for a time, even in the self same instant, others a
far of enjoy the light of the same: yea and sometimes those, that he not so
far of, and the reason is, for yt the Sun does but only suffer some
obumbration for a time, through the interposition of the Moon, which cannot
but in a part of the Sun, hinder his light, and not totally nor whollye. Again
there is this other difference, as that the Sun begins to be Eclipsed on the
West, part of his body, because that the Moons proper motion is from the East.
But ye moon is eclipsed chiefly on the east side of her body. But now a little
let us tarry to report what kind of Eclispe happened in the time of the passion
and sufferyng of our savior Christ, which befell at noone days, and continued
all the whole time that Christ hanged upon the cross: which was so miraculous
strange, that besides the testimony and witness that the Evangelists give
forth thereof, Whatkind of eclipse was at Christ's death.
it is also registered and remembered in the hystoryes of Pagans and Heathen men.
Besides that Dionisius Ariopagita an eye witness thereof: and the^ a student in
the university of Heliopolis in Aegipt, in his epistle to Polycarpus, makes
mention, that he together with Apollophanes a noble Philosoper did both se and
behold the same: and also with exceedinge much astonishment, and admiration
thereof considered of the same most deeplye and diligently. It is manifest that
this Eclipse, was not natural, but rather supernatural. For the natural
Eclipse must be as we said before, only in the time of the Conjunction of
the Sun and Moon, and in the new of the Moon: but when Christ suffered it was
full moon, and the same opposite to the Sun as both witnesses yt, same
Dyonisius which says he saw the same as also Apollophane. Besides holy writ
does very cleerelye set down the time reporting Christ against the feast of
Easter after he had taken the Passover with his Disciples incontinently almost
to have dyed, and suffered upon ye cross. And this feast of Easter must
always of necessity by the prescript of Moses law be observed, and kept in
the full Moon, and so did the Jews observe the same most diligently: so that
this Eclipse, happeninge then at that instant and time, could not be as other
Eclipses of the Sun be natural, through the unfitness and incommodiousnes of
that time: for there is no time so impossible to work such an effect, as in
the time of Opposition: for then the Sun and Moon which require conjunction in
that behalf, are never more remote, or farther distance from coniunncion, the^
in that present time. In five propertyes therefore I find this miraculous
eclipse, yt so happened at ye passion of our savior Christ, to differ from all
other eclipses, yt be only natural. The first which we last touched was in
the time thereof, which happened the^ at the full of the Moon, a time most unfit
to the generation of my natural Eclipse. The second appeared in the corse of
the Moon, which, where as naturally of her own proper motion, she goes from
the East to the West. In this strange eclipse then seen, Dyonisius says, he
saw her with a most swift pace return very stranngely from the East toward the
South, until she stood directlye under the Sun, whereas she stayed by the
space of whole three hours, and by that means caused darkness over all the
whole face of the earth. And after the third hour about which time our savior
Christ was dead, she returned again to her own place in the East, with a
most swift course appearing there again as it had been in a tryce. And so in
the sixte and nynth hour, she was seen under the Sun: but in the evening,
and at the Suns going down she appeared new again in the East, right opposite
to the Sun. The third point wherein this miracle differs from other usual
Eclipses, was upon the strange beginning of the same: for this began on the
East side of the Sunn, whereas all other wonted eclipses of the Sun use to begin
to be eclipsed after their natural order, at ye west part of the Sun. The
fourth point of difference was herein, which was very strange: For that part
of the Sun which was first darkened and obscured of his light by the
interposition of the moon, did lastly show forth restitucion of his light
which is otherwise in other Eclipses: which in ye part of the Sun that
seems first obscured dother again first and foremost appear in the same to
be restored. And then the Moon passed not aside from the Sun as she is wont in
his natural eclipse, but stood right under him for the space of three whole
hours: and so she not after that, going on beyond the Sun, but returning to
the East her place from whence she first came, gave great occasion of
admiration and wonder. The first es^et all difference therein also was upon the
perduratio^: taryance and stay of the same strange eclipse. For ye Suns
ordinarye Eclipses cannot continue long, as which are very spedely perfour med,
by reason yt the body of the Sun does infinitely exceed in bigness and quantity
the body of ye Moon: as also for that ye course of the Moon is very swift.
For which two causes, first because the Moon is so little in respect of the
other, and therefore not able any time to obscure and hyde away ye Suns light,
neither totally nor in part from our aspect. And again for the swiftnes and
velocity of the Moons course, she cannot hyde away the Sun being so huge and
big any long time: but he must needs shine out on one side or other. Besides,
this wonderful eclipse procured of God to show forth evidently ye most heinous
fact of ye Jews, in abusyng his Son so, as it greatly grieved ye stars and Sun
above not only amassed many men, so yt many stroke their breasts and returned
from Caluary where he was crucified: Math. 27
confessing and saying, verily this was the son of God: as ye Centurion and
others: but also there was a general and great darkness over al ye earth, from ye
2 hour until ye 9. for else it could not be true yt Dyonisius the^ in
Heliopolis in Aegipt gave forth to be true undoubtedly in one of ye (...) yt
either ye maker of al things then fuffered, or else yt domes day and the end
of ye world was then come: if yt this eclipse had been only in Judea, which is
so far of from Aegipt. Besides this a long time after by ye du^pe yt this sight
stroke into ye hearts of ye people of Athens superstitious me^, Paul being
co^uersant among them awhyle, and vewinge their doyngs narrowly, chau^ceth to
espy there an Altar wherein was written unto the unknown God erected as is
said prese^tlye after ye fear yt this eclipse cast upon ye Athenia^s, which is
very far from Judea, proves it to be more universal: so yt they scant it to
narrowly yt seem to bound it only with in the borders of yt place, where yt
villainous fact was committed. For shall we think that ye miraculous going back
of ye Sun, which happened in ye dayss of Ezechias king of Judah, witnessing his
recovery of health was alone the^ perceived of ye inhabitants there, and not
as well also among nations further of: for if we should so think, we should be
deceived. Na ye K. of Babylon, which was a far of, sent afterward letters
unto the said Ezechias by Ambassadors and Princes of Babylon, to enquire of
the wonder. And shall not we undoubtedly be resolved that this testimony that
God gave in this order of the abuse of his son, reached further then Judea, na
even over all the whole world? for even the very horror of that fact, caused ye
Sun (as it were to keep back the benefit of illumination of me^ yt had so ill
deserved at the hands of his Maker, and Creator. But now I having sufficiently
spoken of Eclipses, aad of their kinds and causes, I am to proceed to other
visions and sights, caused oftentimes by means of ye Suns working, which are
no less meruaylous. Of the which sort is the show and sight of many Suns
at once in the fyrmament called of the Gretians (...): which are engendered
through this occasion. When as some cloud of good thicknes and continuant, and
which is also regular and uniform is placed so, Many Su^s seen at once.
as that it is neither under the Sun, nor directly against it but as it were on
his side, and so nigh as it may be resolved into rain, and being not yet
resolved, the Sun by the refractions of his beams does imprynte and form his
own Image there, as he does oftentimes in brass that is well and finely
pollished. And this image of the Sun so consisting on his side is called
Parahelius, of the Greek preposition (...), which signifies next, and the
Greek nowne (...), which sygnifyeth the Sun: so that Parahelius is another
impression in all points mostlike to ye Sun. We said before that, that Cloud
which must be the matter hereof, must be condensed or thickt, that it may the
better cause forth refraction. And that it must be continuate, that it may
receive a more perfect Image of the Sun: likewise that it must be regular and
altogether uniform that it may receive a more true and perfect image thereof:
and also that it must beready to be resolved into rain, that the Sun may the
better represent his lykenes in the same: and yet not converted, or resolved,
for that if it were already resolved ye parts thereof being discontinued, the
said clowd were not fyt neither to receive the image of the Sun, nor to show
forth the same. And these impressions be called Suns, through the likeness that
they have of the Sun: so that at their appearance we are to be persuaded, that
there is but one of them the true Sun indeed, and the other to be but
likenesses of the Sun. 3 Suns seenevvhe^
There have been three Suns appeared at once in ye days of our Forefathers
and Auncientes, Plin. lib. 2 cap. 31.
as when Spurius Posthumous and Quintus Minutius, were Consuls, and when
Quintus Minutius, and Marcus Partius were in ye office: and also when Marcus
Antonius and Publius Dolobella had the same rome: and besides when Marcus
Lepidus, and Lucius Plancus enjoyed the same superioritye: and more then three
Suns at one time has never been seen. There appeared also 3. Suns at the
time of the birth of our savior Jesus Christ, which at length coming together
into one gave forth thereby some signification of the mystery of the holy
Trinity to be co^tanied in unity which now by the coming of Christ was to be
preached in all the world: and that the same Child which was then born, the
Sun of righteousness, hadd, and contained in him completely the fulness of the
Godhead, and that together with Christ, now nevertheless incarnated, the
Father and the holy Ghost were al one in substance, and all of them distinct
in person and all of them but one God, one uncreate and everlasting power,
which is to blessed for evermore, Amen. This Parahelius, or appearaunce of
diverse Suns at one time, differs from that Impression, which is called Halo,
Halo of the Sun.
which shows forth ye similitude of a garland about the Sun: and likewise
from ye raynbow, in many points, but chieflye in the situasion of place, for
that the garlande is ever directly under the Sun: and ye rainbowe is ever over
against him oppositlye: but this Parahelius is situated in none of these
orders: for if this should be in place of the first, the Sun must needs
disperse the matter thereof with his heat, and if it were in place of the last,
through ye great distance thereof the distraction should be to feeble to cause
forth the image of the Sun. Therefore it is placed on the side of the Sun, that
the matter thereof cannot through such nighnes be easily dissolved, and yt the
Sun beams may occasionate a sufficient refractio^ to ye better fashioning of
the Suns likeness: and whereas this Halo does seem to be as it were under ye
Sun, as also about ye Moon, even right under her, yet notwithstanding it is
but engendered in the middle region of the air, and often beneath ye same, and
caused only by such direct situation and placing: but it is through the
imbesility of our eyesight, that we therein being deceived, do think amiss,
the said garland to be near the Sun and Moan. Under which this Halo shows
and appears more often by a great deal, then under the Sun: for the Sun with
his adure^t heat does more easily dispach, and consume such vapors, as go to
the original thereof, then the Moon, who has a more moist light and feeble
heat.

There has appeared also a garlande of bloody color, Garlande of bloody
color.
and cyrcled by reason of the condensity, or thicknes of the cloud, dyspersyng
about the Sun beams, as it had been a circle of blood. And this sight was
seen (as Pliny reports it) in the time of the Consulship of Lucius Julius,
li. 2. ca. 30
and Publius Rutilius. There has been also very prodigious, and very long
lack and want of the Suns shyning forth, Long lack of the Sun thine.
as was after that time, that Caesar the Dictator was slain: and in the time
of the wars of Antony, the sun almost for a whole years space never a whit
shyning forth. Bloody bovves.
There has been also seen a bloody bow about the Sun, as when Lucius Opimius
the third time, and Quintus Fabius ye second time, were made Consuls: Stars
seen in the day time. Pliny. li. 2 cap 28.
as also in ye days of the self same supertority imposed upon Lucius Portius,
and Marcus Acilius. So there were seen stars in the day time following, and
accompanying the Sun all the day long, and they showed about the circle of
the Sun, as they had been a kind of garla^d, or a diverse colored kind of
circle, as in the beginning of the Empire of Augustus Caesar. If this
garlandlike impression called Halo whether it be of the Sun of Moon vanishes
away suddenly of by little and little like smoke, Halo what it
prognosticateth,
it signifies and prognosticateth fair weather to ensue: for that those
vapors which otherwise are to be resolved into rain, are now vanished and
gone. The next impressio^ which I have to speak of, (which is also one of the
Suns effect) is the Raynebowe, which is thus engendered in a watery cloud,
Rainbovv now engendered.
and ye same ready to resolve into a shower right opposite against ye sun, as
the beams of ye sun are beaten back again, it causes the same Cloud,
albeit obscurely, and imperfectly to express ye Image of the same, which
nevertheless for the far distance and interiection of the vapors being
between the sun and ye same Cloud, express it very weakly. Which
inbecillity causes the figure of a bow in the same cloud, beautified and
distinguished with 3. several colors: toweete yealow, Three colors in the
same whereupon,
Green, and purple, and sometimes red, and in stead of Green, a color more
black then Green: which diversity of colors come hereof, as the beams of
the sun are drawn out longer or shorter in the cloud: for the longer they be
reached out, so much the weaker and feebler are the colors of the Raynbowe: as
which also give forth a greater obscurity and blacknes in ye same: so yt the
yealow color altreth to a green, the green to a more black. And again, the
same Beams being become weaker give forth in the Rainbowe a more weak
color. And contrarywyse so much ye less as these Beams be stretched out, so
much the more fresh and flourishing colors does the Raynebowe give out.

Now the figure of the Raynebowe why it is crooked, or half circled after ye
manner of a Bow, it would be considered. Why it is crooked or half circled.
When there is a Cloud regular and right set, and the same in a part thereof
as it were sundred in one horizon, so as the other part of the cloud going and
declininge beneath ye same horizon is taken away from our sight, hereupon yt
Raynbowe appears crooked: and the nearer the sun comes to ye horizon, so
much the greater is ye raynbowe. So that the rainbowe does never appear after
a whole circle, or bigger then half a circle, but either as a semicircle, at
one end touching one part of our horizon, and at ye other end the contrary
part of the same: or else it is sometimes less then a semicircle. There are
oftentimes seen 2. Two and 3. bovves at once.
Raynebowes at once, and sometimes although (very seldom) three. When there
do appear but two at once they have does the self same colors: but a
contrary placing of the same: so that whereas the principal has yealowishe,
green, and red: the other has in his situation first red, then green, and
lastly yealowishe. And that Raynbow which shows weakest, is the Pattern or
Image of the pryncipaler, and strongest. Also when there does appear three at
once the third is so weak as it can scantly be perceived. For the third
comes of the refractions of the Beams of the second, which must needs be
but very weak. And this third being of such weakness will have notwithstanding
always the colors of the first and strongest, and will be lightly after a
yelow, green and purple color. Further this is evident that the higher the
Sun is exalted above our horrizon, so much the less does the Rainebow
appear. as when any shows about the mid day, they show very small. But those
which show either shortly after the Son rysinge, or not long before the
sun set: they be the greatest. So likewise in the midst of summer, when the
Sun is in the chiefest Summer points and Signs: as when ye days be longest
we see no Rainebowes show forth at any time, about noone or the mid day, But
after the Aequinoctium of Autumn following, when the sun enters in to Libra:
we see about the same time many Rainbowes almost at al hours of ye day, Now
come we to Comettes or blasing stars being of the kinds of fiery Impressions
also, Comets or blasing stars. How engendered.
and occasioned by the suns operation chiefly, and the other stars. For the
Comet is thus engendered. Whereas by the force of the sun and the other stars
there is elevated and drawn up on hye, very much viscous matter hoate and dry,
gross and fat, and such as will be commodiously kyndled and set on fire, from
these earthly places to the highest region of the Air, where it being turned
about round, with the motion of the air, and being nighe the fire is kindled
and set on fire equally and on every side, and so other exhalatio^s still
continuing and coming on does both nourish and increase the burning thereof:
such kind of impression is called a comet. Kinds thereof.
The matter whereof if it be grosser in ye midst, and thinner on the
furthermore and outeward sides, it appears after the manner of hair, or as
the Horses mane: and is called Stella Comata. But if the sides and outward
parts thereof be be^ding downward in length tailewise it is called Cometa
caudata: but if those sides and parts being very subtle be thinly laid down
or scattered below beardewise, it is called Stella Barbata. The matter of a
Comet must needs be much and great, and very plentiful or copopious, or else
otherwise it should soon be consumed away through the Adurant heat of the
sun. And the shortest time yt ever any Comet continues and is seen, is at
the least the space of seven whole days, Continuance thereof.
and for the most part it is 40. days or more yea 80. days ere it vanishes
away, never giving over his fiery show and look, until all such viscouse
matter be quite consumed away in burninge out. The chiefest time of a Comet is
chiefly in and about ye time of Autumn, Chiefest time there of.
because that then there is sufficient heat to eleuate such viscouse matter,
and then there is also temperate heat, which easily suffers such matter
without any hinder aunce of the same to be soundly compact together: which in
Summer cannot be well done, as at what time such gross matter of exhalation
through the Suns heat dispersing the same, and also for the extreme
coldness of the middle Region of the Air, does not permit the same to pass
up into the highest Region. So in the Spring time there is not for ye more
part sufficient heat to eleuate so great matter: in Winter the extremenesse
of Moisture, and cold is utterly repugnant thereto. And yet Aristotle in his
first book of his Meteores makes mention of a Comet very horrible, great, and
grievous, which was seen in the days of Asius the Prince of the Athenians,
even in a very frosty and cold winter, but as he says, very fair, and
clear, which at ye first appeared so little that in the first day of his show
it was as it had been vanished away and gone, a little before the Sun set: but
afterward it showed again so great that it cast out his light to the third
part of Heaven, and shyned forth in manner of the sin: so that it went as it
were a way of light: and this ascendinge at the last to the Horizon did there
aboutes wear away. Whenever there be any Comets there follows shortly
after great tempests and wyndes and continuance of dry weather, and great
drouthes. Comets what they prognosticate.
These Comets do prognosticate War, Commotions, sturres, stryfes, Treasons,
and such like, because yt in the time of their Generation and continuance,
exceeding heat rules and boyleth in men, which Incenseth and sturreth
forwards thereto, the bodies and minds of men. And besides this, it
signifies more especially the death of Princes and Noble Personages, for that
the Air which then is more gross and viscouse through the corrupted matter of
ye Comet, is not so wholesome for delicate and deliciouse Persons, as for the
lusty and course Constitution of the bodies and appetites of Laborers and
Husbandmen. But now to return to the proper possession of the sun in all
kinds of Bodies here below.

Such as be borne under Sol, are for the most part of a brown color, and of
small stature, yet well and comely knit and proporcioned: they be also of a very
thin hair and curled Head, Gray eyed: they be also hawty stomacked, and they
are advanced often to great honors and dignities. And the Disposition of
their mind is such that they be studious of difficult and hard matters, very
desirous of glory and ronowne. They be also fast and faithful in friendship
and constant in Fact and word. They be likewise, Wise, and Polliticke
touching common wealth affairs, and are given much to procure the profit of
their country. Under his government among the kinds of Beasts are also all
such as be of big stature, and of hawty stomach: likewise such as are
desierous of superiority, and have naturally a pride in themselves: Of which
sort is the Lion, the Crocodile, the wild and untamed Lynx, the Ram, the
Oliphant, the Tiger, likewise the Wolf whom the aunciente Gentiles dedicated to
Apollo and Latona: among Fowls he has as his own ye Phaenix, Lib. 10. Cap.
2.
which chiefly keeps about the Coasts of Arabia, and is in bigness about
the greatness of an Eagle, Phnix.
which shyneth like Gold about her neck, and in other parts of her she is
purple colored, saving that her Tail being blewe is distinguished with rose
colored feathers. She lives a long time, even 6. hundred and three score
years: and when she waxes old and is weary of her life, she gets slippes
of Casia, and Frankincense, and makes her Nest on high as nigh the sun as she
can, and in ye same she dies being brunt and consumed into Ashes by ye suns
heat: out of whose bones and ashes there inge^greth first as it were a little
small worm, which in short time after proves to become a young Phaenix.

There is no man that ever sees the Phoenix eating: likewise to Sol
appertains the Eagle which keeps most in Mountains, Eagle.
and which almost of all Fowls is without her cry, and is also very ravenous,
so that whatsoever pray it catches, it carries it away swiftly. But one good
property it is not without herein, for that it seeks after his pray a far of
always, never spoiling about the place where she abides and breeds. They
never commonly dye upon death, nor sickness, but upon famine: for yt when they
were old, their bill growing out at length in the upper part thereof only, and
the nether part of the same rather shrynking then still continuing at his
old stay, does cause that she cannot co^modiously receive her Food. Her
flight and trauaylinge is only in the after Noone, sitting still idle all the
foore Noone eying the assemblies of men, and will not remove till that she
have had weariness therein. In her Neast is only found the Precious stone
Aetites which is very Medicinable and which no fire can do harm unto. Aetites.
Her feathers being put among other Brides Feathers will eat and consume up
the other: this has a great and mortal hatred to the Dragon, which very
greedely hunteth after the Eagles Eggs.

SOL also or the Sun, rules over the Vultures which are of such smell,
Vulture
as that they can thereby find out any dead Carcass wheresoever it be hidden:
likewise over all such Fowls as which with very pleasant Note and Ditty or
Song, do as it were welcome the Sun at his vprising: Of which fortes are
the Nightingale, Nightingale.
which oftentimes so strives to excel in her singing as that in strayning
herself she falls a bleeding oftentimes: yea, and the continuance of her
singinge is such as Plynie reports, Lib. 10. Cap. 29.
that fiftene whole days and nights together she never leaves of therein. Of
all birds for her Song most maruaylous: first that there should be in so
small a body, so forcible a Breath or spirit: secondly, that in the same
being but one body, all the whole perfection of Music, as it were, should be
uttered forth and and sounded, now in plain Note, now descantinge, anon
recording, and anon recanting all: one while displeased with her Note she is in
her Base, and by and by in her Treable, shortly after in the mean: so that it
is a matter even almost of astonishement to see and hear such variety of Melody
to issue and proceed from so small a breast: which emulateth in a manner all
the melodious, and harmonycall Instruments that ever man's art or wit could
deuyse. The Male, and Female hereof does strive oftentimes, which of them may
most excel other in Song, so long that now and then one of them kills
themselves thereby. And their young listen to them both, framinge themselves
to imitate yt Note yt they most delight in, in as attentive sort as the
diligent. Scholar geeueth good heed to the wholesome instruction of his
Master. The best note they have is 15. whole days and nights together
chiefly in the spring time: then being so wearied they rest a while, being
nothing so earnest to sing as before: in Su^mer after, they sing other whiles,
but nothing so artificially or variously: in which time with their note they
also change their color. Lastly in winter they be seldom or never heard or
seen. Her breedinge only is in the springtime and she lays 6 Eggs. Under the
suns government also is the Lark, as also ye Cock which is ye nights
watchman, and ye mornings Ambassador: Cock.
and the Artificers, wayfaringmen, and hushandmens Clock to awake them out of
sleep, to settle them forwards toward their next days business. The Cock
goes to roust about the sunset, and before his rysinge again he commonly
croweth in the morning three several times: in which crowing he beats
himself with his wings. He is very Emperious over all the other fowls where
he abides, and knows right well the force of his Spurs: if he gets the
victory in fight he triumphs in crowing: but if he be beaten he is ashamed
and hydeth himself. Under Sol is also the Crow, the Pie, the Goshawkes which
be of diverse sorts: Goshawkes.
for some of them fly commonly after Fowls below: other some as the fowls
flies about the trees: other as they sit on high: other as they flys in ye
open air. In a part of Thracia which lies upon Amphipolis the Men and
Goshaukes there, are of such mutual society and fellowship as yt they commonly
hawke together, in such order yt the men there do but only beat ye birds up
out of ye thickets and woods, and ye goshawks tarying on hie meet them and
strike them down as soon as they have flowen up. And therefore for this
seruiceablens of theirs, they ordinarily look for some part of the pray, and
have it. It is not seen at any time that the Goshauke eats the heart of
Fowls. Under Sol is also the Peacocke, which gloryeth in him self in
beholding his Golden, Peacock
Glorious, and Glittering colors, which chiefly show most beautiful and
Radiant, as he stands right over against the Sun: This after he has once
cast his Feathers and lost his tail, (which he does every year) hydeth him
self and is as it were sorrowful for a time, until the same be grown
again. He lives 25. years: and begins to show in his gay colors after
he is once three years old. The first that ever caused the Peacocke to be
served in the course of Service at any Feast, was Hortensius the Orator.

Among Fyshes in Sols subjection is the Fyshe Dactylus, Dactyl.
which is like to a Man's Nail, which is of such glittering color that it
shines wonderfully in the day time, and shows also shyningly in the night:
likewise in the same order under Sol is ye Starfishe, and also Strombus, Stromb.
which is of all kinds of Fyshes most cyuill, Aelianns says that they have
their King upon who^ they always wait. They had in old time such an
opinion, yt whosoever could see any of these being upon the Seas he should
have prosperous success and good luck in all his affairs. Heather to also be
longs the fish Scolopendra, Scolope^.
which has as it were an hundred feet, and which having under the bayte
received in the hook into her Belly, does perbrake and cast out all her Bowels
within her, until she be delivered of ye same, and then afterward she
soopeth and receives them in again: hitherto pertayneth the Seafoxe, Seafox.
which contrariwise as she perceyueth her self caught, does not cast up as
the other, but does devour and receive the Hook and Line down into her Belly
more and more, until she comes to the weakest part of ye Line, and then the
shame she byteth a sunder. Hitherto likewise serves the Fyshe Glanis, Glanis,
which never deuoureth the Hook or byteth at the bayte a right or forth on as
the other does, but contrariwise eats and gnaweth on the sides thereof so
warely as that by snatches got away now and then. He repasseth himself, and
is never taken with the hook. Crabfish
Unto Sol belongs also the Crabush which delights in rocky places, which
also were fat in ye spring time, and Autumn: and specially then at the full
of the Moon. They live a long time, and have eight feet bending crokedly in
one toward another. The Females first foot is doubled or parted, the males is
al alyke. These being in fear will creep as fast backward as forward. They
fight between themselves as it were with horns which they seem to have after
the manner of Rams. They are sufferaigne remedies against the biting of
serpents. Pliny lib. 9. cap. 31.
They say that when Sol enters into Cancer that the bodies of these which
being dead and cast forth into dry places do revive again there, and do
degenerate into a kind of Scorpions. Amongst Plants, and first, and foremost
amongst Trees, these are in subjection to Sol: first the Olyue tree, whose
juice is the oil Olive. Also the Cyprouse treee which chiefly prospers in
ye yland Creta: also the Cedar tree, the Balm tree which in preciousnes of
smell, far excedeth all other woods: and is only to be had as it grows in the
land of Jury: This tree never grows higher then two cubits hye: Likewise the
pepper tree which grows chiefly in Arabia, although now in Italy there is a
kind of pepper tree not much un like the Myrt tree. This pepper tree, has a
certain cod as ye Juniper has, but this is more small, Pepper tree.
in which lies the Pepper seed: which cods pluckte of before they begin
togape or break out and dried against the sun and rolled out at length,
causes the long Pepper: and contrariwise those Coddes suffered and let alone
till they are ready to fall forth out of the husk themselves, grow round and
show first white, until they being dried, and as it were roasted in the Sun,
do thereby both change their color to black, and become wrinckled. With these
pepper berries there are often Juniper berries intermedled which are taken for
the other. The blackest Pepper is accounted the chiefest. Hitherto likewise
belongth the Cinnamon tree which chyefely grows in Aethiopia, Cynamo^ tree.
whose sticks is best at the top of the tree about the bigness of a ma^s hand:
then next toward and at the body of the same: but worst of al toward ye
root thereof.

And the tree is never above the heyghte of two cubits: Lote tree.
likewise under Sol is the Lote tree which is a noble tree in Arabia, so
precious that they say a man shall never feel ache or have disease of body so
long as he uses to eat thereof. The fruit thereof is saffron colored, and
is in quantity as byg as a bean. The fruit hereof is of so pleasant taste, as
is wine: and hereof is confecte and made a kind of wine, but it lasts not
beyond the space of ten Days. With this whole armies have been sustained
often for lack of other necessaries alonge time, and have done very well. It
is called of some Arbor solaris, the Suns tree, for that ye figure of his
fruit and leaf is after the Sun. There is (as Ruellius witnesses) a
notable tree in Affricke of this kind and name: of whose fruit if any
stranger does taste or eat of, he incontinently does forget himself of what
place and country he is of. Amongst herbs these appertayn to Sol. First the
herb Helyotropium which turns round with the Sun, both opening, increasing
and closing as the Sun ryseth, ascends, or goes down. Likewise the herb
Pyonie, and Buglosse which is so said because it is like a bullockes tongue:
and Cynoglosse which is like a dogs tongue. Likewise the herb Scammonie
whose leaves are like Iuye but softer and more Tryanglewise, his flower is
white. This is very hoate and purges choler, and laid to any swellings does
help the same. Dictamus
Likewise the herb Dictamus which is like Sorrel, yet very bitter as
Dioscorides says. It is chiefly found growing in Creet, and with the same
Hearts being wounded or shot in with any arrow or darte do herewith cure
themselves, and discharge their bodies of the weapon whatsoever: Likewise the
herb Celidonye which is used of Swallows as a Medecin to help the sorenes
of their eyes. Amongst gemmes or precions stones, these are chiefly subjected
to Sol. First ye Chrusolyte which being held against the sun does gieue forth
beams in color like gold. Hitherto also belongs the precious Iris whose
color is after a crystal. It is always found in his fashion six cornered
or six square. This being held in any covert place does manifestly show forth
the reflections of the Sun upon the contrary part or side of the wall. There
is also a precious stone called Heliotropius, which is after a Jasper, which
being held up betwixt the sun and our eyes, does make the Sun to apeare
bloody, and represents to us a likeness of the suns Eclypse. With this, (as
also with the Herb of like name) the Magicians plainly professed that a man
may go invisible. Hereupon this last is called Solsequium, as also
Heliotropium. for that it follows and turns round about with the sun. In
like condition is the herb Hyacinth, Hyacinth.
which is made effectuous by the sun to help against Poisons: which also
makes the bearer saufe, and gets him favor, wins him riches, and
disposes him to a quick and sharp understanding: and being held or reserved
in the Mouth, comfort and cheareth the heart or mind, and next after that,
all the whole parts of the body. Hitherto likewise belongs the Precious
Pyrophyte, which is of a mixed red: Pantaure.
as also ye Pa^taure which draws all other stones to it, after such wise as
the Lodestone draws iron: of other some it is called Pantherus, for yt it is
diversely spotted after the manner of the Panther: and it is called Pantochras,
for that it is of all colors. Also the Topaze, the Chrusopasse, the Rubine,
the Gem called Solis Oculus, as also the Carbuncle, which of the sun
receives his hot burning color. Among Metals Sol has in in his regiment
gold beautifying it with so excellent a color as that it shyneth like the
sun: as also gieuing it that force and power confortatiue that it has, as
also the power restauritiue: likewise his is ye Latten metal, and the more
puerer Brass. Humors which be his is the pure Life blood, as also he
chalengeth the life breath. And finally among the Elements, he has to do with
the fire and fiery flame.

Countries subject to Sol.
Sol with Leo has special government over Italy, Apulia, Spain, Cicilia,
Phaenicea, Caldaea, and other such like Provinces, and Kingdoms.

The Sun finisheth and ends his Course about the Zodiac in 365. days,
and six hours.

Of MARS the fifth Planet.
MARS in Greek is called (...), for yt he is fierce and fiery hot: so is he
also dry, and works the choleric Complexion, which is also hot and dry: as
Saturn causes the Melancholicke complexion which is cold and dry. This Mars
is commonly called the God of battle, for that he styrreth up men's minds to
debate and strife, and lets the league of Tranquillity and peace. He is also
called Mars, quasi mors, for that he is a heavy, hard, and deadly Planet: or
for that he procures the death and decay of many Inferior bodies. Ovid says
that he was Son to Juno, without Father, but conceived of her through a
certain herb which Flora on a time showed unto ber. Philologia. lib. 33


Sons to this Mars (as Volateranus says) were first Oenomaus which raygned in
Elys, which obtained the Daughter of Pelops, called Hyppodamia, Oenomaus.
Hyppodamia. The svviftest Runner that ever was. Menalippus.
which was the swyftest Runner that ever was, and had her to his wife, by out
runninge her. And by Meroe, Mars had also another Son called Parthaon: and a
third called Oeneus king of Calidonia, of whom came Dianira, which was wife to
Hercules, and Meleager, Tydeus, and Menalippus. This Menalippus whilst he in
hunting the wild Bore in a Wood earnestly followed his Game, was unawares and
by evil hap slain of his brother Tydeus, who afterward fled and came into
Argos by night, and happening into the court of Adrastus ye king, and katched
in a grievous Rain sought further, and anon hit into a shelter where Polynices
banished his country abode, and was scanted, so that that room would not
serve them both, for the which cause they fell together by the Ears, and
wounded each other grievously.

As Mars is painted and drawn forth he resembles a tall and lusty Stripling
standi^g with open breast, and his feet stretched forth as though he stryded,
noting there by that wars are to be attempted of hawty hearts, and to be
followed and pursued busily. His color is somewhat red, his house or place of
abode is in Aries and Scorpio, his exaltation or ascende^t is in the 28. of
Capricornus. Martlalists how affected.
Such as are borne under Mars are cruel, dreadful, despitefull, malicious,
quickly moved and styrred up to wrath and anger: their countenance and look
also is sour, grim and fearful. Their color for the most part is after a
fiery red their hair cole black, their face roundewise, their eyes yellowish.
In conversation and demeanure or manner of life they he impudent, and shameless,
very aduentrous and bold, hardy, hie minded, proud, crafty and subtle.
Whereupon in token of such dispositions that the Martialistes were so inclined
unto, they were wont in old time to set out Mars their governor like a
souldyer having a sallet on his head, and in his left hand was put a Sword,
and in his right hand he had a Iauelin or spear, whereby was signified his
daily practice and procurement toward wars and contention. The stone which
they used in time paste to engraue Mars in, was commonly the Adamant stone,
wherein they drewout a harnessed man riding upon an Aegle in whose right hand
was a naked sword, and in his left hand a man's head which turned round about.
By this was uttered forth how mighty, swift, and fierce Mars is in battle, so
that his power is a terror to all the whole field. Mars makes those bodies
over whom he has pre-eminence hardy and aduenturous, and disposes them by a
certain natural inclination to aptnes and dexterity to the quick and
expedite obtaining of such arts and crafts as be manual or don by hand. Mars
likewise amongst such beasts as be brutish exceedingly, and savage or wild is
altogether ruler. Likewise amongst the^ that be fierce stomaked or warlik of
which sort is the horse, Horse by whom first found out and ridden on.
which was first found out by Neptunus, and by him first made acquainted with
men, after that, he was first rode upon by the Thessalonians of whom Xenophon
reports as follows, how we shall have an undoubted and perfec trial of a
good horse: First he requires that he be broad brested, A perfect trial of a
good horse.
which tends both to comelines and imports main and great strength, and
besides yt, he shall so bewtout danger beneath in his feet of smiting one
against another in travailing which we call commonly enterfering. And secondly,
his neck he would not have hang down prone, in manner of a boar, nor yet ye
same to be too erect or strayt up, in manner of a Cock, but to be indifferent
between both: his head he would have to be bony, his Iawbones small, and his
eyes in his Iourneying bendinge down to the beholding of his feet: for the
holding out of his neck at length is a sign of wearines and weakness in a
horse, and bewrays a Jade. It is also to be considered whither his eyes be
either hollow and deep within, or whether he be full eyed and often fiery
colored in the same, which only betokens great valiancy in a horse, as also
that he is of exceeding sharp eyesight: his Nosthrils also the more open they
appear and withal bending right down, do both demonstrate great ease and
liberty of breathing in a horse, as also very great fiercenes: his ears must
not be long, his Foretop somewhat longer then his Mane: his belly must be
somewhat gaunt grayhou^dlike: his Loins how much ye broader and shorter they
be, so much the more easy is his pace: and ye more that his buttockes be
divided and parted with a broader strike, seame, or line right down toward his
Tail, the more swifter he is in his runninge, his hinder feet getting an
advantage thereby of his forefeete in every step and pace: if a man will frame
and make his horse fit for warlike exercises, How to make a Horse Warlike
he has (as Zenophon councelleth (to try Maisteries with him in this order: he
must not spare to make him take hedge and dytches: yea, nor to leap over
walls sometimes: he must often also exercise himself both to skip of, and to
skip on at his pleasure: and to put him forth somewhiles right on, sometimes to
reuert and turn him backwards, and somewhiles to ride him sidelong. Somewhiles
the Ryder is to bring him out from his pryuate coursing at home or in ye
fields, into thro^ged and frequented places, that with ye sight, noise, and
hearing of so populous a multitude he may acquaint him self, through ye
tractability of the Ryder to be fit and prepared for every assay. Columella
says of horses, How Horses marks wear away.
that their Marks of age wear away accordi^gly as they grow one in years: for
when they become two years old and an half, he says yt then their middle
teeth both above and below do fall away: and when they be four years old
they cast those teeth of theirs which he called Canini, which be sharp after
Dogs teeth, and have new again by and by grow in their room: and afterward
when they grow to be about six years old, their Wange teeth or great
Grynders above fall away. And when they be seven years old they cast diverse
below, and the remnant become all of a like sise, and begin in the upper part
to wax hollow: after which time it is very hard to affirm truly ye age of
any horse when they come to be ten years old their teeth then remaining are
very hollow, and their Eyebrowes wax hoary oftentimes and some of their teeth
stick out: but of ye Horse we have spoken sufficient. Under Mars also is ye
greedy and ravening Wolf, Wolf.
which being bent upon his pray as he is in his way thitherward, he uses all the while to smell out extremely in every part of his body. Lib. 8. cap. 12.
( Plynie says) that in times past even the very sight of wolfes in Italy was
thought to presage or foreshewe no goodness to the Country. His Tail the
Magicians used in their love Medicines. He uses in ye extremity of hunger
oftentimes to Eat earth. And never bestows more time in conioyning with his
mate then xii. days in the year. Under the jurisdiction of Mars also is the
Ox of both fortes, as well the wild Ox as the Tame. These were first yoked
and prepared to the use of Husbandry in Italy, in so much that ye grecians
through certain contempt, Oxen of vvho^ first yoked.
called ye Italians the Oxes of Italy. There are (as Aelianus says) some of
this kind in Mysia yt are without horns. In India there be Oxen so swift as
that they will out run a Horse. In Eubaea all their breed of Oxen are for the
most part white. There be wild Oxen in Aethyopia that move their horns to
and fro, as our Oxen here do their Ears. Columella says, that ye best
laborers and workmen (as they call them) of these, are chiefly bred about
Hetruria, and Italy, which are well knit and strong to labor. 8ignes of good
Ox
And the signs of good Oxen be these as he says: a broad and curled
forehead, rough and heary Ears, great and black eyes, long horns, broad and
wide nostrells, a broad and wreathed neck, a plenti full and soft hyde, a
right out and plain back, great Hoofes, a long tail, and of a red, brown,
or black color.

Under Mars is also the wild Bull which (as Aelianus says) be he never so
curste, fierce or mad he is to be bridled. If a man tyeth or byndeth his right
testicle or stone with a line to one of his horns. The first that is red to
have caused the Bull to have been bayted was Caesar the dictator. Who first
baited the Bull.
Hitherto belongs also the foming Boar, whose armory in fight consists
chyefely in his Tuskes: as also the cruel Bear which Aristotle calls Animal
omni vorum, Bear.
a deuourer of all. And yet is the female more wood and stronger then ye male
of this kind. White Bear.
There is a kind of white bears in Mysia so infectiue, as that they kill the
dogs put on them, even only with their venomous breath. The she bear perfiteth
her young by little and little with her only lycking, and has young at three
months end, at which time she creeping on her back and sides, steals to
some privy den that she chose before to that purpose, being very wary least he
should be spyde, and there continues fourteen days lyckinge her young.
Then she goes abroad for flesh, and such like to sustain them and her
withal. If in this time she be found, to save her young she takes some of
the^ on her back, and some of the^ in her mouth and away she gets her up
into the next Tree. Amongst all such Fowls as fly unto Mars belongs the
Griffron, Gryffon.
which is bred in India and has only amongst al other fowls four feet. It
is very bygge and mighty, and has crooked nails and claws after the lion: he
is black on his back, purple colored on his forepart, and white winged: his
mouth is like the Eagles and his eyes fiery, very hard to be taken, but only
when he is young. He makes his Nest in the high Mountains, and encountreth
with all kind of beasts except only the Lion and Elephant.

Likewise to Mars pertains the Puttock of al fowls the most snatching.
Puttock or Kyte.
The first chasing of her was by Alphonsus the king of Neapolis, which put up
a Goshauke and a Faucon also of his at once after her in ye apre. Pie.
Also the Pie which every day chatte reth eftsoons changing her note, which
was dedicated to Mars: Also such fowls as are fierce and earnest of pray, and
be of shryll voice, as the Kistrell or Kastell, and the shricke owl, Ovvle^
which cries or shrycketh in sted of song, as also yt other owl which
howleth in sted thereof. Lapvving.
Likewise the Lapwing which makes her nest in deserts in marshes, and upon
mountains, buildinge the same with man's dunge, to the intent yt if any man
come nigh the same he may be dryue^ back by the stink of the same. And
among serpents the Dragon holds on Mars which is of a very sharp and fiery
eyesight: Dragon.
which has also three things in her very much desired after (she is killed by
ye Elephant which is always at mortal strife with her, and she with him) That
is to say her eyes, her skin, and her teeth. Her cies when she is slain become
precious stones called Draconites, and are like the fire: her skyn is very
medecinable: and her teeth are like unto Boares teeth, but that they be smaller
and serve also for sundry and diverse remedies, Likewise the Cockatrice,
Cockatrice.
which speedeth so with her enuenoming, that she being in bigness but as
much as a man's hand does yet not wythstanding kill all other Serpents with
her only infected and poisonous breath. And if any man smite at her but with a
stick or staff, she speedeth him so with poison as that he dies very
shortly after. Among fishes proper to Mars is Cephalus which breeds only in
Ionium an Island, and live most upon mud. So is the fish Arcanus a cauener. So
is the woolfish a great destroyer* which ever swimmeth alone. So is the Mullet
fish which is called Trygle which breeds but only three times in the year:
Of al fishes in the sea a great deuourer, and lives much by the foam or froth
of the sea and by the dead bodies and carcasses of me^, and such other things.
So is also the pickerell, subjected to Mars. Among plants and herbs are
pertinent also to Mars, Lingwort, Radish, Onions, Scammony, who^^ root is of a
strong smell, and his lease is three cornered. So is Spurge which clears the
stomach, Spurge.
helps to make water, yet hurtful to the eyes and raines. So is garlic
which (as Galen says) is good to gieue such as have abundance of phlegm It
being stamped with salt and rue, Garlike.
or herb grace, and received, does remedy the biting of mad dogs: or else laid
plaster wise to the sore place is therefore likewise effectual. In Aegypte
there is a kind of Garlic which has but one only head, and without cloue
as our onions here are, which head is also red, sweet and small. So is also
Rue, Turnepps, long rape in subjection to Mars. And all such as have their
stinge or be pryckely or sharpe-after the manner of a dart, hurting, biting and
festring with the only touching of them, as the Thistle, Nettle, Quick thorn,
and such like. Among precions stones, Mars rules over the Adamant, Adam^at
which is so said for that he is invincible and not to be brought under which
any force to be made plya^t to any use of the Lapidary, but only with Goats
blond very warmely applied unto it. Lode stone.
So is also the Lodestone which as The ophraste says, is of a silver color.
It is dug out of ye ground in Syphnus which is about three furlonges of
from the red sea. It is easy to be engraued in. This stone draws Iron to it
wheresoever it be placed, whether on hye or below. So is also the touchstone
which is of no great quantity and is found in the great river Tmolus in
Armenia. Touchstone.
The property of this is to try the fynes of gold and liluer. So is the
Pomesstone also which comes of a kind of foam in the sea hardened and cast
Pomes stone.
up upon the shore. So is the Sanguinary and a certain kind of Ametiste. Li.
34. cap. 15.
Amongst Metals he possesses and has rule in Iro^ of which Pliny says that
it will consume anon and rust away if it be once put into the fire, Iron,
and be not already hardened a good with laborous strokes and well wroughte.
There is also force of medcine in Iron as it may be used: his property is to
bind, dry up and staunche. It staucheth blood, and helps other excrements
and is good for the gowt. So has he also the redder brass and all other
things metal like, which have most store of the Brimstone in them. His
savors are al such as be bitter, sharp and such as burn and bite the tongue,
and which make a man to weep. Among the Elements he has most right to the
fire. His provinces and dominions are first as he is joined with Aries)
Brittany, Comuries subjected to Mars.
France Germany, Barstany, the lower most country of Syria, Idumed and Judea
or Ievvry And as he is partaker with Scorpio he holds the hyer Syria,
Cappadocia, Manritania, and Getulia. He runs his course about the zodiac
in two years.

Of IVPITER the sixth Planet.
NExt in place above Mars is Jupiter, which te^pereth and allaieth ye malice of
Mars and sinister conditions of Saturn. For this Jupiter is in his qualities
very te^perrate (yt is to say) hoate and moist, and causing heat and
moisture. Whereupon he is said to be ye father and worker of ye Sanguine
Complexion. For it is proper to blood to be hoate and moist. Hereupon for
such benefit wrought by him, he has often ben called the Original Life
Planet. And they were wont to draw him forth in the Royal likeness of a King,
holding a Scepter or golden Mace in his hand: gieuinge to understand thereby
his rule and Empire over all Creatures living. The Poets affirm him to be
Son to Saturnus, and Rhea, which Saturn understanding by a Prophecy that
it should come to pass that his own Sons should thrust him out of his
Kingdom, provided with him self to slay them all as soon as ever they
should be borne. So he began to deal herein, first with Ceres; then with
Neptunus whom he had by the aforesaid Rhea. Who when she perceived his purpose
herein, being great with child of Jupiter and delivered of him, sent him
forthwith very privily into Lycton a place of Creet, where he was hidden in a
Den: and when Saturn came to have devoured him also, she cast him a stone in
steed of her child.

Then Jupiter in process of years growing both into might and wealth,
expelled his Father, and delivered his other Brethren from such Thraldom. The
Stone which Saturn catched in his mouth thinking it to have been his own
Child, was deceived therein, and he euomitinge the same, is yet a Monument
still remaining to be seen at this day upon the high Hill Parnassus.

This Jupiter by Proserpina had Bacchus, who was called the God of Wynes. And
by Alcumena he had Hercules, who by Augaea Daughter to Aleus King of Arcady
had Telephus, which was hid in a wood and nourished up of a Heart. Vulcan.


This Jupiter by Juno had Vulcanus which for his deformity and ill fauorednesse
was ^hrowen of them both into the Island Lemnus, whereas he should make
lightninges for Jupiter: which Vulcanus asceuding upon high, and couetinge to
see the Palace of his Father, going up higher then he was able to hold on and
continue forth, fell down and brake his Lymves and Le^res, whereby he halted
ever after. So had Iuditer by Minerua (whom he forced or ravished) another
Son called Ericthonius, which was the first that invented and found out
Carting: of whom Virgil says thus:

Primus Ericthonius currus and quatuor ausus jungere equos. and may be
Englyshed thus.

The first that Cart and horses drove, and drawing did inuen^
Was Erycthon, who Joined them in Teame for that intent.
THis Erycthonius had one Pandio to his Son which was King of Athens, who
had two Daughters one casted Progne and the other Philomena: the first was
married to Tereus King of Thracia, who being on a time in his sister
Philon^^^aes company, and entising her aside as he though good, forced her
against her will and to ye intent this matter should not be known he cut out
her tou^ge: which thing nevertheless coming to his wives Ear, and she
taking great displeasure the neat, against his return and coming home she
s^ewe his beloved Son Ithys, and dressed him in Meats Banketwise, and so set
the same before him: whereof he unawares of his Son, yea of his best beloved
son did feed hungerly. At which so great wickednesses perpetrated on every
side, Jupiter being highly offended did first change the man into a Lapwing,
and Progne his wife he changed into a swallowe: and Philomena into a
Nightingale.

Of Jupiter also and Taygeta Daughter to Agenor came Lacedemon, who built the
City Lacedemonia: of him also came Orion which was a valiant champion to
Diana, Orion.
and which was so huge of body and great. Giantlike, and of yt arrogance
withal, that he boasted and craked that he would slay all kinds of beasts
and others, and yet to see, he being but stinge of a Scorpion, and serpent of
no great hignes, dyed presently. And the same Orion being now translated and
set up for a sign in heaven by Jupiter, does at this day whensoever he shows
forth to sailors and shipmen prognostycate unto them little good to ^^sue.
Jupiter also by Europa had Mynos, which raygned in Creta, and who had first the
rule over the Cyclade Islands: Mynos first caugh pirates.
he first scoured ye Sea of Pirates, which in that time abounded sore. This
Mynos settinge before him the virtuous and commendable life of Rhada manthus a
most just King, to show that he likewise would do nothing in Judgment
amiss, is said to go and dis^end often into a deep Den at Gnosus an Island
of the Cyclades, where he received wholesome laws at his Father Jupiters own
hands. So likewise of Jupiter and Aegina came Aeacus, Aeacus.
which raygned in the Island Oenon, which afterward he called Aegina after his
mothers name: where wisen as all men died generally of a certain extreme
contagion or pestilence, insomuch that there was not one man left alius, this
Aeacus desired and prayed his father instantly, that he would turn ye Antes or
Emets which he saw there into men: which Request being granted, he
afterward called them Myrmidon: this Aeacus has ye third place and accoumpt
among ye most righteous Judges. So another son of Jupiter was Aeolus, which
raygned in Sicilia, Aeolus.
and was lord over ye Islands called Aeoliae: this Aeolus is called the God of
Winds, which is also said to have first taught and instructed the Maryners and
seafaringe men to know and understand the signs and tokens of tempests
ensuing, as also the disposition and nature of ye winds: this Aeolus begot
Sysiph^ who raygned at Ephora, which as is said, Sisiphus
being made privy of the secrecy and counsel of the Gods, played the part of a
Blab and bewrayed the same unto men, whereat they taking great indignation to
punish him therefore perpetually, have set him in hell to roll astone as much
as ever he ca^ wag or move with all the endeavor he has, and the same most
laborious business of his never to ecase. So was also Tantalus son to Jupiter,
which raygned in Phrigia, Ta^talus.
who calling the Gods on a time to a feast or banquet yt he had prepared for
them, he in the same, having slain his son Pelops, dressed and sod him
piecemeale and served him in so for an especial service: and this he did to
tempt and try their courtesies: at which filthy fact they being highly
displeased, the^ first restored Pelops again to life, and joined together
again his pieces or severed members, saving that his shoulders they could not
restore, for that Ceres had eaten it up: therefore in stead of the same they
made him one of Iu^ry: and Tantalus they threw down into Hell, and appointed
him an especial place of torment for ever, whereas he standing upright in
Floudes and waters up to the Chin and above and having there plesaunte Apples
hanginge over his head reaching down to his upper Lip, strives continually
to catch of them into his mouth, to sustain and relieve his extreme hunger,
and is yet never able to come by one byte of them, Ulysses.
Ulysses also is said to descend and come of Jupiter, vaunting him self
therein: and reckening up his nobility and Progeny so against Ajax, He to keep
him self safe at home, and not to go with the Grecian Army to lay siege to
Troy, craftily devised with himself to feign him self mad: His subtilty.
and to utter forth some show thereof, he went and sue salt, and went and
joined together at Plough, he cared not what cross kinds of Cattle, and all
to make the Greeks believe yt he was stark mad: but deep dissemblinge does by
one means or other ever brust forth, as in this matter: for Pallamedes by and
by bewrayed the same, who laid his son Telemachus in his way as he should
come with his Ploughe, to see whither he were in deed as he pretended: but he
percyuing anon his son to lie in his way shunned and eschued such a danger,
and so disclosed his own counterfayting. But we are now to return again to
the History of Jupiter from which by occasion we have a little and yet not very
much declined. The ancient Gentiles were wont to depicture him out in
likeness of a Bull, for that as the Poets write, Europa.
when as he ravished Europa daughter to Agenae King of Phenicia he transformed
him self into the likeness of a Bull. Danae
Some also used to call him Danaes for that he broke in by the roof or top of
ye house unto Danae, Daughter to Acrysius king of ye Argyues, who was close
shut up and locked fast in a strong tower, and he appearing for all yt so unto
her in likeness of a shower of golden Rain forced her, and begat on her
Perseus, who was he that first gave name to the Country and kingdom of
Persia. See herein what assaults and what means inordinate Love assayeth in
oppugning of chastity. The Panims gave this Jupiter soueraygnty in all things:
and to purchase and obtain through his means as they sinisterly thought
therein, help, and remedy in their calamities and distresses: they joined with
his proper name another as it were a surname, accordingely as the wayght and
nececessity of their cause drive them unto: as for example, when they were
prejudiced by any man of ye house, or by any guest, Jupiter Zenius.
they straight ways sought to Jupiter Zenius for remedy. When all trust and
confidence in friendship failed, Jupiter Philius.
they called upon Jupiter Philius to take vengeance. When familiars or
Companyons betrayed one another, Jupiter Heterius.
they sought after Jupiter Heterius. When kinsfolk and Kinsmen fell to
contention, and were together by ye Ears among themselves, Jupiter Homog.
to Jupiter Homoginus: When those which had taken truce with others, or which
were in league brake Truce, and deceived each other, Jupiter Enhorcius.
then they had their recourse to Jupiter Enhorcius. His star is called in Greek
Phaethon. And the same star of his is somewhat after a silver color. His house
is in Sagitarius and Pisces: his Exaltacion or ascending is in the 15. of
Cancer.

Ionystes how disposed.
Such as are under the government of Jupiter are outwardely of merry
Countenance, and of comely and seemly behavior and gesture: they be also
lovers of clenlinesse, and such as be fair speached. Their color is commonly
white, yet stained here and there with some red among: their body is well set
and proportioned, and their stature and height is indefferent: they be also of
thyn hair, of great eyes, and the pupil or ball of their eye exceeds and is
after a black: they be moreover of short Nose, curled Bearde, and their fore
teeth are great and long. And inwardly concerning the frame or qualities of
their mind, they be studuous, quiet, and well affected toward all me^, but
their love is sodaynely got and quickly lost again. Moreover as concerning
worldly benefits Jupiter aduanceth his to great Prosperity, good success, much
Riches, high Honor, and gets them Favor and friendship in the World, and
preserves them fro ye assaults of their enemies. Among brute beasts all
such kynds are his which in pride of stomach, contend and strive one with
another for and concerning the prerogative of their kind: as the Elephant and
Dragon between whom there is continual and deadly discord as they that
travail the wildernesses of Africa, Elephant and Dragon
and Mauritania can witness. For ye Dragon and the Elephant in their meeting
purpose the death and destruction of each other. And in their first sight they
malice one another being. In so much that ye serpent twyning about the other
with the great length of his body and tail styngeth him round about, at
which deadely strokes, the other extremely payned does fall down to the
ground presently, with ye weight or force of which fall he both kills
himself or at least wise hurts himself very grievously, and is thereby in
danger of dying himself, as also he presently kylleth the Dragon which is so
wound and twynde about his body, and crusheth him all to pieces. Tiger.
So is the Tiger also subject to Jupiter in that respect that he likewise
bears a natural grudge and most mortal malice to the Horse. And his
swiftnes also in running is nothing inferior to ye others. This kind is bred
most often in Hyrcania and India, a wild beast of maruallous swiftenes in
running, as also terrible with all in the same. And the smell of ye females of
this kind is also exceeding wonderful: For so often as she being forth at
purueying for her young, and for her own pray (for the Male kind thereof does
never a whit regard either her or her young all this while) and in the mean
time (as it cannot otherwise be) it falls so forth as that if she be robbed
of any of her whelps at her return home again to her Den, when she
perceives that she has lost any of her littour; she goes forth out of her
de^ by and by, and smells about which wais these should be taken, and after
she pursues that ways hastily. And to avoid the danger of her which is but
present death the party that has robbed her, being on horseback (for one
foot he may not be, for he will then be quickly overtaken of her) turning one
of them down, must yet make away as fast as ever he can, and not stay til he
be got on the other side of some great Water, unto which place she can not
approach, and she in this time making after, at the finding of that one so
cast in her way, seems to be so glad thereof, as that she presently
returns again with all home and there having bestowed ye same, takes again
after the other that she misseth, and never staying till she come at the Water
where the robber in passing through escaped her fury and revenge, she stands
at the brym or banks of the same and roreth out very straungely. So is the
Unicorn in subjection to Jupiter, Vnicor.
which is also a heavy and sore enemy to the Elephant, which with her one horn
whetted and filed upon some flinte, prepares her self to encounter with him.
And always in her fight she strives and labors very busily to pushe at
the belly of ye Elephant, which she knows to be the most tender place. And as
concerning fowls all such kinds be his, as are of tender and soft meat, and
of most temperate bodies, As is the Pheasaunt, ye Partriche, Partrich
which was sometimes dedicated to Jupiter and Latona: Of all fowls ye most
lecherous: For the cock Partrirhe does often destroy his mates nest and all ye
Eggs in the same, and lets her of sytting, to the intent, she should serve
him at his list in the act of Venery. This kind lightly breeds and
brings forth fifteen Eggs. And sits but seven days and then hatcheth.
There is also great wiliness in in the old Partryches, for a man shall see
them at such time as any Fawkener or other approaches nighe unto their Nest or
place where their young (not yet ripe enough in flight) be contained and kept
together, the old Partryches as it were yielding themselves to ye Fawkener
and suffering him to come nigh upon him, to ye intent yt by such policy they
may auert and turn away ye parties far of from happening or chauncing upon
their young, which they know are yet insufficent and unable to shift and
provide for themselves. Doves.
So is ye Dove in subjection to Jupiter, whose kindness to each other as they
be matched or Mated together, (as it were in a certain form of Wedlock)
every days experience does teach us. They assist busily and help one another
carefully in sitting: They breed only two Eggs for the most part, first the
Male, secondely the Female. There is no foul more profitable, or that breeds
oftener. For every spring, summer and Autumnes Months (saving the month of
June only excepted, which is commonly called Carlocke month at which time
they be most unapt and least myndfull of generation) they miss not in a manner
so to increase in breeding. They do lightly return and repair home again (how
far soever now and then notwithstanding they wa^der and fly) unto their
accustomed breeding places. As experience hereof was tried at the siege of
Mutina, Brutus sent a letter by a Dove to the Roman Army.
whereas Brutus catching one of them (which used and kept about ye castle) a
good way of, whereas then ye chiefest of the Romayne army lay, before he let her
go: he wrote an Epistle to them, and fastening the same about her feet, after
she was let go, she made haste home again to the said castle her old abiding
place, and withal by this strange means and message, the other were made
privy of Brutus his purpose, success and Affairs. Under Jupiter also are the
Plouer, ye Quail, the Lark, the hen, the Capon. Among fishes he chale^geth
great a do in ye Dolphin called Philiotechnos for yt she loves her youg
dearly. Dolphyn.
The female of this kind has both milk and breasts and gives her young
suck with the same. As their young begin to learn to swim, they set them
in a rank or row one before another, and the elder Dolphins as well he as
she, to keep them in their ray or order, do swym by them on each side, the
other on ye other side: But as her young wax great, this rank is broken.
Whales.
The Whalefish is also pertinent to Jupiter. This kind brings forth no
spawne but a young fish at the first, and gieueth her young milk. This is
very heavy and slow in swimminge. The Indian Sea is full of these which are in
quantity and bigness five times as big again as the Dolphin. Over Trees he
rules over ye Popular tree, the Oak, the wyllow tree, ye beeche, ye Darnascen
tree, ye Pare and Ipple trees. Likewise he requires the fruit of the Almond
tree Date tree: and among sweet leaves and roots Mirabolanum, Rheubarbaru^,
Cassia. Among herbs he has Mynt, Jupiters beard Sage, Time, He^locke,
Helica^pane. Among gems or precious stones he retains the Iacinct, the
Berill, the Saphy, the Turkys, the Emerald, ye more dusky kind of Jasper, and
all other sorts which declyne Among Gemmes or Precious stones he retayneth
the Iacinct, the Berill, the Saphir, the Turkys, the Emeralde, the more dusky
kind of Jasper, and all other sorts which declyne toward a dusky or dark
color. In Mettalles he is chief master of Tyn, Tyn.
which (as Plynie says) being over laid on such vessels as are of Brass,
makes them savor more sweetly, and preserves them from rusting. All
wholesome moisture also proceeds from him, which cause good increase or
nourishment in the body. And as concerning the Elements he rules and deals
as him lysteth in ye Air. Of Provinces and Kingdoms, Cou^treies subject to
Jupiter.
he is lord (as he is joined with Sagittarius) over Tuscia, Celtica, Spain, and
the higher part of Arabia. And as he partaketh with Pisces, he holds Lycia,
Lydia, Cylicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia, Nasomania, and Garamantye, or
Caramantica.

He runs over the Zodiac, and ends his course therein, in xii. years.

Of SATVRNE the seventh Planet.
SATVRNE is a Planet cold and dry, masculine, malicious and hurtful in many
such Effects as he works: for when he Raygneth, lyghtlye those that be
borne under him, either dye shortly, living no long time to accou^pt of, or
else if they live any long time, they have for the most part an heavy and hard
fortune. Thereupon for this his pernicious condition of hurting and destroying,
he was wont to be set out as a Mower or Harvest man, having and holding a
Sithe or Sickle in his hand, as one which by his own will was fully bent and
given to accelerate and hasten the ruin and decay of all living things; and
were it not but that Jupiter placed betwixt him and us, did temperate and
bridle him much in his aforesaid heavy qualities, and conditions: nothing here
beneath almost could either live long, or prosperously endure. Wherein we have
to consider the unspeakable and wonderful wisdom of the almighty that as in
all other things, so in this he has most especially and wisely provided:
that, ye enemy of life so ernestly laboring ye death and decay of all things,
should have his place appointed him there so far of from the earth, where all
creatures living make their abode, that of all other Planettes he the cruellest
should be most remote and furthest of. For how should any creature living
sustain, help, and defend it self against the force of such extreme cruelty:
If this mortal enemy of all were bestowed and placed any thing nighe: yea, or
any nearer then he is now, to the earth here below, the place of our aboade:
yea and how should any thing continue out his appointed and determinate
Time, if this fearse and furious haruestman as it were, every day laboring to
down with all, were not let and hyndered by other more friendly and gracious
powers, staying him from such his force. See therefore ye truth of holy writ,
and how truly it is there said, God the ^e perfect wisdom has disposed
all things in their just number, measure, and waighte. It is not therefore for
his own worthiness or dignity that Saturn has ye highest place among ye
other Planets, for his deserts deserved: but rather the contrary, upon other
effects and occasion: as that all things living might by that means be the
further of from so frowning, froward, and fatal Foe. He is of a pale and wan
color, and disposes to ye Melancholicke complexion. This Saturn (as the
Poets imagine) was some to Coelus, and Vesta, Saturnus whose Son.
as also father to Jupiter, Juno, Pluto, Neptunus, Ceres, Chiro^, and Picus. Of
Jupiter we have said before: Juno was both sister, His Sons.
and afterward Wife to Jupiter. Juno.
The ge^tilishe women were wont very superstitiously to call upon her in their
time of travail and labor of child, by ye name of Juno Lucina. This Juno had
to her Daughter, Hebe a lusty gallant, whom Juno made afterward Cupbearer to
Jupiter, Hebe.
and being very wanton on a time, and forgetful of womanly modesty, and
shamefastness in a fall yt she had, uncovered her Secrecy, which so offended
Jupiter, and Juno, that she being by and by displaced, and turned out of her
office. Ganimedes a beautiful youth was appointed to her room. Ganimedes.
Pluto they term the God of hell. And Neptunus another son of Saturnus, and
Ops they make the God of the Sea: And Ceres they make the God of Corn, Chiron.
or husbandry. And Chiron the Ce^taure they say was Saturnus his son also by
Phylira a Nymphe, which Chiron became half a man, and half a horfe, who was
brought up in a den, and there he was taught and learned the art of medecynes
and the virtue of herbs: as also he practiced harp music. And Picus the
last rehearsed son of Saturn begat Faunus. Picus.
Ovid should seem to make this Picus ye husband to Circes, Circes.
whom by another name he calls Martius: who says he falling in love with
Pompona, and using her company greatly, this Cyrces his wife gelous over him
as she transposed by incantation diverse other things so often as she lysted,
so for anger and revenge of this matter she turned her husband Picus into a
byrd of that name, which we commonly with us use to call a Pie. The star of
this Saturnus in greek is called Kronos which imports an infinite or
unspeakable time. This time therefore which measures the length of our lives
is called of some ye yard Wande or Meterod of all wordly doings and affairs:
Wherefore the Days, the Hours, the Nights, the Months, the Years: Time his
horses.
all these are the Horses that draw time forward, and continue time in his
course. The Hours being spente even by little, and little, do yet help
forward time apace. Every hour of the Day though of it self supposed but a
short time, is notwythstanding to be employed to some profitable use or
exercise, that we may say we have bestowed not so much as one hour
vnfruitefully. As in times paste our ancient Elders consydering the loss of
time, even of an Hour: did therefore regard how they spente every Hour most
carefully and busily. Martialis says, that the Romans assigned to every
hour of the day aseuerall kind of exercise. The first to the service of God,
The day how spent of the old Romans
and to prayer: the second to salutation by bidding god morrow, and using
other friendly conference: the third and fourth they addicted to the hearing
and pleadyng of common wealth matters, the fyfth to bodily exercyses and
labors: the sixth and seventh to take their former repast and ease: the eight
they applied to fence play, trying of Masteries, and martial affairs: and
after this the reresidue of ye day in his assigned hours was employed to the
invention or finding forth of such profitable arts or ways, as which
furthered and enryched both the state of ye commonwealth, as also the case and
condition of every private person. The days account differs.
But the days accoumpt is not a like in all places and countries: for some
reckon it to be a day from sun rising to sun rising, as the Babylonians:
some from Sun set to Sunset, as the Athenians: some from noone to noone, as the
Vmbrians: some from the Sun rising to the Sun set, as the common People here
with us: some from Midnight to Midnight, as ye Egyptians: and ye Dyall which
declares in ye clear su^ny day how every hour escapes and passes away
from us, was first found out by Anaximenes, Dyall of vvho^ first found out
Scholar to Anaximander, who was the first that showed the Experience thereof
in Lacedemonia: and Papyrius was ye first likewise that brought the same into
Rome: but enough of this, being led hereto by occasion of time. Some are in yt
opinion, that this Planet Saturnus is so called, quasise saturaret annis, for
that in his course or circuit going, he has years and time fully. His house
is in Capricornus, and Aquarius: And his Exaltation or Ascendent is in the 21.
of Libra. Such as are borne under Saturn commonly called Saturnystes,
Saturnysts how disposed.
are lumpish, heavy, and sad, dull witted, full of Melancholy, hard and
strange, a long time to receive understanding and learning, but yet after
they have once with much a do apprehended and taken the same, they after
become fast Keepers and Retayners thereof: whereupon there is this difference
betwixt the Mercurialysts and these, that as the first do quickly and redely
receive and take, that which is red and delivered unto them, but are on the
other side soon forgetful.

So the Saturnysts are commonly hard to learn, but sure in that which they
have once obtained. As that Seal does better Imprinte and keep his Mark
which Seals in Wax, and so forth: then that which is bestowed upon Water,
which soon receives the mark thereof, and soon leeseth the same. The
greatest desire of the Saturnistes also, is for the most part to address them
selves to become sole or solitary in their life, Saturnists gemen to ^olitarines
and to allow of the religious estate or condition chyefly. Their Phisiognomy
is altogether blockish, their countenance cruel and strong, their head
ha^ging down, their eyes ever bent and cast upon the ground. Their property
is such yt they be ever almost either musing or murmuring with themselves. And
in their sleep they are much troubled: For they dream oftentimes that they be
buried alive and put into the earth quycke, or else they dream of dead men,
and think they see such sights which make them astonished, and to cry out in
their sleep, as when they dream of devils which they do often, and of hell,
and hell fire, and of cruel persecution and tyranny and such like. Their other
dispositions.
All which and far many more horible cogitations, do often assault ye
melancholic co^plexioned men. The outward notes and signs of these men be,
they be for the most part of a brown color, hard, heary and rough skynned.
Their faces lean, warped or wrynkled much: their veins greatly distented and
puffed up: they are also of hye brows thick lyppes. And as concerning the
disposition of their mind, they be naturally gieuen to deceipte, to seduce and
to bring the simple people into false belief: to fear and fray, and oftentimes
to murder and flea: to consume and pine away within themselves through wrath,
ire and cancred malice: They are also very ready and prone to civil dissension
and discord. They be also for the most part short lifed, because the
exceeding cold in the^ is a shortner of their Days, as we see it comes to
pass in old men, which through coldness of nature are chopte up of a sudden:
for old me^ as they grow on toward death become very cold and dry, all heat
and moisture wyhch are the preservatives of Life then forsakyng them and
bidding them farewell. Whereupon it follows, that these qualyties of Saturnus,
that is cold and dryness are the very hie ways, Messengers, and Harbengours
of death, and ennemies unto life. Whereupon this kind of complexyoned men can
not endure long, which lack the mayntenaunce and nurserye of the vittayse and
life qualities. The Saturnistes also are gieuen to great sadness, Their sadness.
because that being without hope of good sucesse: in such things as they
desire, which are lightely difficulte: they do descend into a certayns kind
of desperation thereof, Their sudden danger. Clynias Achilles
within themse lues. And they also are gieuen to be suddenly moved and
angered, as was Clynias of Athens, And Achilles, which both, to help themselves
of this sore and sickness: used, before they would either eat or drink to
expel and banish from the^ this inward ennemy of their soul or mind, with
gyeuyng their endeavors wholly to some kind of music. The private end of life.
And solitarynes is a great part of their desire, and the pryuate kind of life:
as Experience gave forth in the Days of Diocletianus and Maximinianus Noble
Princes or Emperors: Diocletianus and Maximinianus.
which forsakying their royal rooms and public, and pryncely pre-eminence:
for to obtain a quyetnes of life, which they hoped to have in exempting
themselves from worldly affairs, gave over all. Hiero. Amurathes.
So did Hiero the tyrant of Syracula. So did Amurathes the Turk, and Otomanus
the Father of Mahomet, which won Constantinople, resigning unto his some his
room and charge. So did Lotarius nephewe to Charles ye great, Lotarius
and many Venetian Lords and Dukes, So did Jerome, Petrus Diamanus,
Celestinus, Celestinus.
forsaking the world, they betoke the^ selves to solitarynes of life. For by
that means they imagined that they should ye more easily come to the quiet
port or Haven of science and speculation. Such an other was Timon of Athens,
Timon.
for solitarines of life, but not to a like end: for the other for desire
only of knowledge in heavenly things separated themselves from the society of
men, but this other through a way wardnes and crokednes of nature, abhorred and
shunned all men's companies. Therefore in the field Atticus he got him a Den and
was gladdest when he was furthest of from the sight of al men. Insomuch that on
a time a very friend of his called Peantus brynging with him great provision
purposing to make merry with this Timon, Peantus
and jesting with him, and questioning how he fared, and how he liked of that
Banque^: Mary very well (quoth he) but I should fare and like better if
Pea^tus were away. Then the which speech, what could have been more hoggishly
or swynishly: Heraclitus
Such another was Heraclitus ye Ephesian which misliking men's company dwelled
in caves of the earth, and in Mountains and mandred in Wildernesses, lived
with Roots, Herbs and Water. Such another also was Diogenes, who for his
doggish conditions was called a Cynicke, Diogenes.
he abode alone in Cranium without Corynthe, harbored in a Tun in stead of
a house. In like so^rt did Theon and Arsentus, but these two chose out
solitarye places to avoid much corruption of life, Theon. Arsenius.
which they saw in those days abound every where. But of these solitary
persons, Melancholicke men, and very Saturnistes: we have per adventure said
sufficiently, and more then enough. We are now to reuerte to the other
effects of Saturn seen and experyenced, in the Inferior and baser kinds of
Creatures. And to come next unto brute beasts, all such kynds be proper unto
him which be of lumpishe and sluggyshe Nature, and slow to drive: As the Ass
which chyefely breeds in Arcady, and now also about Reate in Italy: as also
in Betica and throughoute all Lybia they go to Plough only with these, Ass.
and use them to all other intentes of husbandry. They refuse no burdens
bearing whilst their Backs break. With ye Milk of the she Asses, as
Tranquillus reports Poppea, Neroes Wife made her skin very clear and fair:
yet in Mauritania in the forests there are wield Asses called Onagri so swyft
in running that they cannot be caught until they have runned themselves out
of breath. Onagri.
Hitherto also belongs the Mule which breeds in India through the
conjunction of ye wild ass and Mare. Mule.
These be most what of brown color, and very swift. In ye Monuments of the
Athenians it is remembered that one of these lived four score years. Under
Saturnus is the Camel also, Camel.
both that of Bactria, and the other of Arabia. The first sort has two Kybes
on his Back, and this last has but one. And as they have such like upon their
breasts, upon which they rest and stay their Bodies so often as they lie
down. The Females have four Teates even as our Kyne here have, and their
Tail is like to ye Asses tail. They beat mortal and deadly spite to the
horse. They never drink but first they trouble ye water before with their feet.
Aelianus says yt there are of this kind yt live 50. years. These chiefly of
all other four footed beasts at such times as they mind going together,
seek first after some secret or hid corner or place wherethey cannot be seen.
Under Saturnus also are ye Goats which as they wax fat, Goats.
so do they leave bearing and wax barrayne. They go with their young 5.
months, as Ewes do: and they have 4. at once sometimes, but seldom. Till
they be 3. year old they bear not, and likewise when they wax old, they
wax barre^, they breed till they be 8. year old. They say yt these see as
clearly in the night as in the day time. Look what trees they bark they die
forthwith. And if they lick but upon the Olyue tree they cause it to leave
bearing. Under Saturn also for her solitarines is ye Hare, Hare.
as well those ye breed about ye Alps in Italy, and which be clean white,
living as they report in the wyuter Moueths with Snow, as also ours which
continue alone in ye fields, changing their forms wherein they squat and
keep, as often as they list. They sleep with their Eyes open, wanting Eye lids.
They are still and set at rest in the day time, and stray abroad for their
relief in ye night time. The field Hares are the smallest and swiftest of
foot. And ye hill and Mount Hares are ye greatest and less swift. The
experience of their swiftnes shows forth in then forefeete, which the lesser
and smaller they be so much ye more do they exceed and excel in their pace.
In their coursing they apply their ears fast and flat to their backs. They
use to beguile ye dogs oftentimes with courses in and out, and flexous turning.
When she has young she disperseth the^ abroad and hides ye same in sundry
places, thinking by ye means to keep and preserve the^ from finding out. If
she chau^ceth at any time to happen upon ye for, she strives to escape him
by swift flight. But he matcheth her shift with subtilty and flynes: For in ye
midst of ye course he gives her over and rests himself, Fox.
and being fresh again to follow after her, seeks after her foring, which
brings him directly to her form. The age of Hares is well coniectured by
certain sundry poares or holes that they use to have in their bodies as they
begin to wax old. Among serpents Saturn possesset those that be of most
deadly Venom, and Naturally gieuen to destroy: as the Adder, Adder.
which as S. Jerome in his Epistles says, is so full of poison yt when she
goes any where to drink, she is feign to lay aside her poison till she
returns again, for fear of brusting. So is the serpent Ichneumon which is
continually at hatred with the Aspe, Ichneumon.
and labors daily to find out the Aspes Nest to destroy her Eggs, whereby
she knows how greatly she hinders the Succession or increase of her deadly
Ennemies. Among fowls he chalengeth the Estriche which feeds oftentimes
upon Iron: also ye Pellicane which lives solitarely and in ye Wilderness,
Pellicane.
which resorteth much to the Sea costs and there catching shelfishes, after
she has devoured them she per braketh them up again to the intent she may
the more easly break their Shelles and come by the meat. The Swan also
solitary in her life, and merry at her death, Svvan.
so reioysinge in hope to be shortly with her beloved Apollo, (as says Plato)
seems also to be one of this number. Among Trees Saturn holds the Mulbery
tree which is long ere it waxes old, Mulbery tree.
and is counted of Plynie the wisest tree of all, for that he last of all
others puts forth his Buds and blossoms. And ye Ewetree is of this number,
Evvetree.
whose lease is like the Fyrtree, and whose Bark is like the Cedar: If any
Catrell bite of the roots of the Ewe tree they die presently. Among hear us he
holds Sa^^^try, which has almost ye taste of Time. And Heniwcke, with which,
and with flesh intermedled together, Hunters in diverse places destroy and kit
Wolves. Rhododaphne.
And Rhododaphne, which being taken inwardly poysoneth, and used only
outwardely is sufferayne in many Medicines. Plyn. lib. 36. cap. 17.
Among precious stones Saturn has the stone called Sarcophagus which being
put to the bodies of dead men and suffered to continue so but the space of
forty days, Sarcophagus.
it eats up all the whole Carkase, leaving nothing but the teeth only. It
should seem that there be at this present in Lycia some of these kinds of
stones, which being fastened to them that be alive, do ^^awe and consume away
their flesh. Contrary to this is the stone Chernites, Chernites
which is found in Persia, and is a perpetual preserver of the bodies of men
whether they be alive or dead. In such a stone was the body of Darius the king
of Persia sapped and laid at his funeral, and burial: which kept his body
safe from consuming away many hundred years. Heatherto also belongs the
Chalazy which is both of the color, and figure of hayle. Chalazye
And is the hardness, of the Adamant: This being put never so often or long in
the fire, waxes never the warmer or whotter, but continues still as cold as
yse. Subject also to Saturnus is the stone Galactites which is of a milkie
color: Galactites
this being beat into, powder and mixed with water, and so app^^ed to the
nosthrilles of sheep fetches their milk again after it is dried up.
Elaphoceratites.
So is Elaphoceratites which is like to Hearts horn. This being sta^^nt or
beaten into Powder and intermedled with oil, and so laid upon any part or
place of the body which is become bare or balde, does help in very short time
to fetch the hair again. Galazite
S. is the Galazite that delyuereth from the Ague: Also among Metals Saturn
has a do with Led which is of two kinds that is to say white led and
black: Leadde.
one of them will not be adglutinated or joined to any other thing, without the
commixture of another. Wherefore when they soder any things both these do
concur together thereto. The white is the best. In Medicines ye use of Lead is
great: for it helps to repress maimes, or scars, and being applied to the
Loins and nigh unto the Kidneyes in thynne Plates, or Leafes, with his
exceeding coldness it prohibiteth (as Plynie says) the burning desire and
immoderate lust of Venus. Lib. 34. Cap. 18.
With such kind of provision did Caluus the Orator, Caluus.
burninge greatly in ye desire of Lust and fleshly Concupiscence, assuage and
repress the rage of his intemperate desire. And being used also in such order
as after thin beaten Plates or Leaf wise, and put next the Breast it
clears the same exceedingly, and makes it more apt to singe out clearly.
Nero.
And so did Nero use to do to make his Voice and Breast pleasant. Among the
Elements Saturn has most a do with the Earth whose Qualities are also after
the manner of Saturnus, that is most cold and dry: Earth.
which Earth the Philosophers not without great cause called the Nourse or
Graunde Mother of all Lyuinge things here with us, for that she conceived and
brought forth so many distinct and diverse kinds of things as make now to the
enriching and beautifying of the whole World. And as the Earth serves to
bring forth such variety of fruits and provision, as wherewithal al things
living are richly sustained: so do all other things in ye World by Gods
special apoyntment serve to the commodity and use of Mankind, whom God has
made Lord and master of all. So that the Fire (as says Lactantius) which
serves to heat and to give light: Lib. de I ra Dei. cap. 13.
the Fou^taynes which out of the Earth and sides of hills gieue forth water:
the floudes which water our grounds: ye Hills that bring forth Vynes and other
deliciouse kinds of fruit: the Fennes, and Marshes, which bring forth Reed
and Sedge: the sea which both storeth us with variety of Fishes, as also
serves to the passage of Marchauntmen, and marchaundize: the Suu which altreth
and changes the times and seasons of ye year: the Moon who is a Guide and
governor in the dark night, and also a Distinguisher of the year into
several Months: the stars which serve greatly to the trauayling of the sea
faringe men: the winds which preserves the Air from corruption: all these,
as all things else which the Earth produces of her self any ways beneficially
(which are Infinite) serve all to the commodity, behofe, and use of Man. And
yet is not ye Earth (albeit it is so richly furnished and great withal and
immovable) any ways as big in quantity, Stars o^ what bigness.
as is the least star in the firmament, if ye Astrologians be to be credited,
for they say that the Earth is eighteen times less then ye least star there.
The earth less then the star how much.
To the deeper consideracion whereof (because this thing can hardly sink in
our senses) we are to understand that after the minds of Ptholomeus,
Alphraganus, and others expert Astronomers. The stars of the firmament are
distinguished into six sundry differences or degrees of Magnitude and
greatness. Stars are of six degrees.
In the first degree of quantity or bigness there are 16. in number whereof
every one is bigger then the whole Earth 107. times. 45. in number, whereof
every one is bigger then ye earth 90. times. 208. then the Earth by threescore
and twelve times. 264 and all of them greater then the Earth by 54. times. In
the fifte degree of greatness are 217. 35. times. In the sixth degree of bigness
are 249. 18. times. And all these are the least that are seen and have been
diligently observed and marked of the Astrologians: Whereupon Alphraganus
concludes that the least star which we see is a great way bigger then ye whole
earth. O miserable men therefore that make so much of a Moate, of a Center, or
Point, of a Prison: all which names ye earth has in respect of the higher
Heavens, and to care so little for the Possession of Heaven, where as is no
circumscription of Place, nor measure of Time, nor frivolous Shadows of Joy,
but all places there infinite and Immensurable, and consuming time quite
banished, and the Pleasures that be there be endless, and very glorious. The
virtue of the Earth in all bodies compou^d is to fortify them and to make them
durable, and fast. Whereupon the solidity or soundnes of every mixed thing is
derived and fetched from this Element. Earthquakes whereof they come
Yea and Earthquakes also, which come upon a conflict and force of some sore
winds pent up and scanted, or denied of their free course within the Entrails
or body of the earth, by such his sound or forcible resistaunce, procure
oftentimes great destruction and decay to whole Cities, Towns, and
Countries. As in the time of Seneca a great part of the Town Herculana,
Herculana, Neapolis etc. Overthrown with Earthquakes.
as also the City Neapolis, and certain cities of Ca^pania were overthrown.
In Lybia there was so sore and horrible an Earthquake, that an hundred Cities
at one time were decayed therewith. Lib. de mirabili sacr scripturae. What a
sore earth quakevvas in Thracia and Bythinia at Christ's death. 13. Cities in
Asia de stroyed with one Earthquake.
And S. Augustine says that at the very instant of Christ's passion there was
such a sore Earthquake, yt with the same there were Eleven whole Cities in
Thracia subverted. And in Bythinia at the same time, almost all the houses
there were overthrown. In the 20. year next after Christ's Passion there fell
down with an Earthquake 13. famous cities in Asia (that is to say) Epliesus,
Magnesia, Cesarea, Philadelphia, Sardis, Most hene, Megaethytra, Hymmolus,
Themis, Myrrhina, Cumae, Apollonia, and Diahir. In the 66. year after ye death
of Christ, three other famous Cities were sunk in Asia by an Earthquake,
Cities sunk herevvith in the yeare-of Chtiste 66. The year 79.107.
namely Laodicia, Hierapolis, and Colossa, and great wars afterward happened
throughout all the country. In the 79. year three Cities in Cyprus. In the
107.4. Cytyes likewise in Asia, Elea, Myrrhina, Pytanae, and Cume; and two in
Greece, Opuntys, and Orita: 116.
And in the 116. year, almost all Antioche pearished with an Earthquake. In
the 373. 373.
all Nicea almost was overthrown with the same. In the 557. 557.
year Constantinople whole 10. days together was shaken horribly, insomuch
that a great deal of the buildinges there fell down, and much people was
stayne. In the 829. year throughout Germany, 8 29.
and France there happened such an Earthquake, and so grievous and sore a
Tempest withal, that it overthrew great and lofty trees, and shook and
ouerturned very strong and mighty buildinges. Witzburg 841.
In the 841. year, Witzburge trembled 20. times one after another, and
destroyed many people and much building. In the 855. year Moguntia tre^bled
sore, 855.
and a Church there of S. Vrbane with the terror and trembling thereof fell
down quite. At which time many Cities also and great Turrets, and Castles in
Germany were likewise overthrown. In the 1120. 1120, Fire brust out with an
Earthquake.
year there brast forth out of the Earth with an Earthquake certain flames or
lights of fire, by which many were suddenly slain. And what shall I say of
Basile? which how often it has been decayed by Earthquakes I cannot now stand
to recite. And ever lightly before such effects of Earthquakes there went
before as tokens thereof great drowghts, or else continual and sore rain,
dryings up of Fountaynes, the light Signs of Earthquakes to follow.
of ye Sun in the Summer time greatly obscured by Black and dark Clouds,
or else with Clouds of red and fyery color, and whirle winds, and boisterous
rough winds rending trees a sunder, or else turning their roots upward, and
fyery flames running alonge in the Element, and straung aspect of stars, calm
Air, and also great and gross exhalations, and vapors breathing forth
fulsomly from ye bottom of ye earth, and the heavy aspect of Saturn, and
Mars. These signs have been always, and are yet for the most part
Prognosticators of Earthquakes to insewe. The Places, or Countries which are
most subject to these are such as be nighe to the sea, and chiefly where there
he many Fens, and hollow ventes of running Waters, as likewise in hilly
Countries. For about the Alps, and Appenninum, Plynie himself is Witness that
he has experienced and perceived very great and often tremblings and quakings
of the Earth. Times naturally apt for Earthquakes.
The times which be Naturally meetest for Earthquakes is the Spring time and
Autumn, and very seldom or never in the Winter time. And when they happen it
is oftener in the night, then in the day time: and the greatest and horriblest
that so happens is in or about the night, and is not long before the Sunset,
or else it happens a little before the Sun rising. Cap. 82.2. General kinds of
Earthquakes.
Plynie in his second book makes two kinds, or differences of Earthquakes.
One, which is the easiest, and which does least hurt or harm: which is as it
were a softy or right up shaking, This Vibration happened in England Anno.
Christi 1580. 6. A.
with the Philosophers called a Vibration which lyfteth lifts up buildinges
and houses bending, shaking, and bowing the^ with his upright force and
trembling at their highest or top. And such a kind of Earthquake happened here
in England upon Easter Wednesday, in ye year of Christ 1580. about vi. of
the Clock in the evening, Viz of April: which heaued up waters, hills,
houses, Castles, with such things as were contained in them, so bursting forth
and breaking out in such favorable sort, as that very title harm (the Lord be
thanked therefore) happened within these Countries here about us. Which
kind of Earthquake was a very Vybration or a shaking of Gods sharp and severe
Rod against us for the rottenness of our sins: yet in such merciful order
that upon proof, and trial of our amendment he spared us at that time from
sinking and quite subuertinge us, which thing our wickedness had thoroughly
deserved. God grant the same clemency of our most merciful father may drive
and draw us now at the last to take heed to our selves, least that greater
vengaunce ensuing does not overtake us. The second kind of Earthquake which is
a ruinous rushing together of all, 2. Succussio^ or Inclination.
and of Pessidonius called Succussio, or Inclinatio, is more perilous and
dangerous.

For in this Earthquake Howses that be far distant are tossed and cast up one
to another, and one upon another; and in the same, Walls, Houses, Hills,
Castelles, Floudes, Ryuers, great parts and pieces of Countries are sodaynely
soopte away quite: yea, and of this second kind of earthquake called a
Concussion, A straung Concussion at Fryburge.
there is sometimes that property that runninge up and down within the Earthes
enclosure, and there boiling like a seething Pot or seething Water, at the
length it breaks forth and does wonderful harm. As it happened at Fryburge
in Brisgoia, in the year of Christ 1509. Ann. 1509
Some called this kind of Concussion Brasteis. There is another kind of
Concussion or dangerous earthquake called Hiatus, Brasteis.
a gasping, or gaping as when ye earth with forcible matter wtin is driven to
part and sunder itself, with which kind of Earthquake the City Cyllene (as
says Plutarch) was sundred and rent a two in the days of Mydas the king: and
so was the country Lygustus afterward with the same. Also of this, there is
an other kind called Ruptor a burster, Ruptor.
which bursteth the Earth in twain, and swells the same, and puffs it up
like a hill, with which the Island Hiera, as also the City Heraclea in Pontus
was wonderfully tossed and tumbled. Then is there another kind of Concussion
called Trusor a thrusting earthquake which with violent force thrusts up all
that is in his way as it goes, Trusor
remoouing and bearinge all up on the to side. Then is there another kind
called Mugitus which is after alowing Noise, which with his strong lowing
sound shakes the Ground: Mugitus.
which sometimes also sounds without shaking, as when ye matter thereof is
more weak, but yet it strives and strugleth within and labors to get out
at the Earthes hollownesse. And these kinds of Earthquakes as they have
natural causes, so have they their names accordingly. But there have been
other Earthquakes which being without such causes, and only and merely
procured and caused by Gods mighty Providence very Miraculously, Miraculous
earthquakes.
may worthily be called supernatural and miraculous. As was when Peter was
delivered out of Prison: for yt was most strange in deed: Act. 16.
first by reason of the time, for it was at midnight: and the other are only
in the evening and morning: secondly they differ in form or manner: for this
shook the foundations only of the Prison house where Peter was shut up in, A
miraculous earthquake at Peter's delivery out of Prison.
and the other sorts shake most of all at the highest parts or tops of houses
and Buildings. This also did but only make away for Peter's delivery, and so
closed up the same again: the others where they once make any way they quite
destroy there for a full a do, and never close or shut up the same again.
Wherefore this was only a most special and supernatural kind of Earthquake.
But to return to Saturn. He has under him these Provinces and Countries,
Cou^ntries subjected to Saturn.
India, Aethiopia, and the lesser Asia. He also runs his course over the
zodiac in 30. years.

Thus much of the jurisdiction, proprieetyes, effects, and qualities of the
seven Planets, as also of all other kinds here below subjected unto the^: and
this which I have already said, I think it enough and very sufficient at this
time. God grant us by the consideration thereof to condescend into a more
deep meditation and contemplation of his most excellent and divine Majesty:
which is all in all, and all to all, as ye Poet said well: who is to be blessed
foreuermore.

A TABLE OF ALL SVCH Principal matters as is contained in this Book.
A.
AChylles. Fol. 63. b Adamant. Fol. 49. b Adder. Fol. 66. b Aeacus. Fol. 52. b
Aelurus Fol. 15. a Aeolus. Fol. 53. a Athalis. Fol. 19. a Amurathes. Fol. 63. b
Arsenius Fol. 64. b
B.
BAlmetree. Fol. 40. b Bears. Fol. 47. b Bees. Fol. 14. b Beetels. Fol. 14. b
Blasing stars how inge^dred. 35. a. The kinds thereof. 35. a. the chiefest
time for the^. 35. b. What they prognosticate. 35. b. their continuance. Fol.
35. b Bull first baited. Fol. 47. b Bloody bovves about the Sun when appeared.
Fol. 33. a Bucklers of fire seen in the Eleme^t when. Fol. 9. b Burning
lamps. Fol. 11. a Brasteis or the burninge kind of Earthquake. Fol. 72. b
C.
Camel. Fol. 65. a Cameleon. Fol. 14. b Chancharus. Fol. 21. b Catte. Fol. 14.
b Celestinus Fol. 64. a Cephalus. Fol. 49. a Circes. Fol. 60. b Chalazite. Fol.
67. b Chernites. Fol. 67. a Chiron. Fol. 60. b Clynias. Fol. 63. b Cock. Fol.
39. a Cockatrice. Fol. 48. b Colors seen in the air. Fol. 11 b Comets what
they prognosticate Fol. 36. a Cormorant. Fol. 15. a Countries subject to luna.
Fol. 16. a Cynamontree. Fol. 41. a Crabfishe. Fol. 40. b Cynocephalus. Fol. 14.
a
D.
DAnae. Fol. 54. a Dactylus Fol. 39. b Day how spent in time past. Fol. 61. a
Day how diuerssy accou^pted. Fol. 61. b Dictamus. Fol. 42. a Dolphin. Fol. 57.
b Doves. 57. a. A Dove carried a letter. Fol. 57. b Dragon Fol. 48. b Dyall of
vvho^ first found out. Fol. 61. a
E.
Eagle. Fol. 21. b. 37. b Eatites. Fol. 37. b Echeneis Fol. 15. a
Elaphoceratites Fol. 67. b Elephant and dragon. Fol. 55. b Endymion. Fol. 8. b
Europa. Fol. 54. a Evvetree. Fol. 67 a Earth Fol. 68. a Earth less then the
stars Fol. 69. a Earthquakes Fol. 70. a Earthquakes destroyinge whole Cities
and countries. 70. a. 100. Cities at once destroyed with an Earthquake in
Lybia. 70 a. differences and sundry kinds of Earthquakes. 71. b. A Vibration
or gentle Earthquake happening here in England 1580. 6. April. 71. b. A
miraculous Earthquake at Peter's delivery. Fol. 73. b
F.
Fox Fol. 66. a Fire brusting out of the earth with an earthquake. Fol. 71. a
Fire brands seen in the air. Fol. 1^^. a Fyery flames seen in the air Fol.
9. b Flying stars Fol. 11. a
G.
Galactites Fol. 67. b Galaxia or the milky white way of the Air in the
clear nights Fol. 12. b Galazite Fol. 67. b Ganimedes Fol. 60. b Garland of
the Moon. Fol. 12. a Garla^d of bloody color Fol. 32. b Garlike Fol. 49. a
Gaspings, gapinges, and gulphes seen in the air. Fol. 11. b Glanis Fol. 4. a
Goats Fol. 65. b Goshavvkes Fol. 30. a Gryffin Fol. 48. a
H.
Halo or Garlande of the Moon, and what it prognosticateth Fol. 33. a Halo of
the Sun, and stars what it betokens. Fol. 12 b Hare Fol. 65. b Hebe Fol. 60.
a Heliotropius Fol. 42. b Hermaphroditus. Fol. 19. a Hyatus. Fol. 72. b
Hieraclitus. Fol. 64. b Hiero Fol. 63. b Horse by vvho^ first found out. 45.
a. A trial of horses Fol. 45. a How to make Horses Warlicke Fol. 46. a How
and when horses marks varye and wear away Fol. 46. a Hyacinthus Fol. 42. b
Hyppodamus the svvyft runner. Fol. 44. a
I.
Ichneumon Fol. 66. b Juno. Fol. 60. a Iron. Fol. 50. a Iouialysts how
disposed Fol. 55. a Jupiter Fol. 50. b Iupter Enhorcius. Fol. 54. b Jupiter
Heterius idem Jupiter Homoginus. id. Jupiter Philius ide^ Jupiter Zenius ide^
Jupiter cou^tryes Fol. 58. b
L.
Lapvving Fol. 48. b Lead. Fol. 67. b Lodestone. Fol. 49. b Lotarius. Fol. 64.
a Long lack of the Sun shine. Fol. 32. b Lote tree Fol. 41. b Luna how
called. Fol. 6. b Lights in the night like the days light when. Fol. 6. a
M.
Mars. Fol. 43. b Mars his countries, Fol. 50. a Mars and Sol how they differ
Fol. 24. a Martialistes how disposed. Fol. 44. b Maximinianus Fol. 63. b
Menalipus Fol. 44. a Mercury his disposition. Fol. 16. b Mercurialists. Fol.
17. b Mercuries countries. Fol. 18. b Minos. Fol. 52. b Moon. Fol. 6. a Moons
Eclypse. Fol. 8. a 3. states of the moon. 7. a 3. Moons appeared at once. 9.
a. Course of the Moon. 7. b. Signs of prognostication in the Moon. Fol. 8. a
Mule. Fol. 65. a Mulbery tree. Fol. 66. b
N.
Nero Fol. 68. a Nightingale Fol. 38. a
O.
OEnomaus. Fol. 44. a Onagri Fol. 65. a Orion Fol. 52. a Ovvles Fol. 48. a Ox
Fol. 47. a Oxen by vvho^ first yoaked. Fol. 47. a
P.
Palmtree. Fol. 15. b Pantaure. Fol. 42. b Panthere. Fol. 14. a Partiche. Fol.
56. b Peantus Fol. 64. a Peacocke. Fol. 39. b Pelican. Fol. 66. b Peppertre.
Fol. 41. a Phaeton. Fol. 12. b Phaenix. Fol. 37. a Picus. Fol. 60. b Pomes
stone. Fol. 49. b Poppea Neroes Wife. Fol. 65. a Puttocke. Fol. 48. a Pie. Fol.
48. a
R.
Rhododaphne. Fol. 67. a Rainbovve how engendered. 33. a. the Rainbovves three
colors whereof they come. Fol. 33. b Raynbovves why there is often 2. or 3.
at once 34. a. Colors of the Raynbovv what they be and whereof they come.
Fol. 34. a Ruptor or the brustinge kind of earthquake. Fol. 72. b
S.
SATVRNE. Fol. 59. a Saturn whose son, and his sons. Fol. 60. a
Saturnists how disposed Fol. 62. a Saturnes countries. Fol. 73. b Sarcophagus.
Fol. 67. a Sea fox. Fol. 40. a Scolopendra. Fol. 40. a Selenites. Fol. 15. b
Seleno tropion. Fol. 15. b Spurg. Fol. 49. a Stars of what bigness. Fol. 69.
a Stars how they differ in degree of magnitude Fol. 69. a Strombus. Fol. 40. a
Succussion or the more dangerous kind of Earthquake. Fol. 72. a Sol or the
Sun why placed in the midst of the 7. Planets. Fol. 23. a Sol his Horses. Fol.
25. a Sol his countries Fol. 43. a Sun channging color every day Fol. 24. b
Suns Eclypse some general, and some special. 26. a What kind of eclypse
happened at Christ's death. Fol. 27. b Suns many appearing at once, as
sometimas 2. sometimes 3. Fol. 30. b Suns and Moons Eclypse how they differ.
Fol. 26. b Svvan. Fol. 66. b Sysiphus. Fol. 53. a
T.
Tantalus Fol. 53. a Tereus. Fol. 52. a Times horses. Fol. 61. a Torpedo. Fol.
15. a Torches. Fol. 9. b Timon. Fol. 64, a Touchstone. Fol. 49. b Trochus. Fol.
18. a Trusor or the thrustinge kind of earthquake. Fol. 73. a Tiger Fol. 55. b
Tynne. Fol. 58. b
V.
Venus. 19. b. her color 20, b. how she disposes them that are borne under
her. Fol. 20. b Ulysses his subtelty. Fol. 53. b Unicorn. Fol. 56. b Vulcanus.
Fol. 51. a Vultures. Fol. 38. a
W.
Whales. Fol. 58. a Wolf. Fol. 46. b
FINIS.

