The market or fair of Usurers.

A new Pasquillus or Dialogue against Vsurye, how and where it is forbidden,
and what punyshement belongs unto it, and whether (for ye mayntenau^ce of the
necessary trades of marchaundise) it may be forborne, and ought to be punyshed
or not, The chief Articles whereof shall apeare unto the reader in the next
pagine. Newely translated out of the high Almaigne, by William Harrys.

Deuter. xxiij. Thou shall be no usurer unto the brother, neither in money nor
in fode, nor in any manner thing that is lent upon usury.

Cum Priuilegio ad quinquennium. AN. M.D.L.

The principal matters entreated of in this Dialogue.
WHether Vsurye (for the mayntenaunce of the necessary trades of marchaundise)
may be forborne or not.

Whether usury be sin altogether or not where and of whom it is forbidden.

What punishment belongs to usurers, out of the laws of God and also of man.

Besides this certain questions, as whether a man may not be master of his
own goods, and use the same according to his disposition, for his profit
and pleasure.

What vsurye is.

What an interest is.

What order ought to be kept in felloweshippes and co^paignyes. And many other
objections.

An Epistle to the reader.
THe Scribes and Pharyseis and other enemies of Christ ever did often times
attempt him with diverse questions sometime of the Emperors trybute, sometime
of the highest and greatest precept of the law, sometime of the right way to
eternal life, and such like. Al which questions they did demand not to
search out the truth in any of the said articles whereby to sattle and
ground their consciences, nor to be better instructed in them as though they
had doubted in any such matter as they questyoned with him of, but only as the
holy text says to tempt him, and out of his aunsweres to gather some matter
against him whereby to trappe him, or else to be confyrmed rather in their old
and long before conceived opinions than to be wythdrawen from them, for they
had determined with them selves before what they would hold and believe, and
never to swarne there from nor to suffer them selves to be persuaded there
from, what so ever Christ or any of his Apostles show or teach to the
contrary. For where as they neither would nor could believe him to be the
heavenly doctor which had his commission not from any of the high bishops or
priests, but from the bosom of the father of heaven geuyng him this testimony.
This is my dear beloved son in whom I delyght and am well pleased, hear
him, hear him, how could they receive or believe any poynet of his doctrine:
But whatsoever he or his discyples said or taught, their mind and minds is
being partly festyd with ye rust of ignorans and partly ouercomme with
perverse obstynacy they never minded to alter their old corrupt judgments
and opinions nor to reform the least error wherewith they were blinded. In so
much as they would not ones acknowledge their most great errors to be any
errors at all, but would defend them rather as infallyble truths. And even
at a like point (the more pytye) is the wicked world at this present. Diverse
men are ready to move diverse questions, some of one thing, and some of another
thing, but how many are there that make their demau^des and move their
puestions to the intent to learn or to be better instructed: No no, they do it
rather either of a curiosyte for some color and pretens or else to be confyrmed
in their former judgments and doings. For if they doubted of such matters
as they question of, they would absteyne from doing the thing whereof they
move their doubt, until such time as they were fully resolved whether they
might lawfully do it or no. Were it not an vnsemyng thing for a judge first to
condemn a man to death and than afterward to inquyre whether his cause be
worthy of death or no? He ought rather to suspende the sentens until such
time as the matter were fully tried and examyned. Even so there are diverse that
axe and search whether it be lawful to lend money for increase and advantage
and to use usury and vsans. And in the mean time they practyse the thing to
the vttermooste they can drive it, as though it were a matter so lawful as had
no manner of doubt in it. O Lord what a blyndnes and peruersenes is this, what
do this men dyffer from the Scribes Pharyseis and enemies of Christ, the name
only reserved that they are and will be called Christians the holy Scriptures
were never more taught, reed nor preached nor better set forth then they are at
this day, but let us consider what is ye world ye better, but rather clean
contrary the better preaching the wors living, iniquite will ever have the
upper hand more and more still. To pass ever other matters were the minds of
men, ever so vncharytable or so insatiable as they be at this day even in this
light of the Gospel? The more increase God gives of all things, the greater
starsenes and dearth is there. The more God indewyth men with riches the more
covetous are they and the more shameful usury do they practyse therewith
sekyng them selves only as though they were borne for themselves only saint
Paul's lesson teaching all men to seek their neighbors wealth and not their
own is forgotten. And Judas lesson Quid vultis mihi what will ye give, what
will ye give, is learned at the fyngers endys.

And this causes so much misery in the world as is. Yet it provoke Gods
vengeans daily more and more upon our necks, I pray God we provoke it not to
much that it lyghten not up on us to suddenly, I pray God every may refourme
his enormyties in time. And specially such as are so drowned in couetuousnes
that they care not though their even Christen famysh for honger, as there have
some of late been herd of in this realm, lamentable it is to be hard of. But
at whose hands shall their blood that so peryshe but at the covetous
cormora^tes the covetous leas mongers the covetous rentreasers, the covetous, I
can not tell what ye call them, ingrossers, rakers and scrapers of so
insatiable an hundredth men's lyuynges will not suffice one of them. And when they
have the deuell and al in their hands that the poor must bye of them, they
will sell nothing but at their own price. And hereof spryngeth the inhausyng
of all things. Against the covetous usurers.
And what Godly laws statutes or proclamacions soever be set forth by the
Christen rulers, they can take no place in them though they be found never so
fauty, they will shyft out one way or other, if they be justly complained of
to the justices, some of them will be more ready to excuse them tha^ to punyshe
them, he? No he is to honest a man to do any such thing. Thus one claweth
another in the mean time deuouryng up the poor Tanquam escam panis, as David
says even as a morsel of bread. And what shall I say of the covetous
usurers, how many are gnawen to the bones and eaten up by them. What make they
of the return of their money in one month? But how lawfully how godly how
charitable, this little treatise and dyaloge translated out of the germanis
tongue does teach, if such as are corrupt and infect with that kind of
covetousness will be admonysshed, they may receive admonicion and instruction
thereby. If they will not their blood be upon their own heads, they can not
say but they were taught and warned. To be short God grant that every man may
consider the duty of Christen charity and practyse the some, it was never more
time, it was never more need. If they will not let them be sure of this, The
ox is laid at the rote of the tree, the rod is ready made wherewith we shall
be scourged. If any man may be called back at least from this vice of usury by
this little worck, both the writer and the translatour, shall think their
labors well bestowed and sufficiently recompensed, God grant they may so do
Amen. *

By Edmonde aellen

Pasquillus unto the usurers.
Dear usurers I chanced a lyttel before the last fair to mete with one of
yours in especial, by the way, with whom I had an unadvised communication
concerning your science. And forasmuch as I trusted that it should be
profitable to many, if it might come to your ears, I thought it good to open
it unto you, trustyng that ye will take it in good worth, until God send us
better. Thus fare ye well in haste.

Pasquill. What make shift do I find the here.


Usurer. A ha friend Pasquill where am I not found?


Pasquill. Go to, thou will be found one day, where thy friends would think
full little to have found the.


Usurer. Why so I pray the? where is that as thou thynkest?


Pasquill. In the deuels chymeny or smokinge hole, as I do conjecture, I dare
say none otherwise.


Usurer. Oh Pasquill God forbid it, I trust not that I have deserved it.


Pasquill. No? think thou so? I warraunt the thou art not like unto him
that sto^deth behind the door. Well take heed, believe me, it will be found
either in the dust or else in ye swipings. But whither art thou now bound.


Usurer. Why do thou ask? know thou not, that it is time to go to the
fair at Franckeforde?


Pasquill. Ah will thou thither. Oh how many good fellows will thou there
cut by the throat, I thought the harvest had been in already, will thou now
first begin to reap? But I think thou reapest both winter and Summer, where
thou sowest but little. Thou shall one day, (as I said before) be carried home
to the deuell with thy fruits which thou have reaped so long. Think thou
that thou can not be forborne at Franckeforth? Believe me, of a suertie, there
is many a good man at the fair, that would rather see an old wolf, then the.


Usurer. Why so Pasquill? I hurt no man.


Pasquill. Neither do thou good to any man, for naught: Which thing many a
good man at Franckeforth shall find fulwell, smally for their profit.

What have thou else to do at Franckeforth? Will thou sheare the sheep? It is
toward winter.


Usurer. What should I do there? what do other men there? I care my wares
thither, sell the^ and go my ways again.


Pasquill. What wares cariest thou thither?


Usurer. I carry thither gowns of marterns.


Pasquill. What? cariest thou thither gowns of marterns? The deuell taught the
that occupacion. I am sure thou geuest them good cheap. But woe unto those that
are so oppressed by the reason of winter, that they have need of thy gonnes. I
would rather be a cold until my tethe should clatter in my head, then I
would take pain to cover my body with thy gowns. I believe that many in thy
gowns are in such perplexite, that it were no marueyll though they should
defyle them both behind and before. But I pray the can thou sell them
well? Thou come now very late.


Usurer. Tush not a wit, I come yet soon enough. Though I came thither but at
the going out of the fair yet should I come time enough. For then have I
most commonly the best market.


Pasquill. Have thou so? I perceive when the merchants are bound homewardes
again, and fear the cold wether, the^ are thy gowns of marterns acceptable,
how dear soever some do bye them. Thou warnest many one with thy gowns in
one winter, that they are afterward a cold both winter and summer. I pray
the, why do thou not also wear a good thick, warm gown, that thou nedest
not to be covered so exceeding warm, when men will have a drop of thy sweat?
But what do thou bye again, when thou have taken money.


Usurer. Nothing in especial. I bye certain skynnes of marterns that I may
have work against the next fair. And the overplus of the money which I have
then left do I lend unto some good fellow suffering him to do his profit
withal until I come home, and then do I receive it again.


Pasquill. How do thou suffer him to do thy profit with it?


Usurer. I say his profit and commodity, what profit can he do me with it.


Pasquill. Oh God, save me from that profit and commodity. I pray God keep
thy gowns, thy momey, and thy lendinge out of ny trade: For they should sone
do me such profit and commodity therein, that there should but littell
remain. I know that profit and commodity full well good fellow, tell me
not of it I pray the.


Usurer. I pray the good Pasquil. Let this pass, we will talk of other
matters, I perceive right well where about thou go. Thou inuaiest against
vsurye, and yet know not what vsurye means. I was abashed as soon as ever
I saw the, for I thought well enough that thou would not let me alone,
because thou art always ready to comptrolle every man. Tell us some news I
pray the.


Pasquill. Nay hear thou, thou art not yet rid of me. Thou must at it first
a litell better. I hold the a grote, I will tell the what vsurye is, except
thou will not understand me.


Usurer. Alas good Pasquill, I am nothing afraid of the. I know as much of
that as thou can tell me. I will give the work enough, if thou be so
disposed. But thou wylt understand no reason, wherefore I could rather be
content to talk with the of other matters.


Pasquill. Yea thou know so much of it, that both God and man may lame^te
it. Thou know so many shifts, that a very subtle and large inhibition
concerning vsurye must be made for the, if thou should not find the way to
make a great frendshyppe of most abominable vsurye.


Usurer. Be content good Pasquill, my knowledge, shall neither displease God
nor yet man, for I hurt no man with it.


Pasquill. In deed the knowledge might be suffered, if the deed followed not.


Usurer. Tush Pasquill of a truth thou art ignorant of the matter. Thou will
have to do with vsurye against his will, but it is not to be scanded as thou
think, for thou art not expert in ye trades of marchau^dise: How should tell
the what vsurye means? for I think thou art not so depely seen in the holy
scriptures, nor yet in the laws, that thou should know so properly and
exactely to discuss and to judge of it. There are many poinctes belonginge to
it. Many cry out upon vsurye, Luther has also written fearcely against it,
but it is good to see how they hit it. Yea I know certaynely that if thou
should now tell me what vsurye is or means, thou should be to seek in
it, I omit that thou should exactely dispute of it.


Pasquill. Well go to, I have not studied in holy scripture in deed, very much
nor yet in ye laws. Neither is it possible for me to recite, understand or to
no^bre all and synguler inuencions and practices, of the, and of the theuish,
deuelyshe coming, and subtle felloweshippe, yet dare I undertake to tell the
what usury is, neither will I miss the one straw breadth from the holy
scripture, and the true sense thereof. But I pray the, have thou read*
Luthers book whereof thou have made mention? if thou have, I doubt not but he
has sufficiently told it the. And although it please not the, I think that
Luther wrote it not to the intent that it should please the and such as thou
art. I have heard diverse other which said that he understood it not. But I
think ye will not understand it. If he have not noted, specified and confuted
all your excuses and shifting holes (as it is impossible for any man to know or
to remember them all) yet has he laid such a foundacio^, that ye can not
overthrow it, no though ye knew and had the subtlety and craft of all the
deuilles in hell. Therefore it skilleth not, although thou and such like
helhoundes be not pleased with it.


Usurer. What good fellow, thou nedest not to call me, and my consortes
helhoundes, because I am not pleased with Luthers book, for I know if thou
thy self should read it and pondre it accordyngly, thou should not be
pleased with it, for he will have it in all poinctes so strayt as a line. But he
has not wayed it with further aduisement.


Pasquill. What I pray the, has he drawn the net to straight for the?
think thou so? thou thoughtest he should have favored the, the breadth of
a finger, that thou might find a stertyng hole, as thou do.


Usurer. Yea I wis is it drawn to narrow and to straight, as also the wise
Iuristes of Wittenbergh disputed of late, that if a man should take five or
six in the hundred by the year, it should be sin and vsurye: Think ye that
it was not well spoken of wise men?


Pasquill. Yea I have also heard of the same, Art thou not pleased with it?
Would to God that that man which disputed the same had so much yt he might
write of it, his unwise reason should so spread it out, that thou and all thy
felloweshyppe should have yet less pleasure in it. I pray the think thou
that it is so unwisely spoken, to say that but five or six of the hundred is
sin and vsurye? How does it then please the, that the same disputacion
affirms moreover, saing that if a man take a draught of cold water more then
he has lent, it is and ought to be called vsurye? How think thou by that?


Usurer. What should I think by it? It is folly. They understand it not,
where should they have learned it? I would gladly reason with one of them of
it. And Pasquill, if I should reason with the of it at large, I would tell the
so much, and lay before the such invincible arguments and conclusions, that
thou should be constrained thy self to grant and to confess, that vsurye
may not be tied up so short nor be so narrowely comprehended, how sore soever
thou be now against it. And would also decently prove unto the that such
vsurye (as thou do call it) is no sin.


Pasquill. If I had now four ears more then I have, I would set them all
open with nose and mouth to herke^ unto the, therefore go to with it, and spare
not. If thou could persuade me that Luther and the high learned and expert
Iuristes did not understand it, and that such usury were no sin, I would
hold somewhat of the, and would then also play the usurer in such sort that
nothing should cause me to refrain it, saving lack of head money.


Usurer. But I speak not of very great vsurye, as thou think, but of a
reasonable and decent gaynes.


Pasquill. Thy reasonable and decent is unto the young occupiers and
beginners, even as the playenge of the catte is unto the mouse. But I pray the
say on, thynkest thou that vsurye ought not to be so straightely tied, and
that it is no sin?


Usurer. Well seeing thou have a mind to it, I will talk with the further of
it, and first I will conclude on this manner. Whatsoever may not be forborne
for the mayntenaunce of the commonwealth both in city and country, of mutual
felloweshyp, and of all manner of necessaries pertaining to the natural life of
man, is not imputed unto us of God for sin, yea and the hyer powers ought not
only not to hinder it, but also to further and help to maintain it. For God
will have the mutual conversation among men preserved and entretayned in due
order. Now it is manifest that vsurye can not be forborne for the vpholdynge of
the premises: Therefore can it not be sin, and reason requires that it be
let alone, C ae ff* de Vsuris pertotu^. but it shall be found contrary
according as the temporal laws written have letten it pass, as I am
infourmed.


Pasquill. The first part, will I pass over and let it remain in his force,
Exemp. sunt in Deuteronomy. C. 18. Vbi iudeis specialiter co^ceditur. Vsurari. et in
David, 1. Re. 21 et in Euangel. Marci. C. 2.
for doubteles whatsoever among men can not be forborne, shall not be imputed
of God for sin, for else thereof should follow a great inconvenience,
wherefore I will here make no farther searce of it.

But the other, where thou say, that vsurye can not be for borne for the
same, I do not yet sufficiently understand, neither will I grant it the,
oneles thou infourme me better of it. If thou can prove it me, I will grant
the the consequence the third part, and do as I have said before. But as
long as thou do not prove the same, I will in no wise grant the the third
part.


Usurer. That usury can not be forborne, will I prove on this wise.

The trades of Marchaundise can not be forborne. Wherefore also those things
that help to uphold and maintain the trades of marchaundyse can not be
forborne.

That the trade of marchau^dise can not be forborne is evident. For every
husbandman can not run thither where all things necessary grow and are
made. Neither is there any land, that has al things necessary for man,
therefore must there needs be some me^ to carrye all manner of necessaryes, from
land to land and from one country to another. As it is manifest in the laws.

Therefore must it also follow, that the thing can not be forborne which
helps too maintain the trades of marchaundise. Callistra^usin l^j ff. de
Nu^dinis. Ex pl^tonc. Vide Dn. Budcum hic pulchre.
For like as I can not forbear an house in winter, even so can I not forbear
the thing which sustayneth and keeps up the house from falling. In like
manner, if the thing be not, or else ceasseth, which bears and susteyneth
the trades of marchaundise, then must also the trades of marchaundyse fall and
cease.


Pasquill. Thou nedest not to make half so many words. I know aforehande,
that whansoeuer thou affirmest any thing having some fondacion, thou sekest
all vauntage that can be sought. That the trades of marchaundise can not be
forborne, this do I know very well. I know also on the other part, that
diverse trades of marchaundise might as well be forborne, as some cannot be
forborne. Whereof I could show the sufficient proves, but we will not now so
far digress from our purpose. I know (I say) precysely, that the trades
of marchau^dise can not be forborne. I do also understand and grant, that
the thing can not be forborne which susteyneth and vpholdeth the necessary
trades of marchaundise. But what will thou conclude of this?


Usurer. Soft I pray the, thou shall hear it well enough. I proceed now,
saying.

What soever susteyneth and vpholdeth the necessary trades of marchau^dise,
can not be forborne, neither is it any sin lendyng and borrowynge vpholdeth
the necessary trades of marchaundise.

Therefore can not lendynge and borrowinge be forborne, neither is it any sin.


Pasquill. Concedo totum argumentu^, I grant all the whole argument. But see,
how connyngly he goes about the matter, even as the catte goes about a
mease of hoate potage. Oh, I perceive so pretely wherabout thou go. If thou
get much by this, I am sorry for it. But I pray the, go to, say on, let us se
what thou will make of it.


Usurer. What should I make of it? I will now proceed further, and conclude on
this wise.

Lendynge and borrowinge may not be forborne, neither is it any sin.

Wherefore also the occasion of lendynge and borrowynge, and the thing which
vpholdeth lendyng and borrowyng, may not be forborne, neither is it any sin.


Pasquill. Ha ha he, this makes me to laughe, I pray the where have thou
learned this goodly manner, that thou co^mest in so russhynge smothely over new
market heath? For thou might have come^ nere to the matter a great deal.
But thou will say a good foundation for thy matter, for the buylding is heavy,
and has much need of it, but dig not to deep, or else thou shall find
water. Oh what a sortee of dogs flies have thou about the, although it be not
about midsomer. When did thou ever hear me say that lendyng and borrowinge
is evil? Luc. Vi. Deu xxV Matt. V. Ecclisia* xxViii.
Is it not commanded in the holy scripture? If so be that praise unto the
lendinge and borrowyng, how should I dispraise the cause of lending and
borrowyng? But on I pray the, I will mete with the anon, out with it, go to,
I will tell the anon of that occasion.


Usurer. Well, then will I proceed, and say for a conclusion.

The occasion of lending and borrowyng ca^ not be forborne, neither is it any
sin.

Usury is occasion of lending and borrowinge.

Therefore can not vsurye be forborne, neither is that also any sin.


Pasquill. Ergo, ideo, igitur, quare, quamobrem propterca. Here of follows
vsurye so mightily, and cleaves so fast to lendinge and borrowinge, that no
Logician is able to move the consequence neither is there any Alchimist so
co^nynge, nor any water so strong, that is able to separate them. What way
shall I now turn me self? There have thou hit me in deed.


Usurer. Thou art full of pratynges and mockes, but yet thou can not leap
over it.


Pasquill. No in deed if a loode of hay stood in my way I could not, but I
pray yt who has taught the that high logike? where have thou studied it? Where
have thou read that vsurye is the occasion of lendinge and borrowynge?
specially of that lendynge and borrowynge which is magnified and praised of the
scripture. I thought thou had understood me, that I speak of lendinge
and borrowynge which the scripture prayseth. Eccli. 29. C.
But I must tell it the plain. There are two manner of lendynges and
borrowings. The one is that which is done of Christian charity and mercifulnes
freely without respect of any reward. The other is that which is done of
covetousness for gaynes and rewards sake. Whether of both these (think thou)
is praised of holy scripture? Whether of both (think thou) can not be
forborne? I am sure that lending and borrowinge for naught of more love and
mercy, D.C. 29, Eccli.
with out respect of any reward, is praised in the scripture. And this may
not be forborne, this also is not only no sin, but a Christian good work,
which God will reward, the occasion whereof is the Christian love, not to be
forborne nor dispraysed, for she is a tree full of many good fruits. And here do
I grant the, that this lending and borrowynge with his occasion may not be
forborne, and that it is no sin. But where will thou become with ye other
lending and borrowynge which proceeds of covetousness for lucres sake? Think
thou that this also may not be forborne, and that it is no sin?


Usurer. It is certain that it may not be forborne. Seeing then that it can
not be forborne, it can not be sin, nor yet his occasion, wherefore my
conclusion must needs stand sure.


Pasquill. Well if thou can prove me, that such lendynge which is done for
lucres sake can not be forborne, then must I byte in a four apple, and yield
me self, to be almost overcome.


Usurer. That it cannot be forborne, it is evident, thou co^fessest thy self,
and it is also manifest, that lendinge and borrowynge can not be forborne, and
now, thou make two kinds of lending and borrowynge, wherewith I am content,
neither do I disprayse the same division. But when the one ceasseth, if so be
that lendinge and borrowinge shall continue then must the other needs succeed.
Thou see with thine own eyes, that no man will lend for naught, and there
must needs be lending and borrowynge what way soever it come. Therefore must
needs the other succeed in the rowme of the first, and can in no wise be
forborne. Now seeing it can not be forborne, the thing ought also to be
suffered which is the occasion whereby lendynge and borrowynge is maintained,
least occupieng decay and perysh by the, both in city and town as is before
mentioned. For certain it is, that if lendynge and borrowinge should cease,
occupieng must needs decay and fall, and many men should peryshe and dye for
honger. If then le^ding for aduau^tage were forbidden, or were made so great a
sin, it should cease, and lendynge for naught is ceased and gone already,
what an hurlyburly and inconvenience should follow of it may be easily
perceived.


Pasquill. Behold I pray the, who would have believed that thou had ben so
good an archer, that thou should so justly have hit the prick? Thou have
hit it even as he that would stryke the cow on the head, and hit her on the
tail. I maruaill whether thou do wylfully deceive the self or that thy
master the deuell has so blinded the, that thou can or wilt not understand
thy self what thou speak. Thy meaning is this as I understand thy words,
forasmuch as no man will lend for naught, lendyng for advantage must needs
be suffered and not be counted for sin, that the ordinary felloweshyp and
occupienge among men may be entretayned. What means this else? then, no
man will do good, therefore must God suffer all abhominacion, and count it for
no sin, or else he should be feign to be in heaven alone. Or when the wolf
has eaten one sheep, while he will not be so contented, he does not amiss,
though he take another* either the deuell him self has blinded the, and
spoiled the of thy wits, or else thou will needs go the wrong way against
the deuilles will. A blind man may feel, how this agrees, no man will do
good, therefore must wrong dealing be praised. Thou say, and alas it is to
true, that no man will lend for naught. But what is the cause? Is it not that
detestable insatiable covetousness? If that were not the first lending should
not cease but follow mightily. But when covetousness is present, and does
hinder it, is it then Gods service? Will thou therefore conclude, covetousness
hyndereth Christian charity, therefore must covetousness have his course? Yea
say thou I grant that it were better and more godly done, to lend for
naught, but seeing the same is not done, the other can not be forborne, and
seeing it can not be forborne, the occasion may not be taken away, least it
be dasshed altogether. Lo thou put here two parts, the one that lendinge
for advantage can not be forborne, the other is the consequence wherefore the
same is no sin. So that thou repetest all that thou have said. Now will I
answer the more playner. First that the lendynge for vsurye can not be
forborne do thou prove by this, because that lendinge without reward
ceasseth, and that yet for all that lendynge and borrowinge may not be away.
Whereupon I have answered the that wrong dealing can not be good, because no
man will deal vprightely. Therefore must thou have a respect to the occasion of
the same ceassinge, and let it be sin, namely covetousness, and then shall
easily judge the other part, that is to say, whether lendynge for advantage
by sin or not. And I think also that thou will judge thy self that all is
not well, saving only that necessite causes the to affirm the contrary. For
thou say that need requires it to be suffered, least lendinge and
borrowynge do decay. Here will I ask the a question: Who is it that can not
forbear this lendynge upon vsurye? Think thou that those pore fellows
which are in necessity can not forbear it? Yes yes very well, if they can
not forbear lending, they may forbear vsurye so much the better. Yea say
thou, if they can not forbear lendyng then must also usury needs have his
course. Yea they are sorry enough for it, that it has his course, for they
could forbear it well enough. Who is it then that can not forbear it? The
usurers? Yea verily, because they can not be filled nor satisfied, else could
they forbear it well enough. Therefore may vsurye on every side be forborne
well enough, neither is there any necessite that can make it good.


Usurer. Pasquill thou do not well understand me. How be it thou have said
so much in deed that it may be perceived, that the fault is nowhere but in the
will. And indede a man might as well lend for naught as for lukers sake, if he
would do it. But I will be here, thou talkest much of Christen love, but it
will be long or thou shall bring it into all merchants. Therefore do I suppose,
that vsurye can not be clean taken away in the trades of marchaundise. For
then those trades must decay remedyles.


Pasquill. Yes, I understand the well and fine, now better then before. Thou will grant me I am sure, that it is not well done not to lend for naught.


Usurer. I grant in deed that it were better and Godlyer, if men did so. But
that it should be so evil done to take a reasonable reward for it, this can
not I believe.


Pasquill. Well that shall come after: I will not now digress from thy
purpose, but will reasone with the of that, where thou thynkest, that vsurye
may not be whole taken away, because of this necessite, that occupie^g should
fall and decay. Of the sin will we talk afterward. If vsurye were now
forbidden quyte and clean, in such wise that no man durst take any more then
he had lent (I speak of vsurye and not of rentes which may be redeemed
again) what thynkest thou would follow of it?


Usurer. Tusshe, that is impossible to be done, what should follow of it, no
man would lend or trust any more to other, and so must occupienge needs
decay.


Pasquill. Oh, would to God that many of those trades of occupie^g had never
been invented nor brought up. But hear thou, I must somewhat tell the of
that lendynge and borrowing which may not be forborne. There must needs be
lendyng and trusting, to thyntent that many a pore fellow may have where
withal to begin, truth it is that many one is able to occupy for the
profit of the common wealth although he have not always ready money. But if it
were forboden (as in deed it is forboden sufficiently) that no man should sell
his wares which he trusts, any dearer, then he does when he sells them for
ready money, think thou that lending and trusting would utterly decay? no
verily. The great occupiers would never suffer that lack in their occupienge.
They should not always find such merchants as would bring them great
bags full of dubbell ducates.

Wherefore if they would sell their wares they should be feign to trust then
as well as now. And although they would not trust many one whom they trust
now, yet would they trust some of the^ rather then they would keep their
wares and lose their fresh occupienge. And then must many a man occupy as
far as his purse would reach, and stretche out his legs according to the
length of his couerlet. He must occupy so much the less, go fair and
easily, and not fly before his feathers were grown. Then should he also have
this advantage, that he should bye so much the better cheap, and should
not need to take naughty, old, myngled and deceiuable wares, whereby he might
warraunt them again unto other, and need not to deceive any man. Which
should be unto him an occasion of a good name whereby his occupieng should
greatly increace. Now adays, if a man be trusted, he must give so much more
in every pound, and besides this he must take naughty and rotten wares,
whereby the common people is enhaunced and deceived. For he must needs sell his
false borrowed wares again so much the dearer, if he will recover his head
money, and have a living by it. Wherefore if this enhauncynge were forboden, the
merchants should be constrained to lend and to trust eue^ as well then as
now, if they would occupy, and lendyng and borrowynge should then keep his
course better and more co^modiously than it does now.

Paraduenture thou will say, that ca^ not be done, who should look upon it, or
who can be in all occupacions, and at all bargains? To this answer, that the
borrowers and such as should be trusted, would take good head to it, and
would also inquire diligently, how wares are sold for ready money. Therefore
this is sure, that although such enhauncynge and raysyng of prices in lendynge
or trusting were strayghtely forbode^, yet shoud good trades of marchaundyse
and occupatio^s keep their course nevertheless. And if thou thynkest that the
occupiers would also keep up their wares for ready money, thou may be sure,
that if one come and bring ready money, if so be that the occupier will not let
him have his wares for a reasonable price, he will go to another, which will be
glad to let him have it for a price reasonable. Whosoever will make money of
his wares, must also receive money for them. The merchants and sellers are
expert enough in that feate, if a man come unto them and bring a bag of money
in his hand, they are loath to send him away.

In like manner we conclude of lending. Where as one merchant le^deth to
another, or a rich Jew having much money lends to this man or to that man
for money. If this were forbidden, as in deed it is forboden in all laws, that
no-man should take more again then he had lent, should occupienge then
decay? No forsothe. One good neighbor would lend to another nevertheless a
crown or twain at his need. If then one rich man would not lend to
another, so must the nedy leave much pride, deceyte and bragging. If the
rich would not lend unto the pore merchants, and specially to young
beginners, then must every man order him self thereafter, and occupy fair
and softely, he must not cry ho before he were over the dyche, nor make larger
cloakes then the cloth would give, and it were better and more profitable for
the occupiers and the commonwealth, that it is now when vsurye and such
great lendyng is occupied.

It were better for the occupiers, for then should not every one that is not
worth one hundred crowns be so ready to borrowe for.iij. thousand crowns
wares, trusting to the usurers. Item it chau^ceth many times when a man has
occupied for a season, and has been trusted of many an honest man, which have
lent him their wares, that an usurer comes after them, and eats him up
clean, so that of flesh and bones he becomes iron, in the devils name, and
pays nothing to noma^. And though it were not greatly for the profit of ye
great occupiers which lend so much money upon vsurye, yet have they no need
of it, neither should their occupienge decay by the reason thereof, and it
should be for the commodite of the mean sort, that they should not be so
deceived, and also for the young beginners, for then they should learn to take heed to them selves, and to occupy after their ability, that they should not
clyme so high in one year, that that they should afterward be constrained to
fall so much the hier with shame, they should also know their gaynes, and that
they get it for them selves and not for the usurers. It should be for the
common weith, that God were not so offended with vsurye, that there chanced
not so many co^plaintes of decayed merchants, that every man must occupy
according to his purpose, and not above his abylite, least he might be
occasioned to take much upon vsurye, by the reason whereof he should be feign
to raise the pryces of his wares again, and to sell so much the dearer. If
princes and cities had not one or twain that were rich alone and made a
hundred men pore or more the high Potentates and also their poor commons
should not so fore be burdened in time of need, they should learn also to
avoid some dangers. Wherefore it were better that vsurye were forboden, for
necessary occupienge should remain nevertheless in his course. And although it
gave the occupiers a blow, (for many of them should not have so great a
trade, neither should there be so many occupiers) yet can not I perceive
wherein it should be prejudicial or hurtefull to the commonwealth. For it
should profit the commonwealth in those things which I have recited before.

Parauenture thou will say unto me, it is a thing which perchance might be
brought to pass in such things as shall be done and contracted hereafter, but
how should it agree with that which is in occupienge all ready? One man is
indebted to another, every man wylbe paid, if his debtor have no money there
must needs be some body to lend him, for his creditour has made his reckoning
upon it. Wherefore if vsurye were forbidden, he should find no man that would
lend him.

To this I answer. That one must bear with another from the least unto the
most, for they may tarry well enough. If they will not, Eccli. 29.
they may go their ways from the doors. If complaynte be made then must the
hyer powers help and counsel according as the matter requires. Yea I can be
content to grant that it would give the occupiers a blow, but wherein
should it hinder the commonwealth? The merchants also should find the
means well enough, that the trades of occupienge should not be greatly hindered
by it. But they let it not come to that, for it would seem very grievous them,
but if it were ones put in ure, no man should feel any hurt by it except the
usurers, neither should any man be the worse by it saving the chief
merchants, and that could make no great matter. For within the space of a
year or twain it might be brought to that pass that all should be
forgotten, and there should be an upright and true dealing in all trades of
occupienge. In deed it is a great matter to speak of, yea and I know right
well that all merchants think it impossible, but yet if they were so
disposed, having a mind to it, and would help thereunto, they should find
it otherwise. This do I not speak because I would teach the hyer powers what
they should forbid, or because I think that lendynge and trusting may be
altogether forborne. But to show the my mind how vsurye may be right well
forborne, and that, although it were sharply forbidden, the commonwealth
should not be only not hyndered by it, but also greatly furthered. Sicut
ipse Imperator facitin L. I. fin. C. de. cad. tollen
And although it were somewhat prejudicial to certain fat Cobbes, yet ought
rather a respect to be had to the furtheraunce of the commonwealth, then to
the private wealth of certain private and sinful persons. Su^ma GOD forbids
us nothing that for the maintenau^ce of a decent order and for the necessite
of mutual conversation and lyuinge between man and man can not be forborne.
But God has forbidden vsurye. Vt infra patebit.
Wherefore it is certain and clear, that it may well be forborne. Also that
the abolishing of it seems to be such a busy piece of work, is for lack of a
good will toward the same, for the fault of it is nowhere else but in the
will, wherefore I say, that the objection of the great occupiers and specially
of the usurers is nothing worth, which say, that usury can not be abrogated,
though there be never so much cryeng and writing against it, because that for
the maintenau^ce of the trades of marchaundise it can not be forborne. In deed
they that be usurers, and such as have a profit by it, think that they can
not forbear it, yea many of them (I think) would go nygh to hang them
selves, if it should be forbidden, or rather more then forbidden, but the
commonwealth might forbear it well enough, for the necessary trades and
occupie^ges, should keep their course nevertheless, as farrefurth as they are
necessary and profitable for the commonwealth, and can not be forborne.


Usurer. Of a truth Pasquill thou art able to bring a man in a doubt. In
deed it is true that the fault is but in the will, for else it could not be
so impossible to be done, But to bring men to this will is very hard to be
done. There are very many of this opinion, yea and I my self have been of this
judgment, that vsurye ought to be permitted, and not to be abolyshed, because
of the trades of marchaundise. But now verily I know not what I should say.
Truly I will look better upon the matter.


Pasquill. Remember thy self and study about it, and thou shall find that
the fault is in the will only, and not in the possibilite, as pertayninge to
the merchants. I know that not a few, unto whom this our communication
shall come, will be very sore offended with all, thinkinge that heaven would fall,
and the world peryshe, if vsurye should be abolyshed and taken away,
notwithstanding every man is bound to counsel, to say, and to do the best
for the profit of the commonwealth. But if there were any wise man among them
being persuaded and certified by his learning that vsurye might not be
forborne, for the mayntenaunce of occupieng and for the profit of the commonwealth, that would write against me? How should I do then? But I do not
greatly fear it, I trust to God that I shall get never a white hear for
it. For they are asshamed of their occupacion, neither will any of them
lyghtely cry Cuckowe.


Usurer. No faith Pasquill, thou nedest not to fear that matter nevertheless if
it should chance, which God forbid, I doubt not, but thou would find
an answer for him.

But I will look better upon it my self, and at this time we will proceed, and
talk further of the matter that I spoke of before. I will grant the that it
were more Godly and Christenly done, if one would lend to another for naught,
yea I permit also ye vsurye might be forborne for a need. But think thou,
I pray the, that a man is so bound to lend for naught, that it should be
sin, if he did it not? May not one use his goods for his most advantage?
Who will compel a man to lend away his goods for naught, which he might
occupy him self?


Pasquill. Thou put here three manner of questions. First, whether a man be
bound to lend unto his neighbor: Secondly whether it be sin to take any
thing for it. Thirdely whether a man may not occupye his goods to his most
advantage. To the first will I answer the with Doctor Luther, that the
te^porall powers does not compel the to lend away thine own, wherefore also
the te^porall powers does not correct the if thou do it not, neither can they
say that thereby thou have offended against the^. But whether thou be bound
to it before God, and whether it be sin before god, nedest thou not to ask
me, for it is written. Whosoever has this worlds good, i. John. iij.
and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
abides the love of God in him. Is not love commanded in many places of holy
scripture? and also her works? Says not the scripture, I. Ioh. iiij
beloved, if God so loved us, that he gave his only begotten son for us, and
sent him into the world, that we might live through him, we ought also to love
one another. If we love one another, God dwells in us. Ibidem.
Item this commandment have we of him, that he which loves God should love
his brother also. Leuit. xix
Item thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Gal. V.
Item se that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently. I. Pet. I.
Item, this is my commandment, that ye love one another. John. xV.
Lo, thou art bound to love thy neighbor as thy self, art thou not then
bound to help him to counsel him, and to profit him, as thy self? Yea if
thou must do to other as thou would be done to if thou were in necessite,
Luc. VI. Mat. Vij.
and if thou might be helped with money, and kneweth that thy neighbor had
enough, would thou not be glad that he would help and succor the? Romans
xij.
Thynkes thou that love is called the fulfilling of the law in vain? Wylt
thou then be a Christian? will thou walk in the law? Will thou dwell in God?
And wilt not abide and walk in love? Says not the lord Christ, I. John iiij
Mat. V. Deuteronomy. xV.
turn not away from him that would borrowe of the? Item. When one of thy
brethren among you is waxed pore se that thou harden not thine heart, nor shut
to thine hand from thy pore brother, but open thine hand to him and lend him
sufficient for his need which he has. Lo thynkest thou that thou art not
sufficiently commanded to lend unto thy brother? Thynkest thou yet that thou
art not bound to it? Yea is not by this also thy second question
sufficiently answered, where thou demau^dest whether it be sin to take ought
for it? Behold, if the lendynge of a Christen man, be a deed of charity and
mercy, should then the sellyng of thy wares to a man for money be also a deed
of charity? What do thou give him for gods sake I pray the? Luc. vi.
Says not Christ, that thou should le^de loking for nothing thereof again?
He says lokinge for nothing, I omit taking any thing. Should this also be a
Godly work, when thou lendest and art paid dear enough for thy labor? Do not
sinners also lend sinners, as Christ says in the same place? Will thou ask
yet whether it be sin to take any more than thou have lent? Is it not
vsurye? Do noth both the Spiritual and temporal laws call all that vsurye,
whatsoever is taken above the head sum? i. iiij. iiij. q C plerique. Cum. c.
sequen. A. xx. C. de Vsuris in Sum. ae. Communiter.
Not only the money which is that above, but also whatsoever it be, D. xiiij.
q. iij. C. si feneraueris. C. sequen. D. C. plerique. etc. fin.
as meat, drink, rayme^t cloth or any thing else. Yea also the only desire or
hope to have any lucre or gaynes by it is vsurye, and whosoever lends ought
after this sort is called an usurer in the spiritual laws. c. For it is
written, Mutuum date nihil inde sperantes. Se that ye le^de loking for nothing
thereof again. D.C. Foenerarius. et de Vsuris C. Consuluit. D. C. 6. Luc.
Excipe casus in. 6. Conquestus. c. Salubriter. et i. Ex de Vsurisquo rumque
solutiones sunt in glossis. et in Interesse de quo. i.
Saying then that it is vsurye whatsoever is desired and taken above the head
sum, as it is without any doubt; and is also so taken in all places in the
laws, do thou yet demand I say, whether it be sin to take any thing
for it? Is not vsurye forbidden hard enough both in the spiritual laws, and
also in the te^porall laws? Is not this a plain text of Christ which I
have now certain times aledged out of the sixth chapter of Luke, where our
savior himself commands saying, se that ye lend lokynge for nothing
again? nothing is not some thing, neither is some thing, nothing. What says
the Psalm? Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? Who shall rest upon thy
holy hill? Even he that leads an vncorrupt life, and lends not his money
upon vsurye.

Where shall he than become that gives his money upon usury? Even without the
doors. In that heaven, where the deuilles chase one another with do^ge forkes.
Exo. xxij.
What says the lord in the second book of Moses? If thou lend money to any
of my people, thou shall not oppress him with usury. Ezech. 18.
Item Ezechiel nu^breth those among the righteous that receive no vsurye, Leu.
xxV
nor any thing over. Item in the third book of moses. Thou shall not take
vsurye of thy brother, nor yet vantage. Thou shall not lend him thy money upon
vsurye, nor lend him of thy fode to have aduau^tage by it, but shall fear thy
God. Lo, if thou must fear thy God concerning vsurye, the^ must it needs be
sin. Item in the fifth book of Moses. Deu. xxiij
Thou shall be no usurer unto thy brother, neither in money, nor in fode, nor
in any manner of thing that is lent upon usury, that the lord may bless the.
That is least he course and condemn the if thou do the contrary. xiiij q.
iiij i.c. et q. c. quod debetur. etc. nec hoc d. q. iiij. etex. de Vsuris c. 1.
and ij. and in alijs locis.
In like manner is vsurye forbidden in the spiritual laws written, so that it
is not lawful to commit usury neither for priests nor yet for lay men. And
the temporal power submits her self unto the spirituality in such cases as
draw to sin and disquiete the conscience. Willing men therein to obey the
spirituality. Authen. de Ecclesiast. titulus. Anno M. D. and Anno. M. D. xxx.
auguste Vind. licorum.
Whereby she will also have vsurye forboden and abolyshed. Yea besides the
wholesome laws and statutes of this realm, the most puyssaunt emperor Charles
now reignyng and all the states of thempire together assembled at sundry
general counsels, have earnestly forbidden, abrogated and besides that
knowledged to be of none effect all manner of contractes agreeme^tes and
bargaynes, myxt with usury. Lo, do thou yet ask whether it be sin to
receive more then thou have le^t? Thou hear and see by many evident and
plain textes of holy scripture, and by many places alleged out of the laws,
that it is against God and the hyer powers both spiritual and temporal,
think thou then that if such usurers as have taken so much vsurye of many
one, were deprived of their head money, were served amiss? And that it were
commanded, that whosoever had given so much vsurye as the head some me
amounts, should neither give any more vsurye nor yet return the head sum?
For vsurye is forbidden, and the usurers have had warning enough. And if now
the hyer powers and magistrates would earnestly and openly proclaim al manner
of co^tractes mixed with vsurye to be void and of none effect, and to put in
execution the foresaid ordinances contained in Gods book and the wholesome
laws and statutes of this realm agreeable to the same, thynkest thou that it
were not well done? Have not those helhundes had warnyng enough? Have they not
been sufficiently admonyshed, both by open textes of holy scripture, and also
by wholesome laws and statutes before mentioned?


Usurer. Tushe Pasquill, thou art to tediouse for me, I can hold my peace no
longer. I have herkened unto ye till I sweat again. Thou have told me so
much, that I must needs grant that it were better and more godly, if one
would lend to another for naught, then for money, neither can I choose, but
must needs confess that it is sin also, if a man take more than he did
lend, for both the spiritual and temporal law says that it is vsurye, how
littell or whatsoever it be, and again the holy scripture and our Lord and
savior Christ himself, and besides this the spiritual and temporal
magistrates do forbid usury. If so be then that God does count it for great
sin whatsoever is committed against the commandments and ordinances of
the hyer powers only, how much more will he count it sin, and grievously
punyshe whatsoever is committed against his divine majesty his only begotten
son Jesus Christ, his word, and against the hyer powers both spiritual and
temporal also? Therefore must vsurye needs be a great sin doubtless. But yet
there are certain cases in the laws, wherein a man may take somewhat more the^
he has lent? Wherefore I believe, that in this lendynge whereof thou speak are
many cases and exceptions wherein it is no sin at all.


Pasquill. In deed, there are certain cases, wherein the surplus is not taken
for vsurye, Gloss. in c. quonia^ multi. xiiij q. iiij.
as where the surplus is taken for auoydinge of damage, for there it is
counted and taken for an interest, and not for vsurye. What vsurp is
For vsurye is, when any thing is taken above the head sum, the creditour
remaining harmeles, and the head sum not being diminished. But this is not
vsurye, when a thing is taken away from the one end and put to again to the
other end, as I will declare unto ye.


Usurer. Forasmuch as thou have brought me into this disputacion, I can not
yet cease from it. Thou speak here of Interest, I pray the tell me, is not
Interest usury, surplus and such other all one? Or what difference is there
among them?


Pasquill. (advantage) Cum per id probat^r dom. et possess. l. ij. C. de arg.
et ret. possess.
Well, seeing thou art disposed, I take it also for a pastime, and will gladly
talk with the further in the matter. But of Interest will I tell the
afterward. It is far another manner of thing then vsurye, although it be a
covering for much usury. I will first answer the to thy third question, Cum
quis que sue rei moderator and arbiter sit. l. In re mandata, c mandat i.
(Loss and) hinderau^ce.
which thou mouedest before, namely whether it be not lawful for a man to
occupy and use his goods as he may best for his advantage, for thou
should else build upon it again. Arg. l. Iusticia Iuris precepta, ff. de
Iustit. and iure. and sic secundum. l. Nam hoc natura. ff. de co^dict. indeb.
l. Iure naturae. ff. de reg. Iur.
Wherefore thou shall understand that the temporal powers and their laws do
not forbydde the the use of thy goods according to thy will and pleasure for
thy most profit and aduau^tage. Notwithstanding although the same power in
general will and grants the the use of it after thy mind without any man's
loss or hynderaunce, for thy most profit and aduau^tage, yet does it not
extend so far and so straightely against thy question as the holy scripture
does. Howebeit the temporal power does so L. si quis. fin ff. de Instito. act
l. si pupilli.. sed and si quis ff. de nego gest d. ll. nam hoc. not. and iure.
naturae.
straightely and narrowely co^prehende the use of thy goods, that thou can
not build usury upon this question. For neither the spiritual nor temporal
powers do permit unto the the use of thy goods any further, then as far as
it is not against God and his laws. If so be then that they forbid the the
use of them. arg ab of ficio Magistratus et possint adduci in numerabi lia
exempla exutro que iure.
as it is against God and his laws, the^ do they also forbid the the same in
usury. For that is against God and the laws as thou have heard before.

But yet the holy scripture goes further, and co^prehendeth the use of them
more straitely. For the hier powers suffer the to apply the use of them for
thy most profit and advantage so that thou do not hinder nor harm any man
with them, nor attempt any forboden thing therere with. But the holy
scripture wadeth further, and will also that thou shall do good with them. The
temporal powers in general are content with the although thou do no good with
them, so that thou do no hurt or harm with them. But the holy scripture takes
better hold of thine authority which thou wylt have in thy goods. As has been declared above.
And will that thou shall not only do no harm with them but also that thou
shall and must do good with them, if so be that thou will be a Christian, and
the child of God, and not a panyme or a Turk. Thou art forbidden to commit
any vsurye with them, and thou art commanded to serve and succoure thy
neighbor with them, as thou have heard before. Therefore shall thou
understand and take this answer concerning thy third question, that it is
not lawful for the without any difference to occupy and use thy goods at
thine own pleasure, as thou can best, for if thou would occupye and use
them in matters contrary to God and his laws, thou have none auctorite to do
it, for thou art forbidden so to do both by God and also by the hye powers
who^ thou must obey, or else thou art the child of the deuel both body and
soul, for God is thy creator, Romans xiij.
and the hyer power is thy defender under God. Genesis i.



Usurer. Of a truth Pasquill this same is a good Instruction, neither do I
think that any man can reprove it. And I assure the that I have oftentimes
heard this objection, that a man is lord and master of his own goods and
has auctorite to use them for his commodite and profit, thinking thereby to
make usury lawful, or at least that a man were not bound to le^de his goods
for naught. But now I perceive right well that a man not only has none
auctorite to use his money in vsurye or in any other thing against God and the
laws, but also that he is bound of very duty to serve other with it for
naught, according to ye manifest instruction which thou have given me out of
the holy scripture. But I pray the now tell me some, what of the Interest, for
there will also befall some questions.


Pasquill. Truly of this Interest has Doctor Martyne Luther given the
sufficient instruction in his book by the before mentioned, wherewith thou
ought (if thou were not so full of hou^des flies) to be satisfied. But to
the intent thou may have occasion to demand more questions, I will repete it
again.

Phil. Det. in l. Vnica C. desenque pro eo quod int. prof.
This word Interest has many significations among the lawyers: But they serve
not al for our purpose, wherefore I speak of that, whereof thou demaundest.

And the same is nothing else but amends making for the loss and
hinderau^ce which the creditour may have sustained by ye reason of the debtors
none payment at his day appointed. And this is called elegantly of doctor
Martine Luther, a scathe watch, for it is nothing else. And if there be no
scathe wache (that is, notable loss or damage sustained by the creditour)
there can be no Interest, but it turns to usury whatsoever is taken above the
head sum.

This loss or damage may happen to a man two manner of ways. quo ad nostrum
propositum. ut. sup.


First if thou lend me twenty pounds, and I promise the to repaye the same at
a certain day and place appointed. The day being expired. I break promise
with the. By the reason whereof thy creditours oppress the, and put the to
trouble and loss. And if I had kept promise with the thou should not have
neded to suffer any damage, but myghtest have pleased thy creditour without
any further costs and charges.

Secondely, when I have lent the my money, and thou having promised and
appointed me a day of payment, faylest in thy promise and breakest thine
appointement with me, I may chance upon a bargayne, by the which I might have
gotten somewhat toward my living, but thou by the promise breaking causest me
to lose the bargain, and so hinderest me in mine occupienge, and living.

Lo here are two manner of losses. Wherefore the Interest is elegantly called
among the lawyers a wasshinge of scate, or an hyndering and ceassinge of
gaynes. Glos. in Ver. Possibile, ibi Det. and com. d. l. Vnica. d. tit.


Now this loss or scathe may happen unto a man two manner of ways as
co^cerninge the time or day appointed. First when I do not keep promise with
the, as it is said before. Secondely also before my day is expyred. For it may
chance that thy creditour may arreste the and put ye to hynderau^ce, before my
days come and peradventure before thou wast ware of him. Or thou may
chance upon a bargayne, in the mean season whereby thou might do good, but
forsomuche as I have thy money in hand, having apoicnted the a day of
payment, which is not yet come, thou must forgo the said bargayne. Thus I
say may this loss or scathe chance two manner of ways, that is to say,
before, or after the time appointed.


Usurer. Well go to then, what say thou to the first way, when the loss
chau^ceth after the day appointed? That is, when thou by thy breaking of
promise with me, causest me to incur into loss and damage?


Pasquill. Truly this requires no great disputacion, Natura n. aequum est ut
benefaciamus Ba^ath. in l. Ex hoc iure. ff. de just. and iur. Instituti ste in
tt. de obligat. Vbi de oblig. ad. an thitoradi.
for if so be that thou have laid out for me and lent me thy money at my
need, and have gentely and lovingly served and succored me with it, the law
of nature and also the laws written grant no less than that I must be.a.
thankful unto the, and as much as lies in me, keep and save the harmeles
neither is this repugnaunt to the law of God, for God will not that I shall be
unthankful neither will he that I shall endamage any man. Howbeit, (Harmeles)
Sieve stipulatus sint Sieve non. per Iura uulg. d. dam. etc.
yet were it good and Godly, that every creditour and debtoure as then would
have respect to the qualite of the person, of the time, and of the matter,
and temper it after such sort, as it might be conformable to the Christian
love. Many things might be here inferred and disputed concerning the same,
but the cases and qualities of all circumstaunces are diverse, and in, or by one
man otherwise then in or by another. Luc. Vi.
Wherefore the concience must partly be charged, with Christian charity, and
with these words of Christ, whatsoever ye would that other men should do to
you, do ye eue^ the same to the^: by these things ought the matter to be
judged and determined.


Usurer. It must needs be good reason that thou should thankefully content
me. But I must tell the this also, if I were rich and thou pore, and that thy
will were good, but thou werest not able to pay me, notwitstandynge that thou
had not been slack to endeavor thy self with all diligence possible for
to come out of my debte, not having leawdely nor wastfully consumed nor spent
thy substance, or if thou had had some mischaunce, which were no great
loss and hynderaunce unto me, but unto the a great deal, for so much as I were
more able to bear it the^ thou, here thynkest thou that I ought to have
respect to the condition and quality of the matter, and use it according to
the conscience, and not according to extremite.


Pasquill. Yea forsothe, think I in deed, all men knowledge and grant it to
be good reason, yea and it is but reason in deed, that thou should be kept
harmeles, and be recompensed for thy loss and hynderaunce, D. c. Luc. Vi.
Math. 5. c Cum omnes de Co^stitut. Ex l. i. ff. quod quis que uiris. etc.

i. Pet. iiij. Matthew. V Eccli. c. xxix. Pulcherri me de hac nostra materia.

For no man ought to be encouraged nor occasioned to continue in ungodliness.


but whatsoever thou do thy self thou do it to the lord. Every man ought
to use himself in all things, as he would be used him self. Every man ought
to show love and amite to his neighbor, and to be merciful when necessite
requires. But this I say again, if so be, that I had laid out and lent my
money to a man gently and lovingly, for his commodite and profit at his need,
and he were afterward slothful and slack or ydell, or a Ryotour, a
dronkarde, and horemonger, a player, or such like, and by his own will or at
the least thorough his own negligence should put me to loss and hynderaunce,
with such a man I cannot bear, but must needs go against him, Vide ^hesum
Syrach. xij.
till he stynke again. And I trust that in so doing, I should do well and
Godly. But in necessite and innocence, let a Christen man, be a Christen man.


Usurer. But what say thou of the second way after the day of payment be
expired? That is to say, when thou hynderest me of some good bargayne by the
reason of thy promise breakinge and none payment.


Pasquill. Here must I needs make a distinction: Or else thou would some
find an hole to fly out at. And I say that he unto whom thou have gently
lent thy money upon his promise does not well to hinder the of thy lyuinge. For
if he do he is worthy to receive punyshme^t for his ingratitude, and to make
the ame^des. But add, Nihil nisi quod in veritate interest, no more than thou
have lost by it in deed. Therefore I say? must a distructio^ be made and as here
Doctor Martyne Luther says also, a concionable respect and remembrance must
be had, whether, and if such a bargayne did chance in deed, whether thou also
myghtest have had the same bargain in case thou had had thy money. And
whether it was such a bargayne in deed as might have been lawfully contracted
whereunto belongs many things, whether it had been profitable for the or
not. Item wether thou could not have forborne thy money for it, these and
such like circumstaunces ought to be pondered and remembered least thou desire
or take any more then thou have suffered loss in deed, or else it is no
Interest, but theft and vsurye. For under this pretense thou robbest thy pore
brother. Therefore ought thou not only to remember all these things, but
also to have respect to the condition and qualite of the person, of the time,
and of the matter, as it is mentioned above in the first way. Whether the
debtor was able to do it, and to pay the, whether he have wilfully neglected
it or not, whether he have suffered any loss or misfortune, whether thou have
more loss be it then he or not or whether he have suffered any loss or
misfortune, whether thou have more loss be it then he or not, or whether thou
have littell hynderaunce by it and he a great deal, or not, whether thou
myghtest as soon have loost by the bargain, as have gotten any thing by it,
whether thou myghtest have bought the same bargain with a clear conscience,
and with honest, and summa thou ought so to study and to way the matter,
that thou become not a thief and an usurer. That thou may so deal with
other as thou would be dealt with all. That thou measure not to sharp, to
the intent thou may obtain again a full, Matthew. V Eccli. xij.
shaken and heaped measure in to thy bosom. And that thou may again in
time of need obtain mercy and become not an unmerciful, false, deceitful
Turk, Panyme and Jew, to thy Christen brother.


Usurer. Of a truth Pasquill thou concludest very narrowely.

How beit, in deed I can find no great fault with it if so be that I wylbe a
Chrstian, But if I wylbe an usurer, a liar, and a thief, then have I nothing
to do with all this busynes. I pass not of it, but let it go, whatsouer I
get I have it, whatsoever or whatsoever I am called, if I may get it I
take it. But if I will be a Christian (I say) surely then I can not correct ye
in thy saienges. For if so be that I do not so pondre and waighe the loss, but
require and take it without any consideracion of all the circumstaunces, it can
not fail, but I must needs (as it is said before) become a thief and an
usurer, robbyng my neighbor by lyenge and deceiving* neither shall ignorance
excuse me in this matter, though I say for mine excuse that I did it not
wyttyngly but against my will, for I might take better head, and if I had
pondered and remembered it with as much diligence as I ought to have done, and
as tha^ yet had put him to ouermuche wrong without my will and knowledge, it
might be said, transeat cum ceteris erroribus. And I must commit the matter
to God.


Pasquill. Yea that must do as well as it may. But yet there may be no
knauerye hid under the fame knowing and willing. etc.


Usurer. Well go to, tell me now of the loss sustained by the creditour
before the day of paime^t. As when my creditours trouble me before the day be
come which thou have appoincted me that I should be paid?


Pasquill. Here must I make another distinction. If so be that thou have laid
out thy money for me at my need, and have declared unto me what fear and care
thou tokest for thy creditours whereupon I have promised to save the harmeles,
or to turn unto the thy money again, why should I not be bound to do it?
For besides this that reason does require it, I have also made the promise to
do it, by the only reason whereof he were sufficiently obliged. Vt supra.
And here does the Law of God and also the law of man grant the no less,
the^ that thou ought to be saved harmeles, only add to this, eue^ the same
that thou ought to add in the first way after the day of payment, thus
doing thou shall not only do no wrong, but also deal vprightely and Godly

But if so be, that I have promised the nothing but only for lack of payment
at my day and term appointed for so much as thou wast not ware of this trouble,
what will thou then get of me by the law? For I have promised the nothing,
neither did thou motione any such things unto me, nor cast any such
doubts, also thou myghtest have bestowed thy money about some other things
whereof thou should have none assurance to be profitable unto the or not.
Yea thy money might also have turned the to loss that no man had known of
it. What can I do with thy misfortune? I might also paradue^ture have found
some other friend that would have lent me so much without any such busynes.
Therefore after the extremite of the law, I owe the naught. But after the law
of nature I am bound to render the thanks, wherefore I think it good reason
that I do help the to bear thy loss. For thou might have kept thy money
in thy coffre, or might have done good with it some other ways, and have
abyden the adventure as well of fortune as of misfortune. Seeing then that thou
have gentely lent me thy money and helped me out of my needs, I will not,
neither ought I to be so unkind that I would suffer the to incur any loss
for my sake, but will rather help the again and bear part of losses and
charges with the for so would I be dealt withal of other. Howebeit thou may
not use falshede with me, and bring in more loss then thou have suffered in
deed, thou may not so order the matter yt thou should go fre thy self,
and lay all the burden upon my back, for I will bear with the, and not alone.
Forsomuche as I will be thankful and help the to bear thy loss without
co^pulsion, it shall become the in lyke-maner to be thanckfull and not to
begyle me, nor to use any theft or vsurye with me. But if so be that I shall
bear the loss alone, then will I pay it no more, for thou may not
lawfully with one sister make two brethren in law. etc. for I have paid thy
loss according to thy promise.


Usurer. In good faith Pasquill I must needs allow thy reason, when I pondre
and perpende thy sayenges and meaning accordyngly. But how thynkest thou by
the other way before the day apoincted? As when a bargayne comes to my
hands before thy day of payment become, which bargayn I must for go because
my ready money is out of my hands, in thy hands.


Pasquill. Here do I say first as I said before. If I have promised the to
save the harmeles, and to bear thy loss all the while I have had thy money,
then is it reason that I make the ame^des for so much as thou have lost in
deed, but yet thou must be ware yt thou use no deceit, and that thou use the
self in always, as it has been said above in the other way, after the day
appointed, remembering, perpending and inquiringe all and singular
circumstaunces, conditions and qualities least thou become a thief or an usurer
on my behalf, and then will I and also ought to satisfy my promise and reason,
and save the harmeles.

But if I have made the no further promise then upon condition, that if I keep
not touch with the, what will thou then get of me by ye law? For thou wast
agreed with me. But if thou chance to suffer any loss or damage by the
reason of my promise breakyng and not keeping touch with the, whether. I have
promised the or not, I ought must and will consider and ease the same, and the^
will I owe the no more but love and favor. Notwithstanding, if thou will
consydre and remember all circumstaunces, as has been said above in the
second way after the day appointed, and wilt be no dissembler, if I do then
perceive, that thou art hyndered because of my money, I will use me self, as
I would ye another should use himself toward me.

But in any wise, become not thou a dissembler, thief or usurer on my behalf.
Summa, whenever any man puts the to loss or hinderau^ce with out thy
deseruynge, thou synnest not, if thou ask and receive amends, neither is that
any usury, but an Interest. But wheresoever is no less, there is also no
Interest, but it is vsurye whatsoever is demanded or received.

(Loss) Possit addi. nec periculum sed uidetur pro part co^. CC. c. nauig. de
Vsuris.
Lo this is an Interest, as much as pertayneth to lendinge and borrowing. And
by this may thou take in all cases of lendyng and borrowing a sufficient
instruction, to do vpryghtely.


Usurer. O lord God, if all that be usury, and so great sin that has been
taken, and yet daily is taken otherwise, and after another sort, then thou
have now declared of the Interest friend Pasquill, where shall then many an
honest man become?


Pasquill. Mary without the doors shall they stand, as I have said before, in
that heaven, where the black men chase one another with dong forkes, yea where
a lode of hot burninge coals is worth but one half penny. What will thou speak
of honest men? There is neither honesty nor virtue, where as usury bears any
rule. Where as the commandment both of God, and also of the hyer powers is
despised, body and soul for wicked Mammo^s sake put in ieoperdy, and where
our neighbor is spoiled and robbed of his sweat and blowde, what will thou
there speak of honesty?


Usurer. Well Pasquil it is an heavy matter God wot, as thou say. Truth it
is that thou have laid such a sure foundation that I cannot overthrow it,
notwithstanding I must yet ask somewhat more. It so be that I lend a man
money, none otherwise but for naught, and upon this condition that he shall save
me harmeles, and if he do present me with some present or gift, might I not
receive it with honesty?


Pasquill. Lo, whence come thou with that? Has not Doctor Luther given the
a sufficient reason thereof? If any man give the ought, why should it not be
lawful for the to receive the same shameless and blameles? But what call
thou a gift or a present? I: donari ff. de Donationib. A. xx. in Sua Summa. eo.
t. etc.
A gift or a present is that which is given freely without compulsion
procedynge of a thankful heart, or of some other good inclination and
favorable disposicio^. Not that any man must give the somewhat if he will have
thy money, and that thou have no money to help thy neighbor withal, oneles
thou feel him with some present or gift, nor yet this, when I say, if thou will give me a couple of crowns, or if thou will give my wife or my children
this or that, to drink, I will se what I can do. Nullo mo^ cogent^ ut dicit^l
donari ff de Reg. Iur.
But it must proceed of a fre will without any manner compulsion, or else such
gift and present whereof thou speak is no gift, but plain usury, and makes
the a thief, and an usurer.


Usurer. Pasquill thou wylt not leave. But what and if I do a man great
pleasure and high service with it, and he does also take it for no less, and
would not take twyse or thryse so much as he gives me that he would
forbear the money, dec. scienti. de reg. Iur. ut in.
notwithstanding he comes and prays me how can I be against that thing
which he does with his good will?


Pasquill. Thou singest still thine old song. Doctor Luther has sufficiently
told the all these things, what speak thou of high service, and his good
will? If need did not press him, he would desire none of thy hinnes nor yet
of thy gese. Neither would he give the so much as the tail of a pear, nor
yet beg of the so much as a littell piece of bread. For need makes an old
horse to tratte. Whatsoever a man must needs do, can not be done by his good
will. Therefore cease to speak of good will hardely.


Usurer. It is true indede Pasquill, many one gives oftentimes great gifts to
another to thintente he might obtain some money lent of him, which if he had
no need of him would not give him one halfpeny for gods sake, in his most
miserye. Wherefore I may cease to speak of God will for it is a nedy will.


Pasquill. Yea, verily, as pertaynyng to him that gives the gift, it is a
need will, and no free will. But as touching him that receives the gift, it
is vsurye and robberye. Notwithstanding if any man give me ought of
thankefulnes, or otherwise: of frendshipp, whether it were before the lendynge
or after. I would trust to receive it without offense: but I must beware that I
have no dissembler nor usurer in my heart.


Usurer. I must handle the better yet or I go, Pasquill. What and if I be an
occupier, and have not so much money but I could occupy it all my self in
mine own science and get some what by it. Notwithstanding a good fellow
being in necessite prays me to lend him.xl. or.l. crowns, whom I would be
loath to leave in need, and yet if I should lend him I should hinder mine own
occupieng. Might I not lawfully and with honesty take here five or six in the
hundred for amends?


Pasquill. Ah Sir, here must I needs arreste and stand a while. Wherefore I
pray the give ear to that which I shall speak. Like as the Cuckowe bewraieth
him self and cries sorth his own name, eue^ so do thou. For the Cuckowe
cries nothing but Cuckowe, and that is his name. Eue^ so criest thou all into
my bag, never full, never full, and that is thy name. Thou will be very
merciful and just, and would be loath to leave thy neighbor in necessite,
and specially thy friend and fellow, which is a good way to begin: But
that fearful cry which follows, soundinge on this wise, it hinders me, I
must die for honger if the bag be not soon full, is the devil, and
suffers the not to perform thy good enterprise. I have sufficiently declared
unto the out of the holy scripture, above where this question is also, in a
manner, that thou art bound to do unto thy neighbor as thou would be done
to, in lendynge in helping and in counsaylynge. And thou grauntest thy self,
that it is no reason, that thou should leave thy friend or neighbor in
danger. Therefore if thou have it, Vt supra clare.
and do it not, then art thou an unmerciful Turk, and do against God,
against christian charity, (Impossible) Dec. Nemo potest de Reg. Jur. inui l.
impossibil. ff. cod tit.
and against thine own conscience. But if thou have it not, and art not able
to do it, then does neither God nor yet the world compel the to it, For to
things impossible is no man bound. Paraduenture thou will say, I have it
well, and could also do it (thanked be God) but not without my hinderaunce,
for I have need of it my self. Alas good Neuerful, can thou do it, and can
also not do it? If so much loss ensue thereof unto the, because that
paraduenture thine occupienge is but slender, and may not bear the lack of so
much money without the hurt of thine occupienge and living, why say thou
then that thou can not do it? For thou ought to say I would be gladly do
it, but I am nedy my self, I must keep my wife and children, and provide for
the^ fode and other necessaryes as the Lord has commanded me, wherefore I can
not do it. If it be so that one must needs suffer penury, In this casis.
^l^asnon sint discrimine. i. John. iij. Eccl. xxix et sup. satis.
let him suffer it unto whom God has sent it. Truth it is that one Christen
man is bound to help another both with his body and goods, how be it the
necessite is not here so great. Besides this, you have perchance brought thy
self into the breers, so that it is thine own doing. Thou might have
occupied a while by the hundred well enough until the thousand had been
grown. But thou would have five corners of the sack, where thou myghtest
fulwell have been content with four, as other do is ones. Wherefore if thy
Creditour have trusted the with much and that thorough covetousness, and
besides that paraduenture has delivered ye naughty old, rotten, and
deceyuable wares, and peradventure also to dear, let him care how he may be
paid of the. And let him take this for his punishment, that thou art not able
now to pay him. If any man have hindered the with his naughty and enhau^ced
wares, let him take part with the, and receive according to his deserving. If
some usurer have sucte the up, then has he already all that thou wast able to
do, wherefore he may take his amends in his own hands. Thou will say I am
be giled enhau^ced, or eaten up with usury, and yet must I bear the burden,
for he will be paid, and puts me to trouble and loss. Have thou not heard
what I have told the? If so be (I say) that you have brought the self into ye
breers through thine own covetousness, or by negligence, slouthfulnes, riotinge
or playenge, then art thou served well enough, according to thy deseruyng. Why
dydest thou not occupy after thine habilite? If thou see that it is to dear
for the, and that the usury puts the to hynderaunce, why do thou not
order thy self thereafter? Thou will say, I would feign get somewhat as well
as other, and would feign also go with other me^. Alas good fellow, run thou
with the^ as far as thou can. But I would rather go fair and softely,
thinking that of sufferaunce comes ease. What profit is it for the, to get
a quarter of meal which perchance will yield the.xxx or.xl. fair household
loves when scant one of the^ is thine own? And the rest belonging to thy
creditours or le^ders, to thy destroyers and robbers the usurers? Should I now
abate my lyuinge for thy sake? Truly I can not do it. But if so be, that thou
have had any mischaunce without thy deseruynge, show it unto the magistrates
wha^soeuer thou art sued, and let those rich Cobbes have patience with the,
it can less hurt them then the. Lo thus might a man know that thou can not
do it, and nedest not to say that thou can do it well enough, but not with out
thine hynderau^ce. Wherefore I say, if thou can not do it why say thou
then that thou can do it? And again, if thou can do it, why say thou
then that thou can not do it? If thine occupienge be so great that thine
gaynes continue nevertheless after a reasonable fashion, although thou should
keep back from it.xx. or.xxx. pounds, why art thou then such an helles mouth
and never full, that thou will not help thy friend or neighbor with all. How
know thou whether they would have turned the to good luck or to loss
though thou had bestowed them? How can tell whether God will not prosper
the so much the better with the rest? For he will leave no good deed
unrewarded. Some peradventure will say, I have helped, counsaylled and given
many a good fellow, and I am never the rycher for it. Prou. xxi
But how know thou what thou should be if thou had not done it?
According as it is written* whosoever stops his ear at the crieng of the
poor he shall cry himself and not be heard.
Thou myghtest as soon have fallen in poverty, as continued in thine estate.
Will thou make God a liar? Has not he said that he will not leave a draught
of cold water unrewarded? Believe surely that if thou lend thy neighbor the
odd of.xx. pounds or whatsoever it be that thou may forbear with out
loss and hynderaunce of thy necessary lyuinge, quimisere tur pauperi feneratur
dno^.
God will not leave it unrewarded, and thou shall prosper so much the better
with the rest, yea thou shall get more at the lords hand by lendynge upon
usury unto him after this sort, then by bestowynge four times as much more in
any kind of marchaundise. Prou. xix
For it is written, he that has pity upon the pore, lends upon usury unto
the lord: And look what he lays out it shall be paid him again. What
know thou whence prosperity comes or aduersite? Or wherefore the one
comes and not the other? Therefore I say, why say thou that thou can do
it and yet can not do it? If thou can not do it, as has been said, why
do thou say it then? if thou can do it, as now has been said, why
do thou the^ deny it?


Usurer. In deed Pasquill, it is true, as thou say. No man knows wherefore
he has prosperity or aduersite. If a man be not able to lend, then he can not
do it: But if he may do it without any special loss or hinderau^ce, I believe
that he does to him self more hurt then good. For as thou have said, God
will not leave any good deed unrewarded, nor any wicked deed unpunished,
neither does any man know, whence prosperity or aduersite happens unto him
in his occupienge. Although I think in my mind that I may gain, and also do
gayn a great deal with the overplus of my money, yet do not I know what luck
or prosperity I might have had, if I had lent it to yonder nedy person. And
where as some will say, I had rather a lyttel bird in my hand the^ a great
many flyenge in the woods: This is an heathenysshe saying, for there God is
not trusted, but made a liar, wherefore a christen man ought to be ashamed of
such communicacions. Yea and I think it mete also and good reason, to take heed unto whom we lend and trust, what need he has, whence it proceeds,
and that a young beginner occupye wisely and circumspectely, until he be
better at ease: And that he do rather seek to get a piece of bread for him
self, then a great deal for another, that kenneth him no thank for it, and
suffers him to take great care sorrow and pains for it. But yet I must ask
one thing more.

If I were a great occupier, or else some rich man, having much rusty money
lyenge by me: And a good fellow came to me, and said I pray the lend me.xl.
marks, or a certain sum of money, I may have a bargayne, whereby I may
get thus much or so much. Or I put case, that he may get thryse as much
by it, as gives me, thynkest thou that I might not also lawfully take a
reasonable reward?


Pasquill. He must I ask the another question, it is not unknown to all
occupiers, how unstable and uncertain the trades of byenge and sellyng are
for the most part in so much that a man may so sone miss as hitte, and may
as sone lose by a bar game as get by it. Yea there may sone happen a
mischaunce or some other casualtie upon it, that a man may as soon get the
scratchinge behind his ear, as the ryngynge in his purse. Wherefore I say, if
thou had lent a man some money in such wise as thou have demanded, and he
should get some mischaunce, that his wares did peryshe, or that his money
were stolen, and that he were robbed, or that the price of that wares did fall,
or were endamaged some other way sufferynge loss either in the head sum, or
else in his gaynes* would thou then bear any loss with him? would thou
be content then to abate some thing of thy head money, or else of thy lucre?


Usurer. No mary I, who would counsayll me that? He came to me, and prayed me,
and besides this he him self offered me such gaynes without any asking, so
that I have lent him my money at his own request and desire, without any
compulsion or constraining: Wherefore then should I suffer any abatement of my
money, seeing I might have kept it when I had it?


Pasquill. Lo there art thou caught in thine own snare, as trick as can be
possible. If the money be lent which thou have delivered to a good fellow,
whence comes then the odd money, or gains? I am sure thou have heard above
sufficiently what lendinge is, and Doctor Luther has told it the yet more
clearer, where he says: Lending is this, when I deliver my money, goods or
stuff to any man, to occupye it as long as he has need of it, or as long as
I can and will forbear it, that he may re^dre the same to me again in due
season, as good as I lent it him, even as one neighbor le^deth to another,
disshes pottes, pannes, beddinges, clothes, and in like manner money, or money
worth. Hec ille. Now if it be lent, or called lendyng, whence comes then
this vsurye? For whatsoever is taken more is called usury in all the laws. If
so be that thou take any thing for it, then is it not called lendyng, but
lettinge, therefore can it be no lendyng. Also thou do it not for to succor
or to profit him by thy lending, but thou do it for thine own co^modite,
for thine own lukers sake, for else you would let him go by well enough.

Now if it be no lendynge, as in deed it can not be, forsomuche as lendynge is
a Christian deed of charity, but this is a dead of avarice, what should it
be then? Should it be called occupienge? or bargayninge? yea forsothe. What
have thou then laid in with him, thou thy money and he his labor upon this
condition, that the gaynes or loss coming of the same shall be equally divided
between you, or is there any certain gains and loss named and agreed between
you? No. We be agreed upon a certain gaynes, and that I shall have my head
money again whole and sound, and not upon any loss. Whether he do win or
lose, I will have my gaynes vndminyshed, and also my head money again whole
and sound. Say thou so? tha^ art thou in the right way, Ironice.
and here does it appear what thou art. This is even the fashion of all
stool robbers. For thou sit at home behind the oven tournyng the apples
and pears for burning, and thy money is assured or pledged (for an usurer is
very seldom so neglygent that he will open his hand, except he know where to
be sure of his money again) So that it is as good as though it lay still at
home in thy cubborde. In somuche that neither thou, nor thy money sustayneth
any loss, fear, labor nor pains. Where as yonder poor soul must bear
suffer and take, runnynge, and catchinge, care, pains, fear, loss and
sorrow. Yea he must take more care and thought, for thy lukers sake, and
enhau^ce his wares and deceive the people more for thy sake, then for his own
sake. If he might have his own gaynes, whereby he might have a competent
living, he might be at rest, but now must he first take thought for thy
living. And although he should lose al his own gains, yet must he take
thought nevertheless for thine, for thou wylt in no wise lack it. Although he
have had loss in his occupienge, yet come thou and wylt have thy full gaynes
and head money. If he have it not, thou put him to trouble and hynderaunce.
But if he win and get by his occupienge, then has he won and gote^ it
for the, and thou spoilest and robbest him of his labor, care, fear, sorrow
and sweat, and yet wylt have this called lendynge, and wylt take it with a
good conscience. Should this be called a fellowshyppe, or bargayninge? yea it
is a ravening and theuyshe felloweshippe, Cassi. in l. sinon fuerit. ff. pro
Socio.
as the laws do call it. Therefore can this thy lendyng (if I may so call it)
be no more called a felloweshippe or bargaynyng, that it may be called lending.

What is it then? Mary usury and robbery is it, as thou have now sufficiently
heard and as all men perpende and perceive right well. For thou stealest and
robbest him of his paynefull sweat and labor, as it has been said.


Usurer. Thou will have all things so plainly and exactely discussed, that
nothing shall escape the. But how thynkest thou by this if I should lend my
money to a man and suffer him to have the occupienge of it upon this condition,
that if he got ought I would take part with him. If not, I would take my
head money again, and be content.


Pasquill. Instit. de Soci et. nam et ita
Such Contractes are not reproved in the temporal laws, but are left as
indifferent. How be it, when the gaynes should be parted, then all the costs
and charges ought to be deducted from the^, and then ought the resydue of the
gaynes to be diuined, and this might be borne, for he may bring that thing to
pass with thy money, which otherwise he could not have done. But what, and if
he do not only win nothing, but also suffers loss?


Usurer. Whether he win or lose, I have naught to do withal. If he win, I
will have half part, or a certain sum appointed between us. If he win
nothing, or else be a loser, I will have my head money harmeles, and without
any loss.


Pasquill. This is a good neighbourly touch. Thou wylt look for gaynes, but
thou will bear no loss. Is thy money better and more precious, then his body
and life? Was the money made for man's sake, or man for moneys sake? If it be a
felloweshippe, there must an equal proportion be kept, and not the one to
stand to the gaynes only, and the other to ye loss alone. Yea thou with thy
money ought rather to the loss then he with his body. For thou may get
other money, but he can not get another body, nor yet his health so easily,
if he chance to be beaten, or otherwise to be diseased for taking of thought
or fear or such like. And albeit that the laws in this case do grant, that
he shall keep touch with the according to his promise, yet do not they speak
it because they praise or allow such felloweshippe (for they call it plain
robberye, and a theuyshe felloshyppe as has been declared above) but because
he has made a promise, which he ought to keep. And because no man should
lyghtely presume to break his promise. If a man may sell all his goods, Vid.
Institutistas d.. nam and ita. Inst. de So* etc.
ryghtes titels and interestes of the same, according as the case requires,
why should it not be lawful for him also to make such a contract as this is?
Wherefore if he do make it, why should he not keep it? But this clause would do
very well by it, that he did it with his own good will. For I fear least he
have done it against his will, and have been compelled to do it for the
obtayninge of thy money. So that it be therefore turned again into violence,
and robbery. If he have done it with his good will, it is reason that he keep
it, and if he have been constrained to do it, not thorough any compulsion, but
for his lukers and profits sake, then must he needs stand to it and keep it.
But take thou head how thy conscience is in quiet. Thou biest of him with thy
money his sweat and labor. If thou will perpende the matter accordingly,
thou shall find whether thou could be content thy self to be so dealth
withal, or not. Both the spiritual law and also the temporal law
concludes by the law of nature, yt he which will have profit and co^modite,
must also bear part of heaviness. Wherefore if thou will have gaynes, then must
thou also abide the danger of it, or else it is but more vsurye and robberye.
But this were honest, if thou would lend a manthy money, or put it into his
hands, and say, my friend, occupy this with all diligence possible, doing
thine endeavor to the vttermoste of thy pouer, if thou get ought with it,
then will I have thus much of the gaynes according to the proportion of ye
sum. If thou get nothing, then will I get nothing. But if thou be a loser
by it, and the fault be in the, bear it alone. But if the fault be not in
the, and that some misrfotune or other casualtie happen unto it, the^ will I
bear part again of the loss. For if thou will bear no loss nor stand in
any danger at all, what is it else but vsurye whatsoever thou take more
the^ thou have lent? What is such a contract else but a putting forth of thy
money for a certain advantage, as other usurers do? yea and although thou
add unto it, if he get naught, I get naught also, yet do thou hope for
usury and that is usury, although it be somewhat more honest and clenlyer.


Usurer. What and if I should take somuche the less gaynes to the intent that
he should bear the loss alone, if any misfortune should chance?


Pasquill. Of this have thou heard above. Whatsoever thou take, if thou
stand in no danger, but sit at home in thy chyer, or if thy money be
assured unto yt then is thy money lent upon usury. For all be it that a man's
labor and pains may be recompensed with money, yet are not all things
clear, although it be done here after a sort, for thou have a dissembler in
thy bosom, called Avarice, which resists the strongely. If thou do pay him
for his pains, sorrow and care, indede then I let it pass. But if thou do it
not, thou art an usurer. But how can thou bye of a man his fortune, and pay
him for his chau^ces or mischau^ces which neither thou nor he knows as yet?
He may promise it the and if he do, he must perform it, but consider thou
the case and judge in thy conscience whether thou would think it good
reason, if the like should chance unto the. He must needs keep touch because
of his promise by the virtue of the contracte, But know thou not that a
straight law is oftentimes turned into a large wrong? And that to sharp
causes often many gappes? As Doctor Luthers words do sound. Therefore I
say, it is very strange and also very dangerous for thy conscience to
occupy after that sort. How be it thou myghtest make such a co^tracte and
also keep it until thou saw some misfortune, but thou may be no
dissembler as has been often said. If thou will be an usurer, thou may
here bring it to pass well enough without correction of the hyer powers. But
God is a ryghteous judge.


Usurer. Truly Pasquill, thou have laid such a foundation, that whosoever
then buyldest thereon must stand. Thou have given me instruction out of the
laws, what vsurye is, (Desired.) quiae spes and expectatio lucri facit
Vsurariu^. de si faeneraueris 14. q. 3. ex de Vsuris c. Constituit
namely, whatsoever is desired or taken above the head sum, making no manner
exception, the^ where there is adventure or labor concurring. Whatsoever I do
obiecte, there is no case so strange, but it may be judged thereafter. For
thou have laid by it a good pair of balau^ces, namely the conscience. He that
wylbe an usurer, may do it, neither is it possible for the magistrates so
narrowely to look upon it, that all practices and subtelties should be left.

But he that will be good, and no usurer, may by this our communication, take a
sufficient instruction.


Pasquill. In deed it is clear and plain enough for him that will see, mark,
and receive, and will amend his life.


Usurer. Verily it is a piteous case to se that this enormitie is so general.
But I pray the tell me one thing, I have sufficiently perceived by the
scriptures of God and also by the constitucions of man's laws, that it is
forbidden, but is there any pain or penalty prescribed.


Pasquill. Ask thou yet whether there be any penalty prescribed or not?
think thou that although there were no pain at all named, that thou
nededest not to fear enough, considering that thou have heard so evidently
and know so surely, yt it is both against God and against the hyer powers?
Thou art not ignorant I am sure, what he deserves ye wittingly does against
the commandments and manifest will of God. Thou know it I say, if thou
would believe it. But behold I will name the said punyshementes and pains
unto the.

The Emperors Majesty has concluded and commanded by thaduise and will of
the whole Empire in the parliament holden at Ausburgh in the year of our
lord.MD.xxx That no manner contracte participatinge or having any felloweshippe
with usury should be admitted and also that all the same should be taken as
void and of none effect. And that if any man did make or use any such
contracte should forfait to his magistrate ye fourth part of his head sum
with out redemption, and should also be punyshed. Lo this is but a money pain
But how, and if I prove unto the that an usurer is a robber? For whatsoever is
taken from any man undeserved against his will, the same is robbery. But the
usurers take a man's goods or money from him by compulsion against his will,
therefore are they robbers. That they do compel a man to give them his money and
take it by violence is manifest, for the poor man is loath to do it, and yet he
can not choose, but must do it for the usurers do compel him to it, and not his
need. His need compels him to borrowe. Now he might borrowe well enough (as
pertainynge to his will) without paynge any vsurye, yea and he would also do
it fulfayne. But then comes the usurer and compels him to the giving of
usury, and violently takes his goods from him. Need constrayneth him to
borrowe, and this is no less to him, but usury puts him to loss. For if he
will borrowe he does it of necessite, but the usurer compels him to give
money for it, Jesus Sprach calls such fellows murderers, and not worthy to
keep company with christen men
not by plain and manifest violence, but by subtell means and necessities.
Therefore is an usurer a robber, as thou have heard above, and is also worthy
to have a robbers punyshement. Item an usurer is a thief, wherefore he has
deserved hanging. That he is a thief is manifest by the deed, as hereafter
apeareth plainly in the usurers confession. Wherefore he is worthy also to have
the punyshement of a thief. Therefore if he be like unto them both, as he is in
deed, than is he also accursed and not worthy to eat or to drink with any
honest man: And these are the punyshementes of the temporal laws. De Vsuris
in ut etc.
The ecclesiastical laws says yt an usurer ought not be buried with and as
other Christen men, until he have made restitucion of al things gotten by the
way of vsurye. And that although he should command his executours in his
dead bed to do the same, yet ought he to remain unburied, or not to be
buried by and as other Christen men, until it were done in deed or else
sufficient assurance were made concerning the same. The same law showed also
how, when and how far the same restitucion must be made, namely as far as
all his goods extend. But I fear that this will not so suddenly come to pass.
Also a man's own conscience does sufficiently instruct him, and it is
sufficient that the usurer knows, yt he is not worthy buried by other
Christen men, before he have made restitucion of al, wherefore I think it not
necessary here to be spoken at this time. Furthermore the ecclesiastical laws
will that no usurer should be absolved nor admitted to bear witness in any
matter, nor make any testament or last will, nor suffered to have any
fellowshyppe with other Christians, C. quia in omnib. ex de Vsuris C. Preterea
ex de Vsuris. Glos. in de. si quis.
in the use of the sacraments or otherwise. But should be excommunicated and
accursed out of al Christen fellowshippes, and here is he made a thief and a
robber. Lo, is not this also shame enough? Is not this punyshement, of the
ecclesiastical laws suffient?

But what is the punyshme^t of God? Even hell sire, and everlasting damnation.
For it is evident enough that whosoever does wittingly against his son Jesus
Christ, and against his holy word, and besides that against the hier powers,
becomes no Archau^gell, but perpetual kynsman of the devil in hell fire, as
it is taught in diverse places of holy scriptur. Now is it certain and sure,
that an usurer does wittingly against all these, as has been sufficiently
declared above both out of holy scriptur and also out of the laws both
temporal and also ecclesiastical, wherefore there is no doubt, but he goes
after this life straight way to the devil. What says the lord by the
mouth of the Prophet Ezechiell? Ezec. 18
If any man lend upon usury and take more over, Ezec. xxij
shall he live? He that will not be moved by this text, only upon him is all
labor lost for ye devil has surely taken him bodily and blinded him with
covetousness.
He shall not live, but shall dye, and his blood shall be upon him, says the
lord. And again, thou have taken usury and increace, thou have oppressed thy
neighbors by extorcion, and forgotten me says the lord God. Behold I have
smiten my hands upon thy covetousness that thou have used. Is thy heart able to
endure it, or may thy hands defend them selves in the time that I shall
bring upon the? Even I the lord that spoke it will bring it also to pass. I
will scatter the among heathen and strowe the about in the lands and will
cause thy fylthines to cease out of the: yea and I will have the possession in
the sight of the Heathen, that thou may know that I am the lord. Lo if God
be so wroth with his own chosen people for vsuries and covetousness sake
threateninge the^ with so cruel punyshemente what shall happen unto the being
a stranger? By this may thou perceive easily what punishment God has
ordained for usurers, namely, hell fire, and everlasting pain, as thou have
heard plainly.


Usurer. Of a truth Pasquill, thou make me to sweat. For after this manner
should be nothing worse, nor more pernicious more execrable, detestable and
synful then an usurer. In deed it is clear and manifest that usury is against
the law of nature, the law of God written, and against the laws both
te^porall and ecclesiastical. Thou have also partly rehearsed unto me the
punishementes belonginge to the same. Insomuche that a man might be afraied of
an usurer, neither were it any maruail though mendid spitte at him in the
streets. If the laws take an usurer for a murderer a robber, a thief, a
vilayne, and a damnable person, as it is manifest by the scripture and also by
the laws. A man might rather have to do with a Turk, and a Panyme then with a
great usurer. But thou saidest even now, that they ought not to be buried among
other christians, where should they become then?


Pasquill. Know thou not this proverb, Similis simile^ sibi querit. Like
will to like said the devil to the Coiller, for they were both black. The lord
calls them in Ezechiel extorcioners, wherefore it is not against their dignity
to be buried among thieves and robbers. For seeing they are not worthy to lie
among other Christians, they must needs be laid in some place agreinge to
their qualities.


Usurer. Pasquil it were no maruail though one did despair. I have gotten many
a fair penny by usury, yet would I never have thought, that it had been so
great a sin, and such an heathenyshe, ungodly execrable and damnable thing.
I have served many one under the pretense of frenshyp, that he has afterward
felt it full well doubteles, and have under the pretense of a gift sucked many
a man's sweat.

When I lent a man my money I lent it him but from one fair to another, and
when I took him the money, I deducted the increase before hand, and made him
to seal me an obligacion for the hole sum, as though I had lent him so much
and he was bound to render me no less, so that no man found any usury nor
increasse in my writings. For I had received it before hand. And this did I
from one fair to another. For if I should have lent it him for the space of
an hole year, an should have required so much at one time, it should have had
some apearau^ce of usury. Wherefore I take it thryse, or four times a year, and
always as much in a manner as men were wont to take for an whole year. Now if
I came into the fair and required my money, my debtor was bound to pay it me:
if then he had so much need of it that I might perceive it, then was he feign
to grease my hand, yea many one has been compelled to give it me again, yt I
kept it but one day, least he should have been suspected, and then I lent it
him again as I did before. Sometime I did set him a day after the fair, not
past a fourtenight or three or four wekes at the most, and where as he was
bound before to pay me nobles, he was bound at that day to pay me
angellottes. And then I le^t him my money again, as before. So that I have
oftentimes made thyrty of the hundred or rather more. Yea often have I lent in
such wise that my detter was not excused with forty crowns in a year, and yet
could I make it a pretense and appearaunce of frenshyppe, amity and love, as
such my practices of bad and good money are almost known to all the world,
and also partly set in printe, if ama^ would look over all the books that of
late have been written against usury, as the two books of Doctor Martyn
Luther, the one of marchaundise and usury, and the other to the Curates and
Pastors, of usury, the book of doctor Hepium upon the.xv. Psalm, the book of
doctor James schenken of the covetousness of Judas, the book of John
Spangenbergh of almose and others, and also this our communication. So yt it
were no maruayll, though an usurer should despair, and hang him self by the
neck, or that an other man should spitte al usurers in their faces. Which in
deed Pasquill greueth my very sore, not knowing how to behave my self. I am
afraid truly that I shall never come to God. So much do I feel already.


Pasquill. Ah good fellow what speak thou of thy grefe? Ezech. XViij.
if thou will be good, if thou will be saved return. Says not the lord,
turn and ye shall live? If thy grefe be so great, then return, render again
that thou have stolen, and be a good man, and God will be merciful unto ye.


Usurer. Alas Pasquil I would cease with a good will, but the rendrynge again
is to hard.


Pasquill. Aha, I thought as much, that it was but a feigned repentance thou
art afraid, and because of that fear do thou repent. But thou kepest
fast ye goods of usury, and let the fear pass, yea ye goods are in thy
way, so that thou can not passover the^. Well then get ye hence to the
devil in the name of al devils. And there an end. I can no longer talk with
the, For all is but labor lost. Yet will I in time convenient ones more give
to the usurers a bo^del of rods, if God lend me wit and discrecion. Thou
know that I have had this my communication with the unadvisedly, in have,
which not withstanding I will also setfurth to the intent that thou and thy
friends may have something to pass the time withal. And it shall be given to
the and all usurers for a breakefast, until by the grace of God, it shall be
amended in time convenient.


Conclusion.
THat I have in some places set certain allegations or annotacions in the
margent, was done for this purpose, that the usurers should understand that it
is grounded upon the holy scripture and in the laws, whatsoever herein is
entreated and spoken of Pasquillus. And likewise that they do wittingly against
God the father and his only son Jesus Christ, and his holy evident and
clear word, and also against the temporal and ecclesiastical magistrates,
wherefore they have at Gods hand worthily deserved the punishment of hell fire,
and at the hands of the temporal magistrates the punyshement of losyng both
honor body and goods with other corrections.

And this be given unto the great money usurers, hell mouths, helhoundes and
beare-wolues for a fayringe. Nevertheless if there were any man whose
conscience were touched by his writing or by the holy ghost, which seldom
happens to a right usurer, let him learn to ask counsayll and to seek
comfort, where he ought to seek it, namely of Gods word and the ministers
of the same. For if there be an earnest repentance, he shall find both
counsall and comfort doubteles. But if it be a colored repentance, which
lasts until he is out of the Church, or meteth with some that have need of
money, then shall he also find it where as other ungodly people do find it.
For although he deceive Gods minister, and so other men under the color of
holiness, yet shall he never be able to deceive God, who judges the heart, and
sees in secret as the scripture says. Neither will he be made a liar for him,
but will suffer him to dye everlastingly, and his blood to be upon him, as he
says by the prophet Ezechiel.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by Steven Mierdman. 1550.


