A RELATION OF CERTAIN things in SPAIN, worthy of Observation:

Set forth by STEPHEN MAN, one of the Yeomen of his Majesty's Chamber.

printer's or publisher's device GOD IS MY HELPER


^mprinted for John Brown, a^^ (...) ^o be sold in S. Dunstanes Church-(...)
in Fleetstreete, 161^

To the right Honorable, George, Marquisse, and Earl of Buckingham, vicount
VILLIERS, Barron of Whaddon, Lord high Admiral of England, Justice in Air of
al his Maies. Forests, Parkes, and Chases beyond Trent, Mr. of his Maies.
horse, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel.
Right Honorable Lord:
SInce your Lo. Virtues are such, as they have a Title to all men's labors,
both by your honorable apceptation and favor, as your value, and judgment of
them: It is an honest ambition of my humbleness^ (...) to add something to the
heap is daily offered to your altar, with protestation, that nothing is
brought thither with sincerer hands then this small gift of mine own
collections in Spain: which if they retain but a good odor in your
receiving, and that your Honor will take the mind wherewith they are done, it
will be a grace, that shall ever enable my industry, to the study of serving
and honoring your Lordship, in the name of your Lordship

most bounden, Stephen Man.

A RELATION OF CERTAIN Things in SPAIN, worthy of observation.
The Orders Military and their Knighthoodes and Revenues.
THere belongs to the Order of S. James, 94. Knighthoods, and all yield
yearly 3280312 Duckates.

The Knights of this Order, wear a cross of Scarlet or colored Velvet, or
one of Gold hung in a chain: they have for their patron S. James, and their
rule has been drawn from S. Augustine.

The order of Calatraua has 50. Knighthoods, and all yield yearly 1300634.
Ducats.

They follow the rule of S. Bennet, and wear a scarlet Cross, or crimson
velvet, or a Venero of Gold.

That of Alcantara has 58. Knighthoods, and all yield yearly, 1120269.
Ducats.

They follow the rule of S. Bennet, and wear a Cross of the making of that of
Calatraua, although it be green; and of all these Orders and of those of
Christ, and Montesa, his Majesty is perpetual administrator.

There belongs to that of Montesa Origmaria de Valencia thirteen
knighthoods, and yield yearly, 230. Duckates.

The Cross of this order is of Scarlet, or Velvet, they follow the rule of S.
Bennet.

That of Christ is of Portingale, and the Cross is of color, and a white
streake in the midest of it. His Majesty gives the Knighthoods, and some the
Duke of Braganca; the number of the Knighthoodes are not known, nor what they
are worth.

To the order of S. John, although it is not in Spain, belongs 129.
Knighthoodes, besides los Prioratos, and they yield in all yearly, 9110250.
Ducats.

Amongst the Grandes, there is no pre-eminence but only of the Admiral and
Constable, the others seat themselves in the public Acts, as it happens,
without any superiority.

The Admiral of Castille may enter into the Council with his Cloak and
Rapier, and seat himself at the left hand of the President of Castille at all
times when he pleases.

The Duke of Medina Celi every year on Twelfe day delivers a memorial unto
his Majesty, clayming the Kingdom of Castille as heir of Henrig and the other
Kings; which is remitted to the Royal Council, and there is never made any
more dispute of it.

Biscay is excepted; when the King enters there, he is to have one leg
uncovered.

It is not permitted to proceed against any of the Grandes, nor their first
begotten, without express order from the King in writing; to whom when as any
such thing happens, they put in sureties, and in the mean time there comes
order from the King what shall be done.

The Knights of the golden fleece which are in Spain.
HIs Majesty. The Duke de Alua. The Duke de Ossuna. The Duke de Arios. The Duke
de Medina Celi. The Duke de Escalona. The Duke de Cardoua. The Duke de
Montalto. The Earl de Oropesa. The Marquisse Espinola.
Charges which his Majesty is at.
THe vice Roy of Naples. The vice Roy of Portingale. The vice Roy of Navarre.
The vice Roy of Valencia. The vice Roy of Cerdena. The vice Roy of Sicilia. The
governor of Milan. The chief General of the Sea. The General of the Galleys
of Spain. The General of Sicilia: Of Genoua: Of Portingale. Master General
of the field of Spain. Mr. General of the field of Portingale. General of the
Caualleria of Spain. General of the Caualleria of Milan. Vice Roy of Peru.
Vice Roy of Mexico. Vice Roy of the East Indies. Vice Roy of Mallorca.
Governor of Galicia. Vice Roy of Cataluna. Governor of Flanders. Governor of
Oran. Mr. General of the field of Flanders. General of the Caualleria of
Flanders. General of the Artillery of Flanders. General of the Armada of the
Ocea^sea. The Royal Admiral thereof. General of the Galleys of the Plate.
General of the Fleet. The Admiral thereof. The Ambassador of Rome.
Ambassador in Germany. Ambassador in France. Ambassador in England.
Ambassador in Flanders. Ambassadors in the Signories: In Venice. In Sauoy. In
Genoua. In Florence* In Ferrara. In Parma. In Mantua. In Luca. In Vrbina.
Men and women servants belonging to the Queen.
THe chief Lady of the Chamber; twenty Ladies, and their servants. The Nurse
of the Prince and Infants, eight Chamber-maides. Five masters of the Princes.
The Landres of the Kings body. Landres for the Princes. Two guardians of the
rest of the women. Six Ladies of honor. Four Assistants of the Chamber. The
Landres of Estate. The Mistrisse of the work. The chief Keeper of the Jewels,
two inferior ones. Four maids of Estate belonging to the Ladies. The high
Chamberlain. Five Chamberlaines more, twelve inferior ones. The chief
book-keeper of the wages. Four assistants. One Secretary. One Treasurer. One
Secretary of the Chamber. The chief housekeeper. Four Assistants. Two
Physicians of the Chamber. Six of the Family. One Surgeon. Six gentlemen of
the Society. Eleauen Esquires. Twelve keepers of the Ladies. One that keeps
the sick Ladies. Four doore-keepers of the Ladies. Four messengers. The
superior and inferior Tapestry keepers. The Master of the hall of the Ladies.
The dancing Master. Four keepers of the Plate. Eight Chamberlaines. One
Booke-keeper. The Master of the Music. Of all the Artists of the Court there
is one belongs to the Queen, and hangs her Arms in his shop.
The Queens Kitchen.
ONe Steward. Two Overseers. One Ouerseer of the maid servants. A Caruer. The
chief Cook. Four officers of the Kitchen. Four Water-bearers. Six porters
of the Kitchen. One buttler of the bread. Another of the victuals. Another of
the Kings bread. Another for the vulgar. A Dispenser. The Pastie-maker. A
Clearke of the fruit and wood. The broth-maker. The sauce-maker. Two servants
to assist the sauce-maker.
Cauallaerica of the Queen.
THe chief Master of the Horse. His Lieutenant. One Ouerseer. A Secretary.
Four Furrieles. Three Horse-curers. Thirteen Lacquaies. 22. of those that
provide Mules when the King remoues. 20. servants of the Caualleria. Ten
Coachmen. Ten servants belonging to the Coachmen.
The Queens private Chapel.
THe Confessor. The chief Almnor. Two assistants. The chief Taper-keeper. Two
inferior ones. One that keeps the Host. Two young men of the Oratory. Here
the Kings Chaplins say Mass when they are nominated, and do it by turns.
The service and servants of the King.
THe high Chamberlain. Five inferior ones. Gentlemen of his Chamber, with a
gilded key, of no certain number. Gentlemen of the Kings diet. Gentlemen of
the house. Secretary and keeper of the writings of his Majesty. 24. Pages more
or less with their Master and Tutor. The chief booke-keeper of the wages. A
Treasurer. A Paymaster. The high Poste-master. The chief Harbenger. 3.
inferior ones. The chief keeper of the Jewels. Ten Jewel keepers more. Two
Physicians belonging to the Chamber. Eight belonging to the house. The keeper
of the books. Four of the Royal house. Ten continual ones. Fifty Monteros
of Espinola, which are Guardiens of the Chamber. The chief Tapestry Master and
inferior ones. Six Chamberlaines of the beds. Six assistants and inferior
ones. Eight Porters. The chief Waterman and his inferiors. Four Horse Riders,
The chief Snuffer of the Candles. Six inferior ones. Of all the Artists of
the Court, there is one of the King, and places the Kings Arms in his shop.
The Kings Guard.
A 100. archers, borgons and fle^mings, 100. Spanish Halberdiers. 100.
Halberdiers of Switsers. The old Guard being Horsemen, are 50. Spaniards. The
old Foote-guard are 50. or more.
Armory of the King.
THe chief Armorer. Ten Officers of the Armory. Ten inferior ones. Six
servants which cleanse the powder. Four Porters of the Armory. Four Kings of
Arms. 24. Trumpetters. Eight Drummers, 16. inferior ones.
The service of the Kings diet.
THe Gentlemen of the Chamber, serve his Majesty's Table by turns, as the
Ladies do the Queens; and has once again so many services of meat as the
Queen has.

Offices belonging to the Huntsmen.
THe chief Huntsman. Six more. 10. Masters of the Crosse-bowes. Eight
Huntsmen more. 10. a horseback. The Servants of the Hounds. 4. Huntsmen of the
wild Chase. 13. Hare-hunters. 14. a horseback with every one his Gray hound.
12. that wind the horn. Four Huntsmen of the Bull. Six keepers of the Nets
and Engines belonging to the hunting. 4 Assistants. 4. Keepers of the Hounds.
All these, besides the Horsemen which serve his Majesty, are together a
horseback when the King rides a hunting.
Officers of the Cauallerica.
THe chief Master of the Horse. His Lieuetenant. 4. Equal with him. 8.
Grooms of the Stable. A booke-keeper. Two overseers. 10. Ryders. 24. Lacquies.
6. Horse-curers. 4. Coachmen of his Majesty. 20. Coachmen for the Commons. 20.
Prouiders of the Mules when the King remoues.
The Chapel Royal.
THe chief Chaplin. His Majesty's Confessor. The Chaplins of the Altar. The
Chaplins of honor, who sit, and are covered with their Coapes. There is three
sorts of them, the first is of the house of Castille, and the King pays them:
the second is of the Crown of Aragon, and the Crown pays them: the third is
of the Orders of S. James, Calatraua, Alcantara, S. John, Christ, and Montesa:
and these are paid by the Masters of the tables of these orders. All which are
to be chosen by the King equal in degree.
One Master of the Chapel. 60. Musicians. A Tenent of the Mr. of the
Chapel. Two Masters of the Ceremonies. Two Organists. Six children of the
Oratory. One chief Almnor, and two inferior ones. One chief Taper-bearer, and
three Assistants. The Hoste-maker.
The Order of the Royal Chapel.
IN the Royal Chapel none are covered unless it be one of the Grandes,
Archbishop, Bishop, or Ambassador of a King, Crown, or Venice, and the
Chaplins of Honor with their Coapes. At the right hand of the chief Altar
there is a Bench richly covered, the face toward the body of the Church, on
the which sit the Bishops which are present at the divine service, at the foot
of the Altar there is a seat for his Maty. and a Cushion for his knees and
elbowes which are always agreeable with the furniture of the Altar, except the
King mourn.

Lower without the Archof the chapel, there is a great Bench covered with
Tapestry, where the Grandes sit.

At the other side on the left hand of the Altar, there is a seat for the
Bishops and chief Chaplin: a little lower, right over his Maty. there is a
seat for the Nuncio and other Ambassadors.

Lower without the Arch, before the seat of the Grandes, stand two, one
behind the other, and uncovered, for the Chaplins.

Behind the seat of the Grandes and Chaplins, there stand uncovered all the
Knights, men of renown, gentlemen and servants of the Ambassadors, which go
to Mass to the Chapel, and to hear the divine service.

Between the curtain of the King, and the seat of the Grandes, there is a
seat appointed for the High-Chamberlaine, who sits covered, although he be
not one of the Grandes, in that place, by reason of his office; and behind him
stand two Archers of the Guard.

Near the Curtain Royal stand the Masters of the Ceremonies; these advise of
the dignity which is found in the Church, and bring to his Maty. the
Evangelists and the Pax to kiss them, and the four Chamberlaines go before
the Dignity, and return therewith unto the foot of the Altar, and then
return to their places, which is behind the Ambassadors, and there stand; and
having no dignity, one of the Chaplins carries the Missall and the Pax.

His Majesty gives way to the great Prior of S. John, to enter in the Curtain
Royal, and seateth himself in a seat behind his Majesty.

Before the Altar stand four echayres of state; in the lowest, the Queen,
Prince, and Infants hear Mass: and this chayr or seat is close shut, and so
they cannot be seen. In the second is the Music, and likewise there are some
seats, whereon there sit some Knights and men of renown, which come there to
hear the divine Service; the which sit and are covered, because that is not
reputed for the Chapel, and it is lawful for every one to sit and be covered.

In the other two seats above, sit the Ladies and waiting gentlewomen of the
Queen and other Ladies which go to the Chapel, and it is hard to enter by
the quarter of the Queen, and there is no other entrance.

On Twelfe day his Maty. offers in remembrance of the three that came from the
East, three silver Cups, which are given to three Monasteries of poor Nuns.

The day his Maty. came to full age, he offers so much in Crowns.

On holy Thursday his Maty. washes the feet of certain poor men, as the
Pope does at Rome, and commands them to be clothed and food to be given
them. If the Nuncio be a Cardinal, there is a seat set for him in the Chapel
Royal, as for the King; and the like for whatsoever Cardinal right over
against that of his Majesty.

When his Maty. goes to the Chapel, the Guard of the Spanish and German
Halberdiers are placed in rank from the gate of the Hall of the Guard, unto
that of the Chapel. The Spaniards at the right hand, and at his return the
Germans have it. In the midst go the Furrieles of the Chapel, and then
the Knights and Gentlemen which accompany him, and after them the chief of the
house with their staves; and then the Grandes two and two, and then the Prince
of Sauoy when he is at Court, and then the King; after him the Nuncio and
Ambassadors in their orders, and then the horsemen and chief Chamberlaines,
and after them come in troops, the Archers: if there be any Cardinal in the
company, he goes at the left hand of his Majesty, and at the coming out, they
observe this order.

His Maty. goes out uncovered until the midst of the Chapel, and there he
covers himself, and walks two steps, and presently desires the Prince his
cousin that he would be covered; and walking two paces more, returns to the
Ambassadors, and desires them to be covered; and coming to the shadows of the
Gates of the Church, desires the Grandes to be covered.

The manner how the Kings eat in public.
ON the chief feast days, their Maties. are accustomed to eat in public,
as at Easter, and Twelfetide; and the service of the Queen in public upon
such days is as follows.

The Table is set upon a place somewhat high from the ground, richly covered,
and at the upper end is the service of his Majesty: and upon the first napkin
they put two loaves, one very big and white, and the other somewhat brown,
whereof his Majesty most commonly eats.

And at the bringing in of the meat, there goes before it three Corporalls of
the three Guardes of the Archers, Halberdiers, Spaniards and Germans; then the
Mace-bearers with their Maces of silver and gilt, with the arms of Castille
and Leon.

Then the Chamberlaines with their Staves, and after them the high
Chamberlain, with his long Staff upon his shoulder; then the meaner sort with
meat, all encompassed with those of the Guard, and the high Chamberlain
covered. And in the mean time the meat passes, all those which in the mean
time do pass, are to be uncovered, and the Guard have a care to advertise the
same; and so in the place or hall where the dishes or meats of the King stand
or any part thereof, or the Cup wherein they drink, not any body is to be
covered, unless it be one of the Grandes or the high Chamberlain.

The meat being set on the Table by the high Chamberlain, the Queen comes,
and being set at Table, it is permitted that some enter which are desirous to
see them eat.

It concerns the Ladies, three every day by their turns, to come and serve
the Table; the one uncovers the dishes in their order, and delivers them in
the hands of the other, who delivers the dish to the Queen; and her Maty. is
silent, and delivers the dish to the other, and she makes thereof a small dish
for the Queen; and then she delivers the dish in the hands of some of the
inferior ones, who carries the same away. These three Ladies which serve,
stand with their napkins upon their shoulders, and are very gallant.

One Chaplin of honor is always found ready there to bless the Table, and is
accustomed to command the dishes to be delivered to the Queen.

When her Maty. will not have any such dish, then she lifts up her head, and
presently it is sent away; and at every dish the napkin is changed, and the
number of the dishes is from 15. upwards at public meals.

When her Maty. pleases to drink, she makes a sign with her head to one of
the Ladies which serve the Table, and there is another Lady which does assist
her to give the meat; and then one of the four Chamberlaines does accompany
one of the inferior ones to the gate of the Buttery: then he who keeps the
Buttery, delivers to one of the meaner sort a silver plate with a covered
Cup full of water; for the Queen drinks no Wine. Then he accompanied with the
said Plate; goes to the Chamberlain, who with another does accompany it,
where the place is, where the Lady is, who is to give her Majesty the drink.

Then the Lady falls down upon her knees at the feet of her Maty: then
takes off the cover of the Cup with two fingers of her left hand, and with the
other two foremost she takes the plate; and then with her right hand she
takes the cup, and pours in the plate a little of the water, and drinks
it; and then puts the cup again on the plate, and putting it in her right
hand, with the left she covers the cup again, and taking it again in the
left hand, she gives it to her Maty. and presently with her right hand she
uncovers the Cup: and when the Queen has drunk, the Lady covers the Cup
in rising up, and having done her reverence, she delivers it again to the
inferior one.

At the coming of the fruit, the Chamberlain comes with the same Company as
is aforesaid, with the advice of one of the Ladies which serve the Table, and
the meaner sort bring it, and give it to one of the Ladies which put it there;
in the mean time they take away the meat from the Table, and give it to the
meaner sort, who carry it away. At the time when her Maty. eats, the Grandes
which are present stand covered, leaning to the wall, and the Ladies which do
not serve that day, stand in the same piece, conferring with their Gallants;
for at that time it is lawful for them, and those which do serve are wont to
turn back sometimes upon occasions to salute their friends.

In the mean time, her Maty. eats and dinner passes, on such days they
sound in the yard of the Palace with drums and trumpets.

The manner of the Kings eating.
THe like Ceremonies are used when the King eats in public in his quarter,
but only that in stead of the Ladies, Gentlemen serve the Table every one in
his turn, and the same serve the meal on such days in stead of the Pages,
all uncovered, and with their cloak and rapier; only the high Chamberlain is
covered by reason of his office. Moreover the Kings Table is served with the
Assembly of the Town house, and the four Kings of Arms with their rich
Coats, with the Arms of Castille and Leon, and the Mace bearers with their
Maces of silver and gilt, with the same Arms: there are divided two for the
King, and two for the Queen, and also accompany the meat with the Corporalls
and Grandes.

When their Maties. eat in public together, all this is joined, ordered with
the same order without any deduction.

How the Kings take Coach.
THey advertise before hand with Trumpettes, and Drums when their Maties.
come forth, and presently the horsemen make themselves ready, and the other
persons which are to go in the company; and their Maties. being come, they bow
down, bringing the King to the Queen, accompanied with the Noble Men and
Ladies of honor.

At the entrance of the Coach, a Knight lifts up the boot, and the high
Chamberlain takes his Maty. by the Arm, to assist him into the coach. His
Maty. coming to the boot, takes off his Bonnet, and saluteth the Queen, and
lets her go in first, and sits at the right hand; then presently the King
goes in, and the Chamberlaines and master of the horse go in another Coach,
which goes before.

Then the chief Lady of the Chamber, and the other Ladies go into other
Coaches; and the Gentlemen which serve them, every one helps his Lady into
the Coach, and afterward they horse themselves.

Ordinary charges of the Kings and Queens house.
FOr the Horsemen every month four thousand Ducats.

To the furnishing of the house one month with another, five hundred Ducats.

To the shop of agreement, three thousand Rials every month.

For wages yearly, one hundredth forty and four thousand Ducats.

To the Merchants of agreement yearly, eighteen thousand Ducats.

To the Queristers of the Chapel monthly, 000120. Ducats.

To the keeper of the Jewels yearly, five thousand and four hundred Ducats.

For the charges of the Tapestry yearly, one hundred forty and four thousand
Ducats.

For the ordinary Plate of his Majesty yearly, one hundred forty and four
thousand Ducats.

For the expenses of the Queen, one hundred and twenty thousand Ducats.

For ordinary Alms yearly, are seven thousand and two hundred Ducats.

For the expenses of the high Postmaster yearly, two and forty thousand
Ducats.

For the expenses of the Snora Infanta a Nun, yearly, three thousand Ducats.

To the Treasurer of the Queen for expenses of such things as her Majesty and
others eats between meals, is yearly six and thirty thousand Ducats.

For the Chamber of the King yearly, four and twenty thousand Ducats.

For the expenses of the chief gentlewomen of the Queens Chamber yearly,
six thousand Ducats.

For the expenses of the Prince of Spain, yearly, six and thirty thousand
Ducats.


