The happy entrance of the high borne Queen of Spain, the Lady Margarit of
Austria, in the renowned City of Ferrara.

With feastiuall ceremonies used by Pope Clement the eight, in the holy Marriage
of their Majesty's.

As also in that of the high borne Archduke Albertus of Austria, with the
Infanta Isabella Clara eugenia, Sister to the Catholic King of Spain,
Phillip the third.

First translated out of Italian after the Copy printed at Ferrara, allowed by
the Magistrates.

Imprinted at London by John Woolfe, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near to the Exchange. 1599.

The happy entrance of the high borne Queen of Spain, the Lady Margarit of
Austria, in the renowned City of Ferrara.
ON the Thursday at night, being the twelfe of the month of November, came the
high borne Queen, Lady Margarit of Austria on the Island, a delightful place,
at the Bridge of dark Meyrs, nine miles from Ferrara, where she was received,
feasted, and served by the household of the Pope. And the morrow following, her
Majesty was advertised that at her pleasure she might come into the city of
Ferrara: whereupon was presentlye replied, that she would repair to the city
at ten of the clock, to which end his Holiness sent two Legates, which were
the illustrious Cardinal Bandino, and the Cardinal of St. Clement, noblye
accompanied by many Prelates and Gentlemen, and two bands of Lances, and one
of Carabins, and then the Coaches and Litters: all which repaired in good and
modest order to the said Island, where (after the dew ceremonies of the Legates
were ended) she with her mother the Archeduchesse, mounted in a coache prepared
for them, followed with all their suit and retinue, together with the
high-borne Archeduke Alberto, the Dukes of Gandia and Vmala, and the great
Constable: the governor of Millain, the Ambassador of Spain, and the Prince
Don Zanges, D. Maximillian Tristiani, and a German Princess, with many other
lords of name in coaches and Litters, and came thus in fair order toward the
gate of Angels, where not far from thence she descended into a house made of
purpose of Wood, richely beautified, with a Pauillion and a Chair. There her
Majesty stayed until the holy College of Cardinals appeared, clothed
pontifically to receive her, and to conduct her to the Palace with their
train. The said Cardinals being come, and making a fair show in turning, her
Majesty had conference with the Cardinal De Medicis: after which she was
saluted of all the rest, and taken between the Cardinals, Sforra and Mont
Alto: when coming to the City gate, many pieces of ordinance were
discharged. Upon the said gate on the outside were painted three arms, to
wit: those of his Holiness in the middle, at the left hand the Queens, and at
the right hand those of the Catholic King, with this writing:

Angelii gaudent, mortales exultant, Margaritam Augusti sanguinis pietatis
virtutumque omnium splendore lucidissimam, simul laetissime excipiunt. Which is
in English.

The Angels rejoice, and mortal men make merry and receive with great joy,
Margarit of imperial lineage, adorned with the light of godliness. Within the
gate were likewise painted five arms, in the middle the Popes: on the right
hand those of the King of Spain and of the Archeduke Albertus, and on the left
hand those of the Queen of Spain, and of the high borne Infant, wife to the
said Archeduke Albertus, with these verses upon them.

Vrbem aduentus tui lumine illustratum
Regina, read tuo hospitio gloriosam.
In this sort came her Majesty happilye in, at eleven of the clock with a
calm weather, in so much that it seemed that the heaven was cleared by her
royal presence: there appeared for her auantguarde (after that a number of
Wagons and Carts, laden with sundry goods and bagadge were come in, also the
coaches and Litters of her Majesty, richly furnished and opened) two companies
of Horsemen, the one being shot, and the other Lances, with their Trumpets in
mourning apparel, with black Flags at their Lances, which were the men of
the great Constable of Millain. After these follows a great number of Horse
of the court: after these followed two companies of Horse of the Guarde of the
Legate Cardinal Aldobrandino, the one company were shot, the other Lances:
then came eight Trumpets and one in the middle, who played on two great Danish
Kettel drums. After these follows the bagadges of the Cardinals, and then
many Milanesians and other Gentlemen, all mourning.

Then followed the Mace bearers of the Cardinals, and the Mules, pontifically
clothed in read, and the Cardinals with Purple Cappes, to the number of 19, to
wit, F^orenza, Ascoli, Montelparo, Boromeo, Camerino Orimontano, Bandino, S.
Clement, Baronio, Auila, Branchetto, Ceuara, Arrigone, Farnese, Santiquatro,
Aldobrandino, and Cesis, with the Popes Guarde of Switzers.

There appeared the high borne Queen in the middle, between the Cardinals
Sforza, and Mont Alto, with her guarde of Germans clothed in black Velvet:
her Majesty was on a white Palfrey, caparassoned with cloth of Silver wrought
with Gold, she being apparelled in black with a black silk Cap, and a rich
pleasant head-tyre, which was open so that one could perceive her fair hair,
which resembled threads of Gold. After her, came the high borne Archdutchesse
her mother also on horseback, on a Palfrey covered with Peache color Velvet,
imbrodred with Gold. These Palfreyes with their furniture, were sent them by
the Pope, on the left hand of the Archdutchesse, rode the Archduke Albert
clothed in black. For the Reere guard, followed one company of Archers on horse
back, with pieces in their hands apparrelled in black, and after them came the
light horse men of his Holiness. And lastly followed an innumberable number of
wagons, with Lords, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen belonging to his Majesty.

In this order they came through the Angel street toward the great Court,
and being come to the palace of the Ambassador of the Emperor, there was an
upper portall fairly painted and adorned with many garlands: in this portall
was a woman holding a great base, on the which were four arms, to wit: those
of his holiness, of the Emperor, of the King of Spain, and of the archeduke
Albertus, which were accompanied and defended by religion and Justice, and from
the heaven descended victory, who with her hand, pointed to the same Arms. Her
Majesty following on still, and coming at the Cathedral Church, she passed
through a triumphall Arc, set up before the Court gate very costly, and
underset with four Pillars, in the manner of that of Titus in Rome, with an
Image on each side, which in the right hand held a garland of Bays with a
role, wherein was the word Iugum. And on the left hand also was a role wherein
was Maritald in the Frontespire. Phillipo and Margarite Austiacis, imperatorum
gloria, suaque pietate inclitis, vt Catholicorum Regum soboles propagetur,
matrimonio di vnitas coniunctis anni multi, liberorum topia, perpetua felicitas.

Which is.

Phillip and Margaret of Austria, illustrous through the imperial glory, and
her own Godliness: to the end that the royal generation might be delated,
through the matrimonial estate by God conjoined, God grant long life, store
of Children, and a continual felicity.

In the Nichien were two Images with trumpets, the one signifiyng Fame, in the
uppermost, the arms of his holiness, in the midst on the right side, the
King of Spaines, and on the other side the Queens.

As soon as she was come into the Court, she found a great pair of stayres
builded of wood, with leaves, and before on the base were the pictures of the
holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, where her Majesty alighted, and went up the
said stairs, between the aforesaid two Cardinals: after her the Archduches
her mother, with the Archduke, and the rest following, and she was conducted in
a certain Chamber, and from thence into the consistory hall, where she reposed
her self, until (by the Lord Bernardin Scotto of Millan,) was spoken a short
but excellent and eloquent oration to his Holiness, who sat in the upper end
of the Hall, mounted in pontifical robes, and environed with his holy College
of Cardinals: at the end of the oration, appeared the Queen with her Mother,
the Archeduke and her Court, with many burning Torches, and coming before his
Holiness, kneeled all thrice down, and then kissed his feet, first her
Majesty, after her her Mother, and then the Archeduke, to the Queen the Pope
bowed himself, giving her his benediction, saying certain words, and without
other ceremonies he departed with the Cardinals.

Her Majesty departing went into the new Chambers, which were richly adorned,
and especially one (which the Pope had caused of purpose to be made for her
Majesty) was rich, sumptuous, and wonderful, which if I should describe, these
leaves would not suffice me. The Ladies and Gentlewomen of the Queens train,
were likewise all royally lodged in Chambers close to the Chamber of her
Majesty.

The Satterday morning after that the Queen had heard the Mass which was
celebrated by his Holiness, together with the high borne Mother, and the
Archduke, they went to dinner with his Holiness, and the great Constable,
served her for Cup hearer, and when she had drunk, th'Embassador of Spain
gave her the Napkin, at night the Cardinal Aldobrandino supped with her
Majesty.

The Sunday Morning earlye, her Majesty appeared like a Bride, richely
attired, and accompanied with the Cardinals Farnese and Santiquatro, with all
her retinue, appair^lled in rich (...), and her German Guarde, clothed in
Silk and Velvet, red and yllow, also the horsemen with flags of Silver, red
and black.

Being come into the Cathedral Church, which was sumptuously hung and
beautified, the marriage was solemnized, with such ceremonies as were requisite,
her Majesty was merried to the Archduke in the name of the Catholic King
Phillip the third. and the same Archduke married the Ambassador of Spain in
the name of the Infanta of Spain, the Lady Isabella clara engenia, sister to
the King, whom he has taken to wife.

The same day after dinner; in token of pleasure and joy, were made many
Maskes, insomuch that in the place Giudecca, were seen many Knights and
Gentlewomen in maskes, with so much people in the streets, that the Coatches
could give them no way, although they withdrew themselves to the Castle
walls, and they came until the Palace of the Illustrous Dame Lady Marsisa:
But her Majesty came not there, because that in the Morning she had received
the holy Sacrament.

The same night in the great Hall was held a sumptuous Feast, to which came
many Gentlewomen of Ferrara in Maskes, very pleasantly furnished and attyred:
when coming up the stayres, they were saluted by a great number of Trumpets
and Drums: and in the Hall, by the music of diverse sweet and delightful
soundes.

On the Monday her Majesty went to S. Maria del valdo to see the miraculous
blood, from thence to S. Vito, where she heard a most sweet noise of music, of
the honorable Lords there.

Toward the Evening somewhat late, 30. Maids like Seanimphs made an assay, for
the next day to make a ship chase within the Castle wall with six boats, and
were apparrelled with scarffes in liveries, five and five, to wit: Green and
Red, Yellow, Yellow and Blewe, White, White and Blewe, with their hair and
leathers of the same color: some plaide on cimbals, and other singing made a
pleasant noise.

The same day toward night, in the Hall of the Guarde of the Pope, in the
Castle, was made a proof of the play of Judith and Holophernas in Latin,
which the ensuing night was by the Jesuit Scholars plaide before her Majesty.

Tewsday about 10. of the clock the said women made their ship chase 3. boats
at once, which made their course with the sound of trumpets from the Rose
bridge, rowing with great swiftnes, passing under the Rawline: the first boat
which came to the Castle wall on the side of Giude^^, wan the price, which was
of Red Crimson Satin, and therein were the women with Yellow: the other prize
which was of Blew Satin, was likewise won by those in the Yellow and Blew.
This ship chase was effected so prettyly and with such pastime, that every one
wondered at it, for these women plaide and sung in those boats, and daunced
with great nimblenes.

Hitherto have I briefly set down as much as I could know, there will not
hereafter want other high spirits which with more circumstance, and in some
sweeter style, will set forth at large what is happened.

FINIS.

