Mappa Mundi* Otherwise called the Compass / and Cyrcuet of the world, and
also the Compass of every Island, comprehendyd in the same.

woodcut Ptholoweus



woodcut woodcut woodcut woodcut

Mappa mundi.
THE general Hystoryes of Rome, and Chronicles, makes mention of all
Chronicles, of the world. And specially of the.vii. books hystoriall, that se
Alpheges of castle that was chosen Emperor for his great wisdom compyled
out of the.vij. books all the life of Hercules, with the counsel of Claudeo
Tholomeo that compyled out a C. xxxvi^. books This Hercules was the sone of
Jupiter king of Sogrece and of Almayne by the queen of Thebes. Also Tytoleno
that has breuyed all the annuell stories of Rome, making mencyon of the.iiij.
powers Emperyall / that been in the world.

The first Empire.
ANd in yt party, that is to say in the East party, of the wolrd that was
the first Empire in partia in the time of Nynus, and of Gynus and of Serses and
of Sarys, and of Anthyochus, and of many other great kings reygnyng in the
East party.

The.ij. Empire.
THe second Empire, was in the North party of the world, that is to say in
Grecia in the time of Hercules, and of Phelype of Messedon, and of Alexandre,
and of Pietus king of Pirotis, and of many other great kings reygnynge in
Grecia.

The.iij. Empire.
THe third Empire, was is the Southe, that is to say in Aufryke, in the time
of Cola king of Libia and of Ase / Rew^all / and of Amylkare / and of Ancye,
and of Amylkare the younger, the father of ye great Hanyball, and of Asdrewbal
his brother, and of many great kings reygnyyge in Aufryke.

The.iiii. Empire.
THE fourth Empire, was in the West, that is to say at Rome and of Italye in
the time of Romulus / that made Rome, and Marco furranuldo, and of Marco
corylyano, and of great Sipion affrecano, and of Sipion humantino, and of great
Sylla, and of Pompio, and of Julius Cezer, that was the first tyraunte and of
Octauian, that was the first crowned Emperor, and of Constantyne the son of
saint Elyne, and also of many other great kings in the west part.

IVlius Cezer was one of the ^x. worthyes of the world, in Arms and
Conquestes that he made and wonders wise in all things. That time used he in
his time to enserche and mesure the world in length and breadth, and did make
thereof great Books, of all the parties, countres, and provinces and wonders in
them contained, and that books accorded to Batylmewe and to Marcus paulus, and
to Claudius Tholomeus, and to the great Arystotle that went with king Stondynge,
and ben proved true, by many diverse reasonable prouynges, but I have neither
lust nor leisure to copye all the books, but of all the substance that melyked
best to learn, and to know for to make shortly mencyon, of all the parties of
the world, as I understand after mine Auctours, that the world is round
about, by the Occian see xxiiii. M. miles of assyse of Rome, and.viii. M.
miles thwart over, and.iiii. M. miles to the mydle there Jerusalem stands*
and there departs the world in.iiii. parties, East, west, North, and Southe.

The East quarter.
THe first party of the world, is to understand from the North to the
Southeest, all about by the coasts of the Occian see, by the East party, and
these be the names and prouynces of the East, quarter of the world. Ynde
mayor, Ynde medyan, and the most party of Ynde mynor, and Sanre corneto,
Ethyopia, Azonas, Greeis, Aponia, Mesapotama, Sacas, Cofides, Mede the moore.
Amasona, Albonia, and a great party of Percia, the country of Babell.

The South quarter.
THe South quarter of the world is from the Southeest, to the Southwest, by the
coasts of the Occian see, on the south party, and these be the names and
prouynces, in the south party of the world. Ynde minor Thert the most
meruayles, ben of diverse shape of people, and many great wonders, and it is so
burning hot / that no man may dwell there, for the great heat of the Son,
and Genophysis, and there ben trees of the son and of the Moon, and
Brakmana, Meros, Hebrycos, Gysonas, Merdos, Bubogras, there grows, and in the
I Will of Cleophas the people have no heedes, and Affricabilia, Babilonia, Neubra,
Arabia, Ethiop, and of Barbary, and part of Suty.

The Westquarter.
THe west quarter of the world, is from the Southwest, to the Northwest, all
about the coasts of the Occian see, in the west party, and these ben the
names and prouynces of the west party of the world, and the Maremedian: that
some men call the Greeks see, and that is in the West quarter of the world a
part of Mare mayor, that lies betwixt Turkye and Tartarye, and there lies a
great part of Barbary, and of Belmere that is be Southe the streytes Iebaker,
and by North the streytes Iebal^^e these ben the prouynces. First Hispania
that is the Realm of Castle, and Lions* Dragone, Cataline, Garnat Portugale,
Algarne, Galis, Byshay and Nauerne, and Gallia, is to understand France, Guy
a prouynce, amorous, Bretayn, Normandy, Pycardy, Turrayne, Lorayne, Buorgon
Sauoy, Almayne, that is to understand, all the honor of the Emperor from the
Occian See; to the mount Gogarde on both the parties of the water of Rygne.
The Cities of the Emperor aforesaid ben these, Acon Col^yne, Men's, Tryre,
Frankforth, Straesbroth, Basell, and Constans. And so forth to the Mountains
of Almayne, and Bayer, Sweuen, Ostenryche, Denmark, Boeme, Norway, Swecia,
Pomar, Pruce, Saxon, Freeslande, Hollande, Gelderlande, Brabaunte, Flaunders,
England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, and the out Isles of Orbenay, Gutlande,
Zeland, Iselande, Freesland, and many other small Islands, that be i^ the party
of other the Occian see, and Italia is to understand Pymonde, Lumbardy, Froyll,
and the Marks of Trenysane, Romayne, Tuskane de patrimone of Rome. The duke of
Splate the mark of Acon, the realm of Naples, and Poyle, Taranter, Calabre,
the I Will of Serle, and the I Will of Sardyn, and Grecia, is to understand,
Romenay, Tracia, Tessalia, Athenas, Sallydon, Thobas, Aquaya, yt now is
called, the pryncypalytie of Murre Abania, and all the I Will of the Archpelago,
the I Will of Sipre, Rodes Greece, that now is called Candye, Corsu, Chiffolonia,
Iacento, Nigrepounte, Lango, Calanio, Palamose, Niporey, Ixeo, Metholome,
Andrestalau^to, and many other Isles with in the Archepelago, that is the Gulf
betwyxt Greece and Turkye, that comes from the Greeks see, into the great see
before Constantynople, through the brace of s. George. And these be the names
and provinces betwixt Greece and the Occian see. Toward the Northwest part,
that is to say, Hungarye, Polonye, Russe, Ramye, Gallaci, Ludwary, Comney,
Blylgary, Blagy, Cerny, Slawony, and part of Turkye, and part of Surry, and
the west part of the world.

The North quarter.
THe North quarter of the world is for to understand, from the North west to
the Northeest, by the Occian See, on the North party, and these be the names
and prouynces i^ the North quarter of the world a part of Russe lectony,
Tartarye, P^rty the less, Media, Ermenia the more, there stands yet the Ark of Noah upon the Mount of Aracke, and Germynia the less, that goth to the
Greeks see, in the North quarter of the world, yt the most part of Turkey is
in, that is to say the realm of Frygye, there the great City of Troy
stands, and the realm of Lydia, and Pompsilia, Cilica pounto, there now
dwells the Emperor of Trapasande that is a Greek, and king George
sanastopoly, that is a christen man / and holds of the Bishop of Rome and
his lands joins to Tartarie on the one side, and with the Emperor of
Trapasand on the other side at the East end of the Greeks see.

And also in the North quarter is in Asary alismace, and a great part of Surre
/ there was Anthyoche the great City, there the prince of Antyoche dwelled.

And also the compass of England round about is.iiij. thousand.iii. C.
and.lx. miles. Venys stands from Flaunders. East and be south. viij.C. miles.
And next course by the sea, from Flaunders unto Iaffe is this, from Sluse to
Calys is.lxx. miles. From Calys to Bewchef.lxxx. my. From Bewchef to
Lezarde.ij. hondreth and.lx. miles. From Lezarde to Capefenester.vi. hondreth.
and.l. miles. From Capefenester to Lysbone.ii. hondreth.lxxx. miles. From
Lysbone to Cap s. Vyncent to the stractes.ii. c. xl. miles. From stractes of
Iebalter to the I Will of Sardyn.xi. c. miles. From Malfitana in sardyn to
Inalta.iiii. c. and.lx. miles. From Inalta by the course of Sarogogora, and
Sysyl to sail to Iaf in Surry, is. M.viii. c. miles. From Iaf to Baffa in
sypre to the castle Roge.ii. c. xx. miles. From the Castle Roge to Rodes, is
an hondreth miles. From Rodes to Candy.ii. c. l. my. From Candy to Modon.iii.
c. my. From Modon to corsu.iii. c. miles From Corsu to Venis.vii. c. miles The
length of the coasts of Surre by the set coasts, is from the Gulf of
Ermonye: to the Gulf Dalaryse next the south, and be West, from Lazarye to
Rise is.v. c. and.xx. miles. That is to understand from Lazary in Ermony to
Soldyne, that comes from the River coming from Anthyoche.lxx. miles. And
from ^oldyne to the port of Lycha next to the south.l. miles. From Lytha to
the port of Tortosa south.l. miles. From Tortosa to the port Trypoll.
south.l. miles. From Bernet to Acres south and be West.lxx. miles. From Acres
to port Iaf, South and be west.lxx. miles. From port Iaf / to port Delazara
south southwest.c. xxx. miles. From Damiat Lariza in surre, to damiat in
Egypt.c. lxxx. miles. From Damiat / to Babylon Alchaer.lxxx. miles. From
Damyat, to Alexandre, is. a hundred and.l. miles. The length of Mare mayor, is
from the Gulf s. George in mids of the gulf that is betwyxt Trapasande
sanastopoly / unto the port of Messembre West from s. George a thousand.lx.
miles. The breadth of the westende, is from the brase s. George at
Constantynople / upon the River of Danabes, next the North, from s. George
brase is.v. c. lx. miles. From Pero to Caffa in Tartary Northeest.vi. c. miles.
From Caffa to the stractes of the Taken Northeest.c. miles. The gulf of the
Taken, is about.vi. hundred. miles. The capte of Caffa is about.vi. hundred
miles. From the head of the Tana to Sanastopoly.iiii. c. miles. From Sanastopoly
to Trapasonde and by west.ii. c. l. miles. From Trapasond to synopia, next the
south.iiii. c. xxx. miles. From Synopia to Pero next the west and southwest.ii.
^. xxx. miles. From Pero to Messembre next the worthwest.ii. c xxx. miles. From
Messembre to ma^cro north Northeest iii.clx. miles. From Mancro castro to
Danobia Northeest.c. xxx. miles. From Danobia to the stractes of Caffa next the
East.ii. c. miles.
The Compass of the Islands.
THe I Will of Sypre, is about.v. hundred miles. The I Will of Rodes, is about an
hundred.lxxx. miles. The I Will of Lange, is about.iiij. score miles. The I Will of
Nigrepount, is about iij. hundred miles. The I Will of Cecilia, is about.vii.
hundred miles. The I Will of Sardyn, is about.vii. hundred miles. The I Will of
Mayorke, is about.ii. hundred miles. The I Will of great Brytayne, is about.ii.
M. miles. The I Will of Irlande, is about a. M.vii. c. miles. The pryncypalytie
of Murre is about.vii. c. miles.
Thus ends the length, breadth and compass of the world. And follows how
the world is divided in three parts. (?)
Here follows how the world is divided in three parts.
ALL the earth in the world shall be enhabyted, and shall be divided in three parts.
The first party is named Assye the great: and is as great as the other two,
and this party dureth from Septemtrion by Oryent till myddy. The second part
is named Ewrape, and dureth from Occident unto Septemtrion. The third party
is named Aufrike that dureth from myddy unto Occident.

And Paradyse terrester is in the first regylyon of Assye legrande toward
Orient, and there is no earthly man that may come there, but god or his angles
led him and gyde him thither. For this Paradyse sythen yt Adam was cast and
driven out there of by an Angel, anon forthwith it was environed al about
with great fire, that dureth from the earth unto the sky above, that no man may
enter nor come thereto. And there is all about Paradyse great wyldernesses where
there is also great multitude of many diverse and peryllous beestes.

And also hell is in the mids of Affryke under the earth, and is set in the
mids of the earth, as a karnell of an apple is in the mids of the apple, for
asmoch earth is there above as beneth. And there be the souls that be dampened
in great pain and turment with out end.

And also a man may se openly the waters comes from Paradyse re^restre, for
there is a well spryng of the which.iij. Ryuers comes out of it. And one of
tho.iij. Ryuers goes by the parties of myddy toward Oryent, and falls into
the sea of Occydent, and that aryseth out of an hill again that is in the
parties of Ynde And the other two Ryuers aryseth again i^ Ewrope of an hill
and there pass by many countres, till they mete, and then they fall in to the sea as nature requires. And also a man may se in Affryke openly two hills
that be soup^rall of hell, and they cease not neither day nor night and be
ever bre^nyg with fires fire.

Explicit.
Thus ends this Mappa mundi Very necessary for all Merchants, and Maryners*
And for all such, as will labor and traueyle in the countres of the world. (?)
Imprinted by me Robert wyer, dwelling in s. Martyns parysshe, at the sign of
S. Iohu^ Euangelyst, beside the Duke of Suff^lkes places, at tharynge Cross.
Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum sofum.

woodcut astrological diagrams

Robert Wyer's device ROBERT WYER.




