The Governance of Virtue, teaching all faithful christians, how they ought
daily to lead their life, and fruitfully to spend their time unto the glory
of God and the health of their own souls. Newlye corrected and augme^ted by
Thomas Becon. 1566

Imprinted at London by John Day.

CVM PRIVILEGIO Regie Maiestatis.

THOMAS BECONVS SACROSA^CTAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSOR.
AETATIS SVAE. 41 ANo. DN^I. 1553.



Ora expressa vides viuos immitantia vultus,
Quod potuit calamo pictor and art vides.
Mentis quam Nullus potuit tibi redere pictor,
Effigiem scriptis prebuit ipse suis,
To the Godly Reader.
GRace grows after governance,
Is an old said saw in each place:
If governance has good resemblance
Grace delights to follow the trace.
Grace glories in godly governance,
Grace hastes ^o her haule and palace.
Grace does godly governance auaunce,
And cause it to excel in each place.
Where governance is godly wise,
Sage Sober, Honest, and Prudent:
There does grace, gloriously devise,
To have her seat aye permanent.
But if governance be wicked,
Idle wanton, indiscreet and vain:
Grace which is godly disposed,
With such governance can not remain.
This book shall thee instruct therefore,
Thy life virtuously to leave:
That grace with thee may evermore,
Remain as Gods most blessed seed.
To fight against Satan and sins
To repress errors and heresies:
To pray to God his grace to win,
In this book to learn thou may devise.
Take thou it therefore in good part,
As a joyful Jewel for thy wealth:
And give God thanks withal thy heart.
Which by his word works thy health.
As for my travail and pain,
I crave none other recompense:
But thy life virtuously to train,
That thou may enjoy gods presence*
FINIS
3. Regum 1. If a man be virtuous, there shall not an hear of his fall to the
ground. But if wickedness shall be found in him, he shall dye for it.

Tobi. 4. Love virtue all the days of thy life, and walk not in the ways of
wickedness For while thou studiest for virtues, thou shall have good success in all things that thou go about and so shall all they that love goodness.

A Table to find the principal matters contained in this book.
AN exhortacion to the Reader. The Epistle dedicatory. How a man should be have
himself in the morning when he rises. A prayer in the morning. A confession of
our sins unto God the father. How thou should behave thy self before thou
go to dinner. A prayer before dinner. Of the behavior at the Table in dinner
time. A thanks geuinge after dinner. What is to be done after dinner. Of
Supper. A prayer before Supper. Of the behavior at the table in supper time. A
thanks giving after supper. Of going to bed. A prayer to be said when we go
to bed. A prayer to be said* when thou art in bed. Remedies against all kinds
of temptacions. Against Idolatry. Against infidelity or misbeliefe. Against the
heresy of such as deny Jesus Christ^ to be god. Against the heresy of them,
which hold that Jesus Christ the son of God, took no flesh of Mary his
Mother. Against the gross and fantastical opinion of the Papists, which
affirm that Christ's natural body and blood is carnally eaten and dronken in
the Lords supper. Against the plucking away of thy trust and confidence from
Christ and his merits, to put in the merits of other creatures, or in thine
own good works, or in the intercession of Saints, or in sacrifice of the
popish Mass. Against such as go about to diswad^ the christian people from the
studiing, reading or hearing of Gods word. Against strange religion, or
new found woorshipping of God. Against men's traditions and unwritten verities
Against the following of ungodly forefathers. Against the wicked old customs
and long vsages. Against such as slander Christ's gospel by call linge it
new learning. Against pensiuenes and thought taking for the life. Against
hunger poverty, or carefulnes of living. Against keeping of evil company.
Against idleness. Against swearing. Against lying, slaundering* and filthy or
unclean talk. Against pride or vayneglory. Against feasting glotony, and
dronkennes. Against fornication and adultery. Against covetousness. Against
rebellion and disobedience. Against malice, grudge, envy, hatred, and anger.
Against the temptation of the faithful in consideringe their own miserye, and
contrariwise the wealth of the wicked. Against the most horrible and dampnable
sin, the sin against the holy Ghost. Against the despising of gods word:
and of the plagues that follow the same. Against carnal security and fleshly
living without the fear of God. Against the flacknes of doing good works.
Against the troublous tempests of sickness, of loss of goods, or any other
kind of adversity Against the temptation of the Devil for no^t satis fieng the
law of God, and for thy sinful living* Against desperation for thy late
conversion and tur ning unto God. Against sin, death and hel^
To the right honorable and most virtuous young Lady Jane Semer, daughter to
the high and mighty Prince Edward Duke of Somerset his grace, Thomas Becon
wishes increase of godly knowledge in Christ Jesus our Lord.
THere are no Parents (most godly Lady) that deserve better of the Christen
public weal, then they which through gods gift having Children, employ all
their endeavors to train them up even from their very cradels in good
letters and in the knowledge of gods most blessed will, that with their young
years, learning, virtue and godliness, may grow and increase and the younglinges
by this means be made at the last ancient and perfect scholars in the
mystery of Christ's schole. This careful study and studyous care for the
virtuous bringing up of youth, god in time paste earnestlye required of all
Fathers and Mothers in the common weal of his people the Israelites, and
according to gods holy commandment such as unfeignedly feared the Lord
their God, and wished well to their country, refused no labor, no pain, nor
cost that their children might be made profitable members of the public
weal. As I may pas over the ancient and holy Patriarchs De. 4. 6. ^
which were before the law of Moses (of whose diligence in the virtuous
bringing up of their yonglinges, it is more than double wickedness to doubt,
seeing we have this evident testimony of Abraham even of gods own mouth. Shall I
hide from Abraham says god, that thing which I entend to Gene* 1^
do. Seeing that Araham shall be a great and a migh^ye people, and all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him? I know this also, that he will command his
Children and his household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and
do after right and conscience. What earnest diligence did the most noble and
virtuous King David show in the godly bringing up of his Children, specially
of Solomon, that he might become a Prince worthy both for his godlynes,
learning, wisdom and pollicye, to rule in the common weal after him? What
godly instructions also gave he him, when he was at the point of death?
Behold (says he) I must walk by the way of all the world, nevertheless be
strong and quite thy sel^ manfully, and se thou keep the appointment of the
Lord thy god, that y^ walk in his ways* and keep his commandment,
ordinances, laws and testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses. etc.

Likewise read we of the ancient Father Toby which taught his young Son Toby
to f^are god from his infancye, and to abstain from all sin. His
exhortations are to godly and so meet for all persons to learn, that I think
it not convenient to pass them over with silence. His words are these.

Harken my Son what I will say, and lay my words in thy heart as a
foundation. My Son when I am dead bury me and after despise not thy Mother,
but honor her all the days of her life, and do to please her, and not to
displease her. My Son remember how great peril she suffered bearing thee
in her womb, and when she is dead, bury her in the same grave by me. Son
reverence our Lord God at all times, sin not, nor break not his
commandments* but love virtue all the dates of thy life, and walk not in the
ways of wickedness For while thou studiest for virtue, thou shall have good
success in all things that thou go about, and so shall all they that love
goodness. Do alms of thy substance and be no ^igard in doing of it.

Turn not thy face away from any poort man, as thou would that God should
not turn away his face from thee. Give as thou shall be able, if y^ have much,
give much, and if thou have little, give of that little. For thou shall lay up
for thee a good treasure against the day of necessity. For alms delivers
from death, and suffers not the soul to come into darkness. Alms is a great
comfort before the highest to all that use it.

My Son beware, keep thee from all whordom and use no evil company besides
thy wife, Suffer pride never to rise in thy mind no not in word for death is
joined to pride and much trouble, and to hautines is joined displeasure and
great pouertye, and she is mother of honger. Let no man's hire remain with
thee, whose service thou have had, but forthewith pay his wages, for unto thee
also serving God, reward shall be given.

Son be circumfpect and ware in all thy deeds and in all that thou do,
while thou live, be wise and do not to any man that thou would not to be
done unto thee. Drink not wine until thou be dro^k nor carry it not with thee by
the way, give thy bred to the hungry, and with thy clothes cover the naked.
What soever thou have more then is sufficient give it to the poor, and never
grudg to be liberal, set thy bread upon the Sepulcres of the just* and bestow
it not upon the noughty, Ask council always of the wise, and despise no good
council. Be always praying unto the Lord, and beseech him that he willorder
thy footesteppes and ways, and prosper thy devises, for no people are wise,
but the Lord him self is the geuer of all good things, and thrusts down
whom, and who he lists. My Son be not afraid, we lead a poor life in
this world, notwithstanding if thou fear god, and study to please him, thou
shall have goods inoughe. Therefore my son remember my precepts, and put
them not out of thy mind. Again being redye to dye, he called unto him his
son and his sons Children, and among all other things he spoke unto him on
this wise: keep thou the law and co^m^un dements, and show thy self merciful
and just, that thou may prosper. Have god ever in thy remembrance, and
praise him at all times with all thy might

In like manner read we of the Parents of that Tob. 14
most godly and chaste woman Susanna, which be ing righteous the^ selves,
taught their young daugh ter to fear the Lord her god, even from her very
cradle, and diligently brought her up, according to the law of Moses Dan. 18


Luke also in his book of the Apostles, makes me^ Act. 2^.
cion of the four daughters of Phillip the evangelist, which did Prophecy
(that is to say) were so godly brought up in the knowledge of gods most
blessed law, that they were able to declare and expound the holy Scriptures
and mysteries of God Joel. 2
according to this prophecy. I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, and
your sons and your daugh ters shall prophecye, Does not blessed Paul also
commend Timothe because he had known the holy scriptures even of a child.

Diverse histories mo might be alleged out of the holy Scriptures to declare
the careful studies and earnest labors which the holyfathers in time past
took for the godly and virtuous bringing up of their younglinges, that they
might be fathers not only of the body but also of the mind and for their
power satisfy the good will of God which re quireth of all parents, an earnest
diligence and a watching ye in bringing up their children in his nou^ ture and
fear, in his word and doctrine, but these for this present may seem
aboundauntlye to suffice. Furthermore as touching the heathen, which of them
all even from the lowest both amongst the Romans and the Greeks, with
diverse other na tions although having respect not unto the glory of God,
whereunto the end of all studies ought to be directed, but only unto the
auauncement of themselves unto the maintenance of good politic civil and
honest orders, unto the hability of rulinge in a comom weal unto the polishing
of their wit un to eloquence, unto immortality of their name: Enforced not both
them selves to be learned, but also sought all means possible to have their
children brought up in good letters. That their yonglings might become learned,
what pains or costs refu sed the parents? They sent their children from
country to country, from one learned man to an other. Many of them called
learned men home unto their houses, gave them honorable intertainmente great
gifts and large stipendes for teaching their children. There was no burden to
heavy, no labor to paineful, no cost to charge able for them so that their
children might prove learned. If they obtained that, they thought themselves
worthy and righteous parents, and to deserve well both of their children and
of the public weal. And as every one of them excelled in worthiness and
auctority, so labored they that both themselves and their children should
excel and pass the baser sort in lear ninge, iin knowledge, in virtue and
honest behavior in so much that if any were unlearned, and wanted the godly
qualities of the mind, albeit he were of an honorable parentage, he was
counted of no re putation, and called a stone, a block, a beast, a golden
slave, a sheep with a golden Flcese, an horse trapped with silver, an ass
covered with purple with such other despytefull names, so little regarded
(even among the Heathen) was noble blood, worldly substance, sumptuous
apparel, gorgious buildyng, delicate fare, and what soever besides the folly
she world wondereth at, and most highlye extolleth, if learning and virtue
were absent. By this means, came it to pass that Philip king of the
Macedonians, and his son Alexander, Julius Caesar, Darius, Antonius
Philosophus the Emperor, Hieron, Attalus, Magones, I^, Dion Siracusanus,
Thebanus Epaminondas, Pompeius, Augustus, Traianus, Antonius Pius, Claudins*
Tiberius, Titus Uespasianus, Domicianus, Aelius, Adrianus: Galerius, Maximus*
the sonues of Tiberius Gracchus, with other innumerable, became both learned,
and the unfeigned favorers of learning, yea and the diligent promoters of
learned men. Many of them which were right excellent Emperors and noble kings
thought themselves more noble and more worthy of renown for their learning and
virtue then for their imperial dignity and princelike authority. When king
Alphonsus heard a certain man say, that learning was not semely for a prince,
or for a noble man, he cried out and said, vox bouis non hominis. This is the
voice of an ox and not of a man: When a certain man demanded of Isocrates
whether he thought the king of the Persians happy and blessed or not, he
answered, I know not how much learning and virtue he has, meaning that the
true felicity, happiness, and wealth consists not in the flitting and
uncertain goods of fortune, but in the constant and immortal treasures of the
mind. The bringing up of youth in learning and honest qualities, was so much
regarded among the Lacedaemonians, that they made a law, who soever did not
study for the honest and virtuous trayning up of their children in good
letters and other necessary arts profitable for a common wealth: the same
should be deprived of all such privileges and liberties, as were due to true
and faithful Citizens. Our auncetors both among the people of God, and among
the heathen, did consider, that the health, prosperity, and safeguard of the
common weal, ^th principally consiste in the godly and virtuous bringing up of
youth. If they be learnedly and fruitfully brought up, then shall they
afterward prove, (...) ^ble Magistrates, some wise and faithful counselors,
some godly spiritual ministers, some learned scholemaisters, some diligent
laborers, some cunning artificers, some, yea and ail obedient subjects to the
high powers, and profitable members of the common weal. Contrariwyse, if they
be brought up in barbarous rudenes and with out any civility or knowledge of
good letters and such other necessary arts: it must needs come to pass yt
they shall be rather pestile^ces the^ preseruers of y^ common weal. Therefore
did our elders above all things show earnest diligence about y^ godly
trayning up of their youth, in honest and virtuous exercises, ever setting
before their eyes, that learning to a noble man, is a joyful jewel, to the
baser sort, a sure defense and a mighty bulwark, against the stout storms
of froward fortune, and to a common weal a precious preservative. In like
manner my Lords grace your father a prince of noble renoune in who^ ^s in a true
mirror liuelye shyneth ye beautiful bea mes of right nobility, considering
that the office of a worthy Parent appears in nothing so manyfestly as in
the Godly bringing up of youth in heavenly mysteryes, that is to say, in the
knowledge of good letters and in the study of Gods most blessed word, has
with my Ladies grace your mother a Lady of a notable godliness, and of
singulere pity toward y^ poor members of Christ even from your cradels studied
to train and bring up both my Lords your brothers, and my Ladies your Sisters
and you likewise his graces children in good literature, and in the knowledge
of Gods most holy laws, that ye may learn from your infancye to fear the
Lord your God, and to walk in his godly ordinances, and so be come truly
noble, not only for birthes sake, but also for learning and virtue, and for
the Godly qualities of the mind. In the which Godly exercises ye have so
profited even in these your tender years, that ye ^aue not only answered but
also overcome the expectation of many. If ye go forth according to your
beginnings, I doubt not, but that ye shall get to my Lords grace, and to my
Ladies grace your most honorable Parents, much renoune, and to your self
noble fame and glorious immortalitye. And albeit your good Ladyships breast is
so furnished withal godly doctrine, that ye need not my simple and homely
exhortations to move you unto godlynes and virtue, whereunto of your own
disposition ye are most willinly bente and inclined, yet to declare some part
of my good will toward your Ladishippe I thought it not good to let go the
occasion offered unto me. Certain wekes past considering the miserable face of
this to much wretched and lamentable world, and weighinge with my self that
the next and most ready way to redress our miseries, is to fly unto God with
continual and hearty prayer. I made a book entitled: The Flower of Godly
prayers, dedicated to my ladies grace your mother, wherein ar contained pray
yers not only for all degrees and states of men, but also for all other things
necessary to be asked of God, either for the body or for the soul, which
prayers I would with daily as occasion shall serve, to be used of the
faithful. Immedyatly after the setting forth of these prayers, certain of my
friends came unto me, and earnestly required of me to peruse and correct the
Governance of Virtue, which about viij. years paste, even in the bloudye
wysterous burning time, when the reading of the holy Bible, the word of our
souls health, was forbidden the poor lay people, I gathered out of the holy
scriptures, and caused to be printed for the edifiyng of the simple and
unlearned Christians. Yet suppressinge my name which at that time was odious to
those ou^s that could not abide the glorious light of gods blessed word, that
the book might have the better success, and be the more free from Antichrists
thonderbolt^ I knowinge my self debtor to all good men and to all their godly
requests, perused the book, wherein I found so many fautes through the
negligence o the hongry printers, that very pity without any request of
friends, might have been thought sufficient to have given me occasion to
correct the book which hitherto has been so greatly desired and gre dely red
almost of all men, yea and that not with out great profit, as the often
printing of the book does rightwell declare. I have diligently perused the
book corrected the faults changed diverse things and added many necessari
instructions with diverse godly prayers for the edifiyng of the readers. This
little book recognized and augmented (most virtuous Lady) I give unto your
Ladyship as a testimony of my good will toward you desiring you to take this
my poor gift in good part. And I shall most humbly beseech the Lord our
God to preserve my Lords grace and my Ladies grace your honorable parents in
good health long life and increase of honor, and to give my Lords, your
Brothers and my Ladies your Sisters, and you also grace to go forth in your
godly enterprises and Christen studies, that ye may true ly know the Lord your
God and the salvation which ye have by his son Jesus our alone Savior, who
ever preserve your good Ladyship in continual health and prosperous felicity.

Amen.

THE GOVERNANCE of Virtue.
How a man should behave him self in the morning when he rises.
When thou risest in the morning, look that thou with all humbleness of mind
knelest down, and lifting up thy heart, thy hands and thine eyes into heaven
unto God the father almighty, pray on this manner.

A prayer for the morning.
O Lord God my heavenly father I most humbly thank thee, y^ thou of thy
fatherly goodness have vouchsafed to defend me this night from all evil: I most
entyrely beseech thee, to preserve me also this day, both from suffering and
doing any evil, and to give me grace so to walk in the light of thy holy
word, that I may bring forth ye fruits of y^ same unto the glory of thy
blessed name, and the profit of my neighbor.

Amen.
After thou have prayed on this manner, seeing we be al sinners, it shall be
expedient (if thou have convenient leisure) to confess thy self to God on
this manner.

A confession of our sins unto God the father.
MOst greuouslye have I wretched sinner offended thee my Lord God and heavenly
father, both in thought word and deed, in so much that in my self I u^nde such
unworthiness, that if I did not behold thine exceeding great mercies, set forth
in thy dearly beloved son our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, I could not but
despair and wholly give my self into the hands of Satan that old enemy of
mankind. But when through thy grace and holy workyng, I look upon thy mercies
offered freely to all faithful penitent sinners in thy son Christ Jesus, for
whose sake thou art well pleased with man, and of thy own good will forgeuest
us al our sins when soever we flee unto thee in his name, I cease to
despair, and begin to conceive an earneste faith and an undoubted hope of
obtaynyng forgiveness of al my sins in Christ's blood for thy loving and
fatherly promise sake. I therefore poor and wretched sinner, most humbly
beseech thee for Christ's sake, to forgive me al my sins, where with from the
day of my birth unto this present time I have most grievously offended thy
fatherly goodness, and to give me grace so to resist the devil, the world,
and the flesh* and so to order my life according to thy blessed will, that thou
may delight in me as a father in his son, de fend me from all evil, and
work in me all good things unto the glory of thy holy name.

After the confession, say the Lords prayer called the Pater noster, and so
commendyng thy self unto God, faule in hand with some honest and virtuous
exercise, according to thy calling. But whatsoever thou do, do it with
pureness of heart and singlenes of eye* yea, so do it, as though God were
present and look upon thee, as undoubtedly he does.

Of Dinner.
When the time comes, that thou should refresh thy weary and hongry body,
approach unto the table with reverence, and when thou art set, lift up thy heart,
thy hands and thy eyes unto heaven, and pray unto God on this manner.

A prayer before dinner.
O Most gentill God and loving father, which mercifully ^edest al ly uing
creatures, we beseech thee bless us and all these thy gifts, which we at
this present shall receive of thy beu^ teous hand, for the refreshyng of our
hungry bodies, and give us grace to do all things unto the glory of thy
name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Of the behavior at the table in Diner time.
When thou have thus prayed unto god eat thy meat soberly and christenly:
esche wyng all superfluity, surfeting and drouckenship. Consider that thy
meat and thy drinck, are the gifts of God, and are reverently and thank
fully to be received* Remember that in the time of thy repast, thy behavior
be honest and comely in all things. Let thy communica tion, as the Apostle
says, ve well sauoured and powdered with ^t: that is to say, seasoned with
godly wisdom, that thou may know how to answer every man. Let no fill thy
talk proceed out of thy mouth, but that which is good to edify, when need
is, that it may have favor with the hearers, remem bring that thou shalt give
accountes at the day of judgment, for every idle word that thou speak.
Eschew all dissolute and uncomely laughyng, least thou be thereby counted
wild, wa^ton, foolish, and without good manners. Let thy cou^tenau^ce he
grave, sober, modest, gentle, and ^ouyng, toward all that be at the table, and
so fashion thy self in gesture, word and deed, as though God and his angels
we^ visibly present at the table: And when Dinner is done, give thanks to God
for his benefits on this manner.

A thanks geuyng after Dinner.
WE thank thee O heavenly father for this our food, which being sa^ctif^ed by
thy word, thou have vouchesafe at this present to give us: we beseech thee,
that thou will also feed our souls with the lively bread of the word, which
comes out of thy mouth, that we receauyng at thy merc^full hand, meat both
for our bodies and souls* may live and grow in all godliness unto the glory
of thy blessed name, tho row Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
What is to be done after dynner.
After thou have given thanks unto God for thy repast* return unto thy
labor, and virtuously exercise thy self, according to thy voca tion and
calling. Employ earnest diligence about thy business, and always in thy mind
desire God to bless, to prosper, and to bring to pass all thy counsels,
devises, travails, labors and enterprises. Do not thy work negligently and
deceitfully, but so labor as though God were present and beheld thee, as
unfeignedly he does. Cursed be he says Hiere mye, that does the Lords work
deceitfully. Saint Paul also exhorts, that what soever we do we should do
it hartly, as though we did in unto the Lord, and not unto men: for as much
says he* as ye know that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of
inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. Yea verily so many as labor or
travail in any virtuous enterprise, they serve God, and of God shall they
receive their reward. Therefore in thy calling labor earnestly and diligently,
what soever thou be, sekyng not only thine own lucre and ^uaunt age: but much
more the glory of God, and the profit of thy neighbor, as the Apostlesayth:
do all things unto the glory of God. Again, let every man look not for his
own profit, but for the profit of other. Charity seeks not her own.

Of Supper.
When the time is come* that thou shalt leave of thy work, and prepare thy
self unto supper, eue^ with the same reverence that thou came unto the table
at dinner, come again now: but before thou do taste any meat, pray on
this manner.

A prayer before Supper.
THe eyes of all things look unto thee, O Lord, and thou geuest the^ meat
in due time, thou openest thy hand, and fillest every living creature with the
blessing: vouchesafe, O heaven ly father for Christ's sake, mercifully to look
upon us, lovingly to bless us, and liberally to give us grace so to taste of
these thy creatures, that our bodies being satisfied with the moderate use of
them, we may be the more able to serve thee our Lord God, and to profit our
neighbor, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Of the behavior at the table in Supper time.
After thou have thus prayed unto GOD* eat thy meat with a cheerful and
thankful mind using the same modesty and honest behavior, that thou did
use at dinner. And when thou have supped, give thanks unto god for his
benefits on this wise.

A thankesgeuing after Supper.
FOr these thy benefits, wherewith thou have refreshed our hungry bodies, we
thank thee (most merciful fa there) desiring thee that thou will also feed our
souls with y^ lively faith in the blood of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord,
that we beleuyng steadfastly, and working diligently thy holy will, may obtain
thy glorious kingdom, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
What to be done after Supper.
When thou have on this wise give thanks unto God, thou may do what thou will, so it be godly and honest* until thou go to bed* If thou can read,
read thou thy self or else here some other read part of the holy scriptures,
that may be to the comfort of thy self, and of so many as be with thee, or
pass the time by friendly and honest talk with some of thy lo^yng and trusty
familiares, or else debate with thy self, how thou may most conveniently
bring that to pass, that thou have to do the next day following.

Of going to bed.
And when the time comes, that thou must go to bed thou being in thy chamber,
to call remembrance how thou have spent the day past. If thou perceiuest, that
you have offended God in any thing at all, confess thy fault unto him with a
repentaunt and sorrowful heart* and desire him of his great mercy for Christ's
sake to forgive thee, and promise that unto the uttermost of thy power, his
grace woorkyng with thee, thou will amend that wherein thou have offended, and
walk more diligently in the rules of thy profession. Cry with the Publicane. O
God be merciful to me a sinner. Cry with that lost son: Father I have sinned
against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.
Pray with David: for thy names sake. O Lord, for give me my sin for it is
excedyng much. Thus with a faithful heart beleuyng that thy sins are for
given thee, content thy self and quiet thy conscience. If thou perceyuest,
that thou have that day committed no notable crime* then give to God right
hearty thanks, which by his holy spirit has wrought the same in thee: and
desire him to increase his gifts in thee, that his glory may be showed in all
thy acts and deeds. This done, prepare thy self to bedward, and when thou art
ready to lie down, lift up thou heart, thy eyes, and thy hands unto heaven, and
pray to God on this manner.

A prayer to be said when we go to bed.
I Thank thee (O heavenly father) by thy dearelye beloved Son Jesus Christ
our Lord and Savior, that of thy free mercy thou have preserved me this day
from all hurtes, and dangers.

Uouchesafe also I most humbly beseech thee to keep me this night, and to save
me ftom all mine enemies both bodily and ghostlye. Give to my body quietness
and fleepe, but let my mind continually watch unto thee, think on thee, and
on thy holy law, that when the cherefull light of y^ day shall spryng and
appear. I being whole both in bo die and mind, may joyful rise again: be
thanckefull unto thee, and diligent ly walk in my vocation unto the glo ry of
thy blessed name, and the common ditie of my neighbor, through Jesus Christ thy
son. Amen.

When thou have thus prayed, lie down in thy bed and say on this manner.

The Prayer.
O Lord God and my heavenly Father, I commend my body and soul into thy
hands, that in Christ which is our life and resurrection, thou may
defend me from everlasting death, and give me that blessed and joy full life
of immortality, and that he which is the true light, may pour out the
brightenesse of his grace into my heart, and preserne me both body and soul
unto that day of the glorious resurrection where the faithful with joyful
hearts shall see thee face to face, and for ever reygne with thee in glory.

Amen
Remedies against all kinds of temptations.
Against Idolatry.
If that old enemy Satan goes about to persuade thee, that there be ^o gods
then one resist him with these Scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
I am the Lord thy God. Thou shall Exo. 20
have none other gods in my sight.

Understand and mark well that the Deuteronomy. 4
Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath, neither is there
Deuteronomy. 6.
any other God besides him. Here Israel, the Lord our god is one Lord. Deuteronomy. 32


Se how that I, yea that I am the Lord and that there is no god but I.

Hear O my people I will charge Psalm. 81
thee, O Israel, that if thou will her^en unto me, there shall no strange god
be in thee, neither shall thou worship any other god. For I am the Lord thy God.

I am the lord, and there is none other. Esaias 4^


I am the Lord, and there is else none, It is I that created light and darkness I
make peace and trouble, yea even I the Lord do all these things.

Am not I the Lord? is there any god but I? A god that is righteous, and such
one as saves, there is none besides me.

Turn unto me all ye coasts of the world and ye shall be saved, for I am God,
and there is else none.

Have we not all one Father? has Mal. ^
not one god made us?

An example out of the old Testament.
Abraham saw three, and worshipped one Gene. 8


Sentences out of the new Testament.
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy Math. 4
god, and him only shall thou serve.

We have but one god, which is the 1. Cor. 8
Father, of whom are all things, and ^e in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ by
whom are al things, and we in him.

There is one Lord, one faith, one ba Ephe. 4.
ptisme, one god, and father of all, which is above all, and through all, and
in you all.

There is one god, and one mediator 1. Tim. 2.
between god and man, even the man Christ Jesus, which gave him self a ra^nsome
for all men.

There are three which bear record Ihon. 5.
in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost. And these three are one.

Against infidelity or misbelief.
IF Satan at any time moves thee, unto in fidelity or misbelief, either
toward God or his word, by no means lean unto him, vnt against his
temptation enarme thy selfwith these holy scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
If ye do not believe, there shall no Esaias. 7.
promise be kept with you.

Thy eyes, O Lord, look upon faith. (...). 5.


The righteous shall live by faith. Abacu. 2.


I will mary thee unto me in faith, ^ Ose. 2.
thou shall know that I am the Lord.

The wrath of y^ Lord came upon I Psalm. 78
raell, because they believed not in god, nor trusted not in his saving health.

The Lord does appear unto them S^pi. 2
that has faith in him.

Woe be to the dissolute in heart, that Eccle. ^*
^eleue not god, and therefore shall they not be defended of him.

In all thy works put thy trust in Eccle. 3^*
god from thy whole heart, for that is the keeping of the commandments. Who so
believes gods work takes ^ede to the commandments: and he that puts his
trust in the Lord shall want nothing.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Abraham believed god, and it was reckened Gene. 15.
unto him for righteousness.

David being a young man and of 1. Reg 17.
^itle stature through faith in the name of the Lord of hoastes, fought with
that proud monstrous gyante Go^iath the Philistine, and slew him. Dan. ^*


Sidrach Misach, and Abdenago through faith, chosed rather to be cast into a
whote burning furnace, then at the kings commandment to commit Ido latry, and
to worship strange gods.

Daniel through faith wished rather Dan. ^*
to be cast quick into the den of Lions, then by the space of thyrty days,
not to pray unto the Lord his god, according to the kings commandment.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
He that believes and is baptized shall be Mat. 16.
saved. But he that believes not, shall be condemned.

As many as received christ he gave John. 1
them power to be the sons of god, in that they believe on his name.

As Moses lifted up the serpent in the Ihon. 3.
wilderness: so must the son of man be lyfted up, ye so many as believe in him
may not perish, but have everlasting life. For god has so dearly beloved the
world, that he gave his only begot ten son, that every one that believes in
him, may not perish, but have everlasting life.

He that believes in y^ son of god, is not condemned. But he that believes
not, is already condemned, because he has not believed in the name of the
only begotten son of god.

He that believes in the son has everlasting life, but he that believes not
in the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of god abides upon him.

This is the will of him that sent me John. 6*
that every one that sees the son and believes on him, should have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

I am the resurrection and life, he that Ihon. 1^.
believes in me, although he were dead yet shall he live, and every one that ly
ueth and believes in me, shall not dye euerlastyngly.

Ye believe in god, believe also in me, Ihon. 14.
says Christ.

Be i^ known unto you, ye me^ and bre Acts. 89.
thren, that through the name of Christ is preached unto you ye forgeuenes of
sins, and that by him are all that believe *15.
justified from all things, from the which ye could not be justified by the
law of Moses.

With faith does God purify our Acts. 1^
hearts.

The ryghteousnes that is allowed Romans ^*
before god comes by the faith of Jesus ^
Christ unto all, and upon all that believe

We being justified by faith are at Romans ^.
peace with god, through our lord Jesus christ by whom we have a way in, tho row
faith unto this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the praise that
shall be given of god.

Christ is the perfect fulfillyng of the Rom 10.
law, to justify every one y^ believes.

If you wilt knowledge with thy mouth Esaias. 28.
that Jesus is the lord, and believe with thy heart, that God raises him from
death, thou shall be saved. For the belief of the heart justifies, and to
knowledge with the mouth makes a man safe. For ye scripture says: who soever
believes on him, shall not be ashamed.

What soever is not of faith is sin. ^m. 14.


All ye are sons of god, because ye ^lla. 3.
have believed in Christ Jesus.

In Christ Jesus neither is circumcision ^la. 4.
any thing worth, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

By grace are ye saved through faith, ^e. ^.
ye and that not of your selves. It is the gift of god, and comes not of
works, because no man should boast him self.

Above all things take unto you the (...). ^.
shield of faith whereby ye may be able to quench all the fire darts of the
devil. Heb. 11.


Without faith it is not possible to please god. For he that comes unto god,
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder to the^ that seek him.

Be ye sover and watch, for your adversary 1. Pet. 5.
the devil goes about like a to aryng Lion, seking whom he may devour, whom
see that ye resist with a strong faith.

This is the victory which ouercom meth the world, even our faith.

Examples out of the new Testament.
The woman that was diseased by Math. 9.
the space of. 12. years of the bloody issue, through faith was made whole.

The woman of Canane through Math. 15.
faith, obtained of Christ health for her daughter.

The father of the child possessed with Mar. 9.
a devil from his childhoode, obtained of Christ through faith, perfect health
for his son.

Bartimeus the blind man through Mar. 1^.
faith recovered his sight.

A certain sinful woman through Luke. 7
faith obtained of Christ forgiveness of all her sins.

The Apostles of Christ through faith Acts. 5
notwithstanding y^ hye priests co^mau^dment, continued in the preaching of
Christ's gospel, and both pacie^tly, joy fully, and tha^kefully, suffered al
kinds of displeasure for y^ name of y^ Lord Jesus. Read ye. 11. chap. of the
Epistle unto the Hebrews, where thou shall find plenty of examples concerning
this matter.

Against the heresy of such as deny Jesus Christ, to be God.
IF Satan at any time moves thee to doubt of the godhead of Christ as though
he were only man and not God, a creature or a thing made, and not the creator
and maker of all things, enarme thy self against him with these scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Unto us a child is borne, and unto Esaias. 9.
us a son is given, upon his shoulder does the kingdom ly, and he is called
we his own name, wonderful, the geuer of counsel, the mighty god, y^
everlasting father y^ prince of peace. and ^

In that day it shall be said: Lo, this is Esaias. 25
our god, we have waited for him, and he shall save us. This is the Lord, in
who^ we have hoped, we shall be merry and rejoice in the salvation that comes of
him.

They shall see the glory of y^ Lord, and Esaias. 35
the majesty of our god. And therefore strength the weak hands, and comfort
the feeble knees, say unto the^ y^ ar of a fear full heart, be of good chere and
fear not.

Behold your god comes to take ve^geaunce, and you shall see the reward ye
god gives. God comes his own self, and will deliver you. The^ shall the
eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf opened. Then shall
the lame man leap as an heart, and the dumme man's tongue shall be losoned.

O that thou would cleave y^ heavens Esaias. 64
in sonder, and come down.

Behold, I see four men going lose Dan. 4
in the midst of the fire, and nothing hurt, and the fourth is like the son
of god to look upon.

Out of Egypt have I called my son. Ose. 11


This is our god, and there shall none other Baru. 5
be compared unto him. It is he that has found out all wisdom, and has
given her unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved.

Afterward did he show him self upon earth, and dwelt among men.

The Lord said unto me, thou art my Psalm. 2.
son, this day have I begotten thee.

Thy seat (O god) endures for ever, Psalm. 45
the scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter.

The Lord him self had me in possession Prou. 7.
in the beginning of his ways, or ever he began his works before time. I have
been ordained from everlasting, and from the beginning or ever the earth was
made.

When I was borne, there were net there depthes nor springs of water. Be fore
the foundacio^s of the mountains, were laid, yea before all hills was I borne.
The earth and all that is upon the earth, was not yet made, no not ye ground it
self. For when he made the heavens I was present, when he set up y^ depthes in
order, when he hanged the clouds above, when he fastened the springs of the
deep, when he shut the sea within certain bounds, that the waters should not
go over their marks that he commanded. When he laid the foundacions of the
earth, I was with him, ordryng all things, deliting daily, and rejoicing
always before him.

I came out of the most highest, first borne before all creatures.

I caused the light that fails not Eccle. 24.
to arise in the heaven, and covered all the earth as a cloud.

I will be his father, and he shall be 2. Reg. 7.
my son.

Examples out of the old Testament.
WHen god created the earth and all Gene. 1.
things therein, he said: Let us make manne in our Image, after our own
likeness: this word, us. does evidently declare that there be three persons
in the godhead, the father, and the son, and the holy ghost. Whereof it
manifestly follows, that as the father is god, and the holy ghost god, so
likewise is the son god, yea true and natural god, hegotten of god the
Father from everlasting.

Abraham saw three, and worshypped Genesis 18
one, saying: Lord I beseech thee, if I have found favor in thy sight, go not
away from thy servant.

Here it is evident also, that there are three persons in the deity, and yet
notwithstanding they three are one God. Therefore like as the first and the
second persons in the deity are ve ry God (I mean the father and the holy
ghost) so likewise is the second person in, the trinity, I mean the son,
true and natural God, worthy all honor and glory for evermore.

GOd said unto Moses I am the god Exodus 3
of thy father, the god of Abraham, the god of Isaac, and the god of Jacob.

Here also is evidently declared the blessing and glorious trinity, and that
there be three persons in the godhead, and yet one God: so that as the father
is God and the holy ghost God: so likewise is the son God.

IN the same year that king Osiah Esaias. 6
dyed, I saw the Lord, says the Pro phete Esaias, sittyng upon an high and
glorious feat, and his train filled the temple. And about him stood
Seraphins, whereof every one had. 6. wings With twain each covered his face,
with twain his feet, and with twain did he flee. They cried also each one to
another on this manner. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts. The whole
world is full of his glory.

This word holy, thryse rehearsed, does also manifestly declare that there are
three per sons in the godhead, and that they three are one God: Christ
therefore the second person in the Trinity, is very God.

King Nabuchodonosor commanded Dan. 4
these three men, Sidrach Misach and Abdenago, to be cast into an excedyng hot
burning oven, because they would not become Idolatours and at his
commandment, fall down and worship the golden Image. And when they were
bound in their coats, bosen, shoes, with their other garments and cast into
the hot burning oven, the king looked into the oven, and said unto his
counsel: did ye not cast these three men bound into the fire? They au^swered
unto the king, yea, O king. He answered and said, lo for all that, yet do I
see four men going lose in the midst of the fire, and nothing corrupt, and
the fourth is like the son of god to look upon.

Here is a manifest testimony yt Jesus Christ is the son of God, and God
himself, as we shall evidently learn of the histories of the new Testament.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
His name shall be called Emanuel, Mat. 1
which is by interpretation, God with us, or God and man.

This is my well-beloved son, in Mat. 3. 17
whom I have great pleasure.

Thou art Christ the son of the living Mat, 16
God.

Without all doubt this was the Math. 27
son of God.

He shall be great, and shall be called Luc, 1
the son of the most highest.

That holy thing which shall be born, shall be called the son of God.

In the beginning was the word, and y^ Ihon. 1.
word was with god and the word was god

We saw the glory of the word, as the glory of the only begotten son of
the father.

No man has seen god at any time, the only begotten son: which is in the
bosom of the father, he has declared him. Thou art the son of god, y^ art
the king of Israel.

He that believes not, is condemned John. 3.
already, because he believes not in the name of the only begotten son of
god. The father loves the son and has given all things into his hand. He
that believes the son has everlasting life, and he that believes not on the
son, shall not see life, but the wrath of god abides on him.

I am that living bread, which came John. 6.
down from heaven.

Except ye believe that I am the son John. 8.
of god, ye shall dye in your sins.

I and my father are one. John. 10.


I believe that you art Christ the son of John. 11.
god, which should come into the word.

Do thou not believe, that I am in John. 14.
the father. and the father is in me?

This is everlasting life, even to John. 17.
know thee the alone true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

O father thou louedst me before the John. 20.
world was made.

These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is Christ the
son of god: and that in beleuyng ye life thorough his name.

Jesus Christ was declared to be the Romans 2.
son of god with power of y^ holy ghost.

Christ is the image of the invisible Colos. 1.
god, first begotten of al creatures. For by him were all things created,
things that are in heaven and things that are on earth, things visible and
things invisible, whether they be majesty or lord ship, either rule or power.
All things are created by him and in him, and he is before all things, and in
him all things have their being.

We look for that blessed hope and Titus. 2
glorious appearing of the great god and our savior Jesus Christ.

God in time past diversely and many Hebr. 1.
ways spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets, but in these last days he has
spoken unto us by his Son, who he has made heir of all things, by whom
also he made the world. Which Son being the brightness of his glory, and
very image of his substance, bearyng up all things with the word of his
power, has in his own person purged our sins, and is sitting on the right
hand of the majesty on hie, and is more excellent then the angels, in as much
as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they have. For
unto which of the angels said be at any time. Thou art my son, this day
begat I Psalm. 2.
thee. And again, I will be his father and he shall be my son.

And again, when he brings in Act. 13.
the first begotten son into y^ world, he says: and all the angels of god
shall worship him. And of the angels he says: he makes his angels
sprites, and his ministers flames of fire. But unto the son he says: God,
thy seat shall be for ever and ever. The scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter.

Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, Heb. 13.
and the same continues for ever. Who is a lier, but he that denies that
Jesus is Christ? The same is the Antichrist that denies the father and the
son: who so ever denies the son, y^ same has not the father. Let therefore
abide in you that same, which ye heard from the beginning. If that which ye
heard from the beginning shall remain in you: ye also shall continue in the
son and in the father, and this is the promise that he has promised us, even
everlasting life.

For this purpose appeared y^ son ^. John. 3.
of god, to lose the works of the devil.

This is gods commandment that we believe on the name of his son Ie sus
Christ.

In this appeared the love of god toward ^. John. 4.
us, because y^ god sent his only begotten son into the world that we might
live through him.

Who is it, that overcomes the ^. John. 5.
world, but he which believes that Jesus is the son of god.

God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son. He that
has the son, has life, and he that has not the son of god, has not life.

We know that the son of god is come, and has given us a mind to know him
which is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his son Ie sus Christ.
The same is very god and eternal life.

Examples out of the new Testament.
God the Father proclaimed Jesus Mat. 3. 17. ^
Christ both when he was baptized and transfigured, his only begotten,
natural and well-beloved son, saying: this is my dearly beloved son, in who^
I have great pleasure.

Two men possessed with devils called Math. 8.
Jesus the son of god saying: O Jesus the son of god, what have we to do with thee
Math. 13.


The men which were in the ship, se yng that the wind ceased so soon as
Christ was come into the ship, said unto him, truly thou art the son of god.

When Christ demanded o^f his dis Math. 17.
ciples, whom they thought him to be, Peter in the name of all the disciples
answered and said: thou art Christ the son of the living god.

When bishop Cayphas said unto Math. 26.
Christ, I charge thee in the name of ye living god, that thou tell us whether
thou be Christ the son of god, Christ answered: thou have said. Nevertheless I
say unto you, hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the right
hand of power, and come in the clouds of the sky.

When the Centurion and they that Math. 26.
were with him watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things which
happened they feared greatly, saying: Of a surety this was the son of god.

They brought to Christ a man sick Math. 9.
of the palsy, lying in his bed, and when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said
to the sick of the palsy, son be of good chere. Thy sins be forgeuen thee.
And behold certain of the Scribes said in themselves, this man blasphemeth. And
when Jesus saw their thoughts, he said: wherefore think ye evil in your
hearts? Here Christ proves himself god against all his enemies two manner of
ways. First, in that he forgeueth sins. For no man can forgive sin but god
alone. Secondly, in that be knows the very hid and secret thoughts of
men. For who searches the hearts and raines of men but god only.

When a certain man possessed with Mar. 15
an unclean spirit saw christ a far of, he came runnyng and worshipped him, and
cried with a loud voice, saying: What have I to do with thee, O Jesus, thou
son of the most highest god?

The high priest asked Jesus and said Mar. 14
unto him, art thou Christ the son of the blessed? He answered, I am. And ye
shall see the son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in
the clouds of heaven.

Christ said unto Nathanaell: Before Ihon. 1. ^
that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the ^ygtree, I saw thee. Na
thanaell answered and said unto him, Rabby, thou art even the very son of
god, thou art the king of Israel. Jesus answered and said unto him: Because I
said unto thee, I saw thee under the figtree, thou beleuest: thou shall see
greater things then these. And he said unto them, verily verily, I say un to
you, hereafter shall ye see heaven open, and the angels of god asce^dyng and
descendyng over the son of man.

The miracle which Christ wrought John. ^*
at the marriage in Cana by turnyng water into wine, proves him manifestly to
be god.

After the sermon that Christ made John. 6.
of the eating of his flesh, and the drinking of his blood, many of his
Disciples understanding his words grosely (as the papists do understand the
words of the Lords Supper) went back and forsook him, and walked no more
with him. Then said Jesus to y^ twelve, will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter
answered him, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou haste the words of eternal
life, and we believe and are sure that thou art Christ the son of the living
god.

Jesus heard that the Jews had excommunicate John. 9.
the blind man, whom he had made to see, and when he had found him, he said
unto him: do thou believe on the son of god? He answered and said: who is
it Lord y^ I might believe on him? And Jesus said unto him, thou have seen him,
and he it is y^ takes with thee. And he said, lord I believe, and he
worshipped him.

Martha said unto Christ, I believe y^ John. 11.
thou art Christ the son of god which should come into the world.

Jesus said to Thomas, bring thy Ihon. 20.
finger hither, and see my hands and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into
my side, and be no more faithles but believing. Thomas answered and said unto
him: My Lord and my god. Jesus said unto him: Thomas, because thou have seen
me thou have believed, blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

The Enuche said unto Phillip: see Acts. ^.
here is water, what does let me to be baptized? Phillip said unto him. If
thou believe with all thine heart thou may. And he answered and said, I
believe y^ Jesus Christ is the son of god.

The restoryng of y^ blind to their sight the raising up of the dead unto life,
the cle^sing of the leapers, the healyng of the^ that were diseased with the
palsy, the restoring of men possessed with devils and unclean spirits to
their whole mind, the making of the deaf to hear, and the dumme to speak,
with the other mi racles that Christ wrought, do evidently prove Christ to be
the natural son of god, yea and god himself.

Against the heresy of them which hold that Jesus Christ the son of God
took no flesh of Mary his mother.
I feyther Satan with his subtle suggesti ons, or any of his decetifull work
men with their crafty reasons and falsifiyng the holy scrip tures, go about to
persuade thee that Jesus Christ the son of God, took no flesh of that
blessed virgin Mary his mother, but brought his body with him from heaven,
enarme thy self with these authorities of gods word against their pestilent
and damnable darts.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
I will set enmity between thee and Gene 3.
the woman, between thy seed and her seed. The very self same seed shall
tread down thy head, and thou shalt tread upon his hele.

In thee all kynreds of the earth shall be blessed.

In thy seed shall all the nations of Gene. 22.
the earth be blessed.

The scepter shall not depart from Gene. 49.
Judah, and a law geuer from between his fete, until S^lo come, and unto him
shall the gathering of the people be. He shall bind his fool unto the vine,
and his Asses colte unto the branch. He washed his garment in wine, and his
man till in the blood of grapes. His eyes are redder then wine, and his teethe
whiter then milk.

There shall come a star of Jacob and Number. 24
raise a Scepter of Israel. Out of Jacob shall he come that shall have dominion.

I will raise them up a Prophet from Deuteronomy. ^
among their brethreb like un to thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and
he shall speak unto them all that I shall co^mau^d him, and whosoever will not
har ken unto the words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it
of him.

I will set up thy sede after thee, which 1. Par. 1^
shall be of thy sons, and will stablish his kingdom. He shall build me an
house and I will stablish his seat for ever. I will be his father, and he
shall be my son, and I will not put away my mercy from him, as I did from him
y^ was before thee, but I will set him in my house, and in my kingdom for
ever, and his seat shall be sure for ever.

I have sworn once by my holiness, y^ Psalm. 89
I will not fail David. His seed shall endure for ever, and his seat also
like as the sun before me. He shall stand for ever more as the moon, and as
the faithful witness in heaven.

The Lord has made a faithful oath Psalm. 132
unto David, and he shall not shrink from it, out of the fruit of thy body
shall I set upon thy seat.

Behold a Uirgine shall conceive and Esaias. 7.
bear a son, and shall call his name Emanuell.

Unto us a child shall be borne, and unto Esaias. 9.
us a child shall be given, upon his shoulder shall the kingdom lie, and he
shall be called with his own name, the wonde rous geuer of council, the
mighty god the everlasting father, ye prince of peacer he shall make no end to
increase the kingdom and peace, and shall sit upon the seat of David, and in
his kingdom to set up the same, to establish it with equity and rightousnes
from henceforth for ever more. This shall the gelousy of the Lord of hosts
bring to pass.

There shall come a rod forth of the kin Esaias. 11.
dred of Iesse, and a blosso^ out of his root. The spirit of the Lord shall
light upon it, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
council and strength the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of god, etc.

Behold the time comes says the Iere. 23.
Lord, that I will raise up the righteous branch of David, which shall bear
rule, and discuss matters with wisdom, and set up equity and righteousness
again in earth. In his time shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell without
fear. And this is the name yt they shall call him, eue^ ye lord our rightous
maker. John. 29.


Behold the time comes says the lord, that I will perform the good thing
which I have promised unto the house of Israel, and to the house of Judah. In
those days and at the same time. I will bring forth unto David the branch of
righteousness, and he shall do equitye and righteousness in the land. In
those days shall Judah be helped, and Jerusalem shall dwell safe, and he that shall
call her, is even god our righteous maker. For thus the Lord god promises:
David shall never want one to sit upon the stole of the house of Israel.

I will raise up unto them one only Eze. 34, 37
shepeheard even my servant David, he shall feed them and he shall be their
shepeheard, I the Lord will be their god, and my servant David shall be
their prince. Even I the Lord has spoken it.

Understand this and mark it well, Dan. 9.
that from the time it shall be concluded to go and to repair Jerusalem
again, unto Christ, there shall be seven wekes. Then shall the streets and
walls be builded again, 62. wekes, but with heard trou blous time. After these
62. wekes shall Christ be slain, and they shall have no pleasure in him.

Thou Bethelem Ephrata art little Mich. 5.
among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall come unto me, which shall be
the governor in Israel, whose out go ing has been from the beginning and
from everlasting. Zach. ^.


Be glad and rejoice O daughter of Sion: for lo, I come to dwell in y^ midst of
thee, says the Lord. At the same time there shall many heathen clean to the
Lord, and shall be my people.

Behold I will send my messenger Mal. 3
which shall prepare the way before me and y^ Lord whom ye would have, shall
soon come to his temple, ye even the Messenger of the covenant whom ye look
for.

This is our god, and there shall none Barue. ^.
other be compared to him. It is he that has found out all wisdom, and has
given her unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved. Afterward did he
show himself upon earth, and dwelte among men.

Examples out of the old Testament.
AFter that Adam and his wife through the crafty persuasions of Satan had
transgressed gods commandment, god in the presence of them both, even for
their comfort and for the quietness of their conscience, said unto the ser pent.
I will set enmity between thee and a woman, between thy seed and her sede.
The self same seed shall tread down thy head, and thou shall tread upon
his heel.

These words of God the father spoken unto the serpent, show evidently and
manifestlye prove, that Jesus Christ our Lord is the true and natural son of
Mary, and unfeignedly took his flesh and humanity of her. For this word seed,
in this place signifies the whole substance of Christ's manhood, and proves
evidently, that whatsoever Christ was being man, he truly and naturally
received it of the corporal substance of Mary his mother the virgin. Cursed
therefore is the heretic Appelles, which thought that Christ had received his
body of the elements in the air, and passed through the virgin, as the water
passed through a pipe. Cursed are these heretics Cerdo, Marcian and Manes,
which hold that Christ had a fantastical body, appearing to be man, and pet
having no part of manhood in him. Cursed is that heretic Ualentinus with his
Apes the Anabaptists, which hold that Christ took no flesh of Marye his
mother the virgin, but brought his body with him from heaven. God the father
calls Christ the seed of the woman. He therefore is the natural son of
Mary his mother, and received his whole bodily substance of the most pure
virgin or else should God greatly have erred, which called him the seed of a
woman, but let God be true and all heretics liars.

TO Abraham god the father said: in Gene. 22.
thy sede all nations of the earth shall be blessed.

This sede is Christ, as S. Paul decla Gala. 3.
reth to the Galathians, which borne of the virgin Mary, came of the sede of
Abraham.

Now if Christ had taken no flesh of Mary, how could he have come of the sede
of Abraham? But that we should be without all doubt concerning Christ's
humanity, and be certain that he was the true and natural son of Mary, re
ceiuyng his manhood neither of the elements of the air, nor yet bringinning
it with him from heaven, but taking it of the true and natural substance of
Mary his mother. God says expressly: In thy seed. Let us note well this
pronown. Thy. In thy sede says he, and not in the sede that Christ shall bring
from heaven, or out of the air. How could Christ justly haubene called
Abraham's sede, if he had never taken any part of Abraham's substance? But the
Apostle says: Christ took the sede of Abraham, and not of the angels, so that
he must be like to his brothers in all things. Let God therefore be true, and
all heretics liars.

In like manner the Lord swore a truth Psalm. 1^*
unto David, and will not go from it. I will says he, set upon thy seat one of
the fruit of the womb. Here Christ, which before was called the sede of a
woman, and the sede of Abraham, is called the fruit of David's womb.

What ca^ be spoken more plainly, to declare and prove, that Christ came of the
sede of David as concerning his flesh? If Christ be the fruit of David's
belly, I mean concerning his posterity (for Mary the mother of Christ, came
of the stock and kindred of David) so does it evidently follow that Christ
passed not through the womb of his mother without any part^ king of y^ natural
substance of his mother as y^ wa ter passes and runs through the pype, and
yet receives no part of the pypes substance, but rather that he took a
perfect body of substance of his mother, and so became true and perfect man.
Otherwise should not he have been the fruit of David's belly, neither should God
have kept his oath and promise made unto David. But let God be true and all
heretics liars.

THe Prophet Esaias does lively describe, Esaias. 7.
painte and set forth both the mother of Christ, and Christ him self in these
words: The Lord, says he, shall give you a token. Behold a virgin shall
conceive and bear a son, and thou shall call his name Emanuel, But ter and
honey shall he eat, y^ he may know to refuse the evil and chose the good.

First as concerning Christ's mother, we learn here that she was a pure and
vnde^yled maid, and that she, and not the heaven nor the air conceived and
brought forth Christ her son. In that she conceived and brought forth
Christ, it is evident that she was unfeignedly Christ's natural mother,
ministres part of her ^bstaunce to the perfourmyng and making a^ her son
through Gods operacion, and did the duty and office of a true mother in all
points. And where as the Prophet calls Christ her ^onne he declares
manifestly. that Christ took his flesh of the substance of his mother Mary
the virgin, and is her true and natural son, or else to what end should he
be called he son? And that we should be as assuredly persuaded of his
humanity of Mary his mother, as of his deity of God his father. The Prophet
calls him Emanuell, that is to say, God and man, true God of God his father,
an^ true man of Mary his mother. And because there should want nothing unto the
true perfect and full dis cription of Christ's humanity, but that Christ
should be declared to be a true and a natural child, and not fantastical
nor celestial the Pro phet as it were with certain notes and marks both
lively set forth, and shows that he after that manner of other children shall
eat butter and Honey, that is to say, refuse buter and unsavory meat^s, and
chose those that are sweet and plea saunt in taste. This were vaynly put in of
the Prophet, if Christ had no been a natural child, taking his flesh or the
substance of Mary his mother, and not bryngyng his body with him from heaven,
or I know not from whence, as the ungodly Anabaptists in these our days do
most fastly dream. But let God be true, and all heretics liars.

IN another place the Prophet says, Esaias. 11.
there shall come a rod forth of the kyndred of Iesse, and a flower shall
florishe out of his root.

In this place the Prophet does so openly declare Christ to be true man and
the natural son of Mary the virgin, that it is won der that any Heretic
can have so w^oryshe a forehead once to deny i^. This rod and ^loure, which
spryngeth out of rod and kint^ (...) Iesse, is Christ the Lord* The root out
of the which flower undefiled virgin Marye. Christ's mother, which came of
the kynred of Iesse, king David's father. Can any man deny, but that the flower
is of the same nature and substance that the tree is of, which bears the
flower? If we grant the flower to be of the na ture and substance of the
stock that bears the flower, why are the Anabaptists more wicked and cruel
against Christ the flower and fruit (by Gods ordinance) of the holy virgin,
then unto the stock and root of every flower of the field? Can the flower of
an Ora^ge spryng out o^ an Oak? No more can the humanity of Christ which is
the blossom and flower of Mary, take his original of the air, of heaven, or
of such other matter they know not what. But as the flower of the Ora^ge
springs out of the Ora^ge tree, and is of the very same nature and substance
that the Ora^ge tree is, so likewise Christ being the flower of the most
blessed Uirgine took his beginning of her, and is of the very same substance
and nature that she is. Let God therefore be true, and all heretics liars.

AFter the. 62. weeks, says the Prophet Daniell, shall Christ be slain, Dan.
9.
and they shall have no pleasure in him.

The sleyng of Christ evidently proves that Christ was v^y man, yea and a man
mortal and subject unto death, so well as we. If he had brought his body with
him from heaven* so had been a celestial body* an impassible and immortal
body. But for as much as Christ feared death* ^uffed the pains of death, yea
and dyed in ded^, according to the Scriptures, it follows that Christ was
true and unfeigned man, taking his humanity of that holy virgin Mary his
mother, and lived in all points like man, sin alone extep^e, and at the last
dyed for our sins* as the Apostle says. Let God therefore be true, and all
heretics liars.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
THe book of the kyndred of Jesus Mal. 1
Christ the son of David the son of Abraham.

Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was borne that Jesus which
is called Christ.

The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise. When his mother Mary was married
to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child by the holy
ghost. Then Joseph her husband being a perfect man and loath to defame her, was
minded to put her away secret ly. While he thus thought, behold the angel of
the Lord appeared unto him in a dream saying: Joseph the son of David, fear
not to take unto thee Mary thy wife. For that which is conceived in her, is of
the holy ghost. She shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins. All this was done to
fulfill y^ which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet Esaias, saying: behold
Esaias. 7.
a maid shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall
call his name Emanuell, which is by interpretacion GOD with us, or God and man.

The angel gabriell was sent from god unto a city of galile named Nazareth,
to a virgin spoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, and
the virgins name was Mary. And the au^gel went in unto her, and said: Hayle full
of grace, y^ Lord is with thee? Blessed art thou among women.

When she saw him, she was abashed at his saying, and cast in her mind, what
manner of salutation that should be. And the angel said unto her: fear not
Mary, for thou have found grace with god, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and
bear a son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be
called the son of the highest. And the Lord god shall g^ue unto him the sea
(...) of his father David, and he shall reygne over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom shall be none end. Then ^ayd Mary unto the angel:
how shall this be, seeing I know not a mane And the angel answered and
said unto her: the holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
highest shall ouershadowe thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be
borne of thee, shall be called the son of god.

Elizabeth was filled with the holy ghost, and cried with a loud voice and
said: Blessed art thou among women, ^ blessed is y^ fruit of thy womb. And
whence happens this to me, that the mo there of my Lord should come to me. etc.

It fortuned while they were there, her Luke. ^
time was come y^ she should be delivered. And she brought forth her first
begotten son, and wraped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a maunger,
because there was no room for the^ within y^ Inn.

Behold I bring you tidings of great ^oy, y^ shall come to all y^ people. For
unto you is borne this day y^ city of David ^ savior, which is Christ the
Lord.

The child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with wisdom and
the grace of god was with him.

Jesus increased in wisdom and age and in favor with god and man.

Blessed is the womb that bare thee, Luke. 11
and the papes which gave thee suck.

The word was made flesh and dwelt John. 1
among us.

David was a Prophet and knew that Acts. 2.
god had sworn with an oath to him, y^ the fruit of his loins, that is to
say Christ, should sit on his seat.

God did set up David to be their Acts. 13
king, of whom he reported, saying, I have found David the son of Iesse, a
man after my own heart, he shall fulfill all my will. Of this man's sede has
god according to his promise, brought forth to the people of Israel a savior,
even Jesus.

Jesus Christ the son of god was be Romans 1.
gotten of the seed of David as pertaynyng to the flesh.

Christ as concerning the flesh came Romans 9
of the Israelites.

To Abraham and his seed were the Gal. 13
promyses made. He says not in the seeds as many, but in thy seed, as in one,
which is Christ.

When the time was full come, God Gala. ^.
sent his Son borne of a woman, and made bound unto the law, to redeem
them, which were under the law, that we through election might receive the
inheritance that belongs unto the natural son.

Christ being in the shape of GOD Phil. ^
and thynkyng it no robbery to equal with God, nevertheless made him self of
no reputa^ion, and took on him y^ shape of a servant, and became like unto men
and was found in his apparel as a man.

Without doubt great is this mystery 1. Timo. 3
of godliness, God was showed in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, was
seen of angels, was preached unto the gentiles, was believed on in earth and
received up in glory.

Remember that Jesus Christ being 2. Tim. ^
of the seed of David, rose again from death according to my gospel.

He that sanctifies, and they which Hebr. ^
are sanctified are all of one. For which causes sake he is not ashamed to call
the^ brethren, saying. I will declare thy name to my brethren, and in the mids
of the congregation will I praise thee. And again, I will put my trust in him.
And again, behold here am I, and the children which god has given me. For as
much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also him self
likewise took part with them for to put down through death him that had
Lorshyp over death, that is to say, the devil, and that he might deliver them,
which through fear of death were all their life time in danger of bondage.
For he in no condition takes on him the angels, but the sede of Abraham
takes he on him. Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto
his brethren, that he might be merciful and a faithful his priest in things
concerning god for to purge y^ peoples sins. For that it fortuned him self
to be tempted, he is hable to succor them also that are tempted.

Dearly beloved, believe not every spi ^ John. 4.
rit, but prove the spirits whether they are of God, or not. For many false
Pro phetes are gone out into the world. Hereby shall ye know the spirit of
god. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in y^ flesh, is of
god. And every spirit, which confesses not y^ Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of god. And this is the spirit of Antichrist, of who^ ye have
hard, how y^ ^e should come, and even now already is he in the world.

Many deceyuers are entered into the John. ^.
world, which confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a
deceiuer and an Antichrist.

Examples out of the new Testament.
WHen the time was come y^ the blessed Luke. ^
promised sede should be borne. God sent his messenger Gabriell vnt^ that holy
Uirgine Marye, which was of the house of David which among ma ny other things
said unto her: fear not mary. For thou have found grace with God. Behold thou
shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a Son. etc.

Note that the angel says, thou shall conceive. He says not, heaven shall
conceive. And the angel like as the Prophet used this word conceive, to
declare that the flesh which Christ had, was truly and naturally taken of the
substance of his mother Mary the virgin. For to conceive, is none other
thing, than a woman to be a very true and natural mother by ministryng part
of her corporal substance to her child, whereof also the child is formed and
made. Now on this manner by the workyng of the holy ghost without the sede of
man did this blessed virgin conceive Christ, it therefore truly follows, that
Christ brought not his body with him from heaven but received it of the
natural substance of his mother Mary. And because we should not doubt of this
thing, the angel calls Jesus Mary's son. If Christ had not ta ken his
humanity of the blessed Uirgine, of her nature and substance, and so be made
very true and perfect man, the angel had not said truth, when he called
Christ her son. For neither should Mary have been Christ's mother, nor Christ
Mary's son. And so should the angel have brought a false and a lying
message from God, which is the self truth. But let God be true, and all
heretics liars.

The godly and virtuous woman Elizabeth, wife to ^acharie the priest, said to
Mary her Co sen, being newly conceived with child, through the operacion of the
holy ghost: blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy
womb. And whence happens this unto me, y^ the mother of my lord should come
unto me? what soever this holy woman says here, it must needs be believed as
an infallible truth. For she speaks not of her own head, but as she was
filled with the holy ghost. In this her salutacion: she calls Christ the
fruit of Mary's womb. If Christ be the fruit of Maryes womb as
vndobutedlye he is, then is Christ made of the substance of Mary, and is her
true and natural son, or else were it a manifest lie to call Christ the
fruit of her womb. Who is so mad, to call a thing the fruit of a tree,
that never had the nature of a tree? Were it not double madness to call a pear
the fruit of a chery tree? so great a fondnes and a greater lie had it been
to call Christ the fruit of Mary's womb, if he had brought his body with him
from heaven or from any other place. But as it is truly said this pear is the
fruit of a pear tree, because it had his being and natural substance of the
nature and substance of a pear tree, so likewise is it truly said Christ is
the fruit of Mary's womb, because he had his being and natural substance as
concerning his humanity of the nature and substance of Mary. Let God therefore
be true, and all heretics liars.

Jesus says Luke, grew in wisdom Luke. 12
and age, this also declares Christ to to be true man, seeing he grew in age
and strength of body yea and also in wisdom after the manner of other
children, all though in the gifts of the mind he far excelled all other
men, as the Scriptures testify. God says David, even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. S. Ihon Baptist also spea
keth of Christ on this manner. God gives not the spirit by me sure unto him.

If Christ had brought his body with him ^o^ heaven so could not Christ's body
have been a natural body, nor have grown after the man ner of other children
but should have been as bygge when it came from heaven into the Uirgines womb,
as it was on the same day that it was put to death. But the holy Scriptures
teach us, that Christ is the fruit of Maryes womb, that he is her son,
that he was borne a little child, and grew in age after the manner of other
children until he became a perfect man. It therefore truly follows, that he
brought not his body with him from heaven, or I know not from whence* as the
wicked Anabaptists teach at this present, but that he unfeignedly, took it of
Mary his mother* and is her true and natural son formed and made of the
nature and substance of her body. Let God therefore be true, and all Heretics
liars.

Christ calls him self many times in the gospel the son of man to
declare that as concerning the flesh, he is the son of Abraham* and of
David, forasmuch as he took his ma^hode of Mary, which was of the stock and
kynred of Abraham and David* to who^ God promised, that of their sede and of
the fruit of their womb one should be borne in whom all nations of the earth
shall be blessed. So is it evident, that Christ is the natural son of Marye
the virgin. Let God therefore be true, and all heretics liars.

Christ in many places of the holy scripture is called the son of David* not
only because he was promised unto David, but because he came of his kynred,
and took flesh any blood of his stock and family even of the most vndefi^ed
virgin Mary his mother Christ therefore is true and perfect man of the blessed
virgin* and had no fantastical nor heavenly body. Let God therefore be true,
and all heretics liars.

Christ was borne, wrapped in cloutes, laid in a maunger, sede, circumcised,
embrased in arms, grew, was made strong in spirit, profited in wisdom and
age, hungered, thyrsted, eat, drank, wept, was weary, slept, rejoiced, was
moved with wrath and indignation, sorowed, was heavy, sad, was in such an
agony, that his sweat was like drops of blood trickelyng down to the ground,
feared death, and at the last suffered the most spytefull death of the cross,
and was buried. All these are manifest tokens and evident signs of Christ's
true man hoode. Neither could he have done or suffered these things* if he had
a fantastical body or a body brought from heaven. Let God therefore be true,
and all heretics liars.

CHrist after his resurrection appeared Luke. 24.
unto his disciples and said unto them peace be unto you. The disciples being
abashed and afraid, and supposing that they had seen a spirit, he said unto
them, why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold
my hands and my fete, that it is eue^ I my self handle me and see. For a
spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

Here Christ after his resurrection proves and showed him self not to be a
fantastical but a very man, not to have an heavenly body, but a body of flesh
and bones. And to declare him self true and perfect man, he did eat before
them ^ piece of a broyled fish and of an honye tomb. Let God therefore be true
and all heretics liars.

PEter in a certain sermon declared Acts* 2*
unto the Jews, that Christ as concerning the flesh came of the fruit of
David's loins.

In the which words he manifestly declares his faith concerning Christ's
humanity, which is, that Christ is very ^an coming of the sede of David, and
taking his manhood of the blessed virgin, which came of the stock of Da uid.
Hereof may we also learn, that the true and Christen faith is to believe, that
Jesus Christ took his flesh of Mary his mother, and brought not his body with
him from heaven, as the wicked Anabaptists hold.

PAul in his Epistle to the Romans Romans 9
plainly teaches that Christ as concerning the flesh came of the fathers of
the old Testament, that is to say, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David. etc.

In this Epistle to the Galathians he Gal. 4
says, that when the time was full come. God sent his son, made of a woman.

He says not, that he was made before of the elements in the air or that he
brought his b^ ^y with him from heaven, but that he was made of a woman, that
is to say, took his beginning and natural substance of Mary his mother,
concerning his humanity.

Again in his first epistle unto Timothe, 1. Tim ^
he names the man Jesus Christ a mediator between god and man.

This name Mediator, proves Christ both God and man. For he that should be a
mediator between God and man, set them at one y^ were at debate, make peace
among them that before did disagree, and conioyne them to perpetual amity,
which before were ennemies one to another, yea and by his own dignity,
worthiness and justice, make a love day for ever and ever, between God and
man, must have in him both the nature of God and the nature of man. Christ is
that one and alone mediator, which has by his death ad passion set God and
man together in an everlasting peace and quietness, which before through sin
we are at strife and debate. As Christ therefore is true God, so is he true man,
God I say, of God the father, and man of us, of our flesh and of our blood, or
else should blessed Paul err, which calls him a mediator* But let God be
true, and all heretics liers.

Finally, in his epistle unto the Hebrews, after that he had spoken much of
the divine nature of Christ, proving Christ to be very god, he also sets
forth Christ's humanity, and pro ueth him to be true and natural man, made of
our flesh and of our blood, this alone excepted, y^ we received our nature with
sin, and in sin and by natural conjunction, Christ received his humanity of
his mother without sin, without the company of any man by the operation of
the holy ghost. But let us hear the words of the Apostle.

For as much as the children were Heb. 2.
pertakers of flesh and blood, he also him self likewise took part with them.

Here as S. Paul declares evidently, that as the children, that is to say,
men be pertakers of flesh and blood, so likewise Christ (because he might
destroy him that had lordship over death: that is to say, the devil by the
death in his own body) was made pertaker of the same, that is, of flesh and
blood. No man doubts that our flesh is of the nature and substance of a
woman, no more is it to be doubted that Christ took his flesh of the nature
and substance of Mary his mother, seeing the epistle says that Christ was made
per taker of flesh and blood with us. This could he not have been if he had
brought his body with him from heaven, or had taken it of any other then of a
natural woman, although a pure and undefiled Uirgine.

Therefore like as a man takes his nature of his parents, so likewise took
Christ by humain nature of the blessed Uirgine his mother. He sai eth moreover
(He) meaning Christ, in no place takes on him the angels, but the sede of
Abraham takes he on him.

Here the Apostle manifestlye confuteth the wicked opinion of them which teach
that Christ had a celestial body or a body made of the air, and plainly
affirms that he took the sede of Abraham, that is to say: was made and became
ve ry true and natural man of the kinrede of Abra ha^ according to Gods
promise. So that all that ever he had, concerning his humanity, he had it of
the blessed Uirgine, which came of y^ stock of Abraham.

Again he says in all things it became him to be made like unto his
brethren. Here saint Paul confesses that Christ was made like un to us in
all things, which thing by no means could be true, if he had not taken upon
him our nature and substance. If he belyke unto us in all things (sin alone
except) so follows it that he is of the same nature, and of the same flesh
and blood that we are, or else could not he be like unto us in all things. And
so should this holy apostle and al other godly writers and teachers have
brought us in error. But let god be true and all heretics liars.

Now have we learned both truly and fullye of the holy scriptures, which are
infallible verities, that Christ was conceived by the holy ghost and borne of
the Uirgine Mary. By the which word (of) we believe that he took his humanity
of her substance, and had none other beginning as touching his humanity than
in her and of her, by the operation of the holy ghost: so that we may truly
conclude, that as Christ is very God of God the father without a mother, so is
he very man of Mary his mother without any Father. Therefore may his God head be
as justly denied, as his manhood and flesh taking of the blessed virgin Mary.
But Christ abides very god and very man whatsoever the wicked hiretikes hable.
Cursed therefore be Cerdo, Marcian and Manes, which taught that christ
appeared as man, and yet had no part of true manhood in him, but only had a
fantastical body.

Cursed be Cerinthus, which taught that Jesus was begotten of Joseph and Mary,
after y^ manner of other men, and that Christ came down from above unto Jesus*
Cursed be the Ebionites, the Theodosians, the Antimonians and the Photinians,
which affirmed that Christ was borne of the virgin only man and not God.
Cursed be Appelles which taught that Christ had his body of the elements in the
air. Cursed be Ualentinus which said that Christ brought his body with him
from heaven, and took no flesh of the Uirgine Mary: but passed through her as
water through the pype. Cursed be his Apes the Anabaptists* which in these our
dais have raised up that most detestable and horrible heresy. Cursed and
confounded be all they which with their hearts do not believe, and with their
mouths unfeignedly confess, that Jesus Christ is both God and man, to whom be
glory for ever.

Amen.
Against the gross and fantastical opinion of the papists, which affirm
that Christ's natural body and blood, is carnally eaten and dronken in the
lords supper.
IF the devil or the pope, or any of their impes go about with sophistical
reasons to persuade thee, that Christ is natural in the sacramental bread and
wine, or that the bread and wine is turned unto the real and natural body and
blood of Christ: even as he received it of the blessed Uirgine: suffer not thy
self to be beguiled and mocked, but valiauntly resist them with these
sentences and histories of Gods most holy word.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THe Lord is in his holy temple, the Psalm* 11*
Lords seat is in heaven.

The Lord lord looked down from Psalm. 13
heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that would
understand and seek after god.

God is gone up with a merry noise, Psalm. 47.
and the Lord with the sound of the trompet.

God sits upon his holy seat. Psalm. 6^


Thou art gone upon hie (O Christ) thou have led captivity captive, and
received gifts for men.

Sing unto God (O ye kingdoms of the earth) O sing praises unto the lord,
which sits in the heavens over all.

He looked down from his sanctuarye, Psalm. 10^*
even out of heaven did the Lord behold the earth, that he might hear the
mourninges of such as be in captivity, and deliver the children appointed unto
death.

The Lord has prepared his seat in Psalm. 103.
heaven, and his kingdom rules over al.

O Lord my god, thou art become excedyng Psalm* 104*
glorious, thou art clothed with majesty and honor, thou deckest thy self with
light as it were with a garment, and spreadest out the heavens like a
curtayne. Thou layest the beams of thy chambers in the waters, and make the
clouds thy charets, and walk upon the wings of the wind.

The Lord said unto my Lord, sit Psalm. 10
thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footestole.

The Lord is hie above all heathen, Psalm. 113
and his glory above the heavens. Who is like unto the lord our God, that has
his dwelling so hie, and yet humbles himself to behold the things that are in
heaven and earth.

Wherefore shall the heathen say, Psalm. 115
where is now their god? As for our god he is in heaven, he has done what so
ever pleased him.

Unto thee O Lord, lift I up my eyes, Psalm. 133
which dwell in the heavens.

Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or Psalm. 129
whether shall I flee from thy presence? If I clime up into heaven, thou art
there, etc

Will god dwell on the earth. Behold ^. Reg. 8.
the heavens and heavens of all heavens, are not able to contain thee. And how
should then this house do it, that I have builded.

The house which I build shall be great 2. Par. ^.
for great is our god above al gods. But who is able to build him an house,
when that heaven and heaven above all heavens, is not hable to receive him?
Job. 11.


God is hyer then heaven, what art thou able to do? Deper then hell, how will thou then know him? His length excedeth the length of the earth, and his
breadth the breadth of the sea.

Thus says the Lord, heaven is my Esaias. 6^
seat, and the earth is my footestoole, where shall now the house stand that
ye will build unto me? And where shall be the place that I will dwell in?

Sentences out of the new Testament.
IF any man say unto you: Lo, here is Math. 13*
Christ, or there is Christ, believe it not. For there shall arise false
anointed, and false teachers, and shall show great miracles and wonders: in
so much, that if it were possible, the very elect should be deceived.
Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore if they say unto you, behold he is in
the desert, go not ye forth, behold he is in y^ secret places, believe it not.
For as the lightnyng comes out of the east, and appears into the West, so
shall the coming of the son of man be.

Ye have the power always with you Math. 26.
but me shall ye not have always.

And when the Lord had spoken unto Mat. 16.
them, he was received into heaven, and is set down on the right hand of god.

It came to pass as Christ blessed the^ Luc. 24
he departed from them, and was carried up into heaven.

I go to prepare a place for you: And John. 24.
if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you even
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father.

Now I go my way to him that sent John. 16.
me, and none of you asks me whether I go. But because I have said such
things unto you, your hearts are full of sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you y^
truth it is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away that
co^forter will not come unto you. But if I depart, I will. send him unto you.

I went out from the Father, and came into the world. Again, I leave ye world
and go to the Father.

It is Christ which dyed, ye rather Romans 8
which is risen again: which is also on the right hand of God.

So often as ye shall eat of this bread, 1, Cor. 11.
and drinck of the cup, ye shall xeme^ber the Lords death til he come.

God the father raised Christ from the Ephe. 1.
dead, and set him on his right hand in heavenly things, above al rule, power,
might, dominion, and above all names that are named, not in this world only but
also in the world to come.

Christ is gone upon high, and has led cap Ephe. 4
tiuitie captive, and has given gifts unto men.

That he ascended what means it, but that he also descended first into the
lowest parts of the earth.

He that descended is even the same also that ascended up* even above all
heavens to fulfill al things.

God has exalted Christ on high and given Phil. ^
him a name, which is above all names, that in the name of Jesus every knee
should bow both in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.

If ye be risen again with Christ, Colos. 3
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand
of God.

Whenever Christ (which is our life) shall show him self, then shall we al
so appear with him in glory.

The Lord him self shall come down 1 Thessalonians. 4
from Heaven with a shoute, and the voice of the archaungell and trompe of God.
etc.

Christ the Son of God, being the Heb. 1.
brightness of his fathers glory, and the very image of his substance ruling
all things with the word of his power, has by his own person purged our
sins and sits on the right hand of the majesty on hye.

This man Christ after he had offered Hebr. 10.
one sacrifice for sins, sits down for ever on the right hand of God, and
from hence forth tarieth till his foes be made his fotestoole.

Let us run with patience unto the Heb. ^.
battayl that is set before us, lokyng un to Jesus the captain and finisher of
our faith, which for the joy that was set before him abode the cross and
despised the shame, and is set down on the right hand of the throne of god.

Jesus Christ is on the right hand of 1. Pet. 3.
God, and is gone into heaven, Angels, powers and might subdued unto him.

Examples out of the new Testament.
When Jesus had spoke these things, Act. ^
while the Disciples beheld him, he was taken up on hye, and a cloud received
him up out of their sight.

And while they looked up steadfastly to ward heaven, as he went, behold two men
stood by them in white aparell, which also said: ye men of Galyle, why stand
ye gasyng up to heaven? This same Jesus which is taken from you into heaven,
shall so come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven.

Stephen being full of the holy ghost, Act. 7*
looked up steadfastly with his eyes into heaven, and saw the glory of god, and
Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and said. Behold I see the heavens
open, and the son of man standing on the right hand of God.

When Saul iornyed, it fortuned Acts. 9.
that as he was come nigh to Damasco, suddenly there shyned round about him a
light from heaven, and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying to him:
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, what art thou Lord? and
the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest. etc.

Against the plucking away of thy trust and confidence from Christ and his
merits, to put it in the merits of other creatures or in thine own good
works, or in the intercession of saints, or the sacrifice of the Popish Mass.
IF Satan by this subtle and crafty suggestion seking thy damnation, go about
to pluck thy faith, confidence, and trust from Christ his blood, and his
merits, to repose it in the merits of men, or in thine own good deeds, works
and merits, or in the intercession of saints, or in the sacrifice of the
Popish mass, so that thy whole salvation shall not hang on Christ* and his
deserui^gs only but rather on some other stran^g means: lean not to his
temptations, but manfully resist them, steadfastly abiding in this pers^asion
that Christ alone is thy righteousness and that all thy salvation depends on
him alone and on none other thing, neither in heaven nor in earth. And that
thou may est be confirmed in this faith, let these scriptures which are
vn^ubted verities, ever be before thine eyes and suffer not thy self neither by
y^ crafty assaults of satan, nor by the subtle and fleshly reasons of any man
to be plucked from them.

Sentences out of the old Testament
Christ is that seed, which did tread Gene. 4.
down Satan's head.

Christ is that seed, in whom al nations Gene. 22.
of the world shall be blessed.

Christ is the ruler, duke and captain, Gene. 49.
whom al nations have so long looked for, which also defends his people
from the power of Satan.

Christ is that Son of God whom Psalm. 2
we are commanded to kiss and embrace, least we pearish from the right way.

Christ is our vpholder, our glory, and Psalm. 3*
our strong shield.

Christ is the Lord, from who^ al health and salvation comes, and he it is ye
blesses his people.

Christ is the Lord that never forsakes Psalm. 9.
them that trust in him and seek after him. Psalm. 18.


Christ is our strength, our sure rock, our bulwark, our refuge, our defense,
our buckeler, and our mighty sauinge health, and our sanctuary.

Christ is he that saves us, because it is his pleasure.

Christ saves the poor oppressed, and lays full low the high looks of
the proud.

Christ is the Lord, in whom alone Psalm. 12.
our fathers trusted, they trusted, I say in him, and he delivered them.

They cried unto him, and they were made safe, they trusted in him and they
were never confounded.

Christ is that Lord, whose ways v Psalm. 25.
niuersall are mercy and truth to them that seek after his Testament and
ordinances. He it is that will be merciful to our sins, even for his own
names sake, be they never so great.

Christ is our light and our saving health Psalm. 27
who^ the^ shall we fear? Christ is the defe^ der (...) our life, of whom then
shall we ^e afraid?

Christ is the strength of his people and the defender of the health of his
anointed.

Christ is our refuge in all tribulatio^s Psalm. 32.
that assail us.

Christ's eyes are upon them that fear Psalm. 33.
him, and upon them that trust in his mercy, he may deliver their souls from
death* norishe them in the time of hunger.

Christ is gentle, blessed is that man Psalm. 34.
that trusts in him.

Christ beholds the righteous, and hears their prayer.

Christ is at hand for them that are troubled in heart, and he shall save the
hum ble and meke spirited.

Christ gives salvation to the right Psalm. 37.
ous, and he is the defe^der in the time of trouble. He helps the^ and
delivers them, and makes them free from finners, and saves them because
they trust in him.

Christ pardons all our iniquities, Psalm. 103.
and heals all our dyseases, he delyuereth our lives from destruction, and
crowns us in iuercye and loving kindness.

Christ is right mylde and merciful, flow unto wrath, but ready to
forgenenes. He chydeth not ever, neither is he angrye always, he deals not
with us after our sins, nor rewards us according to our wickedness. The
height of the heavens is not so present over the earth, as is his merciable
goodness over them that worship him. He sets our sins as far from us, as is
the East from the West.

Never was there any father so tender unto his children, as is the Lord unto
them that worship him. For it is he that knows our making, he remembers
that we are but of dust.

That the age of man mortal is like grass, that he florisheth like a flower
of the field. Which as soon as any sharp wind touches it, it is gone being
no more found in his place. But the merciable goodness of the Lord is for ever
and ever, preseruyng his worshippers, and the form of his rightwise m^ king is
present with their chylders children, so long as they keep his covenant and
hold his commandments inmynd to do them.

Christ is the Lord, with whom there Psalm. 129
is both infinite mercy, and plenteous rede^tion: For he it is that redeemeth
Israel from al their sins.

Christ is that Lord, yea Christ is that Esaias. 43
Lord in deed which puts away our iniquities for his own sake, and will
remember them no more. Neither have we any thing whereby we may be iusti fied
in his sight.

Christ alone is that savior, in whom Esaias. 45
Israel is saved with an everlasting health.

Christ can no more forget us, then a Esaias. 49.
mother can forgette the child of her womb. And though she forgets her
child, yet cannot he forget us: For he has written up us in his hands, so
that we are always in his sight.

Christ has taken upon him our dyseases, Esaias 53.
and borne away our sorrows.

Christ was wounded for our iniquities, and bruised for our sins.

Christ was offered for us, because it was his pleasure.

Christ alone has trodden down the vynepresse, neither was there any at all that helped him.

Examples out of the old Testament.
When God determined to slay all the Exodus 12.
first borne in the land of Egypt both of man and beast, he commanded his
people every man in his house to slay a Lamb of a year old, and without spot,
and with the blood thereof to annoynte the upper door post, and the two side
posts, that when the Angel, which smote the land of Egypt, should see the
blood, he might pass over them and not destroy them. This pascal Lamb of the
Jews, is a figure of the true Pascall lamb, Jesus Christ the Lord, which is
the pure and undefiled lamb of God, which offered him self a sweet
smelling sacryfice unto God for us, which never committed sin, and in his
mouth no gyle was found. For as the blood of the Lamb sprynckled on the
door posts of the Israelites did drive away the auenger, and kept harmles
the first begotten of the Israelites: so likewise the blood of Christ
sprinckeled in the hearts of men by ^aythe, dryueth Satan, sin, death,
desperation, and hell from them, puryfieth their consciences, makes their hear
tes merye, sets them at one with God, and brings ouerlastyng life as
Saint John says. Behold that lamb of god, which takes away the sin of the
world.

Hereto agrees the saying of S. Paul: 1. Cor. 5
christ our passover is offered up for us.

Christ was figured by Manna which Exo. 16
God gave from heaven unto the Israelites to eat in the desert.

For as that bread was very plesaunte, Sap. 16.
and good of taste, and had in it the savor of all sweet and deintye meats,
so that they which did eat of that, neded none other meat.

Even so likewise is Christ the most Psalm. 78.
sweet and pleasant bread, that came down from heaven.

He that eats of this bread, shall live John. 6.
for ever, neither needs he to follow any other straung repast. For in Christ
the soul of a christen man through faith finds enough to feed upon.

The rock, out of the which plenty of Exodus 17.
sweet waters gushed out for the comfort of the thirstye Israelites in the
wilderness, signified Christ also as Saint Paul does declare. For as that
rock gave out abdundance of sweet and plea sant waters to the great comfort of
the people of Israel, which otherwise should have pearished: so likewise is
Christ y^ rock, out of the which flows plenty of heavenly waters,
comfortable for the thirsty soul, which otherwise can not be succored but
must needs pearish. And he that drinks of those heavenly waters which come
out of the rock Christ, shall not need to seek after the ^inking and dirtie
puddles of other. For in this Christ, he shall find plentye of waters to
drink, yea and that unto the uttermost for his souls health, as Christ him
self says.

Whosoever shall drink of the water John. 4.
that I shall give him, shall never more be a thirste, but the water that I
shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting
life.

The brazen serpent in the old law Number. 21.
was a figure also of Christ.

For as those which were stricken of y^ fyry serpents were made whole, when
they looked upon the brazen Serpent for their faithes sake which they had in
the promise of god annexed unto the ser pent: so likewise they that are wounded
with the fiery darts of Satan, are made whole, when so ever they behold with
the eyes of the inward man by faith. Jesus Christ which was crucified for our
sin, as Christ himself testifies, saying: As Moises lyfted up the Serpent
in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lyfted up: that none that
believes in him peryshe, but have ever ^astyng life.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Christ is so called a Savior, for he Math. 9.
it is that saves his people from their sins.

Christ came not to call the iusticiaries Math. 11.
but sinners to repentance.

Christ calls al them that labor and Math. 11.
are laden, and he promises that he will refresh them.

Christ is that true light, which light John. ^
neth every man that comes into this world.

Christ is our Lord of whose fulness al John. 1.
we have received, even grace for grace. For the law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ

Christ is that lamb of god, which takes away the sins of the world:

As Moses lyfted up the Serpent in John. 3.
wilderness, so must the Son of man be lyfted up, that every on that
believes in him, may not perish but have everlasting life. For God loves the
world so fervently that he gave his only begot ten son that every one that
believes in him may not pearish, but have everlasting life.

For god sent not his son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world should be saved by him. He that believes in the son, has everlasting
life, but he that believes not in the son, shall not se life, but the wrath of
God abides upon him.

Christ geuethe that living water, John. 4.
whereof whosoever drinks, shall neuermore thirste, but that water shall be
unto him a fountain of water that springs up into eternal life.

Christ is that bread of life, which came John. 6.
down from heaven. If any man eat of that bread, he shall live for ever.

Christ alone the Son of God makes Job. 8.
us free.

Christ is the door. If any man enter John. 10.
in by him, he shall be safe.

For he shall go in and come out and ^nde pasture.

Christ is that good shepeheard which gave his life for his sheep. John. 11.


Christ is the resurrection and life, he that believes in him although he were
dead, shall live and every one that lives and believes in him shall never dye.

Christ is the light of the world, and John. 12.
came into the world for this purpose y^ every one that believes in him
should not abide in darkness.

Christ is the way, truth and life. John. 14.
No man comes unto the Father but by him. John. 15.


Christ is that mighty prince which has overcome the world. Act. 4.


There is none other name given unto men under heaven where in they must be
saved, but only that name of Christ. Neither is there any salvation in any
other, but in him alone. Acts. 10.


Christ is ordained of God a judge of quick and dead. To him give all the pro
phets witness, that through his name all that believe in him, shall receive
remis sion of sins.

Through Christ, is preached unto us the forgeuenes of sins, so that by him
Act. 13.
all y^ believe, are justified from all things from which we could not be
justified by the law of Moses.

The righteousness no doubt, which Rom 3.
is good before God, comes by ye faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon
all that believe. There is no difference, for all have sinned, and want the
glory of God, but are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus, to whom God has made a ^eat of mercy through faith in his
blud, to show the righteousness, which before him is of valor.

Christ died for our sins, and rose ^ Romans 4.
gain for our justification.

We being justified by faith, are at Romans 5.
peace with god through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have away in through
faith unto this grace, wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of the praise that
shall be given of God.

God sets out his love that he has to us, forasmuch as while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then now (being justified in his
blood) shall we be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies
we were reconciled to God by the death of his son: much more saying we are
re conciled, we shall be preserved by his life. Not only so, but we also joy
in God by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement.

Read the whole Chapter.

Everlasting life is the gift of God Romans ^
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

There is no dampnation to them which Romans 8
are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
For the law of the spirit that brings life through Jesus Christ, has made
us fre from the law of sin and death.

We know that al things work for the best unto them that love god, which also
are called of purpose. For those which he knew before, he also ordained before,
that they should be a like fashioned to the shape of his son that he might
be the first begotten son among many brethren. And whom he appointed before,
them also he called. And which he called, them also he justified, which he
justified, them also he glorified.

What shall we the^ say to these things? If God be on our side, who can be
against us, which spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, how shall
he not with him give us all things also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifyeth, who then shall condemn? It is
Christ which is dead, yea, rather which is risen again, which is also on the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

Christ is the end of the law to iustifye Romans 10.
all that believe. Whosoever believes on Christ, shall not be ashamed. There is
no difference between ye Jew and the Gentile. For one is Lord over all that
call on him, for whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be safe.

Christ is made of God our wisdom, 1, Cor. 1.
our righteousness, our sanctification, and redemption

Christ our Easter Lamb is offered up 1. Cor. 5
for us.

We are washed, we are sanctified, yea, 1. Cor. 6
we are justified by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

The liberality of our lord Jesus Christ 2. Cor. 8.
is great, which though he were rich, yet for our sakes he became poor,
that we through his poverty might be made rich.

If righteousness come of the law, then Gal. 2.
died Christ in vain.

Christ has delivered us from ye curse of Gal. 3.
the law, and was made accursed for us.

S^ande fast in the liberty wherewith Gala. 5.
Christ has made us free, and wrappe not your selves again in the yoke of
bondage.

Ye are gone quite from Christ as many as are justified by the law, and are
fallen from grace. For we look in spirit to be justified through faith. For in
Jesus Christ neither is circumcision any thing worth, neither uncircumcision,
but faith which by love is mighty in operation.

God forbid y^ I should rejoice in any thing, but only in y^ cross, death
and passion, of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Blessed be god the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly things by Christ.

By christ we have redemption through Ephe. 1
his blood, even the forgeuenes of sins according to the riches of his grace
which he shed on us aboundauntlye in all wisdom and prudence.

God which is rich in mercy through Ephe. 2
his great love, wherewith he loved us even when we were dead in sin, has quic
kened us to gether in Christ (for by grace are ye saved) and has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly things through Christ Jesus.

By grace are ye made safe through faith and that not of your selves. For it is
the gift of God, and comes not of works, least any man should boast himself.

We were strangers and far of, but now we are made nigh by thy blood of
Christ.

Christ is our peace.

By Christ Jesus our Lord are we bound Ephe. 3
to draw nighe in the trust which we have by faith on him.

Christ is ascended up on high and has Ephe. 4
led captivity captive, and has given gifts unto men.

In Christ have we redemption through Col. 1.
his blood, that is to say, forgeuenes of sins.

By Christ through the blood of hyscrosse are all things reconciled to God the
father and set at peace both in heaven and in earth.

This is a true saying and by all means Tim. 1
worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into this world to save sinners.

There is one God, and one Mediator 2. Tim. 2
between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus which gave himself a
ransom for all men.

God has not saved us for the deeds of Titus. 3.
rightousnes which we have wrought, but of his mercy has he saved us.

We are not redeemed with corruptible 1. Pet. 1.
silver and gold, from our vain conuer sation, which we received by the
tradicions of the fathers, but by the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
undefiled and without spotte.

Christ is the shephearde and bishop of 1. Pet. 2.
our souls

The blood of Jesus Christ Gods son, Ihon. 1.
makes us clean from all sin.

If any man sin, we have an advocate John. 2.
with the father, Jesus Christ that ryghteous one, and he is a mercy stock
for our sins: not for our sins only, but also for the sins of all the
world.

Our sins are forgeuen us in ye name of Christ.

For this purpose appeared the son John. 3.
of God to loose the works of the devil.

In this appears the love of God toward ohn. 4.
us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him. Herein is love, not that we love God, but that he loved
us, and sent his son to be a sacrifice for our sins.

Christ in his own person has purged Hebr. 1.
our sins.

Christ through death put down him that Heb. 2.
had rule over death, that is to say, the devil, and has made us free from
the danger of bondage. In that Christ himself suffered and was tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted.

We have not an high priest which can Heb* 5
not have compassion on our infyrmities, but was in all points tempted like
as we are, but yet without sin. Let us therefore go boldelye unto the seat
of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.

Christ has an everlasting priesthood. Heb. 7.
Wherefore he is able also ever to save them that come unto God by him,
forasmuch as he ever lives to make intercession for us.

Christ being Bishop of good things Hebr. 1^
to come, came by a greater and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with
hands, that is to say, not of this manner buildyng, neither by the blood of
Goats, and Calves, but by his own blood he entered in, once for all into the
holy place, and found eternal redemption. For if the blood of Oxen and
Goats, and the ashes of an Heyfer, when it was sprinkled, purifyed the
unclean, as touching the purifyeng of the flesh: how much more shall the
blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit, offered himself without
spotte to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living god.

And for this cause is he the mediator toure of the new Testamente, that
through death which chanced for the rede^tion of these transgressions that were
in the first Testament, they which were called might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance.

Christ now in the end of the world has appeared once for all, to put sin to
flight by the offering up of him self.

We are sanctified by the offeringe of ^eb. 10.
the body of Jesus Christ once for all. With one offering has Christ made
perfect for ever them that are sanctified.

Christ loved us and washed us from poc. 1.
our sins in his own blood, and made us kings and priests unto god his
father.

Christ lives for evermore, and has the keys of hell and death.

Christ is Lord of Lords and king of poc. 17.
kings, and they that are on his side, are call led and chosen, and faithful.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Christ is that well-beloved Son of ^ath. 3.
god, for whose sake the heavenly father is well pleased with man.

Christ is that king which forgave the Mat. 18.
servant the ten thousand talentes that be ought.

Christ is that most loving Samaritane, Luke. 10.
which healed the wounded man that was half dead.

Christ is that tender shepeheard which Luke. 15.
fetched home unto the shepefolde even upon his shoulders the lost sheep.

Christ is that most gentle father which with so great joy and with embracinge
arms received home again the lost son.

Against such as go about to dissuade the christen people from the studying,
readyng, or hearing of gods word.
IF Satan or any of his impes go about to dissuade thee, and to pluck thy
mind from studying, readyng or hearing gods word, that thou may walk in
darkness, and never come to the knowledge of the truth, least by this means
thou should be saved: lean not unto him, but enarm thy self against his
wicked temptations with these scriptures followyng.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THou shalt tell thy son at the same Exodus 13.
dai, and say: because of that which the lord did for me, when I departed out
of Egypt. Therefore shall it be a sign unto thee in thine hand, and a token of
remembrance before thine eyes, that the law of the lord may be in thy mouth,
how that the Lord brought thee out of Egypt with a mighty hand.

Speak to the children of Israel, and say unto them, that they make the^
gardes upon the quarters of their garments amongst all your posterities, and
put yellow r^handes upon the gardes in ye quarters. And the gardes shall serve
you that ye may look upon them and remember all the commandments of the
lord, and do them, y^ ye order not your selves after the meaning if your own
heart, nor go a whoryng after your own eyes. Therefore shall ye remember, and
do all my co^maun dements, and be holy unto your God.

Take heed to thy self now, and keep Deuteronomy. 2
well thy soul, that thou forgette not the things which thine eyes have
seen, and that they depart not out of thy heart all the days of thy life. And
thou shalt teach them thy children, and thy childers children.

Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is Deuteronomy. 6
one Lord only. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words which I command thee
this day shall thou take to heart, and shall rehearse them unto thy children,
and shall talk of them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou
walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou rysest up. And thou
shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be a token of
remembrance before thine eyes, and thou shall write them upon the posts of
thine house, and upon the gates.

If ye harken unto my commaundeme^ts Deuteronomy. 1^
which I command you this day, that ye love the Lord your God, and serve him
with all your heart, and with all your soul, then will I give rain unto your
land in due season, earlye and late, that thou may gather in thy corn, thy
wine, and thine oil, and I will give grass upon thy field for thy cattle,
that ye may eat and be filled. But beware that your heart be not deceived,
that ye go aside, and serve other gods, and worship them, and then the wrath
of the Lord wax whote upon you and he shut up the heaven, that there
come no rain, and the earth give not her increase, and ye perish shortly from
the good land which the lord has given you.

Put up therefore these my words in your hearts and in your souls, and bind
them for a sign upon your hands, that they be a token of remembrance before
your eyes, and teach them your children, so that thou talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, or walk by the way, when thou lie down and when
thou risest up, and write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon the
gates, that thou and thy children may live long in ye land which the Lord swear
unto thy fathers to give them as long as the days of heaven endure upon earth.

Let my doctrine increase as rain, and Deuteronomy. 32.
my speech flow as does the dew. Even as the rain upon the grass, and the
drops upon the herb.

Take to heart all the words which I testify unto you this day that ye
co^mau^d your children to observe and do all these words of this law. For it
is no vain word to you, but it is your life, and this word shall prolong
your life.

Be strong and very bold, that thou Joshua, 1.
may keep and do every thing according to the law that Moses my servant
commanded thee.

Turn not aside from it, neither to the right hand nor to the left, that thou
may deal wisely whether soever thou go And let not the book of this
law depart out of thy mouth, but exercise thy self therein day and night
that thou may keep and do every thing according to it that is written
therein.

Then shall thou prosper in thy ways and deal wisely. Lo I have commanded
thee to be strong and bold. Fear not and be not afraid, for the Lord thy God
is with thee, whersoeuer thou go.

Blessed is the man that deliteth in the Psalm. 1.
law of the Lord, and exercises himself in his law both day and night.

Lay hand on the learning lest the Lord Psalm. 2.
be angry, and so ye perish from the right way.

The law of the Lord is pure, it turns Psalm. 18.
souls. The witness of the Lord is faith full it gives wisdom even unto
babes.

The statutes of the Lord are right they rejoice the heart, the commandment of
the Lord is bright, and lighteneth the eyes

The fear of the Lord is holy, it endures for ever, the judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether, they are more pleasant and worthy,
more to be desired then gold and precious stone, yea they be sweter then the
honey and the honey comb.

The Lord shall tell in the Scriptures Psalm. 85.
of the people and of those Princes that were in her.

Blessed is the man whom thou have nur Psalm. 113
tered, O lord, and taught him thy law.

He has sent his word and healed them and Psalm. 117.
delivered them from their destructions.

Blessed are they ye search his testimonies Psalm. 117.
and seek after him with their whole heart.

Thou have given strait charge that thy commandments should be kept.

Oh that my ways were stablished to keep thy statutes, then should not I be
co^ founded while I have respect unto all thy commandments.

Where with all, shall a young man clenfe his way? Uerely by ruling himself
according to thy word. With my whole heart have I sought thee, oh let me not
go wrong out of thy commandments.

Thy words have I hid within my heart that I should not sin against thee.

Thou rebukest ye proud, cursed are they that depart from thy commandments.

In thy testimonies is my delight, yea thy statutes are my counselors.

Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.

Oh give me understanding and I shall keep thy law, yea I shall keep it with my
whole heart.

Lead me in the path of thy commandments, for that is my desire: Enclyne my
heart unto thy testimonies, and not un to covetousness.

The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver.

The wicked me^ have told me tales but nothing agreeable to thy law. For all thy
commandments are true, yet have the ungodly persecuted me.

If my delight were not in thy law, I should perish in my trouble.

Oh how sweet are thy words unto my throat, yea more then honye is unto my
mouth. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my pathe.

It is hie time for thee O Lord to lay to thine hand. For they have destroyed
thy law. For I love thy commandments above gold and precious stone.

The preachinge of the word gives sight, yea and brings forth
understanding even unto the very babes.

Health is far from the ungodly, for they regard not thy statutes.

But great is the peace that they have which love thy law, and they are not
offended at it.

My Son, if thou will receive my Prou. 2.
words, and keep my commandments by thee, that thine ear may harken unto
wisdom, apply thine heart then to under standing. For if thou criest after
wisdom and call for knowledge: if thou sekest after her as after money, and
diggest for her as for treasure, then shall thou understand the fear of the
lord, and find the knowledge of God.

For it is the Lord that geeueth wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge
and understanding. He preserves the welfare of the righteous, and de^e^deth
them that walk innose^tly, he keeps the^ in the right path, and preserves the
way of the saints? Then shall thou not under stand righteousness, judgment
and equi tie, yea and every good path. If wisdom enter into thine heart, and
thy soul delight in knowledge, then shall council preserve thee, and
understanding shall keep thee.

That thou may be delivered from the evil way, and from the man that
speaks froward things, from such as leave the high streat and walk in the
way of darkness, which rejoice in doing evil, and delight in wicked things,
whose ways are crooked, and their paths slanderous. That thou may be
delited also from the strange woman, and from her that is not thine own,
which gives sweet words, forsakes the husband of her youth, and forgets
the couenaunte of her God. For her house is inclined unto death, and her paths
unto Hell. All they that go in unto her come not again, neither take they
hold of the way of life. That thou walk in the good way, and keep y^ paths
of the righteous. For the just shall dwell in the land, and the innocents
shall remain in it, but the ungodly shall be rooted out of the land, and the
wicked doers shall be taken out of it.

Blessed is the man that finds wisdom Pro. 3
and obtains understanding, for ye getting of it is better then any
m^rchandise of silver, and the profit of it is better then gold. Wisdom is more
worth then precious stones, and all the things that thou can desire, are not
to be compared unto her. Upon her right hand is long life, and upon her left
hand is riches and honor. Her ways are pleasant ways, and al her paths ar
peaceable. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and blessed
are they that keep her fast.

My son let not these things depart from thine eyes, but keep my law and
counsel so shall it be life unto thy soul and grace unto thy mouth.

Then shalt thou walk safely in thy way, and thy foot shall not stumble. If
thou slepest, thou shall not be afraid, but shall take thy rest and sleep
swetely. Thou shalt not need to be afraid of any soden fear, neither for the
violent rushing in of the ungodly when it comes.

For the lord shall be beside thee, and keep thy foot that thou be not taken.

Let thine heart receive my words, keep Pro. 4
my commandments, and thou shalt^ live.

Get the^ wisdom, get thee understanding, forget not the words of my mouth,
and shrink not from the^. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, love
her, and she shall keep thee. The chief point of wisdom is, that thou
willingly to obtain wisdom, and before all thy goods to get understanding.
Make much of her and she shall promote thee, yea if thou embracest her, she
shall bring thee unto honor.

She shall make thee a gracious head and garnishe thee with the crown of
glory. Hear my son, and receive my words, that the years of thy life may be
many: I will show the way of wisdom and lead thee in the right paths. So
that if thou go therein, there shall no straitnes hinder thee: and when thou
runnest thou shall not fall. Take fast hold of doctrine, let her not go, keep
her, for she is thy life.

The commandment is a lantern, Pro. 6.
and the law is a light and the way of life.

Where no knowledge of gods word is, Pro. 19
the soul is not well,

Apply thy heart unto learning, and Pro. 2^
thine ear to the words of knowledge.

He that turns away his ear from Pro. 28
hearing the law, his prayer shall be abhorred.

When the preachinge of Gods word (...)* 29
fails, then perishes the people.

Every word of GOD is pure and Pro. 30
clean, yea it is a shield to them that trust in it.

Uaine are all those men, in whom no Sap. 13
knowledge of god is.

Neither herb nor emplasture has Sap. 16.
healed the^, but thy word O Lord, which heals all things.

The fountain of wisdom is the Eccle. 1
the word of god.

Be make and lowly to hear the word Eccle. 5
of god, that thou may understand, and bring forth a wise and true answer.

Have all thy pleasure in the commaun Eccle. 7
dements of god, and in his laws be thou most of al occupied, and he shall
give thee an heart, and a desire of wisdom shall be ge uen thee.

Be not slack to believe the word of Eccle. 16
God.

Learnig is a precious jewel to a wisema^. Eccle. 21


Nothing is better then the fear of god, and nothing is sweter then to have a
respect Eccle. 23
to the commandments of the Lord

My people is led captive because they Esaias. 5.
have no knowledge.

They have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and the word of the
holy one of Israel have they blasphemed.

Therefore is the wrath of the lord who^ against his people, and he will stretche
out his hand, and destroy them.

Make have unto the law and witness. Esaias. 8.
If they speak not according to this word they shall not have the morning
light.

All ye that are a thirst; come unto the waters, and ye that have no money, make
Esaias. 55
haste, by and eat. Come I say, by without money and without any ^xchaunge, wine
and milk. Why lay ye out your monye for that that is not bread in deed, and
spend your labor about that that shall never satisfye you? Hear me, hear I
say, and eat that which is good, that ye may be well liking. Give ear and
come unto me, hear me I say, and your soul shall live.

As rain and snow comes down from heaven and returns not th^ther again,
but waters the earth and makes it to bud, and bring forth the fruit, so that
it gives sede to the sower, and bread to the eater: so shall my word be that
shall come out of my mouth.

It shall not return unto me boyde, but shall do what soever I will, and
prosper in them, to whom I send it.

Let not the wise man rejoice in his Iere. 9
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor yet let the rich man
glory in his riches, but let him that reioyseth, rejoice in this thing that he
know me, that I am ye Lord which does mercy, judgment and righteousness in the
earth.

Withdraw not the word from the Iere. 26
people, if peradventure they hear and turn from their wicked way, so that it
may repent me of the evil which I have determi ned to do unto them for the
maliciousnes of their councels.

Hear Israel the commandments Baruc. 3.
of life, give ear that thou may become wise. How chanced it O Israel,
that thou art in the land of thine enemies? Thou art worn out in a strange
land, thou art defiled with the dead. Thou art^ reputed with them that go down
to Hell. Thou have forsaken the fountain of wisdom. For if thou had
walked in the way of god, undoubtedly thou had dwelt in rest upon the
earth: Learn therefore where wisdom is, and understanding is, that thou
may also know where continuance of life is, and all things necessary for to
maintain the same, again where the light of the eyes and peace is. Bar^c. ^


This is the book of the commandments, and the law which abides for
ever. All that keep it, shall come unto life, but they that forsake it, shall
come unto death. Amos. 8


Behold, the day is come, says y^ Lord that I will cast an hunger upon the
earth, not the hunger of bread, nor the thirst of water, but of bearing the
word of the Lord. And they shall go from sea to sea, and walk about from the
South to the East, sekinge the word of the Lord, and yet shall they not find
it.

Examples out of the (...) Testament.
GOd the Father wrote the law of the Exodus 2
ten commandments in tables of stone with his finger, and commanded Moses
to declare them unto the people.

The people are commanded of God, ^eut. 4
not only to read his holy law, but also diligently to exercise them selves in
the me ditation thereof so long as they live, and to teach it their children,
yea to talk of it, both in their house, and when they go abroad, and to write
it upon the thresholds, doors and posts of their houses, that it may be ^er
in their sight. For man shall not live with bread alone, but with every word
that proceeds from the mouth of God.

A king is commanded to read the ^eut. 17
book of the law of the Lord all the days of his life, that he may fear the
Lord his God.

Joshua was commanded that the book ^sua. 1
of the Lords law should not depart from his mouth, but that he should study
in it day and night, that he might keep and do all things that are written in
that book.

King Saul was cast down from his roy ^g. 15
all estate, because he was negligente and disobedient to the law of God.

When David lay on his death bed, Pa. 29
he said to Sallomon: thou shall prosper and come to great renoume, if thou
kepest the commandments and ordinances, which the Lord commanded Moses.

Ioas, when he was crowned in y^ temple, 2. Par. 23.
had the law of the Lord delivered unto his hands, that he should keep and
maintain the same.

Iosaphat that walked in the commandments 2. Par. 27
of the Lord and loved Gods word so entierly, that he sent his princes,
Levites, and priests to teach in all parts of Judah, which had the book of
the Lords law with them, and went about in all the cities of Judah, and taught
the people.

Ezechias diligently walked in the law 2. Par. 29.
of the Lord, purged his realm of all idolatry, set up again the true
worshipping of God, and exhorted all his subjects to follow the law of their
Lord God.

Iossas that most godly king which walked 2. Par. 34.
so purely in the ways of the lord, that he declined neither on the right hand
nor on the left, when the book of the law was delivered unto him, did not only
cause the book to be red before him, but he himself also red it before all his
people, both small and great, and (all idolatry destroyed) restored the true
religion to his kingdom.

Esdras red the law of the Lord plainly ^. Esd. 8.
and distinctly to the people, and they gave very earnest and diligent
attendaunce to the bearing of it.

Susan from her infanci^, was so diligently Dan. 13
brought up of her parents in the law of God, that she did not only fear
god, but also chused rather to be stoned un to death, then she would once
transgress the law of god by committing adultery.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Man shall not live with bread alone, Math. 4
but with every word that comes out of the mouth of God.

Uerely, verily, I say unto you, this age Math. 24.
shall not pass, till all these things be done. Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but my words shall not pass away.

Blessed are they that hear the word Luke. 11.
of god and keep it.

Blessed is he that eats bread in the Luke. 13.
kingdom of God.

They have Moses and the Prophets, Luc. 16.
let them hear them. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they believe though one should rise from the dead.

This is condemnation, that light is John. ^*
come into the world, and that men loved darkness more then light, because
their works were evil. For every man that does evil, hates the light,
neither comes he to y^ light, least his works should be reproved, but he
that does truth, comes to light that his deeds might be known how they are
wrought in god.

Search the scriptures for ye think to John. 5.
have eternal life in them, and these are they which testify of me, neither
will ye come unto me that ye may have life.

The words that I speak to you, are John. 6.
spirit and life. Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of everlasting
life.

He that is of god hears the words of John. 8.
god. But ye hear not because ye are not of god. If a man keeps my word, he
shall never see death.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know John. 10.
them, and they follow me, and I give them everlasting life.

Walk while ye have light, least darkness ouerwhelme you. He that walks in
John. 12.
darkness, knows not whether he goes. While ye have light believe in the
light: that ye may be the children of light.

He that has my precepts and keeps Ioh. 14.
them, he it is that loves me. If any man loves me, he will keep my word, and
my father will love him, and we shall come to him, and dwell with him.

This is everlasting life, even to know Ioh. 17.
thee the alone true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Every one that is of the truth, hears John. 18.
my voice.

The gospel of Christ is the power of Romans 1.
god unto salvation, for so many as believe.

Except the Lord of bostes had left unto Romans 9.
us sede, that is, his most blessed word, we had been as Sodom, and might well
have been likened to Gomorra.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing Romans 10
by the word of God.

Whatsoever things are written before Romans 15.
time, are written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope.

The word of the cross, is to them that ^. Cor. 1
perish, folishnesse, but to us* that obtain salvation, it is the power of
God.

If the gospel of Christ be yet bid, it is ^. Cor. 4.
bid among them that are lost, in whom y^ god of this world has blinded y^
minds of them which believe not, least the light of the glorious gospel of
Christ, which is the image of God, should not shine unto the^. Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly with all wisdom. Teach and monish one an other.

Quench not the spirit. Despise not the studies and preachinges of the holy
Scripture. Prove all things, and that is good, hold fast.

God will all men to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth. 1.
Tim. ^*


Give thy mind to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, continue in these
things. 1. Tim. 4


Continue in reading the holy scripture, which is able to make thee wise unto
salvation, 2. Tim. 3
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus: For all Scripture given by
inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to improve, to amend, and to
instruct in ryghteousnes, that the man of god may be perfect and prepared to
all good works.

The word of God is liuishe and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword.

Lay a part all filthiness, all superfluity Heb. 4.
of maliciousness, and receive with meke^es, y^ word that is grafted in you,
which is able to save your souls. And see ye be doers of the word, and not
hearers only, disceauinge your selves. For if any hear the word and do it
not, he is like to a man that beholds his bodily face in a glass: For as soon as he has looked on him self he goes his way, and forgets
forthwyth what his fashion was. But who so looks in the perfect law of
liberty, and continues therein (if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer
of the work) the same shall be happy in his deed.

Lay a side all malice, and guile, and dissimulation ^. Pet. 2.
and envy, and al backbityng, and as newborn babes desire that milk not of
the body, but of the mind, which is without corruption, that ye may grow
therein.

We have a right sure word of prophecy: ^. Pet. 1.
whereunto if ye take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, ye
do well until the day dawne, and the day star arise in our hearts. So
that ye first know this, that no prophecy in the scripture has any private
interpretation. For the scripture came never by the will of man, but holy men
of God spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost.

Whosoever transgresses and abides 2. John. 1.
not in the doctrine of Christ, has not god. He that endures in the doctrine
of Christ, has both the father and the son.

If there come any to you, and bring not this learning, him receive not to
house, neither once bid him god speed, for he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds.

Blessed is he that reads and hears Apoc. 1.
the words of the prophecte, and keeps these things that are written therein.

Blessed is he that keeps the words of Apoc. 22.
the prophecy of this book.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THe people preased so greatly upon Luke 6.
Christ to hear the word of God, that he was compelled to enter into a ship,
and so to teach them.

Mary the sister of Martha, sat at Jesus Luke 10.
feet and heard his preaching. And when Martha being greatly combred about
much serving and other worldly business, said to Christ: Master, do thou
not care that my sister has lest me to minister alone. Bid her therefore that
she help me. He said: Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled, about
many things, but one thing is needful. Mary has chose^ her that good part,
which shall not be taken away from her.

When Christ preached in the temple, Luke 19.
all the people did hang of his mouth, hearing him.

Peter turned three thousand at one of Act. 2.
his sermons.

The Eunuch chamberlain, and of great Act. 7.
authority with Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians, read the Prophet Esaye,
sitting in his charet, to whom the holy ghost sent Philip, which did both
expound the Scriptures unto him, and also baptized him. So dear are they to
God which delight in the reading of his holy word.

The noblest of birth among them of ^ Acts. 17.
Thessalonia, which received the word with all diligence of minds, searched
the Scriptures daily, whether those things were even so as Paul and Silas
preached.

Apollos was an eloquent man and mighty Act. 18.
in the scriptures, He was informed in the way of the lord, and he spoke
fervently in the spirit, and taught diligently the things of the Lord, and
yet knew he but the baptism and doctrine of John only, whom when Aquila and
Priscilla his wife being lay persons, had herd, they took him unto them, and
expounded unto him the way of God more perfectlye, in so much that afterward he
mightily overcame the Jews and that openly, showing by the scriptures that
Jesus was Christ.

Philip the Euaungelist and preacher of the gospel, had four daughters
excellently Act. 21.
learned in the holy scriptures.

Timothe was brought up in the holy 2. Tim. 3
scriptures from his young age.

Against strange religion or new found worshipping of God.
IF thou be moved unto strange religion or new found worshipping of God,
either by Satan, by the pope, or by any subtue hipocrite, look that thou by no
means do lean unto their wicked motions, but rather valiauntly withstand
the^, with these sentences and examples of the holy scripture.

Sentences out of the old Testament
Hear Israel, your Lord God is one God. Thou shall love thy Lord god Deuteronomy. 1^
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. Thou shall
fear thy Lord God, and serve him alone.

And now Israel, what does the Lord Deuteronomy. 6
thy God require of thee, but that thou fear the Lord thy God, and walk in
his ways, and love him, and serve the Lord thy Godwith all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and keep the commandments of the Lord.

Do that which is pleasant in y^ sight Deuteronomy. 13
of the Lord thy God. Sacrifice to the Lord the sacrifyce of righteousness,
and trust in him.

I will not reprove thee in thy sacrifices, Psalm. 5.
says the^ Lord, for I am full of thy burnt offeringes. Offer to God the
sacrifice of praise, and pay to the most highest thy vows. Call on me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall honor me.

Hear O my people, I will give thee Psalm. 81.
a charge O Israel: If thou will hear me, there shall be no strange nor new
found God in thee, neither shall thou worship any foraine God. For I am the
Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. To do mercy and
judgment pleases the Lord more than sacrifice.

A sacrifice well pleasing to the Lord isto attend to his commandments, and
to depart from all iniquities and unrighteousness.

What shall I do with all these your sacrifices, Esaias. 1.
says the Lord: I am full of them. The burnte offeringes of Weathers and
fatlynges, the blood of Calves, Lambs, and Goats, I will none of them. When
ye come before my sight, who required these things at your hands, that ye
should walk in my courts? Bring me no more sacrifice on this manner in vain:
Your sensing is abomination unto me. The feasts of the new Moon, and the
Sabbothes, and other holy days I can not abide. Your congregations are wicked:
Your Kalendes and your solemn feasts, my soul hates. I am even werye of
them. It greueth me to the heart for to suffer them. When ye shall pray many
prayers: I will not hear you. For your hands are full of blood. Be ye
washed and clean. Take away your evil thoughts from mine eyes. Cease to do
evil, learn to do well. Seek judgment, help the poor oppressed: be
favorable to the fatherless, defend y^ widow, and then come and prove me,
says the lord. If your sins be as red as scarlet, yet shall they be made
as white as snow. And if they be made like purpell, yet shall they be made as
white as wolle. If that ye will be contented and hear me, ye shall eat the
good fruits of y^ earth. If that ye will not, but provoke me to anger, the
sword shall devour you, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Put your burnt offerings to your sacrifices and eat the flesh. For when I
brought your Fathers out of the land of Egypt, I spoke not one word unto them
of burnte offeringes and sacrifyces, but this I commanded them, saying: hear
my voice, and I shall be your God, and ye shall be my people. See ye walk in
all the ways that I have commanded you, that ye may prosper.

I hate and utterly defy your holy days, and where as ye sense me when ye
come together, I will not accept it. And though ye offer me burnt offeringes,
yet will not I receive your gifts. Away from me with the noise of thy songs,
for I can not abide the hearing of thy playeng at the Organs. Provide that
equity may follow as the water, and righteousness as a mighty stream, for
in these things have I delight and pleasure says the Lord.

I will mercy and no sacrifice, says the Ose. 6.
Lord, and the knowledge of God do I set more by, then burnt offeringes.

What shall I offer worthy the Lord? Mich. 6.
Shall I bow my knee to y^ hie god? Shall I offer unto him burnt sacrifices
and calves of a year old? May the Lord be pleased with a thousand fat
Weathers? Or with many thousands of lusty Goats? Shall I give my first
begotten for my wickedness? Even the fruit of my womb for the sin of my
soul? I will show the^ (Oman) what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee: verily to do judgment, to love mercy, and carefully to walk with thy
God.

How long will ye halte on both parts. 3. Reg. 18.
If the Lord be God, follow him. If Baall be God, follow him.

Examples out of the old Testament.
NAdab and Abihu of a good intent offered incense to the Lord with strange
Leuit. 10*
fire, yet for all their good zeal, they were consumed with fire, so that they
dyed before the Lord.

King Saul thought that he had done 1. Reg. 13.
great worship unto God, when in the absence of Samuel he offered burnt
offeringes, but Samuel said unto him: thou have done folishly, neither have
kept the commandments of the Lord thy God, which I commanded thee.

Saul also of a good zeal contrary 2. Reg. 15.
to the commandment of God, spared Agag the king of Ameleche alive, with the
best and fattest flocks of sheep, oxen, ^c: Pretending, that he reserved them
for to offer unto the Lord. But Samuel said unto him: for as much as thou
have cast away the word of the Lord, the Lord has cast away thee: that thou
be no more king. Wills the Lord burnt offringes and sacrifices, and not
rather that it may be obeyed unto his word? Obedience is better then
sacrifices: and to give ear to the lords commandment, is more then to offer
the fat of Weathers.

Oza thought y^ he had done God high ^. Reg. 6.
service, when he stayed the Ark of God in the waine, being in ieoperdie of
falling: but yet was y^ Lord angry with him, because he touched it contrary to
his word, in so much that he was stricken and suddenly dyed.

King Ozias took upon him to burn incense 2. Par. 26.
unto the Lord, thinking that by this means he should highlye please God, but
for all his pretensed holiness he was strike^ with leaprosie: and so being cast
out of the house of the Lord, he continued a leper even unto his death.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
THese people draw nighe unto me with Math. 15
their mouths, and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far
from me. Behold, they worship me in vain, teaching doctrines, even the
commandments of men.

Woe be unto you ye Scribes and Pharisees, Ma. 23.
yea very ipocrites: which devour widows houses under the pretense of long
prayer, ye shall therefore receive the more grievous dampnation.

God has delivered us from the hand of Luke 1.
our enemies, that we should serve him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life.

The hour comes and now it is, when John. 4.
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the father
seeks such, that should worship him.

God is a spirit, and they y^ worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth.

The time shall come, that whosoever kills you, shall think that they do
unto Ioh. 16.
God an hie good service.

God is my witness whom I serve in Romans 1*
my spirit.

Be ye fulfilled with the spirit, speaking Ephe. 5
with your selves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and making
melody to the Lord in your hearts, giving thanks always for all things unto
God in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Unto god king everlasting, immortal, ^. Tim. 1.
invisible and wise only, be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Examples out of the new Testament.
OUr Savior Christ when he lived in this world, did all things according
John. 5.
to his heavenly fathers commandments as he him self says, as my father
has given me commandment, so do I: this did he to give us example, that in
matters of religion we should attempt nothing as due service unto god, but
that only which we have learned out of his holy word.

The apostles of Christ both taught and wroughte that only, which they
had received of their Lord and master Jesus Christ.

Of these aforesaid Scriptures and histories, may thou learn that God is
not worshipped as carnal reason and fleshly wisdom imagines and prescribes,
but as god by his holy word bids, appoints, and commands. A Christen
man ought to follow Christ's steps and to walk, as he has walked.

Against men's traditions and unwritten verities.
IF Satan or any of his impes unto the derogation of Gods glory. shall at any
time tempt thee with man's tradicions or unwritten veryties, for to give no les
credit unto them, than unto the word of God: avoid him with these scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
YE shall not ad unto the word that I Deuteronomy. 4
speak, nor take ought from it.

Ye shall not turue unto the right hand nor unto the left hand: but by the way
that the Lord your god has commanded you ye shall walk: that ye may live and
have good luck.

Keep the commandments of the Deuteronomy. 6
Lord thy god, and the testimonies and ceremonies, which he has commanded
thee: and do that which is pleasant and good in the Lords sight, that thou
may have good luck.

That I co^mau^d thee, do y^ only neither Dan. 12
put to any thing, nor take ought away.

Put nothing to his words, least thou Pro. 20.
be reproved and found a lier.

Woe be unto them that call evil good, and good evil: which make darkness
light, and light darkness: that make sower sweet and sweet sower.

Woe be to them that are wise in their Esaias. 5
own sight, and think them selves to have understanding.

Woe be unto you that make unrighteous Esaias. 10.
laws, and devise things which be to hard to be kept: through which the
poor are oppressed on every side: and the innocents of my people are
therewith robbed of judgment.

Woe be to those shri^ki^g children says y^ lord Esaias. 30.
which seek counsel but not at me: which take a web in hand, but not after my
will y^ they may heap one sin upon an other.

Thus says the Lord, my thoughts Esaias. 55
are not your thoughts, and your ways are not my ways: but as far as the
heavens are higher then the earth, so far do my ways exceade youres, and my
thoughts your thoughts.

Your lips speak leasinges: and your tongue sets out wickedness.

No man regards righteousness, and Esaias. 59.
no man judges truly.

Every man hops in vain things: and imagines disceite, conceiueth
wickedness, and brings forth evil.

They breed Cockatrices eggs, and weaue the spiders web: Whosoever e^eth of
their eggs dies, but if one tread upon them, their comes up a serpent. Their
web makes no cloth, and they may not cover them with their labors. Their
deeds are the deeds of wickedness, and the work of robbery is in their
hands: their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent
blood. Their councels are wicked councels, hate and destruction is in their
ways: but y^ way of peace they know not. In their goings is no equity, their
ways are so crooked y^ who so goes therein, knows nothing of peace.

My people have committed two great Ierem. 2
evils. They have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and dug them
pits, pits I say that are broken, and can hold no water.

Take b^de says the Lord ye trust in Iere. 7
co^sels that begile you and do you no good.

Hear not the words of the Prophets, Iere. 23.
that preach their own dreams.

Hear O ye house of Israel, says the Eze. 18
lord. Is not my way right, or are not your ways rather wicked?

The children of thy people, say, tushe Eze, 33
the way of the Lord is not right, where as their way is rather unright.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Jeroboam king of Israel, contrary to Reg. 12
gods word, made two calves of gold and set them up to be worshipped of people
as their gods, but both he and his posterity were grievously punished for it.

How grievously god punished al such as brought in strange worshippings of god,
or any matters concerning Idolatrye or ought else contrary to y^ word of God,
although y^ authors of the^ made the simple people to believe y^ they were
verities, although vnwritte^ as the Papists do now adays, y^ holy scriptures
in diverse places do evidently show, namely in the books of the kings and of
the chronicles.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Except your righteousness does excede Math. 5
the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye can not enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

Beware of false Prophets which come Math. 7
unto you in sheep clothing, and inward ly are ravening wolves.

Why do ye transgress the commaunden^ent Math. 15
of God for your tradicions.

Every plant y^ my heavenly father has Mat. 15
not planted, shall be plucked up by ye rotes.

This is my well-beloved Son, in Math. 17
whom I am well pleased, hear ye him,

Teach them to keep all things that Mat. 28.
I have commanded you.

Ye leave the commandment of god, Mar. 7.
and maintain your own constitutions. Well, ye do cast aside the
commandment of god, to keep your own tradicions.

If ye abide in my word, ye are my disciples John. 3.
in deed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you fre.

He that is of god, hears the words of God.

My sheep hear my voice and I know John. 10
them and they follow me: neither shall they at any time pearishe, nor yet
shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

He that has my commandments Ioh. 14.
and keeps them, he it is that loves me: If any man loves me, he will keep
my words.

If ye keep my commandments, John. 15.
ye shall abide in my law.

Ye are my friends, if ye do those things that I command you.

Every one that is of the truth, hears John. 19.
my voice.

I dare not speak of any of these things Romans 15.
that Christ has not wrought by me.

I beseech you brethern, mark them that make division and give occasions of
evil, contrary to the doctrine y^ ye have learned, and avoid them. For they
that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies: and with
sweet preachi^gs and flattering words, deceive the hearts of the simple.

Though we our selves or an Angel from Romans 15
Heaven, preach any other Gospel to you then that which we have preached unto
you, hold him accursed. As I said before so say I now again, if any man
preach any other thing unto you then that ye have received, hold him accursed.

Though it be but a man's testament Gal. 3.
yet no man despises it or adds any thing thereto, when it is once allowed:
How much more ought nothing to be added to the tes tament of the most high
God, nor yet be taken from it.

Be no more children from he^ceforth, Ephe. 3
wandering and carried with every wind of doctrine, by the wilines of men and
crafts: whereby they lay awaite for us to deceiu^ us, but let us follow the
truth in love, and in all things grow in him which is thy head: that is to
say Christ.

Cast away ungodly and old wives fables, 1 Timothy 4.
exercise thy self unto godliness.

If any man teach otherwise, and is not 1. Tim. 6.
content with the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the
doctrine of godliness: He is pufte up and knows no thing, but wastes his
brains about questions and strife of words, whereof spring envy, strife,
railing, evil surmisinges, and vain disputations of men of corrupt minds
and destitute of the truth, which think that lucre is godlynes: From such
separate thy self.

If any man speak, let him speak as 2. Pet. 4.
though it came of gods own mouth.

Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
god He that endures in the doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the
Son.

If there come any unto you and bring 2. John. 1
not this lerning, him receive not to house neither bid him god speed. For he
that bid death him god speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

Be not carried about with diverse and Hebr. 13
strange learninges.

If any man adds to these things, Apo. 22
god shall add unto him the plages that are written in this book, And if any
man shall minish of the words of this book of this Prophecy, god shall take
away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from
those things which are written in this book.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Christ rebukes the pharisees for bringing Math. 15
their traditions into the church of God, by that means defacyng the glory of
Gods most holy word.

Blessed Saint Paul reproves them Col. 2.
which be dead with Christ, from the commandments of the world, and yet
suffer themselves still to be led with traditions, as these for an example
touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. Which all perish through the very abuse
after the commandments and doctrins of men which things outwardly have the
similytude of wisdom by superstition and humblenes of mind. etc.

Thapostles of Christ would not burden Act. 15.
the christen congregations with new and superfluous tradicions, but only
charged them with such things as were necessary.

Saint Paul in his Epistle unto the Gala. 4.
Galathians inueieth against them, which after they have known god, turn again
unto nedie and beggerlye ceremonies, traditions or ordinances observing dais
months, times and years.

Against the following of ungodly forefathers.
If thou through temptation of the Devil or the ^alse persuasions of
Antichrists Prophets be m^ ^ed at any time to doubt of the truth of gods word
which the papists at this day call seditious doctrine, new learning and
heresy, because thy forefathers have both beloved and done the contrary* call
these scriptures to thy remembrance.

Sentences out of the old Testament:
Follow not the multitude to do evil. Exodus 23.


Do not you these things that they Leu. 18.
have done, which were before you neither be ye defiled in them: I am the Lord
your God keep my commandments.

The Lord sent his prophets to his people, 4. Reg. 17.
saying: return from your unrighteous ways, and keep my precepts and
ceremonies, according to all the law that I commanded your fathers. But they
would not hear, but became stifnecked, even as their forefathers were
stifnecked, which would not obey the Lord God.

Let them put their hope in God, and not Psalm. 69.
forget the works of the Lord but seek after his commandments, Let them not
be like their forefathers, which were a froward and a spiteful nation, a
nation that would never be true hearted, nor bear an upright mind toward God.

Be not hard hearted as your forefathers Psalm. 125.
were, says the Lord which chyde and rebelled against me.

We have sinned with our forefathers we have done unjustly, and committed
iniquity.

Trust not in rulers nor in the sons Psalm. 146.
of men, in whom is no health. For when their breath goes away, they return
un to their earth: In y^ day shall al their thou ^hts, counsels, devises and
imaginations come to naught. I have always said unto your forefathers since I
brought them out of the land of Egypt even unto this day hear my voice, but
they would not hear nor once bow their ear unto it: But every one of them is
gone astray in the fr^ wardnes of his wicked heart, ye the people of Judah and
the men of Jerusalem are also fallen unto the wickedness of their fore fathers
which would not hear my words: Insomuch that they ar already gone away after
strange Gods and serve them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah, have
broken ye covenant which I made with their fathers. Therefore thus says the
lord: Behold I will bring in extreme punishments upon the^, so y^ they shall not
escap from the^.

They shall cry unto me but I will not hear them. The cities of Judah and the
inhabiters of Jerusalem, shall go and cry unto them, to whom they offered
sacrifice: and yet shall they not save the^ in the time of their trouble.
According to the number of thy cities were thy Gods, O Judah, and after the
number of thy ways, O Jerusalem, haste thou set up altars of abomination to
do sacrifice unto Baalim.

Your forefathers have forsaken me, Ierem. 16.
says the Lord, and they are gone away after strange Gods, and have served
the^ and worshipped them: yea, they have utterly given me over, and have not
kept my law. But you have wrought more abomination, than all your forefathers
have done.

For behold, every one of you walk after the lewdness of his own wicked
heart, and will not hear me.

Their forefathers have broken my covenant Eze. 2.
even unto this day, and they to whom I send thee, are children without all
shame, and of such an heart, as can not be reclaimed.

Walk not in the commandments Eze, 20
of your fathers, nor keep not their ordinances: neither pollute your selves
with their idols. For I am the lord your God.

Therefore walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments, and do them.

Confusion of face and utter shame be Dan. 9.
unto us, unto our kings, unto our rulers: and to our forefathers, which have
sinned.

Be not like your forefathers, unto who^ Zach. 1.
the Prophets in times past cried, saying: thus says the Lord of hosts,
turn from your evil ways, and from your abominable thoughts, but they
would not harken nor give any attendaunce unto me, says the Lord.

Our forefathers have sinned, and have 2. Par. 19.
done evil in the sight of the Lord our god. For they have forsaken him, and
turned away their faces from the tabernacles of the Lord our God.

Be not like your forefathers and brethren, 2. Par. 30
which rebelled against the Lord God of their fathers, and he gave them over
into desolation, as ye see your selves. Be not ye hardnecked now as were your
forefathers, but offer your hand unto the Lord, and come to his sanctuary,
which he has sanctified for ever, and serve the Lord your God, so shall the
indignation of his wrath turn away from you.

Examples out of the old Testament.
CAin ^lewe his brother Abel, and followed Genesis 4.
his forefather the devil, which was a mansleyer from the beginning.

Nadab king of Israel followed his forefather 3. Reg. 15
Hieroboam, committing idolatry against the lord his God. Therefore Baasa
destroyed him and his kingdom, and all the house of Hieroboam, so that one of
the stock remained not alive.

Ozochias king of Israel followed his 1. Par. 22.
wicked forefather Achab, and grievously sinned against the lord his God. He
therefore reigned but a little time, and also died a miserable death.

Amon king of Judah, followed his Idolatrous 4. Reg. 21.
forefather Manasses, and did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord
his God. He reigned but two years, and was slain of his servants in his own
house.

Ioakim king of Judah for^oke the godly 4. Reg. 23.
ways of his most virtuous father king Josias, and followed the steps of
his wicked forefathers. The Lord therefore suffered him to reign but three
months in Jerusalem, and gave him over into the hands of his enemies.

Sedechias king of Judah followed his 4. Reg. 25
wicked forefathers, and provoked y^ lord his God unto anger. He therefore was
deprived of his kingdom, saw his children slain before his eyes, and
afterward he having his eyes plucked out of his head, was bound in chains, and
miserably carried away into Babylon.

Sentences out of the ne^ Testament.
All that come before me are thieves and John. 10.
robbers, but my sheep have not heard them.

O ye stifnecked and uncircumcised of Act. 7.
hearts and ears, ye have always resisted the holy ghost* as your forefathers
did, so do ye.

Which of the Prophets have not your Act. 7.
forefathers persecuted.

See that ye pass the time of your pilgrimage 1. Pet. 1*
in fear, for as much as ye know how that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
silver and gold from your vain conversation, which ye received by y^
traditions of the forefathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb undefiled and without spot.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THe Pharisees and the Scribes following Mat. 15.
their ungodly forefathers, observed the traditions of their elders, and
neglected the commandments of God.

The Jews fulfilling the measure of Math. 23.
their forefathers, which slew the Prophets that were sent unto them from
God, killed Christ and his blessed Apostles.

Paul before his conversion following Act. 9.
his wicked forefathers the Jews, persecuted the congregation of Christ, even
as his elders persecuted Christ and the Prophets.

Against the wicked old customs and long vsages.
IF Satan or any of his members labor to pluck thee from gods word unto
wicked old customs and long vsages, avoid him with these scriptures
following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
ACcording to the custom of the land Leu. 18. 3.
of Egypt wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the manner of the land of
Canaan, whether I will bring you shall ye not do, neither walk in their
ordinances, but do after my judgments, and keep my ceremonies to walk
therein. I am the lord your God. Ye shall keep therefore mine ordinances and my
judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them. I am the lord.

Take heed that ye commit not one of Leu. 18. 30
these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and look that ye
defyle not your self therein. I am the Lord your God.

An example out of the old Testament.
Even unto this present day do they still 2. Reg. 17
follow their old customs.

They fear not the Lord, neither keep they his ceremonies, his laws and
commandments. The Prophets cried, worship no strange Gods, but fear the
Lord your God, and he shall deliver you from the power of all your enemies. But
they would not hear, but still committed wickedness according to their old
custom. They pretended as though they served the Lord and yet nevertheless
did they also service to their idols.

For as their forefathers did, so do their sons, and neuewes unto this
present day*

Against such as sclaunder Christ's Gospel, by calling it new learning.
IF the aduersarye of true godliness go about to persuade thee, that Christ's
gospel is new learning, and that therefore thou ought to geu^ no care unto
it, nor believe it: look that thou by n^ means consent unto them, but rather
remember that this is no new blasphemy, but used many years before of
wicked hipocrites, as thou shalt perceive by these examples following.

Examples out of the new Testament.
WHen Christ preached in the Sinagoge Mar. 1.
at Capernaum, and healed the man that was possessed with an unclean spirit,
the people cried out and said: what new learning is this.

When Paul preached at Athens the Acts. ^7.
resurrection of the dead, certain bellye gods as the Epicures and Stoikes,
straue with him and said: what means this pratler? Other said, he seemed to be
a preacher of new devils. An other company said, may we not know what new
learning this is, that thou show? Thou bring in new things in deed unto
our ears. Our old fathers never taught us any such gear. We will know what
these things mean.

Against pensiveness and thought taking for the life.
IF thou be troubled for the preseruacion of thy life either in sickness,
trouble, persecution, emprisonment, or otherwise, comfort thy self with these
scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THe Lord kills and gives life again. 1. Reg. 2.
He brings even to hell, and back again.

The Lord is my light and my health whom then should I fear? The Lord is
Psalm. 27.
the strength of my life, of whom then should I be afraid: though an host of
men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid. And though there
arose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him.

He has given his Aungells charge of Psalm. 91.
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.

The Angel of the Lord shall be sent Psalm. 34.
among all them that fear him, and shall deliver them.

The sourges of the sea are marvelous, Psalm. 93.
yea the lord on high is rather marvelous.

They consented all against me, they co^spired Psalm. 31.
to take away my life, but in thee (O Lord) have I trusted, and I said, thou
art my God, In thy hand are my destenies.

Many tribulations fall on y^ righteous, Psalm. 34.
but from them all, the lord delivers the^. The Lord keeps all their bones,
so that not one of them shall be broken.

The health of the righteous is of the Psalm. 37.
Lord, and he defends them in the time of their trouble. Yea the lord will
help them and deliver them, and set the^ harmeles from the ungodly: and save
them because they have trusted in them.

Thou haste limited the waters these Psalm. 104.
bounds: which they may not pass.

The Lord is my helper, I will not fear Psalm. 118.
what man do unto me. The Lord is my deliverer, therefore will I set naught by
mine enemies.

The Lord has given a commandment: Psalm. 148.
and none shall go beyond it, Fire, Hayle, Snow, Ise, and vapors, stormy
winds accomplish his word.

Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh Eccle. 5
for to sin, neither say thou before the Angel, there is no providence:
least peradventure the Lord being angry against thy words do destroy all the
works of thy hands.

Life and death are of God. Eccle. (...)


Thy providence (O father) governs Sap. 14
all things from the beginning.

Thou (O Lord) art he which have power of life and death. Who can say that any
thing can be done without the Lords commandment? From the mouth of the
highest, goes there not good and ill?

Examples out of the old Testament.
ESau burned with an immortal hatred Genesis 27. 32. 33.
against his brother Jacob: because of the blessing wherewith his father had
blessed him: and purposed fully in his heart to kill his brother. But Jacob
prayed unto the Lord, and he mollifyed Esaus heart, in so much, that when Jacob
thought that both he and his should be slain, his brother Esau came gently
unto him, louinglye embraced him, kissed him friendly, and for very joy wept:
so mighty is God to mollify tira^ntes hearts, when it pleases him, and to
make them gracious and favorable to his servants.

Saul persecuted David cruelly, purposing 1. Reg. 1^.
to kill him, but his labor was in vain.

Iezabel threatened and swear to sley Helias, 3. Reg. 19.
but the Lord preserved him.

Satan could do nothing to Job, till Job. 2.
God suffered him: neither exercised he his cruelnes any further against Job,
than he was appointed of God.

The godly woman Susan through the Dan. 8.
false accusations of ye two wicked judges was at y^ point to be stoned unto
death, but God wonderfully delivered her from the hands of her enemies.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Fear not them which kill the body, Mat. 10.
and be not able to kill the soul. But rather fear him, which is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparowes sold for a
farthing? And none of them fall on the ground without the will of your father.
Yea all the hayres of your head are numbered. Fear not therefore, ye are of more
value than many sparowes.

Ye be come out as unto a thief with Math. 26.
swords and staves. When I was daily with you in the temple, ye laid no hand
upon me, but this is your hour and the power of darkness.

Thou could have no power at all against John. (...).
me (said Christ unto Pilate) except it were given thee from above.

All things are of him, by him and Math. 12.
in him.

If we live, we live to be at the Lords Romans 14
will. And if we die, we die at the Lords will. Whether we live therefore or
die, we are in the Lords hand.

Behold, I am alive says Christ, for Apoc. 1.
evermore: and have the keys of death and hell.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Mat. 8.
THe ship, wherein Christ and his Disciples were, was greuouslye tossed with the
waves of the sea, through y^ wind and the tempest that arose, in so much that
it was at the point of drowning. Notwithstanding, neither water, wind, nor
tempest, did once hurt it. Math. 8


The devils had no power to enter into swine till Christ gave them leave. If
thou cast us forth, said they, suffer us to enter into the herd of swine.
Christ answered, John. 7.
go ye, and they went.

The Jews did seek to kill Christ, but his time was not then come. No man did
set his hands on him because his hour was not yet come.

They went about to take Christ, but John. 10.
he escaped from the midst of their hands.

There came certain of ye Pharisees and Luke. 13.
said unto Christ, get thee out of the way, and depart bence. For Herod will
kill thee. And he said unto the^, go and tell that Fore: behold I cast out
devils, and heal y^ people to day and to morrow, and the iii. day I make an
end. Nevertheless, I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day following: for
it can not be that a prophet perish any other where then at Jerusalem.

Herod threw Peter in prison, bound Acts. 12.
him fast with chains: and set certain soldiers for the more assurance to
keep him, purposing after Easter to bring him forth unto the people, and so to
have slain him. But God being mightier then all the tirannie and power of the
world sent his Angel, and delivered Peter out of prison.

Paul being at Milete gathered a Act. 28.
bundel of sticks, and put them in the fire, and suddenly there came a
venomous adder, otherwise called a Uiper, out of the heat, and lepte on his
hand. The men

The men that were present and saw this thing waited when he should have
swollen or fallen down dead sodynly.

But Paul shoke of the vermin into the fire and felt no harm.

Against hunger, poverty, or carefulnes of living.
IF at any time thou be tempted with the carefulnes of living, comfort thy
self with these holy scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THey that fear the Lord, shall have no scarceness. They which seek the Lord
Psalm. 33*
shall want no good thing.

Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, and upon them that
Psalm. 34
trust in his mercy, y^ he may deliver their lives from death and norishe
them in the time of honger.

I have been young and am waxe^ old, and I have not seen the righteous
forsaken, Psalm. 37*
nor his children begging their bread on the earth.

Lay thy care on the Lord, and he shall norishe thee. Psalm. 55


All creatures depend upon thee (O Lord) that thou should give them meat
Psalm. 10^
in due time. For thou giving it them, they take it, and thou opening thy
hand, they are well satisfied.

But thou hidinge thy face they are sorrowful, and thou taking away their
breath, they are but dead, and turned into y^ earth that they came of.

The eyes of all things look upon thee, Psalm. 165
(O Lord) and thou geuest them meat in due time. Thou openest thy hand, and
replenishest all things living with thy bles singe.

The Lord gives meat to the hungry. Psalm. 166.


The blessing of the Lord makes men Pro. 10.
rich: and there shall no grief accompany them.

The Lord will not let the soul of the righteous suffer hunger, but he puts
the ungodly from his desire.

He that tilleth his land shall have ple^ Pro. 12
teousnes of bread, but he that follows idleness, is a very fool.

Good and evil, life and death, poverty Eccle. 11.
and riches are of God. Trust in god, abide in thy place. For it is an easy
thing in the sight of God, quickly to enrich a pore man.

Fear not my son, we lead a pore Tob* 4
life, notwithstanding we shall have plenty of all good things, if we fear the
Lord depart from all sin, and do well.

Examples out of the old Testament.
GOd fed the people of Israel with meat Exodus 16*
from heaven, and gave them drink out of the rock.

God sent meat by the Ravens to Helias. 3. Reg. 17.


The Angel of god took Abacuk by Dan. 14
the top, and bare him by the hear of the head, and through a mighty wind set
him upon the den where Daniel was prisoner: and gave him that meat, which the
Prophet had prepared for his reapers,

Sentences out of the new Testament.
MAn shall not live with bread alone, Math. 4
but, with every word that co^ meth out of the mouth of god.

Take no thought, saying what shall Math. 6
we eat? or what shall we dri^k? or wherewith shall we be clothed, after these
things seek y^ heathen. For your heavenly father know eth y^ ye have need of
all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of god, and the righ teousnesse
thereof: and all these things shall be cast unto you.

God gives us abundantly all things to enjoy them. 1. Tim. ^*


I will not fail thee, nor yet forsake thee. Hebr. 13


Examples out of the new Testament.
Christ at the marriage, turned water in John. 2
to wine.

Christ with five barlye loves and two Math. 10
fisshes, fed five thousand people and yet remained. xii. baskets full of
fragmentes.

Against keeping of evil company.
When the Devil, the Flesh or the world move thee to resort unto any evil
company, defend the self from it with remembering these scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
HE shall dwell in the Lords tabernacle Psalm. 15.
and rest upon his ^oly hill which sets not by the ungodly, but makes much
of them that fear the Lord.

With the holy shall thou be holy, and Psalm. 19.
with the innocent thou shall be innocent. With the clean thou shall be
clean, and with the froward, thou shall be froward.

A froward heart, shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person.

Who so has a proud look and an high sto Psalm. 101
make, I may not away with him. Mine eyes shall look for such as be faithful
in the land, that they may dwell with me, and who so leads a godly life,
shall be my servant. There shall no deceitful person dwell in my house.

He that tells lies shall not tarry in Psalm. 119
my sight,

I hate the ungodly, but thy law O Lord do I love.

My Son, if sinners entice thee unto Pro. 1.
wickedness, lean not unto them.

If they say, come go with us, let us lay awaite for blood, and convey our
selves privily to trap the innocent. Let us swalow them up quickly like hell,
and devour the perfect like a whirle pit. For thus shall we find great riches,
and garnishe our houses with oil. Cast in thy foot among us, and let us make
a common purse.

My son, walk not with them, but refrain thy feet from their ways, for
their feet run unto mischief. In vain are nets spread abroad for birds
before their eyes. For even these men lay awaite among them selves one to shed
another blood.

Neither are their own lives in sauegard among the^ selves. These are y^
paths of covetous men among whom one spares not the life of another.

Come not in the path of the ungodly Pro. 4
and walk not in the way of the wicked. Eschew it, and go not therein, depart
aside, and pass over by it. For they cannot sleep except they have first done
some mischief. For they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of
robbery. The path of the righteous shines as the light, and is ever brighter
and brighter unto the perfect day. But the way of the ungodly is as y^ darkness
wherein men fall or they be aware.

Who so accompanies the wise, shall Pro. 13
have wisdom, but he that is a companion of foles, shall prove like them.

Trauail not by the way with him that Eccle. 6
is brainles, least he do thee evil.

For he follows his own wilfulnes and so shall thou pearish through his folly.

Strive not with him that is angrye and cruel, go not with hi^ into the
wilderness, for blood is nothing in his sight, and where there is no help, he
shall murder thee.

Look not upon a woman that is desirous of many men, least thou fall into her
Eccle. 9
snares.

Use not the company of a woman that is a player and a daunser, and hear her
not least, thou perish through her entising

Behold not a maiden, that thou be not hurt in her beauty. Eccle. 1^


Bring not every man into thine house for the disceitfull lays wait diversely.
Eccle. 1^


Who will have pity on the charmer that is stinged of the serpent, or of all
such as come nie the beasts? Even so is it with him that keeps company with
a wicked man, and lappeth him self in his sins. Eccle. 13


He that touches pitche shall be defiled of it, and he that keeps company with
a proud person, shall also become proud and stately.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Ge. 11. 12
ABraham because he would not be partaker of their Idolatry, fled from the*
people of Chaldea, being his native country. Ge. 19


Lot at the commandment of the An gels, departed out of Sodom, least he tari
yng with y^ Sodomites, should have been consumed with them. Ge. 12


Sara would not suffer Ismael which was given to mocking, to keep company with
her Son Isaac, least he also should become a mocker. Ge. 33


Jacob would not keep company with his Brother Esau, although greatly
entreated least some wickedness should thereof have happened.

Moses at Gods appointment commanded Number. 16.
the people to depart from the dwellinge places of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron,
least they also be wrapped in their sins and so pearishe among them.

Iosaphat king of Judah, was almost slain 3. Reg. 22.
in the bartail, because he kept company and went unto the wars we wicked king
Achab.

After his return also he was greatly ^. Par. 19
rebuked of Iehu, for so doing.

When all the people went to worship Tob. 1.
the Golden calves which Jeroboam had made: Tobias only fled away from the
company of them all and went to Jerusalem unto the Lords temple, and there
worshipped the Lord God of Israel.

So long as Judas Machabeus did put Mac. 89
his trust in the Lord, all things prospered well with him: but when he began
to join friendship and to keep company with the hea the^ and the Romans,
shortly after he was overcome and slain in battle.

The like thing chanced to Ionathas. Mac. 12.


Sentences out of the new Testament.
GO not into the ways that lead unto ^ath. 10
the hethen, and into the Cities of the Samaritans, enter ye not.

I beseech you brethern, mark them Romans 16
which cause division and give occasions of evil, contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them.

Do ye not know that a little leue^ sow ^. Cor. 5
reth the whole lump of dow. Purge therefore the old leaven, that ye may be
new dow ^s ye are sweet bread.

I wrote unto you that ye should not keep company with whoremongers

If any that is called a brother that is to say (a Christen man) be a
whoremonger, or a couetouse person, or a worshipper of images, either a rayler,
or a dronkarde, or an extorcioner: with him that is such se ye neither eat,
nor yet keep company.

Put away from among you that evil person.

We require you brethern in the name 2. These. 3
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother
that walks inordinatlye, and not after the institution which ye received of
us.

If any teach otherwise, and is not content 1. Tim. 6
with the wholesome words of our lord Jesus Christ, and with y^ doctrine of
godliness, he is puffed up, and knows nothing, but wastes his brains about
questions and strife of words, where of spring envy, strife railings, evil
surmisinges, and vain disputations of men with corrupt minds, and destitute
of the truth, which think that lucre is Godliness: From such separate thy
self.

A man that is given to heresy, after the Titus. 3
first and second admonicion avoid. Remembering that he that is such, is
perverted and sins, even dampened by his own judgment.

If there come any unto you, and bring ^. John. 1
not this learning, hi^ receive notto house, neither bid him GOD speed. For he
that byddeth him god speed is, partaker of his ill deeds.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Luke. 22
Peter so long as he kept company with Christ and Christ's disciples, he
concinued in the truth, preached the truth, confessed openly Christ to be the
son of the living god: and promised that he would not only go into prison,
but also unto the very death with Christ, but when he once came into the
court into the Bishops house, he straight ways was stricken with such
fear, that a poor maid and a simple Simme Shakebuckler, made him both to
deny and also to forswear Jesus Christ his Lord and master: whom before he
had boldly so often confessed before the world. Saint Peter preaching to the
believing and repentaunt Jews among other his godly exhortations, commanded
them, to save themselves from the untoward generation of the unfaithful, and
to flee the company of such as deny Jesus to be Christ and the son of the
living God. Act. 7. 8. ^


Saul keeping compani with the unfaith full Jews as with the bishops, the
priests the pharisees, etc. became a grievous persecutour of the christen
congregation, but being delivered from their fellowship he be came a worthy
Apostle, and a fervent prea cher of gods truth.

Against Idleness.
IF Satan move the unto idelnes, which is the well spring and rote of al vice,
^et before the eyes of thy mind both these sentences and examples of the holy
scripture.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
The Lord took Adam, and put him into Ge. 2.
the garden of Eden, that he might dress and keep it.

In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat Gene. 3
thy bread, until thou teturnest into the earth, from whence thou wast taken.
For dust thou art and into duste thou shall be turned again.

A man is borne to labor, and a bird Job. 5.
to fly.

Thou shall eat the labor of thy hand. Psalm. 128


Go to the Emmet (thou fluggarde) consider Pro. 6
her ways, and learn to be wise. She has no guide nor ouersear, nor ruler:
yet in the summer she provides her meat, and gathers her food together in
the harvest. How long will thou slep thou sluggish man? When will thou arise
out of thy sleep? Yea sleep on still a little, slum ber a little, fold thine
hands together yet a little that thou may sleep: ^o shall poverty come unto,
the as one that traualeth by the way, and oppress thee like a thief.

If thou be not stouthful thy harvest shall come as a springinge well, and
pouertye shall fly far from thee.

Who so gathers in summer is wise, Pro. 10
but he that is sluggishe in harvest, brings himself to confusion.

The sluggard would ^aine have, and ca^ Pro. 13.
not get his desire, but the soul of the^ that work shall have plentye. Pro.
2^


A ^outhfull body will not go to plowe for cold in Winter, therefore shall he go
a begging in summer, and have nothing.

Delight not in sleep, least thou come un to poverty, but open thine eyes, that
thou may have bread enough. Pro. 2^


He that tilleth his land shall have ple^teousnesse of bread, but he that
follows idleness, shall have pouertye enough.

Idlensse has been the occasion of much Eccle. 33
evil and wickedness.

Behold the sins of Sodom were these Ezech. 1^
pride, fullness of meat, abundance, and idleness.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Adam gate his living with the labor of Ge. 2. 3
his hands, and the sweat of his brows.

Caine was a plowman and tilled the Ge. 4
earth.

Abel was a shepeheard and kept sheep.

Iubal was a Musicion and exercised Musycke.

Thubal Cayne was a Smithe, and a grauer in metal.

Nohe was a Planter of Uineyardes. Genesis 9


Abraham, Lot, Isaac, and Jacob, were Ge. 13. 2^
Plowmen and shepeheardes.

Joseph was a magistrate and a public Ge. 14
minister in the common weal of Egypt under king Pharao.

Moses was a shepehard and kept the Exo. 3
sheep of Iethro his Father in law, Priest of Madian.

The Children of Israel got their living with hard and painful labor in
Egypt Exodus 1
under king Pharao.

David before he was anointed king of Israel, was a shepeheard.

All the preistes and levites of the old Exodus 28
law, every man according to his vocation labored by giving attendaunce in the
te^ ple, by killing of beasts and offering of sacrifices, by studiyng the
scriptures of god and teaching the same unto the people.

Amos the Prophet was one of ye shep ^mos. 1
heardes of Thecua.

Abacuk the Prophet travailed in husbandry. ^an. 14


Sentences out of the old Testament.
LEt us not be weary of well doing. For ^al. 6
when the time is come, we shall reap without werines.

Let him that stole, steal no more: but ^he. 4
let him rather labor with his hands the thing which is good, that he may
give to him that needs.

We beseech you brethern that ye study. 1. These. 4
to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business, and to work with your own
hands, as we commanded you.

When we were with you, we gave you 2. These. 3
this commandment, that if any man will not labor, the same should not eat.
Let*all men work with quietness and eat their own bread.

Examples out of the new Testament.
CHrist was a carpenter. Math. 6


The Apostles of Christ were fisher Math. 4
men. Act. 20


Paul labored with his own hands, and get both his own living and others
that were with him.

Saint Luke was a Physician, and as Col. 4
some write a painter also.

Aquila was a maker of tents, of the Act. 18
which occupation saint Paul was.

Simon S. Peter's host was a tanner. Act. 10


Dorcas that virtuous woman made Act. 9
garments with her own hands and gave them to the poor people

YE have heard how it was said to them Math. 5
of ye old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto
the Lord those things that thou swearest. But I say unto you swear not at
all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods seat: nor by the earth for it is his
footestole, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King:
neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou canste not make one hair
white or black. But your communication shall be yea, yea, nay, nay. For
whatsoever is added more then these, it comes of evil.

Above all things my brethren swear Jacob. 5
not, neither by heaven, neither by earth, nether any other oath. Let your yea,
be yea and your nay, nay, least ye fall into hipocrisy.

Examples out of the new Testament.
HErod to perform his wicked and diuelishe Math. 14
oath which he had made to the daughter of* Herodias his whore for her
pleasant daunsinge, suffered and commanded the head of that most godly
preacher saint John Baptist, to be cut of. Let all men therefore beware of vayn,
rash and wicked oaths.

Saint Peter, when it was laid to his Math. 2^
chardge, that he was one of Christ's disciples* swear that he knew not the
man. But afterward he bitterly wept for his swearing and denying of Christ.
Let us also lament and be sorry sor our idle and wicked manner of swering and
lean it, and praise the name of the Lord our God.

Against lying. slaunderinge and fylthy or unclean talk
IF Satan at any time moves thee to abuse thy tongue contrary to the will of
God, either in lying slaundering, or other wicked and idle words resist his
temptacion ^ these scriptures following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THou shalt eschew lyinge. Exodus 23


Ye shall not lie, neither shall any Leuit. 19
of you deceive his neighbor.

Thou (O Lord) shall destroy all them Psalm. 6.
that speak lies.

There be six things that God hates, Pro. 6
and the seventh he utterly abhors. A proud countenance, a lying tongue,
hands defiled with innocent blood, an heart imagining wicked councels, feet
swifte unto mischief, a false witness, the sower of discord among brethren.

Liyng lips are abhominatio^ to the lord: Pro. 2
but they that do faithfully, please him.

A false witness shall not escape unpunished, ^ro. 19
and he that speaks lies, shall pea rish and come to naught.

He that gathers his goods with a ly ^ro. 14
ing tongue shall leese all, and be in peril of his life. He that keeps his
tongue, keeps his life from troubles.

A lying witness shall perish, have thou ^ccle. 7
no delight to speak lies against thy brother, nor yet against thy friend: have
no pleasure in lying, for the use thereof is naught.

The mouth that lies sleyeth, the soul. ^ap. 1.


Examples out of the old Testament.
Satan brought forth the first lie, when Gene. 3.
he made our grandmother Eve believe that if she and her husband did eat of the
forbidden fruit, they should be as Gods. Therefore, is he a liar and the
Father of lying. ^an. 3.


The two judges which accused the most virtuous woman Susanna of uncleanness,
because she would not agree to their most filthy and dishonest request: were
most abominable liars and slaunderers, but they received a reward worthy
their lying.

All the false prophets of ye old law which ^ained them selves to be sent of
God, and yet prophesied lies to please the Princes and rulers withal, were
liars and blasphemers of God.

Sentences out of the new Testament:
LYing set aside, let every man speak the Ephe. 4
truth to his neighbor for as much as we are members together.

Lie not one to another. Col. 3.


Let no filthy communication proceade Ephe. 4*
out of your mouths, but y^ which is good to edify. Let all bitterness,
fearcenes, and wrath, roaring and cursed speaking be put away from you, with all
maliciousnes. Be courteous one to another and merciful, for geui^g one an other
eue^, as god for christ's sake forgave you.

Let neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, Ephe. 5
neither jesting, which are not comely, be once named among you, but rather
thankesgeuing.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THe Scribes and the Phariseis with ye Math. 1^
other enemies of Christ which called Christ a wine bibber, a glotton, a
deceiuer of ye people, a blasphemer, one possessed we a devil, such one as
forbade the people to pay tribute unto Caesar. etc, were most ab hominable
liers and blasphemers.

Ananias and Saphira died suddenly, because Act. 5.
they lied.

They were liers and blasphemers, which Act. 6.
said that the blessed Martyr saint Stephen, spoke blasphemous words against
Moses and against God: when of God, no man spoke more godly, nor of Moses
more reuerentlye.

They also that complained of the Aposties Acts. 17.
of Christ, calling them sedicious persons and teachers of new learning, were
also liers and slaunderers.

So many as make or love lies, shall be cast ^po. 22
among murderers and Idolatrers in the lake of hell, burning with fire and
brimstone

Against pride or vain glory.
IF thou be tempted unto pride or vain glory of the devil that old enemy of
mankind: defend thy self with these scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Thou shall save (O Lord) the people Psalm. 18.
that are humble, meke and lowlye: but the high look of the proud thou shall
bring down.

The Lord will save such as be of an Psalm. 33.
humble spirit.

The Lord hates a proud countenance

Disoain pride* a wicked way, and a mouth Pro. 8
that is double tonged, I utterly abhor, says the Lord.

The Lord abhors all such as be of a Pro. 16
proud heart, his hand, is against their hand, and they shall not escape
unpunished.

Better it is to be of humble mind with the lowly, then to divide the spoil
with the proud.

Presumptuousnes goes before destruc tion, and after a proud stomach there
fol loweth a fall.

Why art thou proud, thou earth and Eccle. 10 ^
ashes? Pride is hated before God and man Pride is the beginning of all sin,
and ^e that maynteined that shall be cursed, and at the last he utterly
destroyed.

God has destroyed the seats of proud Princes, and set up meek in their
stead.

Woe be unto you that are wise in your Esaias. 5
own eyes.

I hate the pride of Jacob, and I abhore Amos. ^
his palaces, ^ayth the Lord.

Let never pride have rule in thy mind Tob. 4
nor in thy word: for in pride began all destruction*

Examples out of the old Testament
LUcifer for his pride fell down from the Esaias. 14.
glory of heaven into the pains of hell.

Pharao for his pride was plagued, and Exo. 14
at last drowned.

Sennacherib for all his boasting, pride, ^Reg. 19.
and proud crakes, cowardly fled away and afterward was slain of his own son.

Nabuchodonozor was so punished for ^an. 4
his pride, that he was made of man a beast til he had given over his pride,
confessed him self to be but a man, and that God alone is the Lord, worthy
all glory and honor.

Proud Aman was hanged on those ga ^est, 13
lowes, which he had set up for good Mardocheus.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Learn of me says Christ, for I am Iath. 11
meek and humble in heart.

He that eralteth him self shall be made ^ath. 15.
low, and he that lowely meketh and submits him self, shall be exalted.

Be not hie minded, but make your selves ^om. 12.
equal to them of the lower sort. Be not wise in your own opinions.

What have thou, that thou have not received. 1. Cor. 4.
If thou have received it, why reioy sest thou, as though you have not received
it.

Humble your selves in the sight of the Ia. 4
Lord, and he shall lift you up.

Submit your selves every man one 1. Pet. 5.
to another, knit your selves together in lowlines of mind.

For God resists the proud, and gives 1. Pet. 5.
grace to the humble. Submit your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God
that he may exalt you, when the time is come.

Examples out of the new Testament.
MAry that blessed virgen being meke Luke 1.
humble, and lowly, was made the mother of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Peter, James, Andrew, John and the other Math. 4
disciples of Christ, were humble and low ly in their own eyes, and
estraunged from all pride and arrogance. Christ therefore chosed them to be
his Apostles.

Our Savior Christ disdained not to John. 13.
wash his disciples fete, to give us an example of humility and of brotherly
love, The proud Pharisy was rejected and cast away as unrighteous because he
bosted him self of his good deeds, and despised the poor Publicane. Act. 1^.


King Herod upon a day appointed, a rayed himself in royal, apparel, set
him in his seat, and made an oration unto the people.

The people gave a shoute, saying, it is the voice of a god and not of a man.
And immediately the angel of the lord smot him, because he gave not god the
honor, and he was eaten of the worms and gave by the ghost.

Against feastyng, glotony, and dronkennes.
TO avoid feasting, glotony and dronkennes* set these holy scriptures ever
before the eyes of thy mind.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Wine make folk lecherous and dronkenship causes braw^ing and chyding Who so
has a pleasure in them shall not be wise.

He that loves banketes, shall be brought* Pro. 20
to poverty. Whosoever deliteth in wine and de licious meats shall not be rich.

Accompany not with riotous drinkers Pro. 33.
and eaters, for such shall come to poverty, and such sluggish slepers shall go
all to rag ged. Where is woe? Where is wailing? where is strife? where are
trappes laid? where are wounds without a cause? where are bloody eyes? Do not
al these things chawnce unto them, that sit always at the wine, and give their
minds wholly to gulling and glossing.

Woe be to you that rise up early to give Esaias. 5
your selves to dronkennes, and set al your minds so on drinking, that ye sit
sweating thereat until it be night. The harp, the Lute, the Tabour, the
droumslade, the trumpet, the shalme, and plenty of wine are at their feasts:
but the works of the Lord do ye not behold, neither consider ye the works of
his hand.

Woo be unto you that are strong to drink wine, and are mighty to auaunce
dronkennes.

Fornication, wine and dronkennes, Ose. 5.
take away the heart.

Through feasting many have died, but he Eccle. 23
that eats in mean shall prolong his life.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Adam and Eve by satisfiyng their gred^ Ge. ^.
appetite in eating the forbidden fruit, did not only transgress the
commandment of god, but also throw both themselves, and al their posterity
into everlasting da^pnation, if we had not been redeemed by Christ.

The stinking Sodomits by giving the^ Eze, 16
selves to inordinate eating and drinking, fell unto unnatural lusts, and so
most miserably perished.

Through dronkennes, Lot committed Genesis 9.
incest with his own daughters.

The people of Israel giving their mind Exodus 32
unto bancketting, fell into Idolatry.

Holofernes that most Ualeant captain Judith. 13
being dronken, was slain of a woman.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Take heed that your heart be not overwhelmed Luc. 21.
with feasting and dronkenship.

Let us walk honestly, as in the day Romans 13
time: not in banketting and dronkennns, not in chambring and wantonness, nor in
strife and enuiyng: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. And make not provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Banketeing add dronkennes are the Gal. 5
works of the flesh.

Be not dronken with wine wherein is Ephe. 5
lechery, but ye be filled with the spirit.

It is a good thing that the heart be established Heb. 13
with grace, and not with meats, which have not profited them: they have had
their pastime in them.

Dronkardes shall not inherit the kingdom 1. Cor, 6
of God.

Be ye sober and watch, for your adversary 1. Pet. 5
the Devil goes about like roaryng Lion, sekyng whom he may devour: who^ see
that ye resist, being strong in faith.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Herod giving his mind to banketting, Mat. 14.
granted that the holy man John Baptist should be beheaded at the desire of
his whorishe daughter.

That evil servant, which says in his Ma. 24
heart, my Lord will be long a coming, and so begin to smite his fellows, yea
and to eat and drynk with the dronken: The same servants lord shall come in
a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and
shall hew him in pieces, and give him his portion with the Hipocrites, there shall
be weping and gnashyng of teath.

The rich gloton that fared so daintely Luke. 16.
every day, was cast down into hell, and most grievously punished,

Against Fornication and adultry.
IF at any time thou be tempted of the Devil of the world, and the flesh, to
defile thy self with fornication, adultery, whoredom, incest, or with any
other uncleanness: call these sentences and examples of the holy Scripture to
remembrance, and valeantly resist those most wicked temptacions.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou Exodus 10.
shall not lie with thy neighbors wife to defile her with sede.

Thou shall not make thy daughter com mon, that thou would cause her to be
an whore.

The man that breaks wedlock with an other man's wife, even he that breaks
wedlock with his neighbors wife let him be slain, both ye aduoterer and ye
aduoutres.

If a priests daughter fall to play the Leuit. 21
whore, she defiles her father: therefore must she be burnt with fire.

If a man be found lying with a woman that has a w^dded husband, they shall
die either of them, both the man that lay with the wife, and also the wife: and
so shall thou (...) away evil from Israel.

Cursed be he that lies with his neighbors Deuteronomy. ^7
wise, and all the people shall say. Amen.

There shall be no whore of the daughters Deuteronomy. 23
of Israel, nor no whoremonger of the sons of Israel.

An whore gives sweet words, forsakes Pro. 2
the husband of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her god. Her house
is inclined unto death, and her paths unto hell. All they that go into her,
come not again, nether take they hold of the way of life.

The lips of an harlot, are a dropping Pro. 5
honye comb, and her neck is softer then oil: but in the end she is as
bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as is a swerd. Her feet go down unto
death, and her steps have them into hell.

Wherefore dear child give ear unto me, and swerve not from my words. Fly
from her ways, and come not once so niegh ^s unto her doors.

Keep thee from the evil woman and Pro. 6
from the flattering tongue of the harlot, that thou lust not after her beauty in
thine heart and le^t thou be taken with her fair lokes.

An harlote will make a man to beg his bread, but a married woman will hunt^
for the precious life.

May a man hide fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Or can one go
upon coals, and his feet not be hurt? Even so, whosoever goes into his
neighbors wife, and touches her, cannot be unguilty.

He that is an whoremonger, is a fool and brings his life to destruction. He
gets himself also shame and dishonor, such as shall never be put out.

He that accompanies himself with an Pro. 9
whore, shall go down unto hell: but he that goes away from her, shall be
saved.

He that medleth with an whore, is a Prou. 18
fool and without wit.

He that maintains whores, shall come Prou. 29
unto beggary.

If mine heart has lusted after my neighbors ^b. 31.
wife, or if I have laid weight at his door: Oh then let my wife grind unto
another man, and let other men ly^ with her. For this is a wickedness and sin
that is worthy to be punished, yea a fire that should utterly consume and
(...) out al my substance.

My son, keep thee well from all whor ^ob. 4
dom, and beside thy wife see that no ^aut be found in thee.

Cast not thy mind upon harlots in any manner of thing, least thou destroy
both thy self and thy heritage.

Go not about gasinge in every lane Eccle. ^
of the City, neither wander thou abroad in the streates thereof.

Turn away thy face from a beautiful woman, and look not upon the fayrenes
of other.

Sit not with another man's wife by any means, lie not with her upon the bed,
make no words with her at the wine, lest thy heart consent unto her, and thou
with thy blood fall into destruction.

A man that breaks wedlock, and re Eccle. 23
gardeth not his soul, but says, tush, who sees me? I am compassed about
with dark nes, the walls cover me no body sees me Whom need I to fear? the
highest will not remember my sins. He understands not that his eyes, see
all things, for all such fear of me^, drives away the fear of God from him.
For he fears only the eyes of men, and considers not that the eyes of the
Lord are clearer then the Sun, beholdinge all the ways of men, and the
ground of the deep, and loking even to men's hearts in secret places. etc.
Read forth the Chapter to the end.

Examples out of the old Testament.
God drowned once all the whole world Ge. 7
(eight persons only excepted) for the sin of uncleanness.

God poured down from heaven water Ge. 19
fire, and brymstone upon the Sodomites, Gomorrians and such other, and
destroyed them al for their abominable uncleanness.

When Sychem the son of Hemor had Gene. 34
violently defloured Dina the daughter of Jacob, her brothers hearing of the
matter, slew not only Sichem and Hemor, but also all the men and men children
that were in the city, and afterward spoiled the city. And when Jacob their
father talked with them of the matter, they answered, should they deal with our
sister, as with an whore?

When it was told Judah, that Thamar Genesis 28
his daughter in law had played the whore and with playing the whore was become
great with child. Judah her father in law answered and said, bring her forth
that she may be brent.

Joseph feared god and would not consent Gene. 29
unto his Lords wife in any point of uncleanness, but chosed rather to be cast
into prison, then he would commit so great wickedness, and defile his Lords
wife. Therefore did God bless him, and brought him to high degree.

There were slain in one day of y^ Jews Number. 25
24. thousand, for the whoredom that they committed.

For the defloring of a certain Levites Judith. 2
wife, there were destroyed mo the^ an hun dred thousand people.

David committed adultery with Bethsabe 2. Reg. ^
Urias wife, but he escaped not vnplaged

Solomon before he doted in love of women 3. Reg. ^
was wholly given to the setting forth of Gods honor, but being once nous^ed
with their love, he did not only neglecte the glory of the alone true and
living God, but he also thoroughe the entisment of these women, fell unto the
worshippyng of strange gods and so he provoked the high displeasure of God
against him and his realm.

Susan feared God, and desired rather Dan. 1^
to be stoned unto death then she should de file her husbands bed or once
consent to the two filthy Judges, and so become an whore, god therefore
preserved her.

Sentences out of the new Testament:
Ye have heard that it was said to the^ ^ath. 5
of old time, thou shall not commyte adultry. But I say unto you, that
whosoever looks on another man's wife to lust after her, has committed
adultry already with her in his heart.

It seems good to the holy ghost, and to ^ct. 15
us, to charge you that ye abstain from whordome.

Keep no company with whoremongers. Cor. 5


If any that is called a brother, that is to say, a christen man, be an
whorehunter, with such one se that ye eat not.

Neither whoremongers nor adulterers, ^. Cor, 6
nor weakelynges neither abusers of them selves with mankind, shall inherit
the kingdom of god.

Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ, shall I now take
the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Do
ye not know that he which coupleth him? self with an harlot, is become one
body. For two says he shall be one flesh. But he that is joined to the Lord is
one* spirit whoredom. Every sin that a man does is without the body. But he
that is a whoremonger sins against his own bo die. Know ye not how that
your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost, which dwell in you whom ye
have of god, and how ye are not your own. For ye are dearly bought. Therefore
glorify god in your bo dies and in your spirits, which are gods.

To avoid whoredom, let every man 1. Cor. 7*
have his wife, and let every woman have her husband.

It is better to marry then to burn. Gal. 5
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wanton nes. etc. are works of the flesh and
whosoever does them, shall not inherit y^ kingdom of god.

Let not whoredom or uncleanness be Ephe. ^
once named among you. For this ye know that no whoremonger or unclean person
has inheritance in the kingdom of christ and of god.

This is the will of god that ye abstain 1. These. ^
from whoredom. For god has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Keep thy self pure and honest.

Avoid the lusts of youth, but follow righteousness, faith, love, and peace,
with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart.

Wedlock is honorable among all me^: ^eb. 13
and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers god will condemn.

Whoremongers shall have their part ^poc. 21.
in the lake that burns with fire and brim stone, which is the second death.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Whoredom was the occasion that Herodias ^ath. 14.
Herod's whore sought so dilygently the death of godly John Baptiste, which
reproved them of their abominable living.

Through whoredom and kepinge of ^ke. 15
riotouse company the prodigal son was ted away his goods, and fell unto
such necessity, beggerye and misery, that he was glad to keep swine, and would
feign have filled his bellye with the coddes that the swine did eat, but he
could not be suffered

Learn of this history what the end of whoredom is.

Saint Paul did excommunicate that Cor. 5
man of Corinth, which ungodly kept his fathers wife. and would not suffer
that any of the faithful should keep him company, nor yet eat or drink with him.

The end of the whore of Babylon is Apo. 18.
described of Saint John to be wonderful wretched, miserable and dampnable.

Against Covetousness.
If the devil and the world move thee not to be content with that is
sufficient and enough, but inordinatly add vnmeasurably to scrat together the
goods of the world, to oppress the pore* to join house to house, land to
land, lordship to lordship, etc. to take great incommes, to raise the rentes,
and to get that may be gotten by right or by wrong, defend thy self against
them with these holy scriptures that follow ever remembering that thou art but
a stranger and a pilgrim in this world, and that thou must go hence, either
unto glory or unto pain, yea and that* how sone thou know not.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
TThou shall not covet thy neighbors Exo. 20
goods.

Ye shall not trouble, hurt, nor anoy no Exo. 22
widow nor fatherles child.

If ye shall hurt them, and they cry unto me, I will surely hear t^eir cry, and
the^ will my wrath wax whote: and I will kill you with the sweard, and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherles.

Thou shall take no gifts, for gifts Exodus ^
blind the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.

Thou shall not do thy neighbor wrong ^eu. 12.
neither violently oppress him. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in
mete yard, in weighte or in measure. True balances, true weightes, a true Epha
and a true Hin, shall ye have.

Fire shall consume the houses of such ^ob. 15
as are gredy to receive gifts.

He heapeth up treasure and yet know Psalm. 39
eth not he for whom he gathers it.

O trust not in wrong and robbery, Psalm. 42
give not your selves unto vanities* and if riches increase, set not your
heart upon them.

Incline my har^ (O Lord) to thy testimonies Psalm. 119
and not to covetousness.

Who hordeth up his corn shall be cursed Pro. 11
among the people, but blessing shall light upon his head that gives food.

He that trusts in his riches, shall have a fall, but the righteous shall
florishe as ye green leaf.

Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great and innumerable
treasures otherwise. He goes about to destroy his own house, that gives his
mind to covetousness but who so hates reward shall live.

Better it is to have a little with righteousness, Pro. 16
then great rentes wrongfully gotten.

He that hates covetousness shall live Pro. 18
long.

A man that is suddenly rich, enuyeth other, and considers not that pouertye
shall come upon him.

Who so robs his father and says it is no sin, y^ same is like unto a
mans^ear.

O Lord give me neither pouertye nor Pro. 30
riches: only grant me a necessary lyuinge.

He that loves money, will never be satisfied Eccle. 5
with monye, and who so delights in riches, shall have no profit thereof.

Where as much riches is, there are ma ny also that spend them away. And what
pleasure more has he possessed then saving that he may look upon them with
his eyes.

A laboring man slepeth swetely, whether it be litlle or much that he eats,
but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

There is a sore plague, which I have seen under the son, namely riches kept
to the hurt of him that has them in possession. For oftimes they pearishe
with his great misery and trouble, and if he have a child it gets nothing.

Read forth the Chapter.

Let not thine hand be stretched out Eccle. 4
to receive, and shut when thou should give.

Trust not unto thy riches, and say not Eccle. 5
tushe, I have inoughe for my life. For it shall not help thee in the time of
vengeance and temptation.

Trust not in wicked riches, for they shall not healp thee in the day of
punishment and wrath.

Nothing is more wicked and ungracious Eccle. 11
then a covetous man.

He that with all his carefulnes heapeth Eccle, 14
together vnrightuously gathers for other folks, and another man shall make
good chere with his goods.

A covetous man's eye, has never enough in the portion of wickedness until the
time that he wither away, and has lost his own soul.

The riches of the proud shall be rooted Eccle. 21
out.

He that loves riches, shall not ^e justified. Eccle. 31


Many one is come in great mysfortune by the reason of gold, and have found
their destruction before them. It is a tree of fallinge unto them. It is a tree
of passage un to them that offer it up, and al such as be folish, fall therein.

Blessed is the rich, which is found without blemish, and has not gone after
gold, nor heaped in money and treasures, where is there such a one: and we shall
com mende him and call him blessed? For great things does he among his people.
Esaias. 5


Woe be unto you, that join house to house, and coopl^ land to land even so
long as any can be gotten. Shall ye alone dwell upon the earth? These things are
in the ears of the Lord of hosts etc.

Woe be unto them that give sentence with the ungodly for rewards and condemn
the just cause of the righteous.

Woe be unto thee that spoylest, for thou Esaias. 33
also shall be spoiled.

Woe be unto him that heapeth up other men's goods. How long will he lade
himself with thick claye?

O how suddenly will they stand up, that Abac. ^
bite and awake, that shall tear thee in pieces? yea thou shall be their pray.

Woe be unto him, that couetously gathe reth evil gotten goods into his house,
that he may set his neste on hye, to escape from the power of misfortune Thou
haste devised the shame of thine own house, so that the very stones of the
wall shall cry out of it, and the timber that lies betwixt the joints of the
building, shall answer.

Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver the^ in the day of
the Lords wrath.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Balaam for luc^es sake would have cur Number. 12
sed the people of Israel contrary to his own conscience, but he was reproved
of the Angel of the Lord, so that his cursing was turned into blessing.

Acham by the commandment of God Iosue. 7
was stoned to death, because ^e took of the excommunicate goods.

Saul for the covetousness of the praylost 1. Reg. 13.
his kingdom.

The covetousness of Naball and his churlishnes ^. Reg. 35
showed unto David, had almost caused that Naball and all that ever he had,
had been utterly destroyed, if Abigail his wife had not pacified the matter.
Notwithstanding God shortly punished him with death so that he was taken away
from all that ever he had.

The covetousness of Achab and Iesabel 3. Reg. ^
was the occasion that the good Nabothe was stoned unto death, against all
equity and right, that by this means they might have his vineyarde. But how
miserable their end was for that their abominable murder, the holy stories do
declare.

Gehesy was stricken with leprosy, because 4. Reg. 5
he received money of Naaman.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
BLessed are the poor in spirit for theirs Math. 5
is the kingdom of heaven.

Lay not up treasure for your selves Mat. 6
upon earth, where neither rust nor mothe does corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal.

But lay up treasures for you in heaven where neither rust nor moth does
corrupt and where thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your
tresure is there will your heart be also.

What does it prophet a man to win Math. 1^
the whole world, if he loses his soul? A rich man shall hardly enter into
the kingdom of heaven.

It is more easy for a cable rope to go Mat. 19.
through the eye of a nedle, then a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Woe be to you rich men, which have Luke. 6
your comfort.

Take heed and beware of covetousness. Luke. 12
For no man's life stands in the about dance of things which he possesses.

Thou fool this night will they fetch away thy soul again from thee. Then
whose shall the things be, that thou have gathered.

Take heed to your selves, lest at any Luke. 21
time your hearts be overcome with the cares of this life.

If any that is called a brother, that is 1. Cor. 5
to say a christen man, be covetous or an ex torcioner, with him eat not.

Neither thieves, neither covetous per 1. Cor. 6
sons, nether extorcioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Let not covetousness be once named among Ephe. 5
you. For no covetous parso^, which is a worshipper of Idols, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. Godliness is great riches, if a
man be content with such as GOD sendes. For we brought nothing into the
world, neither shall we carry any thing out.

When we have fode and raiment, let us therwt be content, they that will be rich
fall into temptation and snares and into many folishe and noisome lusts which
drown men in temptation and destruction For covetousness is the root of all
evil, which while some lusted after they erred from the faith, and tangled
them selves with many sorrows. But thou which art the man of god, flee such
things. Follow righteousness, godliness, love, patience, and mekenes.

Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with that ye
have already. For God verily has said, I will not fail thee, nor yet forsake
thee.

Examples out of the new Testament.
ACertaine rich and covetous person, Luc. 21.
made great provision for many years that he might live pleasantly and
welthely, but shortly after God took away his life, so that he died.

The rich and unmerciful glotton that Luke. 1^
fared daintely every day, and was gorgeously apparaled, died and was buried
in Hell.

Judas for lucre of money, sold and betrayed his master christ to the bishops
Scribes and Pharisees. Afterward he hanging up him self, brast a sunder in the
mides and al his bowels gushed out.

Ananias and Saphira were punished Act. 5
with soden death, because of a covetous mind, they kept away part of the
money which they received for the possession that they had sold.

Against rebellion and disobedience.
IF the devil that old enemy of mankind and troubler of all good orders go
about to put in thy head, that the maiestrates and hye powers do not their
duty in the right gouernmente of a common weal, but to much cruellye oppress
thyre subjects and that therefore thou may justly rise and rebel against
them, and take upon thee of thine own private authority to redress things
that are amys in the commone w eale take heed that thou by no means
consentest to his most subtle and wicked temptations, whereby he goes about to
throw thee into everlasting dampnation both of body and soul, beside the
shameful death, that thou shalt have in this world, and the loss of all that
ever thou have, but content thy self with thy vocation* labor diligently and
quietly for thy ^uing, study to maintain peace, pray for the high powers,
th^k that cross to be laid upon the^ for thy distres, amend thy life, humbly
lament thy cause to God which will not leave thee succour^s, and defend thy
self against Satan, and al his craftye suggestions, with these scriptures
following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THou shall be over my house, and accor Ge. 4.
ding to thy word shall al my people be ruled.

Thou shall do what soever they say unto Deuteronomy. 17
thee that ^e rulers over the place, which the Lord has chosen.

All that thou have commanded us, said Iosue* ^*
the people to Iosue, we will do and whether so ever thou sendst us we will go.

Who so ever he be, says God, that does disobey thy mouth, and will not hear
ken unto thy words, in all that thou co^maundeste him, let him dye.

The Lord has heard your murmurings Exodus 16
says Moses, which ye murmur against him. For what are we? (he speaks of
him self and of Aaron) your murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord.

They have not cast thee away, but 1. Reg. 81*
me (said God to Samuel) that I should not reign over them.

Behold to obey is better then sacrifyce 1. Reg. 15
and to harken is better then the fat of ram mes. For rebellion is as the sin
of witchcrafte, and stubbernes is as the wickedness of idolatry.

By me, kings reign, by me Princes rou. 8.
make just laws. By me Lords bear rule, and al Judges of the earth exercise
judgment.

Where no ruler is, there the people decay, rou. 12
but where as many are that can give counsel, there is wealth.

The kings displeasure is a messenger to. 16
of death, but a wise man will pacify him. The chereful countenance of the
king, is life, and his loving favor is as the eve ning dew

The king ought to be feared as the roaring to. 20
of a Lion. Who so provoke him un to anger, offends against his own soul.
My son fear thou the Lord and the king, and keep no company withthem that
slide back from his fear. For their destruction shall comsodenly. And who
knows the aduersyty that may come from the^ both.

Wish the king no euel in thy thought, Eccle. 10
and speak no hurt of the noble man in thy privy chamber.

For a bird of the air shall betraye thy voice, and with her feathers shall
she bewray thee.

Whosoever will not fulfill the law of 1. Esdr. 7
God. and the kings law, let him have his judgment without delay, whether it
be un to death or to be rooted out, or be condemned in goods, or to be put into
prison.

The king is ruler over sea and land 3. Esdr. 4.
and has dominion of all things, and look what he commands is done. The
common people* and the rulers are obedient unto him.

Examples out of the old Testament.
GOd did strike Miriam with most grievous Number. 12
and horrible leprosy, because she murmured against her lawful magistrate
Moses.

God plagued the Israelites for murmuringe Number. 21
against his servant Moses, with stinging serpents which stong them unto death.

Corath, Dathan, and Abiron, because Number. 16
they did not obey Moses Gods magisstrate, but disdained that he should
reign over them, although appointed of God, were swalowed up of the earth,
both they, their wives, their children, and all their goods. They went down
alive unto ^el, and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among
the congregation.

Absolon king Daulds son made an Reg. 15
insurrection against his Father, and through the councaile of wicked
Achitophel, wrought most vilany against his fathers honor. What followed? Was
not Absolon miserably slain? Did not his untrusty counselor hang him self,
were there not also xx. M. men slain in battle, that took Absalons part.

Seba the son of Bechey had his he^d cut of, because he conspired against king
^. Reg. 22.
David, and dissuaded the people from du^ obedience to their liege sovereign
Lord.

Baasa the son of Abia conspired a ^. Reg. 15.
against Nadab king of Israel, slew him, and reigned in his stead. But in hat
folowed^ though Baasa in the sight of the world die ed no shameful death, yet
died he in the dis pleasure of God, and afterward all his succession with all
his friends and kinsfolks were al destroyed, so that there was not one left
alive.

Zimry conspired against Ela king of Israel, 3. Reg. 15.
slew him and reigned in his stead. But shortly after he was driven to such
misery and straytes that he fled into the kings palace at Thirza, and settng
it on a fire brent himself, and so wretchedlye ended his life.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Let every soul submit himself unto y^ Romans 13
aucthority of the higher power For there is no power but of God. Thepowers
that be are ordained of God. Who soever therefore resysteth the power, resists
the ordi nance of God, but they that resyste shall get to themselves
dampnacion. For rulers are not fearful to them that do good, but to them
that do evil. Will thou be without fear of the power. Do well then and so
shall thou be praised of the same. For he is the minister of God for thy
wealth. But if thou donst that which is evil, then fear. For he bears not
the sword for naught. For he is the minister of god to take vengance on him
that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey not only for fear of
vengeance, but also because of conscience. And even for this cause pay ye
tribute. For they are Gods ministers, seruinge for the same purpose. Give to
every man therefore his duty tribute ^o who^ tribute belongs, custom to whom
custom is due, fear to whom fear belongs, honor to whom honor pertains.

I exhort that above all things prayers, Tim. 2
supplications, intercessions and geuinge of thanks be had for all men, for
kings and for all that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and a
peaceable life, withal godliness and honestye. For that is good and accepted in
the sight of god our Savior, which will have all men to be saved, and to come
unto the knowledge of the truth.

Warn them, that they submit them ^it. 3.
selves to rule and power, that they obey the Magistrates, that they be ready
to do every good work, that they speak evil of no man, that they be no
fighters, but gentle, showing all meekenes unto all men.

Submit your elues unto all manner ordinance Pet. 3
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the king as unto the chief
head, either unto rulers as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment
of evil dooers, but for the praise of them that do well. For so is the will of
god, that with well doing ye may stop the mouths of folish and ignorant men,
as free, and not as having the liherty for a cloak of malyciousnesse, but even
as the sernauntes of God.

Honor all men, love brotherly fellow ship, fear god, honor the king.

Wicked are they and damned shall they 2. Pet. ^
be, that despise authority, and ^eare not to speak evil of them that excel in
honor.

Examples out of the new Testament.
MAry Christ's mother and Joseph Luke 2.
her husband, obeyed the Emperors commandment, and went into their city
Bethelem to be taxed.

Christ paid tribute to Caesar both for Math. 1
him self and for his disciples, and willed o there so to do.

Christ even unto the death obeyed the Math. ^
temporal rulers.

The Apostles of Christ were obedient to the higher* powers and taught other so
to be.

Saint Paul willinglye obeyed the public Magistrates, Felix and Festus. etc

Theudas and Judas of Galile were two sedicious persons. The one boasted to do
great things and so allured much people to follow him, the other councelled
the Jews by no means to pay tribute to Caesar, but to maintain their old
liber ties, and by this means moved great sedicion among the people.

What became of them, were they not put to death, and so many as followed the
either slain or else scattered abroad, and so brought to naught. We read not in
all the holy scriptures that any traitor or notable sedicious person has at
any time ^scaped without notable and famous punishmente. God can not suffer his
magistrates to be disobeyed, his commonweals to be disturbed his polytyqne or
cyuyl^ laws to be conte^ned his godly and honest orders to be broken.
Whosoever attempteth any such wickedness, God will be a uenged of him, as it is
euidente not only in the holy Scriptures, but also in profane histories.

Against malice, grudge, envy, hatred and anger.
IF thou be tempted of Satan to break the order of charity, and to malice
thy christen brother* set these scriptures before the eyes of thy mind.

Sentences out of the old Testament
Thou shall not hate thy brother inthine Leuit. 19.
heart, but shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor that thou bear not sin ne
for his sake.

Thou shall not avenge thy self nor be myndefull of wrong, against the
children of my people, but shall love thy neighbors even as thy self. Pro. 25


If thine enemy honger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink, for so shall
thou heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee.

He that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance Eccle. 2^
of the lord, which shall suerly keep him in his sins.

Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has don the, and so shall thy sines be
forge uen to thee also when thou prayest. A man that bears hatred against
another, how dare ^e destre forgeuenes of god? He that show ^th no mercy to a
man which is like him self, how dare he ask forgiveness of his sins. If
he that is but flesh bears hatred and keep it, who will entreat for his
sins? Remember thy end, and let enmity pass.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Samuel prayed for king Saul, 1. Reg. 15.
although a wicked man an enemy to gods servant, and altogether disobedient
to the will of God.

Moses prayed for the stubborn and un Exodus 22.
faithful Jews, which not withstandinge rebelled against him, and would
have slain him.

Sentences out of the new Testament. Math. 5

Lou^ your enemies. Bless them that curse you. Do good to them that hate you.
Pray for them which do you wrong and pursue you, that ye may be the children
of your father that is in heaven. Mat. 7


Whatsoever ye will, that men should do to you: even so do you to them. That
is the law and the prophets. Math. 19


Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. Luke. 9


Be merciful as your father is merciful. Judge not, and you shall not be
judged. Co^ demn not, and you shall not be condemned Forgive, and ye shall be
forgeuen. Give, and it shall be given to you, good measure pressed down, shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your b^somes* For with the same
measure ye meet, with the same shall other meet to you again.

A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love together as I loved you,
John. 13
that even so you love one an other.

By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye shall have love
one to another.

Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
1. Cor. 13^
be brent, yet if I have no love, it profits me nothing at all.

Brethren if any man be fallen by chance Gal. 6
into any fault, ye which are spiritual, help to amend him in the spirit of
mekenes, consideringe thy self, least thou also be attempted.

Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill ye the law of Christ.

Let not the sun go down upon your wrath. Ephesians. 4


Be gentle one to another, merciful forgeuing one another, even as GOD for
Christ's sake, has forgeuen you.

Let every man be slow unto anger. For ^acob. 1
the wrath of man works not that which is righteous before God.

Above all things have fervent love among 1* Pet. 4
you. For love shall cover the multitude of sins.

If any man say, I love God, and hates 1, John. 4
his brother, he is a liar. For he that lo ueth not his brother whom he has
seen god whom he has not seen how can he love. And this commandment have
we of him, that he that loves god, should al so love his neighbor.

He that loves not his brother, a^ideth 1. John. 3.
in death. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer. And ye know that no
murthe rer has everlasting life abidinge in him* My babes let us not love in
word nor in tongue, but in work and truth.

Examples out of the new^ Testament. Luke. 23

Christ so dearly loved us, yea and that when we^ were yet his enemies, that
he gave him self even unto the death for our sake. Yea he hanginge on the cross
prayed for his very^ enemies, unto his heauenly^ Father.

Blessed Stephen in the midst of his Act. 7
torments prayed for his enemies.

S. Paul wished him self to be cursed Romans 9.
from Christ^, so that his kinsmen might^ be saved.

Against the bitter storms of persecution of Gods word.
IF at a^y time through the frailti of nature thou be troubled in thy mind when
the cross ^f persecution is laid upon thee for the word of God. look that thou
shrink not back from the truth nor discourage thy self. but think thy self
blessed of G^d, call these scriptures that follow unto rei membrance for thy
comfort.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THe Lord kills and geeueth life again^, 1. Reg. ^
he brings even to Hell and back again.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears Psalm. 34.
them, and delivers them out of all their troubles.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a troubled heart, and will save such as
be of an humble spirit.

Great are the troubles of the righteous but the Lord delivers him out of
the^ all

He keeps all his bones, so that not one of them is broken.

But misfortune shall flea the ungodly, and they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate.

The Lord delivers the souls of his servants, and all they that put their
trust in him, shall not be comfortles.

For thy sake O Lord are we killed all Psalm. 44
the day long, and are counted as sheep ap pointed to be slain.

Up Lord, why sleep thou, awake and be not absent from us for ever.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and for gettest our misery and trouble? For
our soul is brought low even unto the duste, our belly cleaves unto the
ground. Arise and help us, and deliver us for thy mercies sake.

Thou O god have proved us, thou also Psalm. 66
have tried us like as silver is tried. Thou broughtest us into the snare, and
laydest trouble upon our loins. Thou suffredest men to ride over our heads,
we went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out into a comfortable
place.

I believed and therefore have I spoken Psalm. 115
but I was sore troubled.

Right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his saints.

The way of the righteous is judged to Eccle. 2
be utter destruction, but they are in rest. Although they suffer pain before
men, yet is their hope full of immortality. They are punished but in few things,
nevertheless in many things shall they be well rewarded.

For God proves them and finds the^ mete for him self, yea as the gold in
the furnace does ^e try them, and receives them as a burnt offering, and when
ye time comes, they shall be looked upon. Sapient. 3


My son, if thou will come into the service of god, stand fast in
righteousness and fear, and arm thy soul to temptation. Setle thine heart,
and be patient, ^ow down thine ear, receive the words of understanding, and
shrink not away when thou art entised. Hold thee fast upon god, join thy
self unto him, and suffer that thy life may increase at the last.

Whatsoever happens unto thee, receive it, suffer in heaviness, and be pacie^t
in thy trouble. For like as gold and silver are tried in fire, even so are
acceptable me^ in the furnace of adversity. Believe in God, and he shall help
thee.

For righteousness take pain with all thy soul, and for the truth strive
thou unto death and God shall fight for thee against thy enemies.

Examples out of the old Testament. Ge. 4.

Abell was cruelly slain of his brother Cayne, whom he never offended. Genesis
39.


Joseph was cast into prison, because he would not lean to the fy^thy
request of his lords wife.

Moses, Aaron, and the Israelites were Exodus 14.
grievously entreated and persecuted of King Pharao.

Saul with great diligence sought to destroy David. ^. Reg. 18


Queen Iezabel pursued the Prophet 3. Reg. 19.
Helias.

Zachary the son of Barachias was ^. Pare. 2.
stoned to death for telling the king truth.

Achymeleche with certain other holy ^. Reg. 22
men of god, was slain at king Saules commandment because he showed kind nes
to David the hearty beloved servant of God.

Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago were cast Dan. 3.
into a firye furnace, because they wouldnot worship the golden Image, that
king Nabuchodonosor had made, but only the God of Israel.

Daniel was cast into the den of Lions, because Dan. 6.
that contrary to king Darius commandment he had prayed unto his Lord God,
the God of Israel.

At an other time also he was cast into Dan. 14.
the den of Lions, because he said, that Bell and the Dragon were no Gods.

The virtuous and chaste woman Susan Dan. 13.
was at the point to be stoned unto death, because she would not break the
commandment of god, and consent to the un lawful and filthy requests of the
two Elders.

Eleazarus was miserably put to death, 2. Mac. ^
because at the kings commandment he would not eat swines flesh, contrary
to the law of god.

A certain woman also with her. vii. 2. Math. 7.
sons were with most extreme cruelty put to death, because they would not
obey the wicked precepte of the most wicked king.

The prophets were vnmercifullye slain because they rebuked sin, and taught^
the will of God.

The most excellent Prophet Esaias, for his liberty of speech in re^uking the
sins of the princes and of the people and prophe^iyng of Gods vengeance to
fall upon the country and people, was cut in two parts asunder with a saw,
and buried un der an Oak.

Jeremy after much enprisonment was stoned onto death of his people at Taphu as
in Egipc^, because he warned them of their wicked living, and exhorted them un
to repentance.

Amos at the commandment of king Amassas for his preching was cruelly bea^en
and grievously formented. At the last Ochozias son of Amasias caused him to
be thirst into the temples with a great nail, and being half dead he was
carried into his own country, where he sone after died.

Micheas was buffeted emprisoned and fed with bread and water.

Examples out of the old Testament.
BLessed are they that suffer persecution Mathe. 5.
for righteousness for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are ye when men revile you and perse^ute you, and (...) speak all eu^l
sayings against you for my sake:

Rejoice and be merry, for great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted
they the Prophets before you.

The scoler is not above the master, nor Math. 10
the servant above his Lord. If they have called the Father of the household
Beelzebub, how much more shall they so call them that are of his household.

Be not afraid of them that ^il the body, but rather fear him which is able
to destroy both body and soul in hell fire.

Every one that shall confess me before men, I shall confess him also before
my fa there which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, I shall
also deny him befyre my Father that is in heaven. Math. 24


Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake Mark. 8


Whosoever will follow me let him forsake him self and take up his cross and
follow me. For whosoever will save hislife shall lose it. But whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake and the gospelles the same shall save it. For what
shall it profit a man, if he win all the world and and lose his own soul,
or what shall a man give to rede^ his soul wtal again: whosoever fore shall be
ashamed of me and my words in this whorish and sinful generation, of him also
shall the son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with
the holy angels.

The servant is not greater the^ his Lord. ^ohn. 16
If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

If the world hate you, know ye, that it hated me before you: If ye were of the
world, the world would love that is his. But forasmuch as ye are not of the
world but I have chose^ you out of the world therefore does the world hate you.

The time shall come, that who so ever ^ohn. 16
kills you, will think that he does God service.

Ye shall lament and weep, but the world shall rejoice.

In the world ye shall have trouble, but be on a good comfort, I have ouercom
the world.

If we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorified together with him.

I suppose that the afflictions of this Romans 8.
life, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed upon us.

Blessed be God the father of our Lord 1. Cor. 1.
Jesus Christ, which is the father of (...) and the God of al comfort, which
comfort us in all our tribulations.

As the afflictions of Christ are plenteous in us: even so is our consolation
pleuteous by Christ.

We are not weried, but though our out ward man perish: yet the in ward man is
2. Cor. ^
renewed day by day. For our trouble which is short and light, prepares an
exceeding and an eternal weight of glory unto us: while we look not on the
things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: For things which
are seen, are temporal, but things which are not seen are everlasting.

We know, that if our earthly mansion 2. Cor. ^
of this dwelling were destroyed, we have a building of God, an habitatio^ not
made with hands, but everlasting in heaven.

Unto you it is given, not only to believe Phil. 1.
in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake.

Suffer affliction as a good soldier of 2. Tim. ^
Christ.

If we die with Christ we shall live with 2. Tim. ^
him. If we suffer we him, we also shalreig^ with him: if we deny him, he will
also dny us.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecutions.

This is thank woorthy^ if a man for conscience toward god, endure grefe and
suffer wrong vndescrued.

If when ye do well ye suffer wrong and take it patientlye, then is there
thanks with God, For here unto verily were ye called.

Blessed are ye if any trouble happen un Pet. 3.
to you for righteousness sake.

Dearly beloved marvel not that ye are Pet. 4.
proved by fire (which thing is to try you) as though some straung thing
happened unto you: but rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
passion, that when his glory appears, ye may, be merye and glad. If ye be
railed upon, for the name of Christ, happy are ye. For the glory and the
spirit of God, rests upon you. On their part, he was evil spoken of, but
on your part he is glorified.

If any man suffer as a christian man, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify god in this behalf.

Let them that be trooubled according to he will of god, commit their saules to
him with well doing, as unto a faithful creator. Heb. 13.


Jesus to sa^ctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.
Let us go forth therefore out of the tents, and suf fer rebuk with him. For
here have we no continuyng city, but we seek on to come.

By many trybulations must we enter Act. 14.
into the kingdom of heaven.

The holy ghost witnesses in every city Ac. 20.
saying, that bands and trouble abide me. But none of these things move me,
neither is my life dear unto my self, that I might fulfill my course with
joy, and the ministration of the word whith I have received of the Lord Jesus to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

I am ready not to be bound only, but Act. 21.
also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus.

Blessed are the dead that dye in the Apoc. 1^
Lord, even so says the spirit, that from henceforth they reaste from their
labors. But their work follow them.

Examples out of the new Testamen.
John Baptist for truth telling to king Math. 1^
Herod, was cast into prison and beheaded.

Jesus Christ our Lord and savior after Math. 2^
many blasphemies rebukes, slanders and bitter torments suffered the most
spiteful death of the cross, and so entered into glory.

The holy marter S. Stephen, was stoned Act. 7.
unto death.

James y^ brother of John was beheded. Act. 12.


What kindness Peter and Paul with the apostles found at the hands of them
whose salvation they most diligently sought, the histories make mention.
Neither I hear speak of those blessed Marters, which sense their days have
dyed for the confession of gods truth, so that the gospel is not without a
cause called of blessed Paul the word of the cross.

For all that will live godly in Christ Ie Cor. 1*
su says he, shall suffer persecution.

I saw says Saint John under the altar, ^poc. 6.
the souls of them that were killed for the word of god, and for the
testimony^ which they had, and they cried with a loud voice, saying: how long
tariest thou O Lord, holy and true, to judge and to revenge our blood on them
that be on the earth? And long white garments were g^ uen unto every one of
them. And it was said unto them, that they should rest a little season, til the
number of their fellows and brethren and of them that should be killed as
they were fulfilled.

Against the temptation which the faithful have, when they compare their
miseries and wretchedness with the wealth, prosperity* and pleasures of the
swinish Epicures and wicked worldlinges. Where thou also shall see the misera
ble end of the un godly.
IF Satan our old adversary with his handemaide, the flesh shall at any time
move thee to forsake God and his holy word* by considering the flourishing and
triumphant estate of the wicked worldlinges, and the to much miserable and
base trade of the Lords servants and professoures of gods truth, which live
in all kind of misery. wretchedness and poverty, and ar piteously oppressed of
the tirants of this world, when on the contrary part the ungodly have all
things at their own pleasure, and live at their hearts ease without
disturbance for lack of temporal things: consent no^ to his subtle
assaults* but manfully resist them, considering with thy self, that though
the ungodly reign in it is world, and have the uppermost hand yet shall their
end be miserable when the poor afflicted for Gods cause shall altar their
manifold temptations be rewarded with perpetual joy, and everlasting glory.
and that thou may be the more assuredly persuaded in these things* call to
remembrance these holy scriptures following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Know thou not this, that from the Job. 15.
beginning ever since the creation of man upon earth, the praise of the ungodly
has been short, and that the joy of the hipocrites has continued, but the
twinck ling of an ey? Though he be magnified up to the heaven, so that his head
reaches unto the clouds, yet he perishes at the last like dong: in so much
that they which have seen him shall say, where is he? He vanissheth as a
dream, so that he can no more be found, and passes away in a vision in the
night, so that the eye which saw him before, gets now no sight of him and
his place knows him no more.

Wherefore do the wicked men live in Job. ^1.
health and prosperity, come to their old age, and increase in riches.

Their Childers children live in their sight, and their generation before
their eyes. Their houses are safe from all fear for the rod of god doothe not
smite them. Their bullock gendreth, and that not out of time, their cow
calueth, and is not unfruitful. They send their children forth by flocks, and
their sons lead the dance. They bear with them tabrets and harpes and have
instruments of music at their pleasure. They spend their days in
welthynesse but suddenly they go down to Hell.

O Lord thou art more righteous then Iere. 1^
that I should dispute with thee. Nevertheless let me talk with thee in things
reasonable. How happens it, that the way of the ungodly is so prosperous, and
that it goes so well with them which without any shame offend and live in
wickedness. Thou plantest them, they take root, they grow and bring forth
fruit. They boste much of thee, yet art thou far from their raines. But thou
Lord to who^ I am well known thou that have seen and proved my heart, take
them away like as a flock is carried to the slaughter house, and appoint them
for the day of slaughter.

O Lord, how long shall I cry and thou will not hear? how long shall I
complain Psalm. 73.
unto thee, suffering wrong and thou will not help: why let thou me se
werinesse and labor: Tyranny and violence are before me, power over goes
right, for the law is torn in pyeces, and there can no right judgment go
forth. And why, the ungodly is more set by then the righteous This is the cause
that wrong judgment proceeds. Thine eyes O Lord, are clean: thou may not
see evil, thou can not be hold the thing that is wicked. Wherefore then do
thou look upon the ungodly, and hold thy tongue when the wicked deuoureth the
man that is better then himself. Thou make men as the fysh of the sea, and
like as the creepyng beasts that have no guide, they take up al with their
angle, they catch it in their net, and do sacrifice un to their yarne, because
that through it their portion is become so fat, and their meat so plenteous.
Wherefore, they cast out their net again and never cease to slay the people.

Like as the wine deceives the dronkard, Abac. 1.
even so the proud shall fall and not endure.

Full miserable, is the death of ungodly, Psalm. 34.
for they that hate the unrighteous shall be plucked up by the root.

Freate not thy self at the ungodly, be not Psalm. 37.
thou envious against the evil doers. For they shall sone be cute down like the
grass and be withered even as the grene herb. Grieve not thy self at one y^ is
in prosperity and lives in abhominacion. Leave of from wrath, let god
displeasure, let not thy gelousy move thee also to do evil, For wicked doers
shall be rooted out, but they that patiently abide the lord shall enherite the
land. Suffer yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone, thou shall
look after his place and he shall be away.

Read forth the Psalm^ and mark it well.

Wherefore thus arrogantly magnifiest thou thy self at all time. O mischeuous
gyaunt, wherefore enforces thy tongue mis chief, fordgyng disceat like a new set
Rasour. Wherefore love thou malice rather then honesty, rather to lie then to
say truth. For thou delightest in all manner of pernicious speech, oh thou
desceitful tongue. Wherefore, god shall utterly rende thee up by the roots and
destroy thee, and he shall throw thee down out of thy tabernacle, and pluck
thy roots out of the land of the living.

Read diligently and mark well the. 73. Psalm which altogether belongs
unto this matter.

Woe be to the proud wealthy in Sion, Amo^. ^*
even to such as think them selves so s^re upon the mount of Samarya which
hold them selves for the best of the world, and rule the house of Israel at
their own pleasure. Ye are taken out for the evil day, even ye that sit in the
stool of wilfulnes: ye that lie upon beds of Iuory and use your wantonness upon
your couches, ye that eat the best Lambs of the flock, and the fattest
calves of the drouy, ye that sing to the lute, and in playing of instruments
compare your selves unto David, ye that drink wine out of goblets, and
annoynte your selves with the best oil, but no man is sorye for Joseph hurt,
therefore shall ye now be the first of them that shall be led away captive, and
the lustye ^heare of the wilful shall come to an end.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
CAine the figure of all wicked and blou Gene. 4.
die Tirantes, slew his brother Abel, and while he lived he was a runnagate, and
a vagabound having an unquiet conscience and now being dead he is a dampened
soul in Hell.

The Tirauntes and mighty Giaunts Genesis 6. 7.
with all the world besides 8. persons were drowned, after they had lived long
in plea sure and in all the filthy desires of the wic ked flesh without
repentance.

The filthy Sodomites lived in all kind Genesis 19.
of voluptuous abhominacion, the conclusion was that they were consumed with
fire and brimstone from heaven.

Pharao handled the people of God very Exodus 14.
cruelly entending utterly to destroy the^ all, but the end was, that both he
and all his army were drowned in the sea, and the people of Israel harmeles
preserved.

Sisar and Abimelech being grievous Iud. 4.
enemies of gods people, were slain of women.

Holophernes for all his proud lokes en tending to destroy the Israelits, was
slain him self of a woman.

Saul persecuted David the servant of 1. Reg. 3^
God, entending to slay him, but David escaped, and Saul was slain with the
sword

Achitophel remembringe what wicked 2. Reg. 17
council he had genen Absalon against his Father David, and perceiving that it
would not come to pass so mighty is God to destroy the wicked councels of the
ungodly he went home and hanged him self.

^bsolon pursuing and sekinge his Fathers 2. Reg. 18*
death, in the midst of his furye was hanged, by the hear of his head on a
tree, and so dyed. 3. Reg. 2.


Ioab was slain, because he killed two good men, even Abner and Amasa.

The house of Hieroboam because he 3. Reg. 15.
made Israel to sin, was destroyed by the sword of Baasa king of Israel.

Queen Iesabel that great enemy to the 4. Reg. 9.
servants and Prophets of the Lord, was thrown down hedlonge out of an
high windewe, and trodden down with horses feet, and at the last devoured and
eaten up of dogs. Iehu slew the house of Achab for the Prophets that were
slain. ^. Par. 24


King Ioas was slain of his own servants, because he slew Zachary the so^
of the high Priest Ioiada, without a cause. 4. Reg. 25


The wicked king Sedechias, which so cruelly handled the Prophet Jeremy: had
both his eyes put out, and being fettered with chains of Iron, he was carried
priso ner into Babylon, where he miserablye died.

Amon that most proud accuser and inuentour Hester. 7.
of mischiefs against the Jews, preparing a pair of galows for good Mar
docheous that faithful Israelite, was han ged upon them him self.

They that accused Daniell to y^ king Dan. 6.
and sought his death, were cast into the dongeon, and devoured of the Lions.

The ungracious and wicked Judges, Dan 13
which sought the death of that godly woman Susan, were slain them selves.

Andronicus, which s^ew that good man 1. Match.
Onias, was slain him self.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
WOE be to you that are rich, that have Luke 6*
therein your consolation. Woe be to you that are full, for ye shall honger. Woe
be to you that now laugh, for ye shall wail and weep. Woe be to you when all men
shall praise you, for so did their fathers to the false Prophets.

Many walk of whom I have told you Phil. 3.
often, and now I tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of
Christ who se end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is
their shame which are worldly minded.

Go to now ye rich men, weep and houle one your wretchedness that shall come
up Jacob. ^*
on you. Your riches is corrupt, your garments are motheaten, your gold and
silver is cankered, and the ruste of the^ shall be a witness unto you and shall
eat your flesh as it were fire. etc.

I heard a voice from heaven sayinge^ Apoc. 17
O my people come away from Babylon that great whore and mighty, strompet the
mother of the abhominacions of the whole earth. Come away I say from her, that
ye be not pertakers of her sins, that ye receive not of her plages, for her
sins are gone up to heaven, and god has remembered her wickedness* Reward her
as she re warded you, and give her double, accor^dinge to her work. And pooer
in double to her in the same cup which she filled unto you. And as much as
she glorified her self and lived wantonly, so much pour ye in for her of
punishmente and sorrow. For she said in her self, I sit being a Queen and
am no widow and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come at one day,
death and sorrow and hunger, and shall be brent with fire. For strong is the Lord
god which judges her.

Examples out of the new Testament
The rich and proud glutton which was ^uke. 1^
gorgeously apparelled, and fared daintely every day, and yet would have no
pity on the poor Lazare, dyed and was carried in to hell.

Judas that betrayed Christ, hanged him Acc. 1*
self.

Herod which greatly vexed the congregation Act. 1^*
of Christ, and slew James the brother of John: even in the mids of his pomp
and glory, was smitten down of the Lords angel and was eaten with worms, and
so miserably perished.

Elimas the sorcerer and false Prophet Act. 13*
resisted Paul's preaching, but he therefore was stretght ways stricken blind
through the mighty power of God.

Against the most horible and damnable sin, the sin against the holy ghost.
IF the Devil which seeks nothing but thy des^ruction, labor so to harden
thy heart that thou contrary to thy knowledge even of a pretensed and wilful
malice should impugn the truth of Christ's gospel, and persecute the same in
his menbers, and so sin against the holy ghost, and blaspheme the Lord thy
God unto the damnation both of thy body and soul, look that above al things
in this be half thou leauest not unto his wicked temtations if thou ^enderest
thine own salvation, but rather withal thy power resist him by calling these
holy scriptures unto thy remembrance.

Examples out of the old Testament.
I will put him out of the book that ^od. 33
sins against me.

A man that speaks evil of his God, (...). 33.
shall bear his sin, and he that blasphemeth the name of the Lorde^, let him
dy^ the death: All the people shall stone him, whether he be a citezen or a
stranger: what soever he be that blasphemeth the name of the lord, let him dye
the death.

If one man sins against another, ^eg. 2
God may be merciful unto him: but if a ny manne sin against God, who
shall pray for him?

The soul that does ought presumt^ ^m. 15.
ously, whether he be an Israelite or a strau^ ger, the same blasphemeth the
lord. And that soul shall be rooted out from among his people, because he has
despised the word of the Lord, and has broken his commandment. That soul
therefore shall perish, and his sin shall be upon him.

They rejoice in doing evil, and delight ^o. ^
in wicked things.

They make boast of their sins them ^ay. 3
selves as the Sodomites did, and hide the^not. Woe be unto their souls, for
they have rewarded (...) unto themselves. Bid the righteous do well, for they
shall enjoy y^ fruits of their study. But woe be unto the ungodly and
vnrigheeous, for they shall be rewarded after their works.

Thou shall not pray for this people, Iere. 7.
thou shalt neither give thanks nor bid prayer for them. Thou shalt make no
in tercession to me for them, for in no wise will I hear thee. Read^ fourth.

This said the lord unto me, thou shall not I^re. 4^*
pray to do this people good, for though^ they fast, I will not hear their
prayers: Though they offer burnt offerings and sacrifices, yet will not I
accept them. For I will destroy them with the sword and hunger and pestilence.

Examples out of the old Testament.
THe servants and all the army of the 4. Reg.
proud Senacherib, were destroyed for their blasphemy against god.

Holo^rnes blasphemed God when ^t. 3
he said, that there was none other god of the earth but Gabuchodonosor, and
therefore was he afterward slain even of a woman.

Nabugodonosor blasphemed god, when he said to the three children, who is the
God that ca^ deliver you out of my hands?

The children of Isarell blasphemed god ^re. 44.
and therefore perished, when they said to the Prophet Jeremy: As for the words
that thou haste spoken unto us in the name of the lord, we will in no wise
hear them: But whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, that will we do. We
will do sacrifice and offer oblations unto the queen of heaven, like as we and
our forefathers, our kings, and our rulers have done in the cities of Judah and
in the streates and fields of Jerusalem. For then had we plenteousnesse of
vitails, then were we in prosperytye and no mysfortune came upon us. But sense
we left to offer and to sacrifice unto the queen of heaven, we have had
scarsnesse of all things, and perish with sword and honger.

Those Jews blasphemed God, which ^ach. 1.
said, let us go and make a couenaunte with the Heathen that are round
about us. For since we departed from them, we have had sorrow enough.

Nicanor blasphemed god when he said ^ach. 1^
Is their a mighty one in heaven that commanded the Saboth day to be kept. It
was answered, yea even the living god, the mighty Lord in heaven, commanded
the. vii. day to be kept. Then said be: and I am mighty upon earth, to
command them for to arm themselves, and to perform the kings business.

Sentences out of the new Testament. Math. 1^*

He that is not with me, is again me, says Christ. And be that gathers not
with me scatereth abroad. Therefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgeuen unto men, but the blasphe mye against the spirit
shall not be forgeuen unto men. And whosoever speaks a word against the
son of man, it shall be forgeuen him. But whosoever speaks against the holy
ghost, it shall not be forgeuen him neither in this world nor in the world to
come.

If any men see his brother sin not unto 1. Ioh. 5^
death, let him ask and he shall give him life for the^ that sin not unto death.
There is a sin unto death, for which I say that a man should not pray.

It may not be, that they which were Heb. 6^
once lightened and have tasted of the heau^nly gift, and were become
partakers of the holy ghost and have tasted of the good word of god, and the
powers of the world to come: If they fall away 'that they should again be
renewed by repentance which in them selves do crucify the son of God making
a mock of him.

If we sin wilfully after that we have Ieb. 10.
received the knowledge of truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins,
but a fearful loking for judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the
adversary. He that despises Moses law, dies without mercy under two or
three witnesses: How much sorer suppose ye shall he be punished which treads
under foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament,
wherewith he was sanctified, as an unholy thing, and dishonor to the sprite
of grace.

Examples out of the new Testament.
The Jews spoke blasphemy against ^ke. 11.
the holy ghost, when they said of Christ: by the power of Beelzebub does he
cast out Devils.

They were blasphemers which said ^ath. 27.
to Christ hanginge on the cross, thou that destroyedst the Temple of GOD and
buildest it again in three days, save thy self. If thou be the son of God,
come down from the cross.

They also spoke blasphemy against the holy ghost, which now adays of a
pretensed malice condemn the word of God as herey, and persecute the
preachers thereof as heretics and sedicious persons.

Against the despising of Gods word, of the plagues that follow the same.
IF the devil go about to pluck down thy mind from the love of gods word,
and to move thee to despise the doctrine of thy salvation, so that thou
should no more delight in the most comfortable gospel of Christ, which is
the power of god to save so many as believe, but rather in things of vanity,
^ake head that thou leanest not to his subtle suggestions, but standing in awe
of gods judgments* and fearing his plagues, valeauntly resist Satan with
these holy scriptures following.

Sentences out of the old Testament. Leuit. 26

IF ye will not harken unto me says the Lord nor keep my commandments, but
despise them. etc. then will I do this again unto you. I will set my face
against you, and ye shall fall before your enemies, and they that hate you,
shall reign over you. I will make the heaven over you as hardyron, and your
land as hard as bras. I will send my wild beasts upon you which shall rob
you of your children, and destroy your cattle. I will send a sword up on you
that shall avenge my Testament with you. I will send the pestilence among you.
Read the Chapter to thend.

If thou will not harken to the voice of the Lord thy God to keep and to do all
his Deu. 27.
commandments and ordinances, then all these curses shall come upon thee,
and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the Town, and cursed in the Field,
cursed shall thine almayrye be and thy store. Cur sed shall the fruit of thine
body and the fruit of thy land be, and the fruit of thy oxen, and the flock
of thy sheep. The Lord shall make the pestilence clean to thee, un til he have
consumed thee from the land: The Lord shall smite thee with madness blindness,
and dasing of heart, because thou seruedst not the Lord thy god with ioyfulnes
and with a good heart for the abou^da^cs of all things, wherefore thou shall
serve thine enemy which the Lord shall send o^ thee in hunger and thirste, in
nakedness, and in need of all things: And he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy
neck until be have brought the to naught. Read this Chapter diligently from
the beginning to thend.

They have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and have blasphemed the
Esaias. 5.
word of the holy one of Israel. Therefore is the wrath of the Lord kindled
against his people and he shakes his hand at the^, yea he shall smite so, that
the hills shall tremble. And their carcasses shall lie in the open streate.

They have offended the law, changed Esaias. 24
the ordinances, and made the everlasting testament of none effect. And
therefore shall the curse devour the earth, for they that dwell thereon have
sinned, wherefore they shall be brent also, and those that remain shall be very
few. The sweet wine shall moorn, the grapes shall be weak, and all ye have
been merry in heart shall sighe.

The mirth of tabrets shall be laid down, the chere of the joyful shall cease,
and the pleasure of the Lutes shall have an end. There shall no more wine be
dronk with ^irth, the beer shall be bitter to them that drink it, the wicked
cities shall be broken down, al houses shall be shut, that no man may come in.

Woe is me says the Prophet all is Esaias. 24
full of sinners which offend of purpose and malice: And therefore (O thou that
dwell upon the earth) there is at hand for thee fear, pit, and snare.
Whosoever escapes the terrible cry, shall fall into the pit, and if he
come out of the pytte he shall be taken with the snare, For the windows above
shall be opened, and the foundation of the earth shall move: The earth shall give
a great crake, it shall have a sore ruin, and take an horrible fall: The earth
shall stacker like a dronken man, and be taken away like a tent: Her misdedes
shall light so heavy upon her, that she must fall and never rise up again:
Read ^e whole chapter Esaias. 30.


These people are obstinate they provoke me unto anger, they are lying children
and even such children that will not hear the law of God.

They say to them that see, see nothing: and to the Southsayer, tell of
nothing for to come if it be either good or honest, but (...) pleasant
things unto us, and preach us false things.

Tread out of the way, go out of the path, turn away the holy one of
Israel from us. Therefore thus says the holy one of Israel: for as much as ye
have cast away his word, and have comforted your selves with power and
nimblenes, and put your confidence therein: therefore shall ye have this
mischief again for your destruction, and fall like an hye wall that falls
because of some rift or blast, whose breakinge comes suddenly. And your
destruction shall be like an earthen pot which breaks, no man touching it, but
breaks so sore that a man shall not find a sheu^r of it to fetch fire in,
or to take water out of the pit. For the God, even that holy one of Israel has
pro mised thus. Esaias. 44.


Who suffered Jacob to be trodden under foot, and Israel to be spoiled: was it
not the Lord himself, against whom we have sinned? we had no delight to walk
in his ways, neither were we obedient to his laws. Therefore has he poured
upon us his wrathful displeasure, and strange battle, which makes us have
to do on every side, yet will we not understand. He burns us up, yet it
sinketh not into our hearts.

Because they have sorfaken my law Ierem. 9.
that I gave them, and have not hard my voice, nor yet walked thereafter but
follow ed the wickedness of their own hearts, and run after straung gods, as
their fathers taught them:

Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts the god of Israel: behold I will
feed this people with wormewoode, and give them gall to drink: I will scatter
them among the Heathen, whom nether they nor their fathers have known. And I
will send a sword among the^ to persecute them and never leave, unto I bring
them to naught

If ye will not obey me, says the Lord Ierem. 17
to walk in my laws which I have given you, and to hear the words of my
servants the Prophets whom I sent unto you, and rising up timely, and still
se^ding. If ye will not follow them I say, then will I do unto this house as I
did unto Silo, and will make this City to be abhorred of all the people of the
earth.

I will send upon them, sword, honger, Ierem. 29.
and pestilence, because they have not regarded my words, which I sent to them
says the Lord by my servants the Prophets.

They would not take heed says y^ lord, Zach. 7
but turned their back, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear.
Yea they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the law
and words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the Prophets before
time. Wherefore the Lord of hosts was very wroth at the^. And thus it came to
pass, that like as he spoke and they would not hear, even so they cried and
I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
NOhe preached to the old world and Genesis 7
exhorted them to repent and amend their life, or else god would surely plage
them. But they laughed Nohe and his doctrine to scorn, and continued in their
abominable, and wicked living. What followed? was not all the world drowned,
right persons only excepted?

Lot seeing the unnatural most filthye Genesis 19
uncleanness of the stinking Sodomits coun selled them to cease so to much
licentiouslye* to offend their Lord God. They would not hear Lot, nor his
sermons, but churlishly entreated him: what followed: Were they not consumed with
water, fire and brimstone from heaven? O most dread full plages.

After what sort the Israelites were plaged for their disobedience to gods
word, the books of the old Testamente do evidently declare.

The despisers of Gods word are punished many and sundry ways: as with
sword, pestelence, hunger, wild beasts and fire.

Of the sword. Read Exodus 5. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 22. Job. 19. Esaias. 1. Iere. 9.
15. 20. 25. 29. 42. 43. 46. 50.

Of the pestelence. Read. Exodus 5. Len. 26. Deuteronomy. 18. 32. 1. Reg. 24. Psalm.
104. 1. Par. 22. Ezech. 7. 14 18. 33. 23. 38. Math. ^4.

Of hunger. Read^ Deuteronomy. 28. 32. 1. Reg. 24. Psalm. 104 Eccle. 39. Iere. 1^. 14.
18. 54. Amos. 8. Act. 11. Apoc. 18.

Of Beasts. Read Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. Reg. 27. 3. Reg. 13. Sap. 16. Esaias.
18. Jeremy. 11. 15. 27. 34. Ezech. 4. 5. 14. 20. 32. 13. 39. Ose. ^

Of Fire. Read. Gene. 19. Leuit. 10. Nume. 1. 16. 21. Deuteronomy. 32. Iosue. 7. 3.
Reg. 18. 2. Par. 7. Job. 1. 15. 20. 31. Psalm. 10. 87. Esaias. 9. 26 66. Ier. 15.
2. 7. Treno. 1. 2. Baruc. 4. Eze. 22 28. 30.. 38. 39. Danie. 3. Ose. 8. Amos.
1. 2. Abd. 1. Mich. 6. Sopho. 2. Nahum. 3. Zach. 11. 12. 13. Apo. 9. 11, 18.
19. 20.


Sentences out of the new Testament.
Whosoever shall not receive you nor Math* 10
hear your Sermons, go ye out of that house or city, and shake the duste of
your feet. Uerely I say unto you it shall be more easy for the land of Sodom
and Gomorre at the day judgment, then for that city.

Woe be to the Choraryn, woe be to the Math. 11
Bethsaida. For if the miracles which were showed in you, had been done in Tire
and Sidon, they had repented long agone in sackecloth and ashes. Nevertheless
I say unto you, it shall be easier for Tire and S^ don at the day of judgment,
then for yon. And thou Caparnaum, which art lift up unto heaven, shall be
brought down to hell. For if the miracles, which have been done in thee, had
been showed in Sodom, they had remained unto this day. Nevertheless I say to
you it shall be easier for the land of Sodom in the day of judge Math. 21
meant, then for thee.

The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation which
shall bring forth the fruits of it. And whosoever it shall fall upon it will
grind Math. 13
him to powder.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are
sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together as the hen
ga thered her chekins under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your habitation
Luke. 10.
shall be left unto you desolate.

He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and
he John. 3.
that despises me despises him y^ sent me.

This is the condemnacion that light is come into the world and men loved
darkness more then, light because their deeds John. 12.
were euel.

He that refuses me, says Christ and receaueth not my words, has one that
judges him. The word that I have spoken shall judge him at the last day.

If I had not com and spoken unto them, John. 5.
they should have had no sin, but now they have nothing to cloak their
sin withal. Act. 13.


It was mete that the word of God should first have been preached unto you,
but seeing you put it from you, and think your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, low tunre to the gentiles for so has the Lord commanded us. 1. These. 4


He that despises the preacher despises not man, but God which has sent his
holy Spirit among you. Heb. 10*


He that despises Moses law dies without mercy under two or iii. witnesses.
Of how much sorer punishmente suppose ye, shall he be counted worthy, which
treads under foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the testament
asl an unholy thing? Uerelye it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God.

The ungodly shall be so plaged, that they Apoca. ^
shall seek death, and find it, they shall desire to dye, and death shall
fly from them.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THey that were called to the marriage and would not come, but ungently treated
the messengers, were destroyed and their city brent up.

When Christ came near to Jerusalem, Luke, 19
he beheld the city and wept on it, saying, if thou knew also even at this
day, the things appertayninge unto thy peace, thou would be more diligent to
look upon them.

But now are they hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee,
that thine enemies shall cast a bank about thee, and besiege and keep thee
in on every side, and make thee even with the ground, with thy children which
are in thee. And they shall not leave one stone upon an other, because thou
know not the time of thy visitation. Hereof may we learn that Jerusalem was
destroyed, because they would not receive Christ nor his word, but despised
the doctrine of their salvation, and the preachers of the same. If we do not
repent and amend, the same or more grievous plages abide us.

Against carnal security and fleshlye living withont fear of God.
IF Satan tempts thee to live after the lusts of the flesh without all fear
of God and to tak^ no thought for thy salvation, that by this means he may
provoke thee unto all kind of wickedness: look hat thou by no means geuest
place to his temptations, but rather watch the more diligently about hyne own
health yt he may not prevail agaiust he, enarme thy self with strong
faith, and always et before thine eyes these Scriptures following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Seek after God, and your soul shall Psalm. i^
live.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, Esaias. 55
and call upon him while he is nie. Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways,
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, so
shall he be merciful unto him. etc. Follow not the lust of thine own heart in
thy strength, and say not: tushe, how have I had strength? or who will
bring me under because of my works? for doutles god shall avenge it. And say
not: I have committed no sins, and what evil has happened to me? For the
almightye is a pacient rewarder. Because thy syn is forgeuen thee, be not
therefore without fear, neither heap one sin upon another. And say not,
tush: the mercy of the lord is great, he shall forgive me my sins be they
never so many. For like as he is merciful, so goes wrath from him also, and
his indignation comes down upon sinners.

Make no tarying to turn unto the lord and pute not of from day to day, for
suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall destroy
the.

A man knows not his time, but like as the fishes are taken with the angle,
and as the birds are caught with the snare even so aremen taken in the
perilous time when it comes suddenly upon them.

Let thy garments be always white, and let thine head lack no ointment.

Examples out of the old Testament.
THe people to whom. Nohe preached, would not amend but went forth to Genesis 7.
nousle themselves in all kind of worldlys pleasures, and even in the mydes of
their riotous living, the floude came and drowned them all.

The Sodomites laughing Lot and his Genesis 19.
exhortations to scorn, and going forth to offend God with their to much
beastlike voluptuo^snes when they thought themselves to be in most safeguard
and furdest from any misfortune, were consumed unto ass^es with fire and
brimston from heaven.

The Jews setting at naught y^ admo 4. Reg. ^
nitions of Gods Prophets continued in all their wickedness and even in the mids
of their carnal security and fleshly quietness, god sent their enemies upon
them, which destroyed their country slew a great number of people, and led
away most miserable captives so many as pleased them, leaving the residue
behynd them in most wretched slavery.

Sentences out of the ne^ Testament.
Watch for ye know not what hour Math. 24
your lord will come. Of this be ye sure that if the householder knew what hour
the thief would come he would surely watch and not suffer his house to be
broken up. Therefore be ye also redye, for in such an hour as ye think not,
will the son of man come. Mhth. 2


Watch and pray, that ye fall not into temptation. Luc (...).


Let your loins be gird about and your lights be burning, and your selves
like men that wait for their master when he will return from the weddings,
that as foone as he comes and knocks, they may open unto him. Blessed are
those servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find waking.

Take heed, watch and pray: for ye know Mark. 13.
not when the time is: As a man which is gone into a strange country, and has
left his house, and given his substance to his servant, and to every man his
work, and commanded the porter to watch: Watch ye therefore, for ye know not
when the master of the house will come, at eue^ or at midnight, whether at the
cockecrow ing, or in the dawning, lest if that he come suddenly, he find you
sleping: and that I say unto you, I say unto all: watch.

Take heed to your selves, least your ^uke. 21
hearts be grieved with sur^eting and dron kennes, and cares of the world, and
that day come suddenly on you. For as a snare shall it come on all them that
sit on the face of the earth,

It is even now hye time that we w^ke ^om. 13
out of sleep.

Behold now is the accepted time, Cor. 6.
now is the day of health.

The day of the Lord shall come even a^ These. 5.
a thief in the night. When they shall say peace and no danger, then comes
there on them soden destruction, as the trauayling of a woman with child, and
they shall not escape. Let us not sleep as other do but let us watch and be
sober.

The Lord is at hand. Phil. 4.


Be patient and settle your hearts, for Jacob. 5
the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Behold the judge sla^deth before the
door.

Be sober and watch, for your adversary 1. Pet. 5.
the devil walks about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour,
whom resist being steadfast in faith.

The day of the Lord shall come as a 2. Pet. 3.
thief in the night.

Little children eue^ now is the last time. 1. John. 2


Yet a little while, and he that shall come, Heb. 10.
will come, and will not tarry.

If thou shall not watch, I will come on Apoc. 3
(...) as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.
Behold I come shortly. Hold that which thou have that no man take away thy
crown.

Behold I stand at the door to knock. if any man hear my voice, and open the
door I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

The time is at hand. He that does en^ Apoc. 12
let him do evil still. And he which is filthy, let him be filthy still. And he
that is righteous, let him be more righteous. And he that is holy, let him be
more holy. And because I come shortly and my reward with me, to give every man
according as his deeds shall be.

Examples out of the new Testament.
That servant that diligently watches Math. 14
at all hours for his masters coming and does in the mean season such things
as his ma ster has appointed him is blessed: for he shall enter into his
masters joy. But the servant that lives without care is idle, watceth not,
looks not diligently upon his office thinks not of his masters coming
smites his fellows, eats and drinks with the dronken that servant I say,
shall have his part with Hipocrites, and shall be cast into utter darkness, where
wepinge and and gnashing of teeth shall be.

The 5. wise virgins prepared both lamps and oil, tarriing, and watching
Math. 25
for the coming of the bridgrome. There fore when he came they being in a
redines went in with him unto the wedding. But the five folishe Uergines
slumbred and slepte, so that when the bridegroom came they were unprepared and
had no oil in their lamps, and therefore were they shut out of the doors,
and entered not into the marriage. Let us therefore watch, for we know neither
the day nor the hour, when the son of man shall come.

Against the slacknes of doing good works.
IF that futtle Satan by his crafty persuasions would at any time make thee
believe that thou art so thoroughly justified by faith alone, and so perfectly
saned by Christ only, that thou nedes^ not do any good works nor yet bring
forth the fruits of faith according to thy profession but live as thou lust,
and do what thou will, so at the full art thou saved through faith in Christ,
take hed^ thou be not deceived with this painted visar, but rather to the
vtteri^ost of thy power, labor to co^ firm thy faith with the plenteous
doing of good works workyng thinc own salvation as blessed Paul says with
fear and trembling. And that thou may be the better encouraged so to do,
set these sentences and examplee of the holy scripturs ever before the eyes of
thy mind. Genesis 17.


Examples out of the old Testament.
I am the almightye God walk before me and be perfect.

Keep the commandments of the lord Deuteronomy. 6.
thy God, and his witnesses, and his couenauntes which he has commanded thee,
and do thou that which is acceptable and good in the sight of the Lord, that
thou may prosper.

Now Israel, what does the lord thy god Deu. 10
require of thee? but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his
ways, to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and
withal thy soul, namely that thou keep the commandments of the lord and his
ordinances, that thou may do well and prosper. Psalm. 1.


The faithful man is like a tree planted by the water side, that will bring
forth his fruit in due season.

Thou hate althem (O Lord, that work Psalm. 5.
iniquity.

Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? Psalm. 15.
who shall rest upon thy holy hill? Even he that leads an vncorrupt life and
works righteousness. etc.

Read the whole Psalm.

Depart from evil and do good. Psalm. 34


Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be Psalm. 37.
thou doing good.

Cease to do evil, learn to do good, Seek Esaias. 1.
to do right, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherless to his right, defend
the widow.

Break thy bread to the hungry, the nedy, Esaias. 58.
and the wayfaring man lead thou into thy house. When thou see a naked man,
cover him, and hide not thy face from thy neighbor. etc.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Nohe was perfect and just in his generations, Genesis 6. 7.
and walked with god, loved god, that is to say, believed in god, leued god,
feared god, sought the glory of god, and framed his life according to the will
of god, being plenteous in all good and godly works: therefore God preserved him
and his, when he dro^ned all such as were wicked persons and doers of no good
works.

Abraham was obedient to the will of god Genesis 17
and walked after his holy commandments, ever doing good works: god therefore
meruelously blessed him, made him the father of many nations, and promised him,
that in his seed all kinreds shoulds be blessed.

God saw the works of the Ninevites Ion. 3
(which undoubtedly sprange of faith, for they believed the words of the
Prophet) and he had psty on them and spared them.

Sentences out of the new Testament
Now is the axe put to the root of the Math. 3
trees. Every tree therefore that brings not forth good fruits is hewn
down and cast into the fire.

Let your light so shine before men that Math. 5
they may see your good works and glorify your father which is in heaven

Every good tree brings forth good Math. 7
fruit. An evil tree brings evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit nor an evil tree good fruit. Every tree that brings not forth
good fxnte, is hewn down andeast tnto^he fire.

Whosoever hears of me these words (...) Math. 7
does the same, I will like^ him unto a wise man, which bnilte his house on a
rock, etc.

A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings soorth good things,
and Math. 12
an evil man out of that evil treasure, brings forth evil things.

If ye were Abraha^s children, ye would ^ohn. 8
do Abraham's works.

We know that God hears no sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of
(...). 9
God and obedyent his will, him hears he

He that has my commandments, and keeps the^, he it is that loves me. If
any man loves me, he will keep my words.

In the sight of God they are not righteous which hear tee law but the doers
of the law shall be ^uste fied.

We are the workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which
god had prepared that we should walk in them.

Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds and put on the the new man which
after the image of god is shapen in righteousness and true holiness.

walk worthy of y^ lord in all things y^ please, being fruitful in all good
works, and ^ncreasing in the knowledge of God.

Br^theren be not werye in well doing.

Be to them that believe an example in word, in conversation, in love, in
spirit, in faith, and puernes.

Thou which art the man of Godfollowe righteousness, godliness, love, patience,
and ^eaknes.

The suer ground of God remains and has this seal. the lord knows them
y^ are his: and let every man that calls on the name of Christ depart from
iniquitye.

Lusts of youth look thou avoid and follow righteousness, faith, love, and pear
with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart. 1. Pet. 2.


Dearly beloved I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. And see y^ ye have honest
conversation among the heathen, that they which backbite you as ill doers, may
see your good works, and praise God in the day of visitation. 1. Ioh. 1.


If we say we have fellowship with god, and yet walk in darkness, we lie, and do
not the truth. But if we walk in light, even as he is in light, then have we
fellowship with him, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son makes us clean
from all sin.

He that does righteousness, is righteus. 1. John. 3.
He that commits sin, is of the devil, for the devil sins from the
beginning.

See ye be doers of the word, and not James. 1.
hearers only, deceauing your selves.

Read the whole epistle of S. James.

God says to the false and feigned Christians: Apoc. 2
I know the blasphemy of them which call themselves Jews, and are not, but
the Sinagoge of Satan.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THe idle were reproved because they Math. 20.
wrought not, and they that would labor, were hired into the vineyarde, and
at night received their reward.

The servants which received tale^ts Math. 2^
of their Lord and occupied them and gained more by them, are praised and
rewarded for well doing. But the idle servant which would not occupy the
talent that he received of his Lord but went and hid it in the ground,
gaining nothing therewith, was cast into utter darkness, where weping and
gnashing of tethe is.

The fig tree which was unfruitful, and Marc. 1^
brought for the nothing but leaves, was cursed and withered away.

Zache a ruler among the Publicanes Luke. 19*
gave half his goods to the poor and if he did any man wrong, he restored him
four times as much. Therefore said Christ un to him: this day is health come
to this house forasmuch as he also is become the child of Abraham.

Against the troublous tempests of sickness, of loss of goods or any other
kind of adversity.
IF Satan when thou art assailed ^ any kind of trouble, labors to move
thee to despair of Gods good will toward thee, as though he had utterly
forsaken thee, given thee over, and care no more for thee, but sends thee
that punishment and lays y^ cross upon thy back (...) toke^ of his anger and
heavy displeasure against the, take heed that y^ do not submit thy self to
his subtle sugestio^s, but rather persuade thy self that thy cross.

Whatsoever it he comes of the good will of god toward thee, and is sent
unto thee for thy health, comfort, and salvation. Look that thou therefore
take it both patiently and thankfully and that thou may so do furnish thy
breast with these treasures of Gods most blessed word.

Examples out of the old Testament.
After y^ lord has punished the and tried the ^eut. 5.
at last he will have pity on the. The lord kileth and makes alive brings
down to the grave and fecheth up again. The lord makes pore and makes rich
brings low and heauethe upon high.

Call upon me in the time of thy troble, Psalm. 50.
and I will deliver the and thou shall honor me. Blessed is y^ man who^ thou
nurterest, O Lord, and teach him thy law.

It is for my wealth y^ thou haste brought Psalm. 119.
me under, y^ I may learn thy righteousness

Naked came I out of my mothers womb Job. 1.
and naked shall I turn thither again. The Lord gave and y^ lord has taken
away even as it pleases y^ lord so is it come to pass, blessed be the name of
the lord.

If we have receued prosperity at y^ hand Job. 2.
of god, why should we not also receue and suffer aduersitye.

Blessed is the man who^ God punishes Job. 5.
therefore refuse not thou ye chastening of ye almighty. For though he make a
wou^d he gives a plasture, though he smite, his hand makes whole again.

My Son despise not the chastning of Pro. 3.
the lord neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord
loves, him he chasteneth and yet delights in him, as a father in his own
son.

Whatsoever happens unto thee, receive Ecble. 2.
it, suffer in heuines and be patiente in thy trouble. For like as gold and
silver are tried in the fire, even so are acceptable men in the furnace of
adversity.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Job being grievously plagued not only Job. 1.
with the loss of his goods, but also with di ^ers diseases of his dody,
praised the Lord ^uen in the midst of his trouble.

Tobye when he had lost his sight grudged Tob. 2.
not aginst god that the plage of blindness chaunsed unto him but remained
steadfast in the fear of god, and thanked God ^l the days of his life.

Ezechias being warned of God by the Prophet to prepare himself unto death^
death, prayed unto god in the time of his sickness, and obtained fifteen years
longer to live.

Manasses being before an Idolatour and a 2. Par. 3
maintayner of Idolatry, after that god had plagued ^i, even when he was in
tribulation He besoght ye Lord his god, and humbled him self excedingly before
y^ god of his fathers, and made intercession to him: He hard his pray er, and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom.

Examples out of the new Testament
IF any man will come after me, let hi for Math* 26
sake him self and take his cross and follow me.

By many tribulations must we enter Act. 14.
into the kingdom of heaven*

We rejoice in tribulation, for we know Romans 6
that tribulation brings experience, experience brings hope, and hope
makes not ashamed.

If we suffer together, we shall be gloryfied Romans 8
together. For I suppose that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of y^
glory which shall be showed upon us.

Be patient in tribulation. Romans 12


If we live, we live to be at the lords will Romans ^4
And if we dye, we die, at y^ Lords will, whether we live therefore or die we are
y^ lords.

While we are punished, we are corrected 1. Cor. ^
of the Lord, lest we should with this world be condemned.

We are not weried, but though our ont 2. Cor. 4
ward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our
exceading tribulation which is short and light, prepares an exceeding and
everlasting weight of glory unto us, while we look not on the things which
are seen but on the things that are not seenne. For things which are seen,
are temporal, but things which are not se^e, are eternal.

Read the fist Chapter of the second to the Corinth. 2. Cor. ^


My strength is made perfect through weakness. Uery gladlye therefore will I
rejoice of my weakness, that the strength of Christ may dwell in me. etc.
Jacob. ^


Read the. 12. chapter, to the Hebrews.

Be pacient and settle your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

Take the Prophets for an example of suffering adversity and of long patience:
which spoke in the name of the Lord Be hold we count them happy which endure.
^e have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the Lord made,
for the Lord is very pitiful and merciful. ^. Pet, 2.


The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptacion.

Examples out of the new Testament.
The prodigal son before he was Luc. 15.
plagued gave his mind to all kind of riot and vnthriftye rule, but after that
he was stricken with pouertye, he knowledged his fault, he submited himself to
his fathers will and pleasure, and so was receued again into favor.

A certain man after he had been punished Ihon. 5.
with sickness for his sin by the space of thirty eight years, was made whole
of Christ.

There have been many good men both Heb. ^*
in the old and new testament of whom some were racked and would not be
delivered that that they might receive a better resurrection some tasted of
mockinges and scourgings some of bonds and emprisonmente some were hewn a
sunder, were tempted were slain with swoordes walked up and down in sheues
skins in goats skins, in need, in tribulation, and vexatio^, which the
world was not worthy of, they wandered in wilderness, in mountains, in dens, and
in caves of the earth. etc.

Against the temptation of the deuel for not satisfiing the law, of god, and
for nby sinful living.
If Satan at the hour of death or any other timet would pluck the from thine
assuered and steadfast faith in Christ's blood, and persuade thee that thou art
but a dampened wretch forasmuch as thou have not so trained thy life that thou
have satisfied the law of God, but rather lived wiakedly and therefore deserved
everlasting damnation, be on good comfort, des^ pair not, harken not to this
wicked suggestions, neither have thou respect to thy works and deeds (which
when they be most righteous and pure) ax as the Prophet says like a cloth
polluted with m^ strue if they be compared to that puritye and cleanes which
the law requires, and should be judged of Gods righteousness according to
their deserts, but settle thine eyes steadfast on Christ and his merits.
consideringe not what thou haste done, but what Christ has done for thee, if
thou repent and beleu^ and always have these most comfortable Scriptures in
thy remembrance.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
AL they that put their trust in thee, shall Psalm. ^*
not be put io confusion. Call to remem bra^ce (O Lord) thy tender mercies and
thy loving kindness which have been ever of old. Oh remember not the sins and
offenses of my youth, but according unto thy mercy think thou upon me O
Lord, for thy goodness sake. Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord, for he
shall pluck my feet out of the net.

Because he has put his trust in me, I Psalm. 91
will deliver him, I will defend him because he has known my name.

Read the. 104. Psalm.

I know that thou would maliciously ^say. 48
offend, says God. Therefore have I called thee a transgressoure, even from my
mothers womb. Nevertheless for my names sake I will withdraw my wrath, and it
shall be for my honors sake, if I patiently forbear thee and root thee not out.

By the knowledge of him which is my ^ay. 53
righteous servant says God the father of christ He shall iustefy the
multitude, forasmuch as he has borne away their sins.

To know thee O Lord, is perfect right 15
ousnes, yea to know thy righteousness and power, is the root of immortality.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Adam transgressed the^ commandment n. 3
of God in Paradise, and by his transgression made both himself and all us
bound to eternal dampnation. Genesis 9


Nohe fell into the sin of dronkennes Genesis 19


Lot was not only dronken, but also lay with his own daughters: and so
committed the grievous sin of incest.

Abraham denied his wife. Genesis 20


Moses committed manslaughter. David Exo. 2
committed both manslaughter and whoredom.

Solomon was an idolator. 2. Reg. 11


All these with many other of the old 3. Reg. 1^
Testament were sinners and offended the Lord their God by breaking of his
laws, yet for their faith which they had in that blessed seed which was so
often promised of God the father, even Jesus Christ they were saved.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
We are not under the law but under grace.

The law of the spirit that brings life Rom^ 8
through Jesus Christ has made me free from the law of sin and death.

Christ is the perfect fulfilling of the law To. 10
to iustefy all that believe

No man is iustefied by the law in the sight Gala. 3.
of god. The just, that is the faithful christian, shall live by faith.

Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, while he was made
accursed for us. Gal. 5.


As many of you as are justified by the law, are fallen from grace. We look
for and hope in the spirit to be iukified through faith. Ephesians. ^


Christ is our peace, he has broken down the wall that was a stop between us,
he has also put away through his flesh the cause of hatred, that is to say:
the law of commandments contained in the law written, be so making peace
has reconciled us to God through his cross.

Christ has put out the, band wrighting, Colos. ^
that was against us contained in the law written, and that has he taken out
of the way and has fastened it to his cross and has spoiled rule and power,
and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed ouor them in his own
person.

Be it known to you, ye men and brethren, Act. 13.
that through this manne Christ: Is preached unto you the forgeuenes of sins,
and that by him all that believe at justified from al things from the which ^
could not be justified by the law of Moses

Examples out of the new Testament.
Math. 9
Matthew was a tol gatherer. Math. 20


The Apostles were ambicious and did strive among them, who should be highest
and of greatest authority. Luke. 7.


Mary Magdalen was a greuouse sinner. John. 18


Peter denied and forsook Christ thrice. Act. 9.


Paul persecuted the congregation of Christ. Ioh. 7


Al these yea and why not? transgressed the law of God (for as Christ says)
Moses has given you a law and yet none of you do fulfill it not with standing
for their repentance and faith in Christ's blood they obtained remission for
their sins and are made the sons of God, heirs of God and fellow heirs
with christ of everlasting glory.

For if righteousness come by the law, Galat. 1
then died Christ in vain but euerl^sting life is y^ gieft of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Against disperation for thy late conversion and turning unto God.
IF Satan lay to thy charge that thou come very late and turneste unto God
out of time, and therefore there is no hope to be looked (...), set these
scriptures before thine eyes, and ever remember that there is no conversion
unto God, to late in this life ^f it come of faith, but at whatsoever hour a
sinne^ repents, believes and turns unto God, he is well accepted and freely
receives remission of all his sins.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Let the ungodly man forsake his own Esaias. 55.
ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginat ions, and turn again unto the
Lord, so shall he be merciful unto him, and to our God, for he is very ready to
forgive.

Return (O thou rebel Israel) says the Ierem. 3
lord, and I will not turn away my face from you. For I am holy says the
lord, and I will not turn away my face from you. For I am holy says the Lord,
and I will not be angry for evermore.

As truly as I live, says the Lord god, Ezech. 32
I have no pleasure in the death of the wic ked, but much rather that the
wicked turn from his way and live. Turn you, turn you, from your ungodly
ways. O ye of the house of Israel. Oh, wherefore will ye die. The wickedness
of the wicked shall not hurt him whenever he conuerteth from his ungodliness.

If the wicked shall repent him and turn Ezech. 18
from al his sins which he has wroughte, and shall keep all my precepts and do
judge meant and righteousness, he shall live and shall not dye, I will not
remember all his iniquities which he has wronght. In his righteousness which he
has wroght, shall he live. It is not my will says the lord, that the wicked
should dye, and not rather that he should turn from his ways and live.

Turn and repent ye from al your iniquities, and your iniquityes shall work
you no displeasure. Cast away from you all your wickedness, wherein ye have
offended, and make you a new heart, and new spirit. And wherefore will ye die.
O ye house of Israel. For I will not that any man should dye, says the Lord.
Return therefore and live.

Turn to the Lord, your God, for he Joel. ^
is great and merciful pacient and of much kindness, and redye at all times to
forgive yea, eue^ when he is at the point to punish.

At all times when a sinner turns unto me says the lord. I will no more
bear his iniquityes in my mind, but freely forgive them.

God appoints here no time of our co^ uersion, but whenever we turn, he
pro miseth us favor, life mercy, and forgeuenes of sin.

Examples out of the old Testament.
After that the Prophet Nathan at the Reg. 12.
commandment of god, had rebuked king David for his dissolute manner of
living. David strait ways with a sorrowful repen taunt heart turned unto the
Lord, and humbly confessed his sins, saying. I have offended the Lord. The
Prophet immediately answered, the Lord also has put away thy sin. David did
not so sone convert but that he was as sone forgeuen to signify unto us, that
at what so ever time we unfeignedly turn unto the Lord our god, he will have
mercy on us and forgive us.

The Ninevites for their abominable ^na. 3.
living were thretned utterly to be destroi ed within forty days but they
falling unto repentance and turning unto the lord their GOD were forgeuen,
spared and not destroyed.

Sentences out of the new Testament
They that are whole, have no need of a Math. ^
Physician, but they that are sick? I came not to call the righteous but
sinners unto repentance?

Come unto me all ye that labor and Math. ^
are laden, and I shall refreshe you. Here Christ prescribes no time, he only
bids us come and be the burdens of our sins never so grievous and heavy,
yet will be ease us of them.

The Son of man came to seek and Luc. 19
save that which was lost.

God will have all men to be saved, and 1. Tim. ^.
to come to the knowledge of the truth. If any man sins, we have an
advocate 1. Ihon. 2^
with god the father, Jesus Christ ye right ous one. And he it is that
obtains mercy for our sins, not for our sins only, but for all the
worlds.

Examples out of the new Testament
The laborers in the Lords vineyarde Math. 1^.
that came last of all received their penny s^wel as they that came in the
morning, nei there had one more then another.

The history of the thief, which was full Lu^. 32.
of wicked deeds, and never turned unto God, until the very hour of his
death declares manifestlye that there is no con uersion in this life to late,
if it be accompanied with true repentance and unfeigned faith. The thief
hanging on the cross, and at the point of death only said to Christ, Lord
remenber me when thou co^mest into thy kingdom. And Christ well accepti^g his
conversion, said unto him: truly I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with
me in Paradise.

Against sin, death, and hell.
IF Satan in the time of sickness or else wha^, go about to fray thee and to
quench thy spirit, either with the greatness of thy sins or else with the
error and fearcenes of death and hell, be not dismayed, but with a lustye
courage resist his temptations, with these most sweet and comfortable
scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
I am he indede says god he which puteth Esaias. 43
away thy sins, yea and that for mine own sake, and will remember them no
more. As for thine offenses I have driven the^ away like the clouds and thy
sins as the miste. Turn thee again unto me, for I have redeemed thee.

Where is there such a god as thou art^ Mich. 7.
that pardonest wickedness, and forgeuest the offenses of the remnaunt of thine
heritage. He keeps not his wrath for ever. And why? for his delighte is to
have compassion. He shall turn again, and be merciful to us, he shall put
down our wickedness, and cast al our sins into the bottom of the sea.

Out of the power of death says the lord will I deliver them, yea from the
death it self will I redeem them. O death I will be thy death, O hell, I will
swallow thee up.

Examples out of the old Testament.
That holy king and prophet David, being Psalm. 20.
fully persuaded that by Christ which was to come, Satan's head was broken a
sunder, sin was vanquished, death was overcome, hell was swalowed up, that
they could nothing hurt that faithful man lamented and sorowed, that he
continued so long in this vale of misery, and most hartelye wished to be
delivered out of this prison, and to go unto the Lord his God.

That godly and aunciente father Toby, knowing that neither sin, death, nor
hell, can do any thing against gods chose^ people which in Christ have gotten
the victory over them al, so that they need not to fear death, nor any thing
to come after this life, prayed to god on this manner: Now O lord drale with me
according to thy will, and commau^d my spirit to be received in peace, for more
expedient were it for me to dye, than to live.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Christ shall save his people from their Math. 1
sins.

Behold the Lamb of God that takes John. 1
away the sins of the world.

There is no damnation to the^ that are Romans 8.
graft in Christ Jesus.

Christ came into the world to save ^. Titus. 1.
sinners.

The blood of Jesus Christ makes us ^. John. 1
clean from all sin.

Through the name of Christ al Prophets Acts. 13
bear witness, that so many as believe in him, shall receive remission of their
sins. Death is swalowed up into victory. Where 1. Cor. 15
is thy sting O death? Where is thy victory O hell? The sting of death is
sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which has
given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

By death has Christ put him to flight Heb. 2.
that had lordshippe over death, that is to say, the Devil, that he might
deliver them, which through the fear of death were all their life time in
danger of bondage.

Examples out of the new Testament.
SO sone as the ancient father Simeon Luke. ^
had seen and received Christ into his arms, he fering neither sin, death
nor hell, showed himself ready to depart out of this world, and spoke with a
joyful voice O Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. etc.

Blessed Paul knowing that through Phil. 1.
Christ the power of sin, death and hell is so altogether weekened, that they
can do the faithful no harm: wished to be losoned out of this world, and to be
with Christ.

Against them that deny the resurrection of the body.
IF that old enemy Satan labor to persuade thee, that there is no
resurrection of the dead, but as the body returns to death, so shall it for
ever continue in the earth, and never receive life again, nor line either in
glory or in peace after this present life, that therefore thou may live as
thou just, defend thy self against his cruel assaults (...) these sentences
and examples of the holy scripture.

Sentences out of the old, Testament.
The Lord kills and makes alive again, Reg. 2.
brings down to the grave, and stretchet^ up again.

I am sure, that my redemer lives, and ^b. 19.
that I shall rise out of the earth in the latter day, and that I shall be
clothed again with this skin, and see god in my flesh, yea I my self shall
behold him, not with other but with these same eyes.

These that be dead will I raise up again ^. Esdr. 2
from their places, and bring them out of the graves.

Thy dead shall live, even with my body Esaias. 26.
shall they rise again. Awake and singe ye that dwell in the dust. For thy dew
is even as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out of her them that
be under her, the earth shall disclose her own blood, and shall no more hide ^em
that are slain in her.

Your bones shall flourish like an herb. Esaias. 66


Behold says god, I will put breath in Ezech. 37.
to you, that ye may live, I will give you sinowes, and make flesh grow upon
you and cover you over with skin, and so give you breath that ye may live and
know that I am the Lord. Thus says the Lord god, behold I will open your
graves (O my peo ple) and take you out of your Sepulchers Dan. 12.


Many of them that sleep in the duste of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reproof.

Examples out of the old Mestament.
THe Prophet Helias raised up from death 3. Reg. 1^
unto life the Son of the widow of Sarepta, which is in Sidon.

Helizeus obtained of God a Child for 4. Reg. ^
his Hostess, which dyed, and as afterward by the prayer of Helizeus raised
unto life.

Read and mark diligently the 37. Chapter of Ezechiel.

A certain woman with her 7. Children 2. Mac. ^
were cruellye put to death because they would not eat swines flesh, contrary
to gods word at the commandment of the king. The second of the brethren
said unto the king, thou most ungracious person put us now to death,
but the king of the world shall raise us up (which die for his laws) into
resurrection of everlasting life.

The mother of the 7. Children said thus unto them: I cannot tell how ye ^am in
my womb, for I neither gave you breath nor soul, no, nor life. It is not I
that joined the members of your bodies together, but the maker of the world,
which fashioned the birth of man and began all things. Even he also of his
own mercy shall give you breath and life again, like as ye now regard not
your own selves for his laws sake.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
AS touching the resurrection of y^ dead Math. 23
have ye not read, what is said unto you of god, which says: I am Abraham's
god, and Isaackes god, and god is not the god of the dead, but of the living.

The hour shall come in the which all ^ohn. 5.
that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth, they that
have done good, unto ye resurectio^ of life, and they ye have done euel unto ye
resurrection of damnation.

I know that my brother shall rise again ^ohn. 11
at the latter day.

God has raised up ye Lord, and shall rais^ ^. Cor. 6.
us up by his power. If there be no risinge again from death, then is Christ
not risen.

If Christ is not risen, then is our preaching ^. Cor. 15
vain, and your faith is also vain.

Read and commend to memory the xv. Chapter of the first to the Corinth.

The Lord Jesus shall change our vlle bodies, that they may be fashioned like
un to his glorious body. etc.

I would not brethern have yon ignorant 1. Tim. 4
concerning them which are fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow not as other do, which
have no hope. For if we believe y^ Jesus Christ died and rose again, even so
they also which sleep by Jesus, will god bring again with him. Read forth.

Examples out of the new Testament.
CHrist raised from death the daughter of Math. 9
y^ Rular, the Son of a certain widow, and Lazarus, with many other. These are
evident examples of our resurrection.

After Christ had given up the ghost, Math. 27.
the graves did open, and the bodies of ma ny Saints which slept, arose, and
came out of y^ graves after his resurrection and ca^e into the holy city and
appeared unto many.

Christ rose again from death the third Math. 28.
day according to the scriptures, and was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve.
After that he was seen of mo then five hundredth brethern at once. etc

S. Peter raised Tabitha from death. Act. 9


S. Paul restored unto life a certain ^ct. 20
young man named Euticus.

Christ rebuked the Saduces, because Math. 22
they believed not the resurrection of ye ded.

The Epicures and Stoykes laughed S ^ct. 17.
Paul to scorn, when as he at Athens taught the resurrection of the dead. But
he defended the doctrine.

Against them that deny the immortality of the soul.
IF Satan or any of his, tempte thee to live at thy pleasure, laboring to
persuade the ^y sophi sticall reasons of carnal imaginations y^ the soul of man
is but as the breath of other beasts, and that after the dissolutio^ of the
body it is nothing, nether lives afterward, but has an end with the body,
take heed that thou geuest no place to such wicked and most damnable doctrine,
but enarme thy self a against it with these authorities of the holy Scripture

Sentences out of the old Testament.
GOd created man in his own image, Genesis 1
in ye image of god created he him, male and female created he them.

The Lord god shope man even dust from Genesis 2.
the ground, and breathed in his nostrels the breathe of life, and Adam was
made a living soul.

I should utterly have fainted, but that ^salm. 27
I believe verily to s^ the goodness of ye lord in the land of the living.

Like as the heart desires the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee O
god. My soul is a thirste for god, yea even for the living god, when shall I
come to ap pear before the presence of god?

The body shall be turned again unto Eccles. ^
earth, from whence it came, and the spirit that is the soul shall return
unto God which gave it.

God made man to be undestroyed, that Sap. 2.
is to say immortal, yea after the image of his own likeness made be him. The
souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and the pain of death shall not
hurt them. In the sight of the vnwisethey seem to die, and their end is taken
for very destruction, but they are in rest.

The hope of the faithful is full of immortality.

The righteous shall live for evermore Sap. 5.
their reward also is with the Lord, and their remembrance with the highest.
Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a bewtiful crown of the
Lords hand. Read the third, fourth and fifth Chapiters of the book of Wisdom.

We are the children of holy men, and look for the life which God shall give
unto them, that never turn their faith from him.

Examples out of the old Testament.
THe holy scriptur testifies, that Ehore Number. 16
and his accomplices went down quick unto Hell, and the earth covered them, so
that they perished. By this it is evident, that the souls of the wicked are
immortal, and live in the pains of hell fire.

If Saul had not believed both the resurrection Reg. 28.
of the body, and immortality of the soul, he would never have gone about to
have had Samuel raised up.

When David saw that his child was ^. Reg. 12
dead, he wept no more, but said, I shall go unto him, he shall not come again
unto me

Helias prayed for the rasing up again ^ Reg. 17
unto life of his hosts Son, saying: O Lord my God, I beseech thee let the
soul of this Child come into him again. And he revived. ^ob. 2


When Tobias was laughed to scorn of his elders and kinssolkes, which said un
to him: here is thy hope for the which thou have done almose and buried the
dead. He rebuked them and said: say not so, for we are the children of holy
men, and look for the life which god shall give unto the^ that never turn
their faith from him.

Again he prayed unto god on this ma Tobi. 3
ner. Now O Lord, deal with me according to thy will, and command my spirit
to be received in peace. For more expedient were it for me to dye, than to live.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Fear not them which kill the body, Math. 10
but are not able to kill the soul. But rather fear him, which is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell.

There is no man that has forsaken house, Luke. 18
either father or mother, either brethren or wife, or children, for the kingdom
of Gods sake, which shall not receive much more in this world, and in the
world to come life everlasting.

This is the will of him that sent me, John. 6
that every one which sees the son, and believes on him, have everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know John. 10
them, and they follow me, and I give un to them everlasting life, and they
shall never peryshe, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

I am the resurrection and the life. He John. 11
that believes on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever
lives and believes on me, shall never dye.

Let not your heart be troubled. Ye believe John. 14
in God, believe olso in me. In my fathers house are many mansions. If it were
not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you even unto my self,
that where I am, there may ye be also.

Father I will that they which thou have ^oh. 17.
given me, be with me where I am, that they may see my glory, which thou have
given me.

We know that if our earthy mans^on ^. Cor. 5
of this dwelling were destroyed, we have a building of God an habitation not
made with hands, but everlasting in heaven. Read forth the Chapter.

When soever Christ our life shall appear, Col. 3
then shall you also appear with him in glory.

The lord himself shall come down ^. These. 4.
from heaven with a shoot and the voice of the Archaungel and tromp of God.
And the dead in Christ shall arise first, then we which shall live (even we
which shall remain) shall be caught up with them also in the clouds, to mete
ye Lord in the air and so shall we ever be with the lord. Therefore comfort
your selves one another with these words.

The spirit or soul is before God a precious thing and much set by.

Christ was killed as pertaning to the flesh, 1. Pet. 3.
but was quickened in the spirit. In which spirit he also went and preached
unto the spirits that were in prison. etc. Here it is manifest that the
spirits or souls of men are immortal, and live either in glory or in pain
after they be losoned from the body.

Examples out of the new Testament.
WHen the Sad^ces denied the resurrec Math. ^
tion of the body, and the immortaliti of the soul, Christ answered the^
saying have ye not read what is written? I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
By this testimony of the holy scripture Christ declares that though Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and al other of the faithful be dead, as concerning their bodies,
yet their souls live with God, and are immortal.

The history of the pore man Lazarus and of Luke. 16.
the rich unmerciful gloton, proves euidentlye that the souls dye not with
the body, nor yet sleep until the day of judgment (as the ungodly Anabaptists
dream) nether are they cast into purgatory, as the papists teach, but that the
souls of the faithful go immediately after their departure from the body,
unto eternal glory, and the souls of the unfaithful, unto everlasting
damnation: so that the souls of al men are immortal and live for ever, either
in heaven or in hell, in glory or in pain.

The parable of the unrighteous steward sets forth also the immortality of
the soul, as these words of Christ do declare, Make you friends, says he of
the wicked Mammon, that when ye shall depart hence, they may receive you into
euerlastig dwell ling places.

The soul came again to the widows ^uke. 7
son, to the rulers daughter, to Lazarus, to them that after Christ's
resurrection came out of their graves, to Dor^s, to Eu tichus. etc. Which thing
declares ma^festlye that the soul dies not with the bo die, but still lived
and remained immortal.

The thief that hanged one the cross Luke. 23
with Christ, said unto him. Lord remember me, when thou shalt come into thy
kingdom. Christ answered verelye I say unto thee, this day shall thou be
with me in paradise. The body of the thief dyed shortly after, and was
committed to the earth. The soul of the thief was in paradise with Christ.
The soul therefore lives and remains immortal, or else must Christ be a
liar. But let God be true, and all heretics liars.

Saint Stephen being at the point of Act. 7
death, prayed, saying: lord Jesus take my spirit.

Saint Paul wisshed to be losoned out Phil. 1
of his body and to be with Christ. I saw under the altar, says Saint
John, the souls of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they had, and they cried with a loud voice, saiing: how long
tariest thou O lord, bolye and true, to judge and to avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth? and long white garments were given unto every one of
them. And it was said unto them, that they should rest for a little season
until the number of their fellows and brethren, and of them that should be
killed as they were, were fulfilled.

Of the glory of heaven, and of everlasting life.
IF Satan go forth to tempt thee that thou might lose the inheritance of
the kingdom of god, and say unto thee that thou art a sinner and an
abominable liver, and therefore thy faith is frustrate, and thy hope vain in
loking for the glory of heaven, for God is a righteous Judge, and rewards
every man according to his deeds and merits: let all these his crafty^
assaults nothing move or abashe thee, but call to thy remembrance and
believe stedfastlye, that the heavenly kingdom is not given thee for thy
merits and desartes (for so should thou receive nothing but eternal
dampnation) but for the promises which god the father has made thee in
Christ's blood, if thou repent and believe. Therefore cast away that rightousnes
which the hypocrites challenge by their good works, and lay hands on that which
comes by faith of Jesus Christ, so can thou not be deceived, so can satan
win nothing at thy hand, so can it not but come to pas, that thou shall enjoy
the glory of heaven through Christ Jesus. And that thou may doubt nothing
in this behalf, imprint these sentences and examples of the holy ^ scripture
diligently and earnestly in thy mind.

Examples out of the old Testament.
THe Lord has saved me because it was ^salm. 23.
his pleasure.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy name.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, which forgeueth
all thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities, which saves thy life from
destruction and crowns the with mercy and loving kindness. Esaias. 37


They that put their trust in me shall inherit the land, and possess my holy
hill. Osec. 13


Thy damnation (O Israel) came of thy self, but thy salvation comes of me.

Examples out of the old Testament.
That princelye Prophet David being thoroughly persuaded that the inheritance of
the glory of heaven and the possession of everlasting life is the free gift of
god through Jesus Christ, and is denied to none, although never so sinful and
wretched, if they repent: being nothing appalled with his former sinful liuig,
as though y^ should pluck him from the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom,
knew what blessed felicity and joyful quietness the souls of the faithful do
enjoy after their departure from the bodies: lamented, he carried so long in
this vale of misery, and no less fervently desired to come and appear before
the face of god, than the thirstye heart desires to come to the water brooks.

The godly ancient Tobye knowinge gods exceeding great liberality in the gift
of everlasting quietness after the humble submission of him self unto the Lord
his god, wyshed rather to die than to live, and beseched god that his spyryte
might be received in peace.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers ^uc. 12
pleasure to give you a kingdom.

Everlasting life is the gift of God through Romans 6
Christ our Lord.

Whom god has predestinate, them Romans 8.
has he also called, whom he has called, them also has he justified whom,
he has justified, them has he glorified.

The eye has not seen, and the ear has 1. Cor. 2
not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, what things god has
prepared for them that love him.

By grace are ye saved through faith, and Ephe. 2
that not of your selves. For it is the gift of god, and comes not of
works, least any man should boast him self.

God saved us, not for the deeds of righ Tim. 3.
teousnes which we wrought, but for his mercy and loving kindness.

God has given us everlasting life, and 1. John. 5
this life is in his Son, he that has the Son has life: and he that
has not the Son of god, has not life.

Be faithful unto the death, and I will Apoc
give thee the crown of life.

To him that overcomes will I give Apoc
to sit with me in my seat, even as I overcame and have sitten with my father
in his seat.

Examples out of the new Testament.
The reverent and ancient father Simeo^ Luke.
being nothing apalled with y^ remembrance of his sins, after he had seen
and embra sed Christ in his arms, knowinge him to be the alone Savior of the
world, showed himself ready, glad and willinge to dye, that he might enjoy
that heavenly enheritance purchased by the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Phil. ^


S. Paul being fully persuaded that al his sins were washed away in Christ's
blood, desired to be loosoned from that his mortal body and to be with Christ.

Virescit vulnere virtus.

Give the glory to god alone.

Here ends the Governance of virtue.
Here follows certain godly prayers, for sundry and diverse purposes.
A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father high and mighty king of kings, lord of Lords, the
only ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne behold al y^ dwelllers upon
earth most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our^ most gracious
sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her with the grace of thy
holy spirit, that she may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way.
Indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant her in health and wealth long
to live, strength her that she may vanquish and ouercom al her enemies. And
finally y^ after this life, she may attain everlasting joy and felicity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A general confession.
O Lord God almighty, father of mercy, and God of all comfort, we thy poor
creatures resort unto thee, knowledgyng and confessing our selves before thy
glorious majesty, that we are all grievous sinners, and can of our selves do
nothing but sin. For all our imaginations, intentes and thoughts are inclined
and disposed unto euel from our youth up. Our damnation comes of our selves,
we our selves are not able to thyncke a good thought. It is thou only that
do work in us both the will and the deed.

We are but earth and naturally the children of wrath. We of our selves are but
vain, yea lighter then vanity it self. We can do nothing without thee, theris
not one of us whole, we are all unclean, and al our rightousnes is but as a
filthy cloth. We have no more power to do good of our selves then a man of
Inde has power to change his skin, or the leoparde her spots. Now
according to this evil and corrupt inclination of our nature so have we
lived in thought^ word and deed. We have finned, we have offended, Dan. ^
we have gone back from thy law, and have not harkned unto thy word. We have
not loved the, O Lord with all our strength, with all our heart, with all our
power. We have been sore transgressors of thy commandments, we have not
putt our whole trust, and confidence only in thee. We have in our
troubles and need, not sought for help only in thee. We have not called
only upon thy name, but with false confidence, with vain supersticion, and
unlawful other, have we blasphemed thy name. We have prayed and made
intercession unto stocks and stones, and made the creatures our advocates and
mediators contrary to thy word. We reposed our trust and affiance in our own
deeds* and in such works as have been devised by men's fantasies besides the
scripture. We have wandered on vain pil gremages, offering up money, candels,
and tapers to Images and relics, with such like supersticion. We have been
slouthful in our business. We have not been fervent and diligent in doing of our
duty. Special ly on such days as be appointed for the preaching of thy word,
we have not plied our selves wholly to learn it, nor occupied our time in
prayer, and giving of thanks unto thee. And as touching the love that we ought
to have unto all men and women for thy sake, we have not been ernest in it at
al times. We have not loved our neigh hour as our selves, we have not done as
we would be done unto, we have been ungentle, vnpacie^t, discourteous, froward,
angry and displeased: we have rejoiced in our neighbors hurt and been sorry of
his welfare. We have been led with false doc trine and errors from the way of
thy truth. We have sinned with our fathers, we have don amiss, we have dealt
wickedly, therefore our most dear father which art in heaven, forasmuch as we
have blasphemed thee and not sought always the glory of thy name, grant now
that from henceforth thy name may be sanctified and hallowed in us. Grant now
that thy kingdom may come, and that in steed of sin and error thou only
may reign in us: grant now that our will may be comfortable unto thine,
and that in all adversity we may be heartily well content to suffer thy will to be
done in us. Grant now, that we be never destitute of our daily food, but that
we may always be nourished with thy word in our souls, and have such a competent
living in this life as is necessary for our body Grant now that we may even
from our heart roots, forgive one another all manner of trespass, as y^ for
Jesus Christ's sake thy Son, haste mercifully forge^ us. Grant now that where
the world the devil, and our own flesh, does daily tempt and provoke us to
sin, we may through thy strength be able to resist all their temptation, Grant
now that through thy help and grace we may be delivered from all evil, from
all danger, and peril of soul and body, from all sin, hell, and dampnation,
from all pride, and enny, from all wrath, and slouthfulnes, from
covetousness, unmeasurable and filthy living. Grant now, that from hence
forth we may be content with such fatherly pro uision as thou haste made for us
already, grant now that we may be temperate in eating and drinking. And of so
honest and cleanly conversation, that we give no man occasion of evil. Grant
now that in stead of our old feigned works we may be occupied with such
fruits of thy holy spirit, as thy word makes mention of. Grant now, that
according to the wholesome monition of thy blessed apostle Peter and of all the
scripture beside, we may be faithful true and obedient unto the king our
sovereign Lord and Supreme head immediately under Christ. And not only unto al
such officers as be sent of him, but also unto al such wholso^ laws and
iniunetions as by his authority be made for ye tranquilt ty and wealth of us his
subjects. Grant now that we al may increase in ye knowledge of the, that our
youth may be brought up in virtue, that children may obey their fathers and
mothers, that servants may be true to their masters, that landlordes may be
gentle to their tenantes, that husbands may be loving to their wives, and wives
likewise to their husbands, that men may keep their household in the fear and
knowledge of thee, ye idle people may be set to labor, and that al such as be
poor in deed, may be well and lovingly provided for. Grant ye for the love of
thee we may feed y^ hu^gry, give drink to y^ thirsty cloth ye naked, give
lodging to the^ that be harbourlesse, ^urye the dead, visit the^ that be in
prison, and help such as be in sycknesse. Finally, grant now most merciful
father, that whatsoever thou forbiddest, we may forbear it, and whatsoever:
thou* co^maundest, we may every one in his calling perform the same, and so
continue in thy service till our lives ends, that al our thoughts, words and
deds may redound un to ye glory of thee, now and evermore Ame^.

Thanks be given to God. Obedience unto our Prince^ and love to our
neighbors.
For the City or town wherein thou dwell.
EXcept thou (O merciful lord God almighty) keep the city, the watchmen wake
but in vain that keep it. Therefore O lord god, send thy holy spirit into y^
hearts of them which rule our city or town, to the intent that we with them and
they with us, may live in thy godly fear, so that it may go well with us.
And suffer us not good Lord to put our trust any more in worldly power, as
money, horse, weapon artillery, gunnes or strong walls, but much rather in
thee, which art adefender of al them that put their whole affiaunce and trust
in thee.

For kings, Princes, and Rulars.
O Lord of Lords, Jesus Christ thou art an example and glass or myror of the^
which govern and bear rule of realms, countries and cities whom they ought
to follow, for thou art the best and the wisest, and therefore can thou not
err nor do any other thing but well. Uouchsafe with the light of thy
clearnes, and with the fire of thy love, to kindle the hearts of al such as
thou through thy godly providence have instituted and ordained to be rulers
over the people, to the intent that they through thee as by a fore going light,
may see and perceive what is best to be done, and fulfill the same, and that
they taking thee always for a sure mark of their eye, do not that thing which
only seems good in their syghte, but that which may be to thy honor, to our
profitte, and to their health and salvation, to the intent also that they may
justly and duly minister, and execute their office given unto the^ of thee, so
that we with the^, and they with us, may lead a peaceable, virtuous, and quiet
life So be it.

Wheu thou go to thy labor or work.
O Most kind and gentle heavenly father thou know and have taught us how
great the weakness of man is so that no man without thy godly help, can do any
thing. Thus vo^chiafe to send us thy ho ly spirit, ye he may strengthen, stir
and indu our understanding and reason in all things, ye we this day outwardlye
shall go about. and take in hand, or it that we in wardlye shall think or
have in mind, to the intent that it may be done to thy glory, and to y^
profit of our neighbor.

A Prayer for a godly life
IT greatly greueth us, O merciful Father and everlasting God, that we through
the gre^ous and continual assaults of our enemies are not able to pass over
our years in this world with such purity of life, as we ought, and as thou
requirest of us. Uerely we are on every part so besieged and compassed round
about of our adversaries, that scarsely at any time we can be free from their
pestiferous and deadly darts, nor yet have so much respite as once to breath
toward true godliness. Oh most loving Lord, thou art our Father and we thy
children: convenient therefore is it that we thy children represent and openly
declare in our conversation the manners of thee our father.

Thou art good, gentle, loving suffering holy, righteous, faithful. etc.

It therefore becomes us thy children in our living to practice goodness,
gentleness love, charity, mercy, patience, long suffering holiness,
righteousness, faith. etc

Thou haste given us an example Ioh. 13
that even as thou have done, so we likewise should do. If we say we dwell in
thee, we ought to walk as thou haste walked.

For thou have called us not to uncleanness, 1. John. 3
but unto holiness.

Thou have delivered us from y^ power 1. These. 4.
of our enemies, that we being without fear should serve the^, in holiness and
righteous nes all the days of our life.

The blood of thy son Jesus Christ 1. Ioh. 1
has cleansed us from al sin, net that we should continue in darkness, but
rather walk in the light, as thou art in light. Thy loving kindness has
appeared unto all men, not that we should follow ungodliness and worldly
iustes, but that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world.

Thou did chose us in Christ before Ephe. 1.
the foundacions of the world were laid, that we should be holy and without
blame before thee through him.

We are thy workmanship created in Ephe. 2.
Christ Jesus unto all good works which thou ordayneste before, that we
should walk in them. Forasmuch then as all the benefytes which thou haste
bestowed upon us, are given unto this e^de, that we should walk worthy of thy
kindness, represent thy manners in our conversation, mortifye the flesh and
the lusts thereof, have nothing to do with Satan, nor the world, but lead a
good life garnished full of good works, and in all points fashioned after the
rule of thy blessed words: we most heartily pray thee to endue us with thy holy
spirit, which may take away our stony heart, and give us a new fleshly and soft
heart, kill that old man in us which is corrupt through deceiuable lusts, and
fashion in us that new man which is made after thy image and likeness in
righteousness and true holiness. Suffer us not to give over our selves again
unto our old lusts and conc^piscences, where with we were led when we knew
not thee nor thy So^ Christ, but eue^ as thou which have called us art holy,
so likewise grant yt we may^ be holy in all our conversation. O mercyful god,
not the hearers of thy law but the ful^llers of it shall be justified. Neither
sha^ Math. 7.
every one that says unto thee: Lord, Lord enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but the that do the will of thee our Father which art in Heaven. To confess thee
with our mouth, and to deny thee with our deeds, works rather our damnation
then salvation. For the true knowledge of thee consists not in talking, but
in working, not in fauouringe, but in folowinge, not in louinge, but in
living. To promise thee by mouth, that we will work in thy vineyarde, and yet
work nothing at all, declares not us to be thy sons, but rather bastardes.
To brag of the justification of faith, and not to bring forth the fruits
thereof, to glory in the merits of thy son Christ, in his blood, death and
passion, and not to live worthy in his kind nesse, to profes thy holy gospel,
and not to walk according to the doctrine thereof, to be baptized in thy name
and not to morti^y our members which are of the earth, nor to walk in a new
life, to be partakers of the divine mysteries, and not to be made one spyryte
with thee: what avails it? We are thy friends, if we do those things
that thou commaundest us. We are thy servants, if we be obediente to thy
will. We are thy Sons, if we honor and reverence thee according to thy
word. We seek thy glory, if we attempt nothing, whereof thou should be
dishonored. Leadinge a life confirmable to thy blessed will, we shall provoke
the ve ry enemies of thy truth to praise thee, but contrariwise, thou shall be
euel spoken of. Grant therefore we beseech thee, that our life may answer to
our profession: and that the light of our good works may so shine before men,
that they saying our godly conversation, may gloryfye thee our heavenly father.

Amen.
A short prayer to be said at the receiving of the mystery of Christ's body at
the holy communnion.
O Heavenly and blessed father, I render unto thee most hearty thanks for all
thy benefits, which thou have showed unto me most wretched sinner, but
specially for y^ most sweet smeling sacrifice which thy only begotten son
offered unto thee on the altar of the cross, by giving his most pure and
undefiled body unto the death for the redemption of mankind, in the remenbraunce
whereof according to thy welbeloned sons ordinance, I now receive this holy
bread, most entierly beseching thee, ye I may both be partaker of the merits
of thy dear sons body breaking, and also lead a life worthy of so great a
benefit, unto the glory of thy name.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said at the receiving of the mystery of Christ's blood in the
holy communion.
O Blessed and merciful Father, thy love toward me sinful creature is so
exceading great and unspeakable, that I cannot but give unto thee most humble
thanks* namely for the sheding of the most precious blood of thy dear Son
Jesus Christ, by the virtue whereof thy wrath stirred up against me wretched
sinner, is pacified: My ransom is paid, the law is fulfilled, my enemies
are overcome and put to flight. In remembrance of this so noble a victory and
of so great a benefit, I am come to this thy table, O merciful father to
drink of this cup. Desiring thee, that as my outward man is comforted by the
drinking of this wine: so likewise, my inward man may be comforted and made
strong by true faith in the precious blood of thy most dear son. O Lord my
heavenly, father, give me thy holy spirit, which may so rule and govern my
heart, that I never be unthankful nor forgetful of this thine exceading great
kindness: But so train my life according to thy blessed will, that what soever
I do speak or think, may be unto the glory of thy blessed name, and the health
of my soul: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For all them which lie in the extreme panges of death or otherwise.
O Pitiful Physician and healer both of soul and body, Christ Jesus: Uouch safe
to cast thine eyes upon this poor sinful creature. N^ who lies here captive
and bound with sickness, turning his weakness to thy glory and to his health. And
bout safe good Lord, to send him patience and sufferance, that he may with a
true and perfect faith fight manfully against all te^tations of the Devil, that
he may no longer continue. So be it.

A confession for all people to be said in the morning.
O Merciful and most loving father, whose love is infinite, whose mercy
endurethe for ever: We sinful creatures trustinge in thine unspeakable goodness,
and love toward us, do appear this morninge before thy divine majesty, most
lowlye confessing our manifold sins and in innumerable transgressions of thy
commandments and fatherly will. Against thee only against thee, O Lord, have
we sinned, therefore we confess our sins, we knowledge our offenses, we
accuse our selves unto the O merciful Lord, and will not hied our
unrighteousness. We find in our selves nothing but ignorance of thy will,
disobedience, mistrust, doubtfulnes in thy goodness, incredulity, hatred, and
con tempt of al spiritual things, selfloue, con fidence in our selves, and
f^ruent lustinge after carnal things of this world. And this tree of our
corrupt nature, bringethe forth continually in us none other fruit, but rotten
and unsavory works of the flesh, in thoughts, words* and doings, unto
condemnation. Wherefore, we humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, even for thy
son Jesus christ's sake, whom thou have set forth for a purchaser to^wardes
us of mercy through faith in his blood: to make our hearts clean: Take away
our stony hearts, and give unto us a true and a liuelye taith, whichshal work
continually by love, through Christ. Have mercy upon us, forgive us our sins,
for thy sons sake: Certefy our conscience of remission of the same, by thy holy
spirit, by whose operation we may so mortefye in us our old man the whole body
of sin that we continually dyinge unto sin, may walk in newnes of life, to
the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our lord. So be it.

Then say this 86. Psalm treatably.
BOw down thine ear O Lord, and hear me, for I am pore and in misery.

O preserve my soul, for I am holy: my God save thy servant, that puts his
trust in thee.

Be merciful unto me (O Lord) for I will call daily upon thee.

Comfort the soul of thy servant, unto thee O lord, do I lift up my soul.

For thou lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that call
upon thee.

Give ear Lord to my prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires.

In the time of my trouble, I will call up on thee, for thou hear me.

Among the Gods there is none like un to thee O lord, there is not one that can
do as thou do.

Al nations whom thou have made, shall come worship thee, O lord: and shall
gloryfy thy name.

For thou art great and do wondrous things, thou art God alone.

Teach me thy way O lord, and I will walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto
thee, that it may fear thy name.

I will thank thee, O Lord my god with all my heart, and will praise thy
name for ever.

For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the
neithermost hell.

O God, the proud are risen against me, and the congregations of naughty men,
have not set thee before their eyes.

But thou O lord god art full of compassion and mercy, long suffering,
plenteous in goodness, and truth.

O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thine handmaid.

Show some toke^ upon me for good, that they which hate me may se it, and be
a shamed, because thou Lord haste helped me, and comforted me.

Glory be to the father, and to the son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Then say the Creed and the Lords prayer. etc.

Lord show thy mercy upon us.

And grant us thy salvation.

O lord save the Queen.

And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee

Indue thy ministers with righteousness.

And make thy chosen people joyful.

O Lord save thy people.

And bless thine heritaunce.

Give peace in our time O lord.

Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou O god.

O god make clean our hearts within us.

And take not thy holy spirit from us. Let us pray.
O God which art author of peace and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect fredom: defend us thy
humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surele trusting in
thy defense, may not fear the power of any ad uersaryes, through the might
of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord our heavenly father almighty and everlasting god, which have safelye
brought us to the beginning of this day: defend us in the same with thy
mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither rune into
any kind of danger, but that al our doings may be ordered by thy governance,
to do always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
GOd preserve Queen Elizabeth, god destroy al her enemies, God preserve her
most honorable counselors, God aid the clergy with his spirit in setting
forth of his truth, God preserve all the nobelity of this realm, and the
commones of the same, God defend the favorers of the gospel, God change the
hearts of our enemies and send them better mynds. The power of god destroy
Antichrist with all his wicked kingdom. God send the gospel a joyful and a
free passage throughoute the whole world. God send unto all degrees such
grace, that they may walk worthyly in their vocation and calling. Amen.

The peace of God which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and minds in
the knowledge and love of God, and of his son Jesus Christ our Lord: And the
blessing of God almighty, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, be amongst
us and remain with us alwais

Amen.
Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath S. Martins.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


