Markhams farewell to HVSBANDRY OR, The enriching of all sorts of Barren and
Sterrill Grounds in our Kingdom, to be as fruitful in all manner of Grain,
Pulse, and Grass as the best Grounds whatsoever:

Together with the anoyances, and preservation of all Grain and Seed, from
one year to many years.

As also a Husbandly Computation of Men and Cattels daily Labors, their
Expenses, Charges, and uttermost Profits.

Attained by Travel and Experience, being a Work never before handled by any
Author:

AND Published for the good of the whole Kingdom.



LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop
near Fleete-Streete Conduit. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and his most worthy friend Mr. BONHAM NORTON Esquire.
Worthy Sir:

KNowledge which is the divine mother of certain Goodness, never came
unwelcome to a knowing Judgment; no more I hope Shall this my Labor to your
worthy Self, since doubtless you shall find in it many things New,
somethings necessary, and nothing which ^th not in it some particular touch of
profit: It is a work your former encouragements to my other labors did create
in me; and the wants you worthily found, I hope shall bring you supplies both
wholesome and becoming. The experience I assuer your Goodness, was the
expense of a bitter and tedious Winter, but the contentme^ (in gaining my wish)
made it more pleasant then all the three other Seasons. What ever it be, it
comes to you full of love, full of service: And since I know Virtue measures
all things by its own goodness; it is enoughto me, that I know you are that
Virtue. In you is power to judge; in you is Authority to exercise Mercy, lth
them both fly from your Goodness, with that mildness, that in them my hopes
may be Crowned, and my Self rest ever at your ser^ice.

GERVASE MARKHAM.

To the Reader.
DId not the beginning of the work it self sufficiently plead an excuse for
every part of the Work; I should (Gentle Reeder) trouble thee with a tedious
tale of the manner, matter, and cause of this Building; and therein beg that
cha^itable Alms, which the honesty of thine own Nature will give me without
any troublesome acclamation: Let it suffice, I have written no more then I have
seen, nor added a benefit which I have not known liberally bestowed upon the
industrious; of which, if you will be a pertaker, follow their Imitation, and
to good labors add a good life, and there is no fear of a Blessing: if any
man be costiue or hard of belief. I know not how to purge him, except it be
with the bitter airs of those barren places where these Sterrill Grounds are;
on which, if he live and have no food but his own labor, doubtless he will
not only belee^e, but love and admire what is written for a general profit;
and to that I leave those: The rest that are of more equal indifferency, to
the Blessings and Increase which shall come by worthy knowledge and experience.
Farewell.

G. M.

The Table and general Contents of the whole Book.
CHAP. I.
THe nature of Grounds in general Page 1 The Authors preamble ibid: The profit
of the Work 4 A satisfaction for the truth of the Work 6 The nature of barren
Grounds. ibid:
CHAP. II.
The Ordering, Tilling, and Dressing of all barren Clayes; simple or compound 9
The first Enriching of barren Grounds ibid The manner of Plowing 10 The hacking
of grounds ibid: The Sanding of grounds 11 The Lyming of grounds 12 The
Meanuring of grounds ibid: The times for all labors 13 The second plowing 14
The second hacking ibid: The first Harrowing ibid: Of Sowing the Seed ibid:
The second Harrowing 15 Falts in the Earth ibid: The Clotting of grounds 16
Another manner of Clotting 17 An Objection and Answer 20 The ordering of
Earthes where Sand wants 21 Sowing of Salt ibid: The excellency of Salt ibid:
Of Steeping Seed in Brine. 22
CHAP. III.
Of the ordering tillying and dressing of all rough barren clay as simple or
compound, being overrun with Gorse, Brom, etc. 24 The destroying of Weeds
26 Burning of Bait ibid: The breaking of the burnt Earth 27 The causes of
unfruitfulness ibid: An excellent Meanure ibid: The Plowing 28 Of diverse
Meanures ibid: Mixture of Meanures ibid: Of Weeding 29 The time for Weeding 30
The gathering of Stones. 31
CHAP. IIII.
Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of barren Clayes that are overrun
with Whinnes 32 What Whinnes are ibid: Paring of grounds 33 Making of Baits
ibid: Breaking of Baits 34 Plowing 35 Harrowing, Weeding, and the profits. 37
CHAP. V.
Of Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing all barren Clayes which are overrun with
Ling and Heath 38 Destroying of Heath 39 Another burning of Bait 40 Of
Weeding. 42
CHAP. VI.
Of the Ordering, Trimming, and Dressing of all barren Sands, bearing no thing
but mo^ie Grass 44 Of Plowing 46 Of Marling 47.53 What Marle is ibid: Of
^kalke, and the use 49 The Profit. 51
CHAP. VII.
Of the Plowing, Tilling, and Dressing of all barren Sands, that are ouerrun
with Braken, Fern or Heath 52 Of Sanding and Liming 54 Of Plowing and Sowing
ibid: Labors after Sowing 55 Of Weeding. 56
CHAP. VIII.
The Flowing, Tisting and Ordering of all barren Sands laden with Twitch and
wild Bryar 57 The destroying of Twitch and Bryar ib: Of Meanures 58 Of
Harrowing and other labors 59 Of Weeding. 60
CHAP. IX.
The Plowing, Tilling, and Ordering of Sands laden with morish stinking grass
61 Grounds for Fish Ponds 62 The Draining of Wet grounds 64 The Harrowing 67
The Weeding. 66
CHAP. X.
How to enrich and make the most bar soil to bear excellent good Pasture or
Meadow 69 Two ways to enrich Earthes ibid: Of watering Grounds 71 The belpes
in watering 72 When and how to Water ibid: The best season for Watering. 73
CHAP. XI.
The i^iching barren Grounds, for Hemp or Flax 75 Black Clay for Hemp 76 The
Weeding 78 The making ill Earth bear Hemp ib: The Weeding. 79
CHAP. XII.
The manner of Stacking all kind of Grain with least loss. 80
CHAP. XIII.
The diseases and impersections which happen to all manner of Grain 84 Crows
or Birds, and the cuer 85 Pigeons and the cuer 87 To save Corn ready to reap
88 Of Dors and the cuer 90 Of Pismiers and the cuer 91 Of field Rats and Mice
ibid: Of worms and the cuer 92 Of Rye not to be wet ibid: Of snailes ibid: Of
Grasshoppers 94 Of Moales and the cuer 95 Offenses from the influences of Heaven
96 Of Smuttinesse or Mildew, and the cuer. 97 Of Hale, and the cuer ibid: Of
Lightning, and the cuer ibid: Of Frosts 99 Of Mysts and Fogges, and the cuer
100 Of Blastings, and the cuer ibid: Corn reapt wet, and the cuer 102 Of Washed
Corn 104 To know washed corn. 105
CHAP. XIIII.
How to keep all manner of Grain thrasht or unthrasht the longest time and
how to preserve it, etc. 106 The needful use of preserving corn. ib: The
keeping corn in the ear or chafe, 108 Keeping corn dressed 109 Of Garners
ibid: Of Hutches, and their uses 110 To preserve wheat 111 To preserve Rye 117
To preserve Beans 118 To preserve Pease or Fetches 120 To preserve Lentils or
Lupins 123 To preserve Oats 125 To preserve Oat-meale 126 To preserve any
Meal ibid: The preserving of all small Seeds. 128
CHAP. XV.
How to keep Grain either for transportation, etc. 129 The use of Grain. 130
Of Pulsse. ibid: Of Rice and the use ibid: Of Wheat and the use 132 Of Oat
meal and the use 133 Of Barley and the use 135 Of Bucke and the use ibid: Of
Pulsse and the use ibid: Of French Bean 136 Of the Kydney Bean ibid: Of
Common field Beans ibid: Of Pease and their use 137 Several sorts of Pease
ibid: To transport Grain ibid:
CHAP. XVI.
A general computation of Men and cattels Labors, etc. 140 Of Plowing,
Sowing, and Mowing 141 Of Reaping and gathering Grain 142 Of Ditching,
Hedging, Plashing 143 Of Deluing and Thrashing 144 The particular expense of a
day 145 The particular Labor of cattle 147
CHAP. XVII.
The applying of Husbandry, to the several Countries 148 The carters Office
150 Of cattle for the Draught 152 The Several Labors, of the several
Months 153
MARKHAMS FAREWELL TO HVSBANDRIE.
CHAP. I.
The nature of Grounds in general: But particularly of the barren and Sterryll
Earth.

Certainly in this unthankful and vninst The Authors Preamble.
Age, where greatness and Garments only make up the virtuous, there is
nothing of less esteem then the painful labors of those pens, whose watch
and indostrie have only kept an unwearied pace, with the benesit and general
good of their Countries; no, though the despisers thereof eat no bread but the
food of their writings, so ungrateful is man to his best Teachers, and so
unhappy they that in this kind become the worlds Tutors.

Why, me thinks those squint-eied uneven accusations: those fools bolts shot
backward from the true mark; and those manifold mouth-torturing imputations,
which a world of wise (in their own conceits) will thunder against me for this
Labor; doeas it were, even now stand before me face to face, and brave me:
Why, me thinks I hear one fool (who has better fortune then wit) say;
writes he of Husbandry and is no husband; nay, I will not believe his rules
till I see his example: poor sot, how Clarke like he he speaks, as if no man
had famously written of any thing to which he had not been bound Prentise
seven years by condition; I would have him look upon Lybault and Steuens,
two of the most famous Physicians that ever lived in France; men, that in mine
own conscience never knew what belonged to the handling of a Plow, or ever
lifted Mattock above their shoulders, for they were merely Scholars, and
better knew how to gather Plants then set them; yet in this Art of Husbandry,
who has ever writ more famously, or more truly and exactly, France
flourishing more by their Theorie, then by the practice of all the pessants of
that Kingdom. So also Seres, an excellent Scholar, an excellent Hystorian, a
man that the State could not spare into the Country, yet who reads his
Agriculture, shall find such deep knowledge and rich rules for Husbandry,
that the Kingdom will ever acknowledge him for a famous Benefactor. So
likewise Vinet, a man of the same nature, the same nurture, and the same
excellence. And to look down into our own Country, was not Fitzharbert and
Goouge, gentlemen of good birth and education, far from any servile or mean
offices; yet in this Art of Husbandry, who has written with greater praise or
allowance. Master Tuffer was merely all University, and outwardly professed
only in Music, yet shall his books of Husbandry live as long as there is life
in any book of that nature. What shall I do speaking of Virgil, who although
his fame and profession was only Po^sie, yet shall his books of Husbandry be
as famous over all the World as in Italy. Now for my self, although a piece
of my life was Scholar, a piece Soldier, and all Horseman; yet did I for
nine years apply my self to the Plow, followed it with earnestness, and my
nature being euermorefull of inquisition, I could not endure to have any thing
hid, that practice, argument, or discourse could reveal unto me; nay, so
far forth (I must accuse mine own ambition) that I could not for bear any
travel, any expense, to find out the truth of any doubt I have in Husbandry
heard related, neither could ever any man's words take up my mind, till I did
by proof find that action and discourse went even hand in hand together:
whence it comes that I have been more darringly audatious to publish my
labors, then otherwise my nature or good manners would have given me leave.

There be some will say, what can I write more then I have written, are not my
two books of the English Husbandman extant; and if they contain not all my
know^dge, sure I wrong the World, or the opinions of ma^y of my Readers.

To this I answer, who knows not that Industry is a mother whose womb can
never be discharged of her whole burden, hourly bringing forth new things,
drawing every Art and Occupation to that height of excellency, that the
knowledge of our forefathers compared with the times now present, is but mere
ignorance; and shall we then be confined to our first rules, not daring to show
the better, because we have published the good: It were a tyrrannie not
sufferable, and a way to murder all the perfection in Art. For m^ne own part,
this I must both conseffe and I^stifie in mine own Works, that for thosetwo
parts of the English Husbandman, they are tracts, as casie and certain for the
ordering of our English grounds, as any that have b^ne published of that nature
within our Kingdom, and do as truly show the manner of ordering of all sor^s
of grounds (in which is any good or reasonable fertility) as either labor or
profit can wish or bring forth. But this part of which I intend now The profit
of this Work.
to treat, bath a higher aim, and shootes much more near to the mark of
commodity: For the former shows how to make the fruitful more fruitful;
this, how to make the Barren most plentiful: every good ground will of it
self bring forth (for Nature was ever a hater of Idleness) But the Barren and
Sterrill Earth, to make it full of increase and plenty, is Gratum opus
Agricolis, and such a general benefit to all good men, that the concealment
can be no less an offense then theft, robbing a man's Country of that treasure
(by negligence) which no other industry, in him, can after restore. I have
formerly written, how by Art to keep good Grounds good, and to strengthen the
weak: But now I show how to make ill Grounds excellent, and to convert that
which is Barren and unfruitful, to become rich in store and plenty: whence
shall ensue to all men, these particular profits following: First, plenty of
Corn and Pulse, because all grounds being made able and apt for Tillage, the
Kingdom may afford to sow for one Bushel that is now, hereafter five
hundred, so mighty great are the unfruitful and untilled wastes of Heathes,
Downs, Mores, and such like, which at this day lie untilled and unoccupied:
and to this abundance of Corn, will redound an equal, or greater abundance of
Grass and Pasture; for besides that, those men and Masters of many grounds,
may convert all their best and most fruitful Earth to Pasture and Meadow, and
only keep the Barren for tillage: yet also this barren earth after it has
done bearing of Corn, which will be in five or six years, shall for as many
years more, bear as good Meadow or Pasture either for breeding or feeding as
can any way be reasonably required, and then being newly made again, shall
newly begin and flourish in his first Profit, as shall be at large showed and
set forth hereafter; as I have seen with mine own eyes, to my no small
pleasure and amazement, not in one, butin diverse and sundry most vntruitfull
and hard Countries.

Secondly, whereas through the most parts of this Kingdom, there is every
year a third or fourth part of all Corn grounds lost in the fallow or tylthe
fields, one field of three, or one of four, continually lying at rest; now by
the use of the Husbandry following, you shall never keep any fallow field at
all, but have all your ground to bear you continually either Corn or Grass
in good abundance.

Lastly, whereas in all the general best parts of this Nation, you cannot have
any Grain of price, as Wheat, Barley, Rye, and such like, under two, three,
four, five, and some six times plowing; now you shall not plow above twice at
the most for the tenderest and richest grain that is to be reaped, whereby
there shall be much pains eased in the Husbandman, great travel saved from
the Cattle, and a much larger limitation of time given for other nece^ary
household and foreign businesses.

Now some may here ask me what true and upright A satisfaction for the truth
and goodness of the Work.
right testimony I can give of this my assertion, or what inducements to draw
men to a belief of my relation: though I could refer such disputers to
practice, and the experience which shall arise from such practice; yet to give
them better satisfaction, if they please to ride or walk into the North parts
of Devonshire, into the Barren or Mountainous parts of South Wales, or North
Wales, or into that wilderness of Bogges, and Barrenness, I mean that cold
vast Country of Exmore, where is nothing but unseasonableness, and they shall
even there find where the ground is industriously made and refined, as good
plenty of Corn and Grass, as in the fruitfullest vales in our Inland and
warmer Countries. Truly for mine own part, I dare boldly auow that which mine
eyes have beheld; for I have seen on oneside of the hedge nothing but moss
for grass, furs, go^sse, whynnes and all other tokens of Sterrill
barrainnesse; and on the other side as good Corn and Grass, and in as great
plenty as in any fruitful Country whatsoever, and all this brought forth but
with a little cost and some labor.

To proceed then to the full effect of my purpose Nature of Barren Grounds.
without more preambulation or satisfaction to the curious, for to the honestly
virtuous are all mine endeavors directed: you shall understand that it is meet
that euety Husbandman be skillful in that true knowledge of the natures of
Grounds, as which is fruitful, which not: of which, in my first Books I have
written sufficiently; nor do I in this Book intend to write any tittle that
is in them contained; for as I love not Totologie so I deadly hate to wrong my
friend: Grounds then as I have formerly written in my first Books, being
simple or compounded; as simple Clayes, or simple Sands; or compounded of
Clayes, Sands, or Grauels together, may be all good, and all fit to bring forth
increase, or all evil and barren, and unfit for profit; for every Earth,
whether it be simple or compounded, whether of it self or of double mixture,
does participate wholly with the Clime wherein it lies, and as that is more
hot or more cold, more moist or more dry; so is the Earth ever more or less
fruitful: yet for the better understanding of the plain Countryman, you
shall know that both the fruitful and unfruitful Ground hauetheir several
faces and charracters, whereby they be as well known as by the Clime or
situation of the Continent; for that ground which though it bear not any
extraordinary abundance of grass, yet will load it self with strong and
lusty weeds, as Hemblocke, Docks, Mallows, Nettles, Ketlocks, and such like,
is undoubtedly a most rich and fruitful ground for any grain whatsoever:
also, that ground which bears Reed, Rushes, Clouer, Daysie, and such like,
is ever fruitful in Grass and Herbadge; so that small cost and less labor in
such grounds will ever make good the profit of the Husbandman: But with these
rich grounds at this time I have nothing to do.

To come down then to the barren and unwholesome Knowledge of barren Grounds.
Grounds, you shall understand that they are to be known three several ways;
first, by the Clyme and Continent wherein they lie; next, by their constitution
and condition; and lastly, by outward faces and charracters. By the Clyme and
Continent, as when the ground lies far remote from the Sun, or when it lies
Mountainous and high, stony and rocky, or so near unto the skirts and borders
of the Sea, that the continual Fogges, Storms, Myfts and ill vapors arising
from thence, do poison and starve the Earth; all which are most apparent
^ignes of Barrenness. By the Constitution and Condition, as when the ground is
either too extremely cold and moist; or else to violently hot and dry; either
of which, produces much hardness to bring forth, and shows the Earth so
lying, to be good for little or no profit. By the outward Faces and
Charracters, as when you see (insted of Grass which should be green, flowrie,
and thick growing) a pale thin mossie substance cover the Earth, as most
commonly is upon all high Planes, Heathes, Downs, and such like: or when you
see the ground covered with Heath, Lynge, Broom, Braken, Gorsse, or such like;
they be most apparent signs of infinite great Barrenness, as may be seen in
many Mores, Forests, and other wild and woody places. And of these vnfertill
places, you shall understand that it is the Clay ground, which for the most
part brings forth the Moss, the Broom, the Gorsse, and such like: the Sand,
which brings forth Brakes, Lynge, Heath; and the mix^ Earth, which vtters
Whynnes, Briars, and a world of such like unnatural and bastardly issues.

Thus having a true knowledge of the Nature and Condition of your ground, you
shall then proceed to the ordering, eareing, and dressing of the same, whereby
it may not only be purged and cleansed from those falts which hindered the
increase thereof, but also so much bettered and refined, that the best ground
may not boast of more ample increase, nor your more fruitful placed Neighbors
exceed you in any thing, more then in a little ease.

CHAP. II.
Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all sorts of plain Barren Clayes,
whether they be simple or compounded.

THou whom it has pleased God to place upon a barren and hard soil, whose
bread must evermore be grounded with sweat and labor, that may nobly and
victoriously boast the conquest of the Earth, having conquered Nature by
altering Nature, and yet made Nature better then she was before; thou, I say,
that take this honest delight in goodness, hearken unto these following
Precepts.

As Soon, as thou haft well pondered and considethe The first enriching of
barren Grounds.
nature of thy ground, and do find that it is altogether barren and
unfruitful, the Clyme and condition not suffering it to bring forth any thing
of worth or profit, and that thou haft well weighed what manner of Earth it is;
as that namely it is either a simple Clay, or a Clay so mixed with other earths,
that yet notwithstanding, the Clay is still most predominant, thou shall then
select or choose out of this earth so much as to thy self shall seem
convenient, it being answerable to the strength of thy Teame, and the ability
of thy purse and labor to compass; and this Earth so chosen out, thou shall
about the beginning of May, in a fair season, break up with a strong Plow,
such as is generally used in all strong Clay grounds, the Share being rather
long then broad, and the Colture rather somewhat bending them straight and
even, according as the nature of the ground shall requier, which every simple
plowman will soon find out in turning up two or three furrows; for according
to the cutting of the earth, so must the Husband man fashion the temper of his
Plow.

Now for the manner of plowing this bad and barren The manner of plowing.
earth, if the ground lie free from water (which commonly all evil barren
earths do) you shall then throw down your furrows flat, and betwixt every
furrow you shall leave a balke of earth half as broad as the furrow, and so
go over and plow your whole earth up, without making any difference or
distinction of lands: but if you fear any annoyance of water, then you shall
lay your furro was more high, near and close together, dividing the ground
into feuerall lands, and proportioning every land to lie the highest in the
midst, so that the water may have a descent or passage on either side.

Now so soon as you have thus plowed up your Hacking of Ground:
land, and turned all the swarth inward unto the earth, you shall then take
hacks of iron well steeled and reasonable sharp, such a competent number, as
or your purse of power can compass, or the greatness your ground requires;
for you shall understand that one good hacker, being a lusty labourer, will at
good ease hacke and cut more then half an Aker of ground in a day; and with
these hacks, you shall hew and cut to pieces, all the earth formerly plowed up,
furrow, by furrow, and not the furrows only, but also each several balke
that was left between, and any other green swarth whatsoever the Plow bad
escaped, and it shall be cut into as small pieces as conveniently you can, for
thereby is your mould made much more mellow and plentiful, and your seed at
such time as it is to be cast into the earth, a great deal the better and
safer, covered, and much more sooner made to sprout and bring forth increase.
Now for the shape and fashion of these Hacks, you shall behold it in this
figure.



When you have thus hackt all your ground, and broke in pieces all hard crust
and toughness of the swarth; you shail then immediately, with all the
convenient speed you can (because time is very precious in these labors) if
you Sanding of Ground.
be near unto any part of the Seacoast, or to any other Creek or River where
the salt water ^th a continuali recourse, and thence fetch (either on Horse
back, or in Cart, or other Tumbrell, such as the nature of the Country or
your own ease can afford) great store of the salt Sand, and with it cover your
ground which has been formerly plowed and hackt, allowing to every A^ of
ground, three score or, fourscore full bushels of Sand, which is a very good
and competent proportion; and this Sand thus laid, shall be very well spread
and mixed amongst the other hackt and broken earth. And herein is to be noted,
that not any other sand but the salt ^and is good or available for this
purpose, because it is the brine and saltness of the same which breeds this
fertillitie and fruitfulness in the earth, choking the growth of all weeds
and bad things which would sprout from the Earth, and giving strength, vigor,
and comfort to all kind of Grain or Pulse, or any fruit of better nature.

When you have thus sanded your earth, you shall Lyming of Ground.
then, if you have any Limestone about your Grounds, (as barren earths are
seldom without) or if you have any quarries of stone (which are seldom
unaccompanied with Lymestone) gather such Lymestone together, and make a Kylne
in the most conuenientest place you have, as well for the carriage of the Lime,
as for the gathering together of the Stone, and bauing burnt your Lyme, the
manner whereof is so generally well known through the whole Kingdom, that in
this place it needs little or no repetition; you shall then on every aker so
formerly plowed, hackt, and sanded, bestow at least forty, or else fifty
bushels of Lyme, spreading and mixing it exceedingly well with the other sand
and earth; and herein is to be noted, that the stronger and sharper the Lime
is, the better the earth will be made thereby, and the greater increase and
profit will issue from the same; neither shall you need to respect the color
and complexion of the Lime, as whether it be purely white (as that which is
made from chalk) or gray (as that which is made from the small Lymestone) or
else blackish brown (as that which is made from the great stone and maine
Quarrie) since it is the strength and goodness of the Lyme, not the beauty
and color which brings forth the profits.

Now, when you have thus lymed your ground, you Meanuring of ground.
shall then take off the best meanure you have, as Ox, Cow, or Horse dung,
straw rotted either by the lyttering of Beasts, or by casting upon the
Highways; the mud of Lakes, Ponds or Ditches; the soil of young Cattle made
in the Winter time by feeding at stand Heakes, or any such like kind of
Ordure; and this meanure or compass, you shall carry forth either on
Horseback, or in Carts or Tumbrels (according as the Country will afford) and
you shall lay it and spread it upon your ground so formerly plowed, hackt,
sanded, and lymed, in very plentiful manner, so far forth as your provision
will extend: for it is to be understood, that barren and hard earths can never
be ouerladen with good meanure or compass, since it is only the want of warmth
and fatness which meanure breeds, that causes all manner of unfruitfulness.

After you have thus meanured all your ground, it is Times for all labors.
to be supposed that the season of the year will be well shot on, for the
labor of sanding will take little less then two Months, your ground being of
any indifferent great quantity, except you have the assistance and help of
many of your friends, which is a courtesy that every Husbandman may embrace,
but not trust unto; for I would not wish any man that has not Tenants to
command, to presume on other friends, lest they fail him, and so his work lie
half done, half undone, which is a great Charracter of negligence and
improuidence: but let every one proportion their labors according to their
own strengths, and the number of their ordinary families. The lyming of your
ground, will take at least half so much time as the sanding; and the meanuring
rather more then less then the lyming; so that by any reasonable computatio^
of time, beginning to Plow your ground at the beginning of May, ere it be
hackt, sanded, lymed, and meanured, Michaelmas will be come, which is the last
of September: for I allow the Month of May to plowing and backing, June and
July, for sanding; August, for lyming; and September, for meanuring. So then to
proceed on with your Labor, at Michalmas, or from that time to the end of
October, you shall Second plowing.
begin to Plow over that ground againc which formerly you had plowed, hackt,
sanded, lymed and manured; and at this later plowing, you shall plow the ground
somewhat deeper then you did before; and taking a good stitch (as they call it
in Husbandry) you shall be sure to raise up the quick earth which had not been
stirred up with the Plow before, making your furrows greater and deeper then
formerly they were, and laying them closer and rounder together then they were
before; and in this ardor or later earing, you shall be careful to Plow your
ground as clean as you can, without balkes or other escapes in Husbandry, and
as you thus plow your ground, you shall have certain Hackers, Second Hacking.
with their hacks to follow the Plow, and to cut the Earth and furrows into
very small pieces, as was formerly showed in the hacking and cutting of the
first Ardor: then so soon as your ground is thus plowed and hackt `you shall
take a pair or two of very strong and good iron Harrows, First Harrowing.
and with them you shail go over your ground, tearing that which was formerly
plowed and hackt into more smaller pieces then before, and raising up the mould
in much greater abundance then was formerly seen: which work once finished,
you shall then take your Seed, which Of fowing the Seed
would be the finest, cleanest, and best Wheat you can provide, and after the
manner of good Husbandry, you shall sow it on the ground very plentifully, not
staruing the ground for want or Seed (which were a tyranous penury) nor yet
choking it with too much (which were as lavish a foolery) but giving it the
falt due, leave it to the earth and Gods blessing.

Now so soon as you have thus sown your Seed, The second Harrowing.
forth with you shall take all the Harrowes again, harrowing the Seed into
the earth, and covering it close and well with all care and diligence; and in
this latter harrowing, you shall have great respect to break every clot as
much as you can, and so stir up and make as much mould as you can, and the
finer such mould is made, the better it is, so it couerdecpe and close; for you
shall understand, that all these kind of barren Clayes, are naturally tough,
cold, and binding, whereby they stifle and choke any thing that grows within
them; for the natural Falts in the earth.
toughness of the earth will not give any thing leave to sprout, or if it do
sprout, the binding nature thereof, so fetters and locks it within the mould,
that it cannot issue our, or if it do (with extreme struggling) rise through
the pores of the same, yet does the cold presently starve the root and make
the stem utterly unable to bring forth fruit, or any profit at all, so that
except the toughnes be converted to a gentle looseness and easy dividing of
it self, the coldness unto warmth, and the hard binding unto a soft liberty,
there can be small hope of commodity which this manner of dressing the earth
bring^ to passe^ for the mixture of the sand, takes away the toughness; the
Lime brings heat, and the meanure comfort and libettie: as for the hacking and
cutting the earth, that is to make all the roast simbolize and mix together:
for as if any Physician, Apothecarie, or Dispensatory, if he make a medicine,
and cast his ingredians confusedly one upon another, without care of mixture,
melting, or dissolution, shall find but a corrupt, disorderly, and ill
compounded receit'; so he that dresseth and meanureth his ground, and does not
by hacking plowing, or some other husbandly course, mix the earth and the
compass perfectly well together, shall seldom find profit from his seed, or
find any man of wit desirous to become his imitator. Now I must confess, that
some easy grounds of light and temperate nature, will mix very well and
sufficiently by the help of the Plough onley; but this barren hard earth of
which I now write, must only be broken by this violent and extreme labor, or
else there will neither be mould, earth, nor any other couerture for the seed,
but only foul, great, and disorderly clots and lumps, through which the grain
can never pass, and that which lies uncovered will be made a prey to foul
and other vermin which will howerly destroy it.

After you have sown and harrowed the ground, you Ofclotting grounds.
shall then see if there remain any clots or hard lumps of earth unbroken,
which the teeth of the Harrowes are not able to tear in pieces (as it is very
likely you shall perceive many) for these hard barren earthes which are
ploughed up in their green swarthes, are nothing near so easily broken and
brought to mould, as are the mellow soft earths which have been formerly
ploughed many times before, because the hard and intricate roots of the
Grass, Moss, and other quick substances growing upon the same, does bind and
hold the mould so close and fast together, besides the natural strength and
hardness of the earth, that without much industrious and painful labor, it
is impossible to bring it to that finenesse of mould which Art and good
Husbandry requires; therefore, as soon as you behold those clots and lumps to
lie vndisseuered and unbroken, you shall forthwith take good strong clotting
beetles, or mauls made of hard and very sound wood, according to this
proportion of figure.



And with these maules or clotting beetles, you shall break all the hard clots
and lumps of earth in pieces, even to so small dust, as possibly you can;
because you are to presuppose, that these clots thus hard, tough, and unwilling
to be with any easy means digested into mould, are either not at all, or else
very insussiciently mixed with the Sand, Lyme, and other meanures; and
therefore you must the rather break them, that thereby they may mix, and give
easy passage to the grain, and not like heavy poyses and dead lumps lie and
press down the Seed so that it cannot sprout.

But if it so fall out that partly by the hardness of An other manner of
clottting.
the ill earth, partly through the season and dryness of the year, that these
clots and lumpes of earth will either not be broken at all, or at least so
insufficiently that the mould will not be any thing near so fine as you would
have it; you shall then having done your best endeavor, let your ground rest
till there have fallen a good ground shower or two of rain, which may wet the
clots through and through; and then the next fair blast, you shall take your
clotting beetles, but not those which you took before in the dry season, but
some much lighter, broader and flatter, being made of thick Ash boards more
then a foot square, and above two inches in thickness, according to this
figure.



And with these flat mauls and beetles, you shall break all the unbroken clots
and lumps of earth which shall trouble or annoy your ground, making your Lands
as plain and smooth as is possible, so that the grain may have easy passage
forth; which labor as soon as you have finished, you shall then refer the
increase and prosperity thereof unto the mercies of God, who no doubt will
give his blessings according to thy labor and thankfulness.

As touching the trimming and weeding of this Corn, after it is sprung a foot
above the earth, or there abouts, you shall understand, that these hard barren
grounds are very seldom troubled with weeds; for weeds, especially great,
strong, and offensive weeds are the issues of rich and fertile soyles; yet, if
through the trimming and making of this earth (which is not commonly seen) you
do perceive any s^ore of thystles, or other grosser weeds to spring up, you
shall then in the Month of May, with hooks, nippers, and such like tools, cut
them away orpull them up by the roots, which indeed is the better manner of
weeding.

Now here is to be understood, that your ground being thus dressed and trimmed
as is before showed, you Several seeds several years.
may very well for the first two years sow Wheat or Rye upon it, but Wheat
is the greater profit and more certain seed; the third yearebestowing but
your fold of Sheep upon it, that is meanuring it with your Sheep, (for it is to
be intended, that in these barren earths sheep are the greatest stock of which
the Husband man can boast) you may very well sow it with barley, and have a
fruitful and plentiful crop thereon: the next three years, you may sow it
with Oats; and the senenth year you may sow it with small white Garden Pease
or Beans, according as you shall find the strength and goodness of the
ground (for Beans desire somewhat a rich^r soil then the Pease) then for
three or four years following the seven, you may let it lie at rest for
Grass, and doubtless it will yield you either as good Pasture, or as good
Meadow as you can reasonably (according as the necessity of your occasions)
shall require. And then after the expeence of this time, it shall be good that
you dress and order your ground again in such sort as was formerly declared;
and thus you may every year dress one or other piece of ground, till you have
gone over all your ground, or at least as much as you shall think expedient;
and without fail, he that is Master of the most fruitfullest and richest
soil, shall not boast of any greater increase then you shall, only your charge
may be a little more, and so shall be also your commoditi^, which shall make an
amends for your charge; as for your toils, yours shall be much the less, by a
just computation; for though you have many labors, yet they are but Somer
labors, and neither hurt your own body, nor your Cattle: whereas the Master
of the rich soil is in continual work both Winter and Somer, laboring twice
so much to confound the superfluous growth of weeds as you do to beget the
increase of Corn; and whereas he must ever keep a third or fourth part of his
Corne-ground without fruit, you shall not keep any which shall not yield you a
sufficient commodity.

Now me thinks I hear, in this place, to be objected Objection.
unto me, that whereas I do prescribe the sanding of these barren Earths with
the salt Sea-sand, and no other (as it is true, for all other fresh sand is
unavailable) what if the ground do lie so far within the Land, that there
is no salt sand within many score of miles of it, how then shall I make good my
barren earth; sure to fetch sand so far, will never equal the cost, or it
may be this experience has no further limits then to such hard and barren
earths as lie along the Sea coast only.

To this I answer, that al-be this salt Sea sand be of Answer.
infinite good and necessary use, enriching grounds wonderfully much, yet is
not this experience of bettering of barren soiles, so strictly feltered or
bound thereunto, but that without any use of the same, you may make your earth
as fruitful in Corn or Grass, as has been already formerly declared.

Therefore if your ground lie much within the Land, and far from the Sea, so
that this commodity of sand is not by any possible means to be gotten, then
you Ordering Earth where sands wants.
shall (having first looked into the nature of your ground, and finding it to be
by all charracters and faces a cold, barren, stiff, dry Clay, yielding nothing
but a short mossie grass, without any other burden at all as is seen upon
most Plains, and Downs of this Kingdom) first, plow it and hack it as was
before showed in the former part of this Chapter, then in stead of sanding it,
you shall lime it as beforesaid, or rather a little more plentifully, then you
shall meanure it, after (at seed time) you shall plow it and hack it again,
then harrow it as before said; then to every aker of ground, you shall take two
bushels of very dry bay salt, and in such manner as you sow Sowing of Salt.
your Wheat, you shall sow this salt upon the ground, then immediately after
the sowing of the salt, you shall sow your Wheat, which Wheat would be thus
prepared before you sow it; the day before you are to sow your grain, you
shall take Bay salt and water, and mixing them together make a brine so strong
that it will bear an egg, then put the Wheat you are to sow into that brine,
and let it steep therein till the next day then draine it as clean as may be
from the brine, and so sow it, harrow it, clot it, and weed it, as was before
declared, and no doubt but you shall find a meruellous great increase thereby:
for this I can assure you, both from a most The excel lencie of salt.
certain knowledge, and a most worthy relation, that a Gentleman buying some
store of seed Wheat, and inforst to bring it home by Sea, by some casual
means some of the sack at the vnlading, fell into the Sea, and were much
drencht in the salt water, whereat the Gentleman being grieved (as doubting
some hurt to come to the Seed) yet inforst of necessity to make use thereof
caused all the Wheat which was so wet to be sown by it self in a parucular
place, and upon the worst ground which he had, (as much dispairing in the
increase thereof) and it is most infallibly true, that of that wet Seed, he
received at least fiue-fold more profit then of any other, and from thence it
came, that this experiment of Bryne and the sowing of salt has taken place;
from which the painful husbandman has found such infinite increase to arise,
that the use thereof will never be laid down in this Kingdom, neither is the
thing in it self, without good and strong probability of much increase and
strength for the bettering of all manner of earable grounds; for there is
nothing which kills weeds, quicks, and other offenses of the ground so much
as saltness: for what makes your Pigeons dung and your Pullens dung to be
better for earable grounds then any other dung or meanure whatsoever, but by
reason of the saltness thereof, by which saltness also, you may judge the
strength and heat thereof, insomuch that the propper taste of fire, or any hot
thing is ever salt; also we say in Phylosiphie, that blood which carries the
vital heat and warmth of the body, is in taste salt, and so a nourisher,
maintainer, and increaser of all the strength and vigor of the inward
faculties; whereas Fleame, Chollar, and Melancholy, which are the hurts and
confounders of the vital spirits; the first, is in taste sweet; the second
bitter; and the last, of an earthy and dry taste, full of much loathsomenesse.

Now again you shall understand, that as you thus wet Of ^ping Seed in brine.
or steep your Wheat seed, so you may also steep any other seed, as Barley,
Oats, Beans, Pease, Lupins, Fetches, and such like; of which, your Beans,
Pease, and Lupins, you may steep more then any of the rest, and your Oats the
least. As touching Rye, it shall be good not to steep it at all, for it is a
great enemy to all manner of wet and moistnre, insomuch, that the curious
Husbandman will forbear to sow it in any great shower of rain, bearing in
his mind this ancient addage or saying, that Rye will drowned in the Hopper: as
on the contrary part, Wheat would be sown so moist that it might ftick to the
Hopper; yet notwithstanding, when you do sow Rye in any of these Inland and
cold barren Country, where sand is not to be gotten, you shall not by any
means omit the sowing of your salt before, for it is nothing near so moist as
it is warm and comfortable. And thus much touching the ordering, plowing, and
sowing of all barren, cold, and moist Clayes, whether they be mixed or unmixed,
which are plain and unfruitful, as bearing no other burden then short mossie
grass, without any other hard and boystrous substances.

CHAP. III.
Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all rough Barren Clayes, whether
simple or compound, being laden and ouerrunne with Gorse Broom, and such like.

NExtvnto these plain barren earths, which by reason of their heights and
eleuations, are subject in the Winter time to all manner of cold, frosts,
ftormes, tempests, blasts, and winds which are the perfect binderers of all
increase and growth; and in the Somer time to all hot scorchings, scaldings,
and fiery reflections of the Sun, which on the contrary part, burns and
withers away, that little seeming increase which appears above the earth. I
will place that barren Clay, whether it be mixed o^vnmixt, which lying not so
high, and subject unto those hurts and offenses, seems to be a little more
fruitful, yet either by the extreme cold moisture thereof, or the stony
hardness and other malignant qualities, is no less barren then that of which
I have formerly written, which inde^de is that barren and vilde soil, which
will neither bear Corn nor Grass, but is only overrun and quite covered
over with great, thick, and tall bushes of Gorse or Furs, which is a most
sharp, woody and gross weed; so full of pricks, that neither Horse, Beast,
Sheep nor Goats dare thrust their noses to the ground to gather up that
little poor grass which grows thereon: Andal-be these Gorse, or Furs, are
one way a little commodity to the needful Husbandman, in being a reasonable
good fuel, either for Baking, Brewing, or diverse other sudden and necessary
uses; yet, in as much as the profit being compared with the great quantity of
earth which they cover and destroy, and which with good husbandry might be
brought to great fruitfulness, is indeed no profit at all; it shall not be
amiss for every good Husbandman that is pestered and ouer-laden with such
ground, to seek by way of good husbandry how to reduce and bring it to that
perfection and excellency which may bec best for his one particular
commodity, and the general good of the kingdom wherein he lives.

Then is there another kind of soil which is nothing at all differing from
this, but is every way as barren and sterryll, which is that ground which is
over run with Broom (which is as noisome a weed as the former) and though
it have not such sharp prickles as the other, whereby to hinder the grazing of
Cattle; yet does it grow so close and thick together, and is naturally so
poisonous and offensive to grass, that you shall seldom see any grow where
this Broom prospers, besides the bittrrnesse thereof is so unpleasant and
distastefull to all kind of Cattle, that not any will ever crop or bite upon
the same, only it is of some necessary use for the poor Husbandman, in respect
that it serves him both for fuel, for thatching and the covering of his
houses (being for that purpose, of all, the longest lasting) and also for the
making of Beesomes for clensing of the house and Barnes, or else for sale and
commodity in the Market; all which profits (as before I said) being compared
with the loss of the ground and the goodness that might be reaped from the
same, are indeed truly no profits but hindrances.

Therefore I would wish every man that is Master of such grounds, whether they
be ouerrunne with Gorse, Furs, Broom, or any such kind of gross, woody, or
substantial weed: first, to cut up the iweede (of what Destroying of weeds.
sort so ever it be) whether Gorse, Furs, or Broom) as close and near unto
the ground as you can possibly, and then making them up into sheafes or big
Faggots, carry them home and stack them up very dry, so as no rain may enter
or pierce into them, for the smallest wet will rot and consume them to dirt and
filthiness; which done, you shall make Laborers with hacks, picks, and such
like tools to stub up ail the roots which you left in the ground, even to the
very bottom of the same; and these roots you shall be very careful to have
stubbed up exceeding clean, by no means leaving (so near as you'can) any
part or parcel of the roots behind you; then these roots thus stubbed up,
you shall diligently gather together into little heaps as big as moale-hils,
and place them upon the ground a pretty distance one from another, and so let
them lie till the Sun and Wind have dried them (for it is to be intended,
that this labor must begin about the latter end of April and beginning of May.

Then so soon as you find these roots are thoroughly ^urning of Bavte.
dried, you shall pile them handsomely together, laying them a little hollow
one from another, and then with a hack cut up some of the same earth, and
therewithal cover all the roots quite over, only leaving a venthole at the
top and on one side, and so let the hills rest two or three days till the earth
be a little partcht and dried, then take fire and some other light dry fuel
which is apteft to blaze, and with the same kindle every hill, not leaving them
till you see them perfectly on fire, which done, let them burn both day and
night, till the substance being wholly consumed, the fire go out of it one
self, and this in some Countries is called the Burning of Bait.

Now as soon as the fire has been extinguished for Breaking of the burnt earth
two or three days, you shall then come, and with shouels and beetles (to
break the hard burnt earth in pieces) you shall spread all the ashes clean over
the ground; which done, you shall with a very strong Plow tear up the earth
into great and deep furrows, and divide into Lands as you shall think meet
and convenient, laying them higher or flatter as you shall have occasion, and
as the ground lies more or less within the danger of water, whether it be the
ouerflowing of some near neighboring Brooks or Rivers, or else other standing
water occasioned by rain and extraordinary showers, which must be carefully
looked unto, because all ouerflowes Causes of of unfruitfulness.
and inundation of water, is a mighty destroyer and consumer of grain: but
these barren grounds of which I now write, are very seldom oppressed with water;
for most commonly they lie so high, that the continual drienesse thereof, is a
strong occasion of the much unfruitfulness. After you have thus burnt your
bait and plowed up your ground, you shall then with your hacks hack it into
small pieces, in such manner as was declared in the former Chapter; then you
shall (if the Sea be any thing near you) sand it with salt sand (as
beforesaid) then lime it and after, meanure it either with Ox dung, Horse
dung, rotten Straw, mudde of Ponds and Ditches, the spyteling of House-floores,
or sweepings of Channels and Streeres, or such like, or An excellent meanure..
for want of all these in case you dwell near unto the Seacoast (where mean^
for the most part is in greatest scarcity, and the hardest to be come by) you
shall gather from the bottom of the Rocks (where the seydge of the Sea
continually beats) a certain black weed, whica they call Hemp weed,
having great broad leaves, and growing in great abundance, in thick tufts, and
hanging together like Pease-straw; and with these weeds, you shall cover your
Lands all over of a pretty good thickness Of Plowing.
and then forth with you shall plow it again somewhat deeper, and with
somewhat greater furrows then before, raising up the new quick earth to
intermingle and mix with those meanures and helps which you had formerly
prepared and laid upon the ground; then shall you again hack it and harrow it,
then shall you take Pigeons dung, or Pullens dung (that is any kind Of diverse
meanures.
of land foul whatsoever, but by no means any water foul) or Pigeons dung
and Pullens dung mixed together, and allowing to every aker two or three bushels
thereof, which is the true quantity of seed proportioned for the same, and
this dung being broken and masht into small pieces, you shall put into your
Sydlop or Hopper, and in the same manner as you sow your Corn, you shall sow
this dung upon the ground, and then immediately after it, you shall sow your
Wheat either steept in brine or salt Seawater, or vnsteept, as you shall
think good, but in case you can neither get salt sand nor Sea-Rocke weeds,
then you shall by no means omit the steeping of your Seed; neither shall you
fail before you sow your seed, to mix with your Pigeons and Pullens dung, a
full equal part of Mi^ture of m^nures.
Bay salt well dried and broken, and so sown with the dung upon the land, and
then the seed after it; which done, you shall Harrow it again, clotit,
slight it, and smoth it, in such sort as was formerly declared in the former
Chapter, for these labors have no alterations, but must in all points be done
as was before set down.

Now touching the weeding of this earth; after the Of weeding.
Corn begins to grow above the ground, there is no fear to be had either
of Thistles, Tares, Cockles, Darnell Docks, and such like strong weeds, which
indeed are the issues of good groundsill ordered and handled: But the weeds
which you shall most fear in this place, is young Gorse, or Furs, or else young
Broom, which are very apt to grow from the leaft part or parcel of roots that
shall be left behind; nay, the very nature of those barren earths is such, that
of the one accord it will bring forth those weeds, the cold sharpness of the
air mixing with the fterrility and roughness of the earth, being the cause
that it will give life to no other better plants; therefore so soon as you
shall behold any of them to appear above the earth, though they be not half a
singer high, you shall presently, with all diligence, pull them up by the
roots and cast them away, or lay them in heaps that they may be afterward
burnt, and the ashes sprinkled upon the ground, and herein is to be observed,
that the younger and the sooner that you do pull up these weeds, the better it
is and the easilier they will come from the earth, and the sooner be destroyed:
for all those mixtures where with already you have been taught to mix your
earth, are in themselves such natural enemies to all these kind of barren
weeds, that should you omit the manual labor of destroying them (which no
good husband willingly will do) yet in time the earth of it self, and the
often plowing of the same would leave no such offense of weeds or other
growths which might hinder the Corn.

Now touching the best time when to pull away these Time for weeding.
weeds, though generally it must be done as soon as they do appear above the
ground; yet it shall not be amiss for you to defer the work till after a
shower of rain, and thenimmediatly after the ground is wet (and so by that
means more apt and willing to open and forsake the roots fastened within it)
you shall with all diligence pull them out of the ground and destroy them:
neither shall you pull them out of the ground with your hands only; for the
Gorse have exceeding sharp pricks, so that with your naked hands you are not
able to touch them, and to arm your hands, against them, with ftrong thick
gloves, would be too boistrous and combersome, so that sometimes you might
either miss the weeds, and pull up the Corn; or else pull up the Corn and
weeds both together; therefore to prevent all these casualties or hindrances,
you shall take a pair of long small wooden Nyppers, made after the form of
this figure.



And with these you shall pull the weeds out of the ground and cast them into
the furrows by the sides of the Lands, till your days work be finished, and
then with a rake you shall rake them together, and so lay them in heaps, to
dry and wither, in more convenient places, that when time shall serve, you may
burn them and use them, as was before declared.

Laftly, you shall have great respect that if this ground Gathering of stones.
be very much troubled with loose stones, as Flynt, pible, and such like, that
then you very carefully get them gathered from the ground, both before and
after you have plowed it, and to lay them on heaps in other vacant places,
where they may serve for pauings, and such like purposes when time requires:
but if the ground be ouerrunne with great or else small limestones, as for the
most part these barren grounds are; then shall you with all care gather them up
and lay them in great heaps in some corner of your field where you may make a
convenient lime-Kilne, and so there burn these stone thus gathered, which will
be both an infinite profit, and an infinite case to the rest of your labors.
And thus much touching the Ordering, plowing and sowing of all manner of rough
barren Clayes, whether simple or compound, being laden and ouerrunne with
Gorsse, Broom, and such like.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all rough barren Clayes, whether
simple or compound, that are ouerrunne with Whinnes, and such like.

NExtvnto this barren Clay which is ouerrunnewith Furs, Broom and such like,
I will place that barren and vnfertill carth, being also a Clay, wether simple
or compound, which is ouerrunne only with Whinnes, as indeed bearing little
or no other burden, or if it do bear any other burden, as some little
short, moffie grass, yet is that grass so covered over with these sharp
Whinnes, that not any beast dare put his nose to the ground, or bire upon the
same; and indeed, this kind of earth is not any whit at all less barren then
those of which I have already written: but rather more, in that the malignant
qualities thereof are not so soon corrected, nor yet the virtues so soon
restored.

To speak then first what these Whinnes are, you shall What Whinnes are:
understand that they be a certain kind of rough dry weeds which grow
bushie and thick together, very short and close unto theground, being of a
dark brown color, and of crooked growth, thick and confused, and full of
knots, and those knots armed with hard, long, sharp pricks, like thorns or
briars, they have little brown leaves which shadow the pricks, and do wind
their branch so one into another, that they can hardly be separated, yet is
their growth at any time little more then a handful above the earth, only they
spread exceedingly, and will run and cover over a whole field, choking up
all sorts of good plants whatsoever, and turning the best grass that is to
moss, and filthiness; Paring of Grounds.
wherefore if at any time you be Master of any such naughty and barren ground,
and would have it reduced unto goodness and fertillitie, you shall first take
a fine thin paring-shouell made of the best iron and well steeled and hardened
round about the edges, according to the form of this figure following:



And with this paring-shouell, you shall first pare up all Making of Baits.
the upper swarth of the ground, about two inches or an inch and a half thick
at the least, and every paring would be some three foot in length at the
least, and so broad as the shouell will conveniently give it leave, and; this
swarth thus pared up, you shall first turn the whinny or grass side
downward, and the earth side upward, and so let it lie two or three days in
the Sun to dry (for this work is intended to begin in the month of May) and
when that side is well dried you shall turn the other side, and dry it also;
then when all the swarth is dried, you shall gather fix or seven pieces
together, and turning the whinny or grass side inward and the earth side
outward, you shall make round, hollow little hills thereof much what according
to the fashion of this figure following:



And the inward hollownes like unto the hollownes of an Oven, butmuch less in
compass, which done, you shall fill the hollownesse with dry chips, or else
small sticks, or Furs and straw mixed together, which you shall put in at the
vent-hole which shall be left on one side of the hill, and then kindling it
with fire, you shall burn all that swarth in such sort as you burnt the roots
of your Furs and Broom before; for this is also called a burning of Bait,
as well as the former; for it is a most principal nurrisher of the earth, and
a very sudden destroyer of all malignant weeds whatsoever.

After the burning of your hills, as soon as the fire Breaking of Baits.
is utterly quenched and gone out, and no heat at all left in the hills, you
shall then with clotting beetles beat them all downeto dust, and then with
shouels you shall spread the ashes quite over all the ground, as was before
declared in the former Chapter: and herein is to be noted, that you must place
these hills as thick and close together as by any means possibly you can,
making your hills so much the less and lower, that they may stand thicker and
nearer together, and so cover more ground, and thereby the heat and strength
of the fire to disperse it self over all that piece of ground; for the fire
burning upon the ground, does as much good for the enriching of the earth and
destroying of the weeds, as the ashes does which are spread upon the same.

Now after your Bait is in this manner burned and Plowing.
spread, you shall then (as was before showed) plow up your ground in good
large furrows, then hack it very small, sand it, limeit, and meanure it; and
of all meanures, there is not any better for this ground then Ox dung and
ashes well mixed together; of which ashes, those of Beane-straw, Pease-straw, or
any other straw, are best; those of Wood or Fern next, those of Charcoale
next, and those of Seacoale or pitcoale are the worst of all; Swines dung is
not much amiss for this ground; for though it be a great breeder of weeds and
thystles in good or fertile grounds, yet in this cold hard and barren earth it
works no such effect, but is a great comforter and warm moistner of the same.

After you have thus made your ground; as soon as wheat seede-time comes,
which is the latter end of September and beginning of October, you shall then
with great care plow over your ground again, and take great respect that you
turn up your furrows much deeper then before, and that for two especial
causes; the first, that the new earth may the better mix with the old earth
and those helps which are added thereunto; and secondly, that you may be surer
to tear up the roots of all the Whinnes from the very bottom of the earth,
not suffering any part of them to remain behind, and for this purpose it shall
not be amiss to have an idle Boy or two to follow your Plow, and to gather
away all the roots that shall be torn up or any way else left bare above
ground, which roots shall be laid on heaps in convenient places, and then
after burnt, and the ashes thereofspread upon the ground, which will be a very
great comfort unto the seed, being a speedy help unto the sprouting thereof,
and a very warm comforter of the root after the stem is spindled above
ground, for in these cold barren earthes, nothing does so much spoil and flay
the Corn, as the dead coldness which lies at the root thereof; for in many
of these vnfertill places, you shall see Corn at the first sowing (whilst
there is a little strength in the ground) sprout in great abundance, promising
much hope of the profit; but when it should spindle and come to much better
perfection, that poor strength being spent and consumed, and the cold and
dryness of the soil, having as it were ourcome all matter of comfort then
presently you shall sec the blade of the Corn turn yellow, the stem or
stalk to wither, and either put forth no ear at all, or else a very poor
little empty one, being laden with nothing but a most dry chaffie husk without
substance: But to come again to our purpose, after you have thus plowed up
your ground the second time, you shall then hack it again, and harrow it, as
was declared in the other former Chapters; then you shall take your
seede-wheate which has been steept either in brine or Sea water, and to enery
bushel of that seed, you shall add a bushel of Bay salt and mix them very
well together in your Hopper or Sydlop, and so sow them together upon the
ground, observing to double your casts so ost, that you may not fail to cast
that true quantity of seed into the earth which otherwise you would have done
if so be there had been no mixture at all, for to do otherwise were to
deceive the ground, and a handful of seed so saved, would be the loss of a
peck in the time of Harvest; therefore have great respect that your ground have
his due, for it is no more cost though it be a little labor.

When your seed is sown, you shall harrow it again Harrowing.
the second time, clot it, smooth it, and slight it, as was before declared in
the former Chapters.

As touching the weeding of this ground, it is the leaft Weeding.
labor of all other, for the earth being so corrected as is before showed, it
will naturally of it self put forth no weeds, especially if you remember to
plow it deep, and be sure to tear up and gather away all the quick roots,
otherwise if that labor be any thing neglected, then will it put forth both
Whinnes and great store of other rough weeds, which as soon as you shall
perceive to appear, you shall presently with your wooden Nyppers pull them up
by the roots, as was at large declared in the foregoing Chapter.

Now for the general profit of this ground thus Profits.
made and prepared, it is the same that the two former are, that is to say, it
will bear you good and sufficient Wheat, in plentiful abundance for the
space of two or three years, then Barley a year after; then Oats three years
together after the Barley; and Pease or Beans a year after the Oats; then
lastly, very good Meadow or Pasture, for the space of three or four years
after, and then you shall begin and dress it again, as was formerly declared,
and thus much touching the ordering, plowing, and sowing of all rough barren
Clayes, whether simple or compound, being laden and ouer-rune with Whinnes, and
such like.

CHAP. V.
Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all barren Clayes, whether simple or
else compound, which are overrun with Lynge, or Heath.

There follows now successively, another sort of barren Earth, which indeed
is much more sterryll and barren then any of the other formerly written upon,
because they, out of their own natures, do bear a certain kind of grass
or food which will relieve ordinary, hard, store-Cattel, whether it be sheep,
goats, or young beasts. But this earth of which I am now to entreat, bears no
grass at all, but only a vilde, filthy, black-browne weed, which we call
Lynge or Heath, the tender tops whereof Cattle and wild Dear will sometimes
crop, yet it is to them but little relief, and only maintains life and no
more. Now al-be some may object unto me, that this kind of soil is ever a
sandy soil and no Clay, as may be seen in most Chasses, Forests, and Downs:
yet I answer, that al-be it hold so in general; yet there are diverse Clayes,
especially in mountainous Countries, that are pestered with these kind of
weeds, as may be seen in the North and North-West parts of Devonshire, in
some parts of Cornwall, and in many parts both of North and South Wales; and
these Clay grounds which are thus offended with these weeds of Lyng or Heath,
are much more barren and unfruitful then the sands, because of their much more
coldness; yet those Clayes which are mixed with either black sand, dun sand,
or yellow sand, and ouerrunne thus with Heath or Lynge, are the most barren of
all: to make any further description of this Heath or Lyng, being a thing so
notoriously known over all this Kingdom, I hold it merely needless, only to
say it is a rough brown weedo, shooting out abundance of stalks from one
root, with little dark leaves, and flowers on the top, of a pale reddish
color, much inclyning unto Peach color at the first, but being full blown,
they are then a little more whitish.

You therefore that have any such ground, and desire Destroying of heath.
to bring it to fruitfulness and the bearing of good Corn and grass in a
reasonable abundance; you shall first with sythes or sharp hooks (but old
sythes are the better) cut down all the Heath, or Lynge which grows upon the
earth, you intend to convert to goodness so near the ground as possibly you
can; then when it is cut down (which would ever be at the beginning of the
Month of May) you shall let it lie upon the ground, daily tossing and turning
it till it become very dry, then spreading it all over the ground, and mixing
or covering it with dry straw of any kind whatsoever you shall presently set
it on fire in so many several corners of the field, that all the several
fires in the end may meet in one point, and not leave any part of the mowen
Heath or Lyng unburned, or any part of the ground vnscortched; after this is
done and the ground cooled, you shall with your flat clotting beetles beat the
ashes hard into the ground, then you shall take a strong plow, with a
broad-winged share, and an even colture, and you shall plow up all this ground
thus burnt, in very large and deep furrows, by no means picking out any of
the quick roots which shall remain in the furrows so turned up, but letting
them rest in the earth still, then with your hacks and the help of your iron
paring-shouell, you shall cut up the furrows, formerly turned up, into short
pieces of three foot or three foot and a half long, and some less, as
occasion shall serve; then with these pieces, you shall build little hollow
hills, such as in the former Chapter you made of the upper swarth of the ground
only; and then filling the hollownesse with dry heath and dry straw mixed
together, you shall set every hill on fire, Another Burning of Bait.
and so burn the very substance of the earth into ashes, which will soon be
done by reason of the infinite number of roots and small strings which lie
mixed in the earth, and the dryness thereof occasioned by the former burning:
And this is another kind of burning of Bait much different from all the
former, and yet to as great end and profit as any whatsoever, and these hills
must as the former be placed one as near another as is possible, so as they
may spread and cover over the greatest part of the ground, and leauiug no more
then a good reasonable path to pass between hill and hill.

Now as soon as you have thus burned all your Bait, and that your hills are
cold, you shall then as was before showed in the former Chapters with Betels
and Shouels break down the hills and spread the earth and ashes over all the
ground; which done, you shall sand it (if the situation of the ground be
answerable thereunto) and lime it in such sort as was showed in the second
Chapter; then when it is lymed, and the lime equally spread, not more in one
place then in another, you shall then meanure it with the best meanure you can
provide, of which there is none better or more propper for this ground then
man's ordure, and the rubbish, sweepings, parings and spytlings of houses mixed
together, or for want of this (because it may not be in so great plenty as
other meanures) you may take either old Ox dung, or Horse dung, or for want of
them, the old rotten and moldy staddels or bottomes of Corne-stacks, or
reeds; especially Peasestacks, or Beane-stacks, provided that it be thoroughly
rotten, for the less rotten it is, the worse it is: Also the scowrings of
common Sewers, and especially those through which much of man's urine does
pass, is a most wonderful and beneficiail meanure for these grounds, so are
also the scow^ings of sinkes and channels which come from Kitchins and
Wash-houses, where great store of Brine and salt broth is shed, and other
greasy, fat and putrified substances, as also abundance of soap suddes, and
buck-ashes, and other soap and lie washings, then which there is no better
meanure that can be used for these kind of grounds.

After your ground is thus perfectly made and meanured, and that Wheat-seede
time does draw on, which (as before was showed) is ever at the latter end of
September, you shall then plow up your ground again in that manner as was
showed for the former earths; to wit, much deeper then before: for you are to
understand, that this ground being dressed as is before declared, there will
remain nothing of the furrows which were first plowed up but the as^s, which
being covered with sand, lime, and meanure, the earth will lie plain and
level, so that of necessity you must raise up new furrows of new earth,
which being done, you shall then with your hacks, cut all the new earth into
very small pieces; mixing them well with the other mould made of sand, lyme,
meanure and ashes, then as was before said, you shall harrow it to make the
mixture so much the better, and the mould so much the finer; and then if it
have been sanded, you may sow your Seede-Wheate simply of it self, without
any doubt of the plentiful increase thereof; but if it have not been sanded,
then as in the fore going Chapter, you shall not only steep your Seed in
Brine (as before showed) but also you shall mix your Seed with Bay Salt, and
so sow it into the ground; or if at the time of sowing (after it is plowed,
hackt and harrowed) youbestow or Pigeons dung, or Pullens dung, or sheep dung
upon the Land, it will be much better, and the Corn will give a much greater
increase. Now as soon as your Land is sown, you shall then forthwith harrow
it again and cover the Seed very close, then you shall clot it, smooth it,
and slight it (as was before showed.)

As touching the weeding and cleansing of this earth Of Weeding.
after the Corn is sprung up, you shall understand that there is great care to
be had thereunto, for this ground is much subject unto weeds, and those of the
worst kind: fot although for the most part it will be free from all manner of
soft and tender weeds, as thy stels, cockell, darnell, ketlocks, docks, rape,
and such like herball stuff; yet is it much subject to twitch Briars, which
grow at both ends, lyng, wild time, `and such like, any of which as soon as
you shall see appear or peep above the earth, you shall presently with your
Nippers pull them up by the roots, and not suffer them in any wise to look a
handful above the ground, for if you do, their hardness is so great, and
their roots so large and fast fixed in the mould, that you can by no means
pull them away without great loss and hurt to the grain, pulling up with them
all such roots of Corn, as shall be fixed near about them, for any other
weak and superfluous things which shall grow from the Land, you may with
ordinary weeding hooks cut them away; as for long grass, whether it be soft or
segy, or any other such like stuff, you shall not stir it but let it grow,
for it keeps warm the roots of your Corn, and gives nourishment and
increase thereunto: Now for the profit of this soil thus ordered and husbanded
it is equal with any of the former, and will bear Wheat very plentifully for
the space of the three first years, good Barley; the fourth year with the
help of the sheep fold (as was before said;) and good Oats the sift, sixth,
and seventh years; and very good small Pease the eight year (for Beans this
Soil will very hardly bear at all) and the ninth, tenth, and eleventh year
it will bear very good meadow (though not altogether very fine pure grass,
yet very good feeding and wholesome grass) or so good pasture as a man can
reasonably require for any holding Cattle whatsoever; nay; it will also
indifferently well feed, and fat Cattle, though peradventure it requires a
little longer time then other finer grounds will. And thus much touching the
well Ordering, Plowing, and Sowing of all barren Clayes, whether simple or
compound, which are overrun with Lyng or Heath.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all plain, simple barren Sands,
bearing nothing but a short mossie grass.

Having thus (in as large manner as I hope shall be needful for any judicial
or indifferent Reader) written of the Natures, Orderings, Plowings and
Dressings of all manner of barren and unfruitful Clayes, whether they be
simple of them selves, or else compounded with other earthes, as sands,
chalkes, grauels, and such like; showing by those natural burdens which
continually of their own accords, they produce and bring forth (which indeed is
the easiest and safest way of knowledge) how to amend and better them and bring
them to that perfection of fruitfulness, that the best earth shall but in a
very small degree exceed them, nay hardly any thing at all, except in the
saving of a little charge and some labor, without which nothing is to be
obtained by the Husbandman; neither ought we indeed to expect any thing without
our industry, since the Highest has said him self, that we shall eat the
sweat of our Labors; neither is this charge or labor thus bestowed on these
barren grounds to be grutcht at by any honest mind, since the worst crop of
ten or eleven, will make good his charge and toil with a reasonable
interest; so that I make account, nine or ten years profits come into his
Barnes without purchase, for it is to be intended that all these earths
formerly spoke of, are not to be dressed or to put the Husbandman to any charge
more then the first year of ten or eleven, for the second year he shall
as soon as he has gathered his Wheat off, which will be in August, and
finished other parts of his harvest, he shall presently put his Plow into the
same Wheate-ground again and Plow it up, hack it, harrow it, sow it, herrow
it again, clot it, and weed it, as in the former year, and so consequently
of all the years following, whereby you perceive that all labors and charges
are saved more then once plowing and sowing.

This then considered, it necessarily now follows, that I speak of the
bettering and bringing into perfection of all manner of barren Sand-grounds,
being simple of themselves, without any mixture of other earths, except one and
the same kind, as sand with sand, though peradventure the colors of the sands
may alter; as red with white, yellow with black, etc. which in as much as the
whole substance is sand without any contrary mixture, therefore it may well be
called simple and not compound: and of these sands, I purpose to entreat, as
formerly I did of the Clayes; that is to say, by their outward faces and
Charracters, which are those burdens and increases which of their own propper
natures without any help or compulsion they produce and bring forth into the
World. And first of that naughty cold and barren sand, which lying upon high,
stony and mountainous Rocky places, or else upon lower cold bleak Plains,
subject to the North and North-East winds and tempests, or bordering upon the
Seas, does not bring forth any thing but a short mossie grass which the Sun
makes bitter, and the cold dewes fulsome and unsavory in taste. If any man
then be Master of such unprofitable and unfruitful earth, and desire to have
it brought to goodness and perfection, he shall First, at the beginning of the
Spring, as about midd Plowing:
April or earlyer, with a strong Plow answerable to the soil, yet somewhat
less both in timbers and yrons then that wherewith you plow your Clay grounds:
you shall Plow so much of that earth up as you may conveniently compass to
sow and dress exactly and perfectly; for to undertake more, were to make all
unprofitable, and to cast away much labor and charge without any profit, this
ground you shall plow of an indifferent depth, though not so deep as the
Clayes, and you shall lay the furrows though flat, yet close one one to
another, without leaving any balke between, but plowing all very clean; yet
not so very clean and close together, that you may lay the green swarth to
the new plowed or quick earth; but rather turn one swarth against another, so
as the furrows may lie, and no more but touch the edges one of another: This
when you have done, you shall then with your hacks cut and break all the earth
so turned up into very small pieces, and not only the earth so turned up: but
also all other green swarth which was left vnplowed; provided, that before
this labor of hacking, you let the ground lie certain days in the furrows,
that one swarth heating and scalding the other, they may both equally rot and
grow mellow together, which once perceived by the blackness thereof, you may
then at your pleasure hack it and cut it as is before declared.

Now some may in this place object unto me, that this Objection.
labor of hacking should be needless, in as much as all sand grounds
whatsoever are out of their own natures so light, loose, and willing to
disseuer, that this toil might very well and to good purpose be saved.

To this I answer, that true it is, most sands in their Answer.
own natures are loose, and light, and willing to disseuer into fine mold
without any extremity, especially rich and fruitful sands whose predominant
quality of warmth gives nourishment and increase; but these barren and cold
sands, in which is a certain flegmatique toughness and most unwholesome
dryness, are of a clean contrary nature, and through the stony hardness
thereof, they are as unapt to break and disseuer as any Clay whatsoever:
besides, the swarth being of a tough mossie substance (which ever carries a
hard strong root answerable with the cold in which it is engendered) does so
constantly bind, fetter, and hold the mold together, that it is inpossible for
any harrow to break it in pieces, or to gather from it so much mould as may
serve to cover the Corn and give it root when it is sown into the same; and
therefore then this work of hacking, there can be none more necessary, or to
the Husbandman can bring more ease or profit.

When therefore you have thus hackt your Land, OfMarling
and distributed the mold into many small pieces, you shall then with all
expedition marle it; which forasmuch as it is no general or common practice in
every part of this Kingdom, I will first tell you what Marle is, and then how
to find it, dig it, and use it for your best behoof.

Marle you shall then understand, is a certain rich, stiff What Marle is.
and tough Clay of a bluish color, and full of many red veins like Porphery
or Marble, it is of a tough and glewie substance, apt to work and hold
together like wax, and chiefly when it is any thing moist, but being dried, it
mouldereth and breaks as small as cynders; and by these three Carracters,
color, toughness, and looseness, being dried, you shall never fail
certainly to know it. Some are of opinion, that this Marle was first found out
in Germany, and there put in practice, and found of most notable use, calling
it by the name of Pytch, or a certain Clay like pitch: others that we found it
out first here in England, as indeed is most probable, because we have the
greatest store, and make the greatest use thereof: others, that the first
knowledge came out of France, but that is least credible, for neither is it
there in much use, nor much mentioned in any of the French Authors, especially
the antientest or any that writ out of present memory; howsoever, most certain
it is, that not any meanure that is in use with the Husbandman is of more
virtue or perfection, especially for these loose, sandy, barre^ earths, neither
of so much goodness and continuance; for it is hard for any one single and
simple meanure to continue above three or four years; yet this Marle is known
to have continued the ground good for the space of a dozen years at the least.

This Marle is commonly found in the lowest parts of high Countries, near
Lakes and small Brooks, and in the high parts of low Countries, upon the
knols of small hills, or within the Cly^ts of high Mountainous banks, which
bound greater Rivers in^to conclude, you shall seldom find any of these barren
sands, but they are either verdged about with Marle grounds, or if you will
bestow the labor to dig beyond the depth of the sand, you shall not fail
to find or Marle or quarrie of stone, or both; for in some places Marle lies
very deep, in other some places within a spades grast of the upper swarth of
the earth: Therefore it shall be good for you to make proof of all the most
likely parts of your ground to find out this Marle; and as soon as you have
found it out, you shall with Mattocks and Spades dig it up and carry it to
your land, there laying it in big round heaps, and setting them within a
yard or two one of another; thus when you have filled over all your ground
(which would be done with as great speed as might be, for the ancient custom
of this Kingdom was, when any man went about to Marle his ground, all his
Tenants, Neighbors and friends would come and help him to haften on the
Work) you shall then spread all those heaps, and mixing the Clay well with
the Sand, you shall lay all smooth and level together; and herein is to be
observed, that if the land you thus marle shall lie against the side of any
great Hill or Mountain, whereby there will be much desent in the ground, then
you shall (by all means lay double as much marle, sand, or other compass on
the top of the Hill as on the bottom, because the rain and showers which
shall fall will ever wash the fatness of the earth down to the lowest parts
thereof; when your ground is thus marled (if you be near to the Seaside) you
shall then also sand it with salt Sea-sand, in such sort as was formerly
declared, only you may forbear to lay altogether so much upon this sand ground
as you did on the Clay ground, because an half part is fully sufficient. If
you cannot come by this salt-Sand, then in Of Chalk and thevse.
stead thereof, you shall take chalk, if any be to be had near you, and that
you may lay in more plentiful manner then the sand; and albe it is said, that
chalk is a wearer out of the ground, and makes a rich father yet a poor
son, in this style it does not so hold, for as it fretteth and wastes away
the goodness that is in Clay grounds, so it comfort and much strengthens
these sand earths, and this chalk you shall lay in the same manner as you did
your marle, and in the same manner spread it and level it, which done you
shall then lime it as was before showed in the Clay grounds, yet not so
abundantly, because also a half part will be sufficient; after your lyming,
you shall then meanure it with the best meanure that you have, whether it be
dung of Cattle, Horse, Sheep, Goats, straw, or other rubbish, and that being
done and Seede-time drawing on, you shall then plow up your ground again,
mixing the new quick earth and the former soyles so well together, that there
may be little distinguishment between them, then you shall hack it again,
then harrow it, and lastly sow it with good sound and perfect seed, and of
seeds though Wheat will very well grow upon this earth; yet Rye is the more
natural and certain in the increase, yet according to the strength of the
ground, you may use your discretion, observing that if you sow Wheat, then to
steep it before in brine or salt-Sea-water, as was before described; but if
you sow Rye, then you shall sow it simply without any help, except it be
Pigeons dung, or Bay Salt simple of it self in such manner as has been
before declared; either sowing the salt with the Corn or before the Corn, as
shall seem best in your own discretion.

After your seed is sown, you shall then harrow it again, clot it, smooth it
and steight it as before showed in the second Chapter, which done (after the
Corn is shot above the earth) you shall then look to the weeding of it being
somewhat a little too much subject to certain particular weeds, as are
Hare-bottels, wild Chesse-bolles, Gypsy flowers and such like, any of which,
when you see them spring up, you shall immediately cut them away close by the
roots, as for tearing their roots out of the ground with your Nyppers, it is
not much material, for the cutting of them is sufficient, and they will hardly
ever again grow or do you hinderance, many other weeds there may grow
amongst these which are also to be cut away, but these are the principal and
of most note; wherefore as soon as you have cleansed your lands of these and
the reft, you shall then refer the further increase of your profit unto Gods
providence, thankfully accepting whatsoever he shall send you.

Lastly, you shall understand that this ground being The Profits
thus plowed, dreft, and ordered, will without any more dressing, but once
plowing and sowing, every year bear you good Wheat or good Rye three years
together; then good Barley the fourth year; good Oats the fifth, sixth and
seventh year; excellent good Lupins the eight year, and very good Meadow or
Pasture three or four years after, and then it shall be necessary to dress
it again in such manner as was before described. And thus much touching the
plowing, ordering, and enriching of all these plain barren sands.

CHAP. VII.
Of the plowing, Tylling, Ordering and Enriching of all barren Sands which are
laden and overrun with Braken, Fern, or Heath.

NExt unto this plain, cold, barren Sand, which bears no other burden but a
short mossie grass; I will place that Sand which is laden and over run with
Braken, Fern, or Heath, as being by many degrees more barren then the former,
both in respect that it is more loose and less substantial, as also in that
it is more dry and harsh, and altogether without nutriment, more then an
extroame sterryll coldness, as appears by the burden it brings forth,
which is Braken or Fern, a hard, rough, tough weed, good for nothing but to
burn, or else to lytter store-beasts with for the breeding of meanure, or if
you strew it in the Highways where many Travelers pass, it will also
thereturne to good reasonable compass.

Of this kind of ground if you be Master, and Of destroying Braken.
would reduce it unto fertility and goodness, you shall first, whether the
Braken be tall and high (as I have seen some as high as a Man on Horseback)
or short and low (as indeed most commonly these barren earths are, for tall
Fern or Braken ^hewes some strength in the ground) you shall with Sythes first
mow it down in the Month of May, then wither and dryeit upon the ground, and
after spread it as thin as you can over all the earth you intend to plow;
which done, you shall bring your plow and begin to plow the ground after this
order: first, you shall turn up your furrow and lay it flat to the ground,
greene-swarth against greene-swarth, then look how broad your furrow is so
turned up, or the ground it covers, and ^st so much ground you shall leave
vnplowed between furrow and furrow, so that your land may lie a furrow and a
green balke, a furrow and a green balke, till you have gone over all the
ground, then shall you take a paring-shouell of iron and pare up the
green-swarth of all the balkes between the furrows, at least two inches thick,
and into pieces of two or three foot long, and with these pieces of earth and
the dry Fern which is pared up with them, you shall make little round hollow
Bait hills as in the third and fourth Chapter; and these hills shall be set
thick and close over all the ground, and so set on fire and burnt; then when
the fire is extinct, and the hills cold, you shall first with your hacks cut in
pieces all the furrows that were formerly turned up, and then break down the
burnt hills, and mix the ashes and earth with the other mould very well
together; which done, you shall then with all speed marle this earth as
sufficiently Of Marle.
as possible may be, not scanting it or sparing it of Marle, but bestowing it
very plentifully upon the same; which done, you shall then plow it over again,
and plowing it excedingly well, not leaving any ground whatsoever untorn up
with the Plow; for you shall understand that the reason of leaving the former
balkes, was that at this second plowing after the Marle was spread upon the
ground, the new, quick, and unstirred fresh earth might as well be stirred up
to mix with the Marle, as the other dead earth and ashes formerly received,
whereby a fresh comfort should be brought to the ground and an equal mixture
without too much dryness, and this second Ardor or plowing would begin about
the latter end of June.

After your ground has been thus marled, and Sanding and lyming
the second time plowed, you shall then sand it with salt Sea-sand, lime it and
meanure it as was declared in the foregoing Chapter: and of all meanures for
this soil, there is not any so exceeding good as sheep meanure, which
although of the Husbandman it be esteemed a meanure but of one year, yet by
experience in this ground it happens otherwise, and is as durable, and as long
lasting a compass as any that can be used, and besides it is a great destroyer
of thystles, to which this ground is very much subject, because upon the
alteration of the ground the Fern is also naturally apt to alter unto Thystell
as we daily see.

When your ground is thus amply dressed and well Plowing and sowing.
ordered, and that Seede-time comes on, you shall then plow it again in such
manner as you did the second time, that is to say, very deep, clean, and
after the manner of good Husbandry, without any rest balkes or other disorders:
then shall you hack it very well, then harrow it, and then sow it; but by mine
advice, in any case, I would not have you to bestow any Wheat upon this soil
(except it be two or three bushels on the best part thereof for experience
sake, or provision for your household) for it is a great enemy unto Wheat, and
more then the marle has no nourishment in it for the same, because all that
comes from the salt sand, lime and meanure it little enough to take away the
natural sterrilitie of the earth it self, and give it strength to bear Rye,
which it will do very plentifully; and therefore I would wish you for the
three first years only, to sow the best Rye you can get into this ground; the
fourth year to sow Barley; the sift, sixth and seventh Oats; and of Oats,
the big black Oate is the best for this ground, makes the best and
kindlyest Oat-malt, and feeds Horse or Cattle the soundest; as also it is of
the hardest constitution, and endures either cold or dryness much better then
either the white Oate, the cut Oate, or any Oate whatsoever; the eight year,
you shall only sow Lupyns or Fetches; and three years after, you shall let it
lie for grass, and then dress it again as before said; for it is to be
understood, that in all the following years (after the first year) you shall
bestow no labor upon this ground more then plowing sowing, hacking and
harrowing at Seede-time only.

But to proccede to the orderly labor of this Labors after sowing.
ground, after you have sown your Rye, you shall then harrow it again, clot
it, smooth it and slight it as was before showed in the second Chapter of this
Book. And although a man would imagine that the sandy looseness of this soil
would not need much clotting or sleighting of the Earth, yet by reason of the
mixture thereof with the Marle and meanure, it will so hold and cleave
together, that it will ask good strong labor to loosen it and lay it so
hollow and smooth as in right it should be.

Touching the Weeds which are most subject to Weeding.
this Soil, they are Thystles and young Brakes or Fernes which will grow up
within the Corn, which before they rise so high as the Corn, and even as it
were at the first appearing, you must with your wooden Nyppers pull up by the
roots, and after rake up and lay in some convenient place where they may
wither and rot and so turn to good meanure. And thus much touching the
ordering, dressing, plowing, and enriching of all barren Sands which are
overrun with Braken, Fern, or Heath.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Plowing, Tilling, ordering and enriching of all barraine Sands, which
are laden and overrun with Twitch, or wild Bryar.

Having written fufficiently of this hard and barraine, waste, wild, sandy
ground, which is ouer-run with Braken, Fern, Heath, and such like: I will now
proceed, and unto it join another sand which is much more barren, and that is
the sand that brings forth nothing but wild Twitch, Briars, Thorn-bush, and
such like vndergrowth of young misliking wood, which never would rise or come to
profit, the bitter cold dryness of the earth wherein it grows, and the
sharp storms to which the clime is continually subject both day and night,
blasting it in such manner that nothing appears but a starued, withered, and
utterly unprofitable burdens good for nothing but the fire and that in a very
simple sort. Such ground if you be Destroying of Twitch and Bryar.
master of, and would reduce it to profit and fruitfulness, you shall first
with hooks or axes cut up the upper growth thereof, that is the bushes, young
trees and such like, then you shall also stubbe up the roots, not leaving any
part of them behind in the earth, carrying away both home to your house to be
imploide either for fuel, or the mending of the hedges, or such like, as you
shall have occasion; this done, you shall take a pair of strong Iron harrowes,
and with them you shall harrow over all the earth, tearing up all the Twitch,
Briars, and rough Grass so by the roots, that not any part but the bare earth
may be seen^, and when your barrowes are cloyed, you shall vulade them in
several places of the ground, laying all such rubbish of weeds and other
stuff, which the harrowes shall gather up in a little round hill, closse up
together that they may sweat, wither and dry; then spreading them abroad and
mixing them well with dry straw, burn them all over the ground, leaving no
part of the weeds or Grass unconsumed, then without beating in of the ashes,
you shall presently plow the ground all over very clean as may be, laying the
furrows as close as you can one to another, and leaving no earth untouched or
untorn up with the Plow, which done, you shall immediately hacke it into small
pieces, and as you hacke it, you shall have idle Boys to go by the Hackers,
to gather away all the roots which they shall loosen or break from the mould,
and laying them on heaps in the worst part of the ground, they shall there
burn them, and spread the ashes thereon, after your ground is thus harrowed,
plowed, and hackt, you shall then mucke it, as was formerly showed in the sixth
Chapter, then shall you sand it, lyme it, and manure it as before said.

Now of meanures, which are most proper for this Meanures
soil, you shall understand that either Ox, or Horse meanure, rotten straw,
or the scouring of Yards is very good, provided that with any of these
meanures, or all these meanures, you mix the broad-leaued weeds, and other
greene-weeds which grow in Ditches, Brooks, Ponds or Lakes, under Willow tree,
which with an iron Rake, Drag, or such likeinstrument, you may easily draw upon
the bank, and so carry it to your land, and there mingle it with the other
meanures and so let it rot in the ground, this meanure thus mixed is of all
other most excellent for this soil, both by the experience of the Ancients who
have left it unto memory, as also by daily practice now used in sundry parts of
this kingdom, as well because of the temperat coolenes thereof, which in a
kindly manner asswageth the lime and sand, as also through the moisture which
distilling through those warm Soiles does quicken the cold starued earth, and
gives a wonderful increase to the seed that shall be thrown into the same.

After your ground is thus sufficiently dressed with Harrowing and other labors.
these soiles and meanures, you shall then plow it again the second time which
would be after Michaelmas; after the plowing you shall then hack it again,
and be sure to mix the earth and the meanures very well together, then you
shall break it in gentle manner with your Harrowes, and then sow it; which
done you shall harrow it again, but then you shall harrow it much more
painefully, and not leave any clots or hard earth unbroken that the Harrow can
pull in pieces: as touching the seed which is fittest for this earth, it is
the same that is spoken of in the next foregoing Chapter: as namely, the best
Rye or the best Masline, which is Rye and Wheat equally mixed together, or if
there be two parts Rye, and but one Wheat, the seed will be so much the
more certain and surer holding, and this seed you may sow on this ground
three years together, then Barley, then Oats, and so forth, as is formerly
writ of the grounds forgoing. After your ground is sown and harrowed, you
shall then clotte it, slight it, and smooth it as you did the other grounds
before, and then lastly with your back Harrowes, that is with a pair of
harrowes, the teeth turned upward from the ground, and the back of the harrow
next unto the ground, you shall run over all the ground and gather from the
same all the loose Grass, Twitch, or other weeds that shall any ways be
raised up, and the same so gathered, you shall lay at the lands end in heaps,
either to rot for meanure, or else at the time of the year to be burnt for
ashes, and sprinkled on the earth the next seed time.

Lastly touching the weeding of this soil, you shall Weeding.
understand the weeds which are most incident thereunto, are all the same you
first went about to destroy: as namely, Twich, rough wild Grass, and young
woody vndergrowth, besides Thistles, Hare bottles, and Gypsy flowers;
therefore you shall have a great care at the first appearance or springing up
of the Corn, to see what weeds arises with it, (for these weeds are euerfully
as hasty as the Corn) and as soon as you see them appear, both your self and
your people with your hands shall pull them up by the roots, and so weed your
land as you would weed a garden, or Woad ground. Now if at this first weeding
(which will be at the latter Spring, commonly called Michaelmas, or the Winter
Spring) you happen to omit and let some weeds pass your hands vnpulled up
(which very well may chance in so great a work) you ^hal then the Summer Spring
next following (seeing them as hie or peradventure hier then the Corn) with
your wooden nippers pull them up by the roots from the ground, and so cast them
away: As touching the cutting them up close by the ground with ordinary
weedhookes, I do in no sort allow it, for these kind of weeds are so apt to
grow, and also so swift in growth, that if you cut them never so close in the
Spring, yet they will again ouermount the Corn before harvest, and by reason
of their greatness, roughness, and much hardness choke and slay much Corn
that shall grow about them, and therefore by all means you shall pull these
weeds up by the roots whilst they are tender, (if possibly you can,) or
otherwise in their stronger growth, since their sufferance breeds great loss
and destruction; And thus much touching the plowing, ordering, dressing and
enriching of all barraine sands that are laden and overrun with Twitch,
wild Bryar, or woody vndergrowth.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Plowing, Tilling, Ordering and Enriching of all barren Sands which are
overrun with mores or morish stinking long Grass.

Unto these foregoing barren Sands, of which I have already written, I will
lastly join this last barren Sand, being of all earthes, whether Clay or Sand
the most barrenest, and that is that filthy, black, morish Sand which bears
nothing but a stinking, putrified Grass or Moss, or Moss and Grass mixed
together, to which not any Beast or Cattle, how course or hardly bred soever,
will at any time lay their mouths: and this kind of ground also is very much
subject to marrishes and quagmires, of which that which is covered with Moss,
or Grass, is the worst, and that which is tufted above with rushes, the best
and soonest reduced unto goodness; in brief, all these kinds of grounds
generally are extremely moist and cold, the ^uperabundance whereof is the
occasion of the infinite sterrillity and barrenness of the same.

And therefore he that is master of such unprofitable Earth, and would have it
brought to some profit or goodness, shall first consider the situation of the
ground, as whether it lie high or low, for some of these marrish grounds lie
low in the Valles, some on the sides of Hills, and some on the tops of
Mountains, then whether the much moystnesse thereof be fed by River, Lake
or Spring, whose veins not having current passage through or upon the earth,
spreads soakingly over all the face thereof, and so rotting the mould with too
much wette, makes it not only impassable, but also utterly unprofitable for
any good burden.

Now if you find that this marrish Earth lie in Ground for Fish Ponds.
the bottom of low vales as it were girdled about with Hills or higher
grounds, so that besides the feeding of certain Springs, Lakes, or Rivers,
every shower of rain or falling of water from higher grounds brings to these
an extraordinary moisture to maintain the rottenness, in this case this
ground is past cure for grass or Corn, and would only be converted and made
into a fish pond for the breeding and feeding of Fish, being a thing no less
profitable to the Husbandman for keeping his house, and furnishing the market
then the best corne-land he has; and therefore when he makes any such pond
he shall first raise up the head thereof in the narrowest part of the ground,
and this head by driving in of stackes and piles of tough and hard wood as
Elm, Oak and such like, and by ramming in of the Earth hard between them,
and sodding the same so fast that the mould can by no means be worn down or
undermined with the water, he shall bring to as firm Earth as is possible,
and in the midst of this head he shall place a sluice or Flood-gate made of
sound and clean Oak Timber and plankes, through which at any time to draine
the Pond when occasion shall serve, and this done you shall dig the Ponde of
such depth as the Earth conveniently will bear, and casting the Earth upon
either side you shall make the banks as large and strong as the ground
requires, then if any Spring which did before feed the Earth be left out of
the compass of the Pond (because it lies too high to be brought in) then
shall you by drawing gutters or draynes from the Spring down to the Pond,
bring all the water of the Springs into the Pond and so continually feed it
with fresh and sweet water. Then storing it with Fish of best esteem as Carpe,
Tench, Breame, Perch and such like, and keeping it from weeds, ^he and
Vermin, there is no doubt of the daily proffit;

But if this marrish and low Ground though it lie low and have many Springs
falling upon it yet it lies not so extreme low but that there is some River
or dry Ditches bordering upon it, which lie in a little lower diffent, so that
except in case of inundation the River and Ditches are free from the moisture
of this Ground, but where there is any ouer-slowing of waters there this
marrish Ground must needs be drowned, in this case this ground can hardly be
made for corn, because every ouerflow puts the Grain in danger, yet may it
be well converted to excellent pasture or meadow, by finding out the heads of
the Springs, and by opening and cleansing them, and then drawing from those
cleansed heads, narrow draines or furrows through which the waters may pass to
the neighbor ditches, and so be conveyed down to the lower Rivers; leaving
all the rest of the ground dry, and suffering no moistures to pass, but what
goes through these small deep channels, then as soon as Summer comes, and
the ground begins to harden, ifyou see any of the water stand in any part of
the ground, you shall forth with mend the draine, and help the water to pass
away, which done (as the ground hardens) you shall with hacks and spades lay
the swarth smooth and plain, and as early in the year as you can
conveniently, you shall sow upon the ground good store of hay seeds, and if
also you do meanure it with the rotten staddels or bottomes of haystacks, it
will be much the better, and this staddell you shall not spread very thick but
rather of a reasonable thinness, that it may the sooner rot and consume upon
the same.

But if this marrish and filthy ground do not lie so Draining of wet grounds
low as these low valleys, but rather against the tops of hills, you shall then
first open the heads of all the Springs you can find, and by seucrall draines
or sluices, draw all the water into one draine, and so carry it away into some
neighboring ditch and valley; and these draines you shall make of a good depth
as at least two foot, or two foot and a half, or more, if need require, and
then crosse-wise, every way ouerthwartthe ground, you shall draw more shallow
furrows, all which shall fall into the former deep draines, and so make the
ground as constant and firm as may be, then having an intent to employ it for
Corn, you shall bring your Plow into the ground, being a very strong one, and
not much differing in Timber - work or Irons from that which turns up the
clay grounds, and laying before the Plow long wades or roules of the straw
ofLupyns, Pease, or else Fetches, (but Lupynsis the best) you shall turn the
furrows of earth with the Plow upon the waddes, and so cover or bury them in
the mould, and thus do unto every furrow, or at least unto most of the furrows
you turn up, and so let it lie a little time to rotte, as by the space of a
fortnight or three weeks, in which space, if the ground receive not rain and
moisture enough to rotte the straw thus formerly buried, you shall then by
stopping the draynes, and making the Springs ouerflow, gently wash the ground
all over and no more, and then presently draine it again; which done, as soon
as the earth is dry, you shall hacke it and break it into small pieces, then
you shall also Sand it, Lyme it and meanureit.

Andlastly, you shall marle it, but if no salt sand be to be had, then instead
of it, you shall chaulke it, yet of all the rest you shall take the least part
of chaulke.

This done, about the latter end of luly you shall plow up the ground again
with somewhat a better and deeper stytch then you did before, that if any of
the straw be vnrotted or unconsumed, it may again be raisd up with the new
moist earth and so made to waste more speedily, and if at this second carrying
you do see any great hard clots to arise, then with your hacks you shall
break those hard clots in pieces, laying the land clean without clots, weeds,
or any other anoyance, and so let it rest till October, at which time you shall
plow it over again, hacke it, harrow it, and then sow it with the best
seed-wheate; for this soil thus dressed and meanured, albeit it be of all other
the most barren, yet by reason of this mosture which at pleasure may be put to
it, or taken from it, and by the mixture of these comfortable soyles and
compasses, it is made as good and fruitful as any earth whatsoever, and will
bear wheat abundantly the space of three years together; then good barley the
fourth year with a little help of a sheepefold, or sheeps meanure; then Rye
the fifth year, Oats the sixth, the seventh and eight year, small Pease the
ninth year good meadow or pasture three years following, and then to be new
dressed agaiue, as before faid.

Now as soon as your seed wheat is sown, you shall Harrowing.
then harrow the ground again, and be sure to cover the wheat both deep and
closse, as for the clots which shall arise from this soil, it shall not matter
whether you break them, or no, for by reason of their moisture, they will be
plyant and easy for the wheatto pass through, so that you shall not care how
rough your land lie, so it lie clean, and the Corn well covered, but for all
other seeds, you shall break the clots to dust, and lay the land as smooth as
may be.

Now for the weeding of this soil, you will not be much troubled there with,
because this ground naturally of it own accord, puts forth no weeds, more
then these which are engendered by the new-made fruitfulness thereof, and those
weeds for the most part are a kind of small sedge, or hollow reed; any of
which if you see appear, or with them any other kind of weed, you shali at the
first appearance, either pull them up by the roots with your wooden nippers or
else cut them close by the ground with your weedhookes.

And thus I have with as much care and diligence, as Weeding.
either my knowledge, experience, tradition from the best and skilfullest
Teachers, or the observations which my judgment could at any time collect from
my travel or other men's labors, faithfully and duly set down the best,
safest and easiest ways how to bring the most vilde and barrenest grounds in
this kingdom, whether they be clayes or sands, mixed or unmixed, or of what
nature soever, to as great fertility and fruitfulness in the bearing and
bringing forth of Corn, as the best and most richest soil under the Sun can
do, and that (all things considered) with as little cost, and much less
labor, for to make a short comparison, or computation of the labor and
charges which belong to these two soyles, the rich and the barren, you shall
understand that the rich soil is that which bears Barley most naturally and
abundantly as is to be seen in all the fruitful vales of this Kingdom, as
the vale of Beluoyre, the vale of ^am, the vale of White-Horse, the vale
Royal, and Taunton-Deanry, with such like; and all these rich vales to be
fallowed in January and February, then Summer stirred in April and May; then
foild in July and August, then Winter rigged in October and November, and
lastly fowne in March following; so that here is a full work of a year and a
quarter betwixt the preparing of the ground, and the sowing of the seed (as may
better appear by my Book called, The English Husbandman) and yet I do,
appoint here no time for the leading out of meanure, supposing the earth to be
so rich that needs no meanure at all, yet is the Husbandman in a most
continual toil both Winter and also Summer, and at continual charge both
with cattle and servants whereas the barren grounds (of which I have written
of before) is begun to be tilled in May, sanded, marled, limed and meanured in
lune, and at such vacant times in July, August and September, as may no way
hinder harueft, then is it sown, clotted and smoothed in October, so that here
is but one half years work before the crop be expected, and that but in one
year of eleven or twelve neither; For after the first year it needs but
only one half months work which is plowing and sowing; also the rich earth
loses every fourth years profit, by reason of the lying fallow, and this
barren earth, never loses any year at all, but always brings forth some
profit: lastly, for the value and prices of the profits arising from these
grounds, I never saw in the rich soyles an aker of Corn sold for above xlvi.
s. viii. d. and I have seen in the barren grounds an aker of Corn ordinarily
fold for v. li. so that I conclude the barren earth ever is worthy of the
Husbandmans charge and labor.

It rests now that I speak some thing of the bettering and enriching of all
forts of barven Grassegrounds, inasmuch as they are for the maintenance of
stock, (without which no Corn or other commodity is to be had) in as great
use and necessity as any Corn ground is, and the rather in as much as there be
some barren earths which partly through their cuill situations, partly through
much distance of place, and other natural defects, can hardly, or very
inconueniently be brought to bear Corn; therefore you shall reduce them unto
good meadow or pasture, by these helps and good husbandries following.

CHAP. X.
How to enrich and make the most barrennest soil to bears excell^nt good
pasture or medam.

MAny will think that in the head of this Chapter, I have taken to large a
scope, and have made so unbounded a promise that I cannot chufe but either
loose my self, or lead my Readers infinitely astray in this large
wilderness: Indeed for mine own part I could have wished to have gathered it
much nearer within the compass of common men's common understandings: But since
I saw the fruitful grounds and gardens, growing about Chatsworth, in the Peake
in Darbye-shire, and since I saw the meadows upon Exmore, and the rich pastures
on the tops of mountains in North Deuon-shire, and all made by industry and
not nature; I thought my promise scant enough, and that any painful man might
with his cost and labor easily walk about my meaning.

To speak then of the bettering and enriching of Two ways to enrich earths.
these barren earths, and reducing them to good pasture or meadow, it is to be
understood that there are but two certain ways to compass and effect the
same, namely water or meanure.

You are then when you go about this profitable labor First, to consider the
situation of the earth, you would convert to pasture and to sellect for this
purpose the best of this worst earth you can find, and that which lies lowest,
or else that which is so discending as that the bottom there of may stretch to
the lowest part of the continent, for the lower that such grounds lie, the
sooner they are made good and brought unto profit; Next you shall consider what
Burden or grass it bears, and whether the grass be clean and entyre of it
self (which is the best and likliest soil to be made fruitful) or else mixed
with other worser growthes, as Thystles, Heath, Brom or such like, and if it
be burdened with any of these naughty weeds, you shall first destroy them by
stubbing them up by the roots and by burning the upper swarth of the earth with
dry straw mixed with the weeds which you shall cut from the same, then it shall
be good for certain nights both before the first and latter Spring to fold
your sheep upon this ground, and that not in a scant manner but very
plentifully, so as the dung of them may cover over all the earth, and their
feet trampling upon the ground, may not only beat in the dung, but also beat
of all the fwarth from the earth, that where the fold go^eth, there little or
no grass may be perceived, then whilst the ground is soft, and thus trampled,
you shall sow it all over with Hay seeds and then with your flat board beetles
beat the ground smooth and plain, which done you shall then strew or thinly
cover over the ground with the rotten staddels of Haystacks, and the moist
bottomes of Hay-barnes, and over that you shall spread other strong meanure of
which horsedung, or Horse-dung and man's ordure mixed together is the best, or
for want of such either the meanure, of Oxen, Kine, or other Beasts; and this
meanure also you shall spread very thin upon the ground, and so let it lie
till the grass come up through the same, which grass you shall by no means
graze or feed with your cattle, but being come to the perfitnesse of growth,
you shall mow it down, and although it will be the first year, but short and
very course, yet it skilleth not, for the ensuing years, shall in the profit,
and bring forth both so good grass, and such plenty thereof, as reasonably you
can require for this is but the first making of your ground and alteration of
the nature thereof, neither shall you thus dress your ground every year, but
once in twenty, or forty years, having plenty of water to relieve it. When
therefore you have thus the first only prepared your ground by destroying the
barren growth thereof, and by meanuring, sowing and dressing it, you shall then
carefully Of watring grounds.
search about highest parts of the ground, and the highest parts of all other
grounds, any way neighbouting round about it, and somewhat above the level
thereof, to see it you can find any Springs in the same, (as doubtless you
cannot choose to do, except the ground be of more then strange nature,) and the
heads of all such Springs as you shall find, you shall by gutters and channels
draw into those ditches which shall compass your meadow ground about, observing
ever to bring the water into that part of the medow-ditch which ever lies
highest, and so to let it have a current passage through the ditches down to the
lower part thereof, and so into some Lake, Brook, or other Channel, and in
this fort you may bring your water amyle or two, Nay I have seen water brought
for this purpose, three or four miles, and the gain thereof has quit the
charge in very plentiful manner.

But if you cannot find any Springs at all, nor can have the help of any Lake,
Brook, River, or other Helps in the watring.
Channel of moving water, (which is a doubt to curious, as being cast beyond
the moon) you shall then not only cast ditches about this your meadow ground
but also about all other grounds which shall lie above it, and that in such
sort, that they all may have no passage but into the upper part of the meadow
ditch, so that what rain soever shall fall from the sky upon those earthes,
it shall be received into those ditches, and by them conveyed into the meadow
ditch; and to augment the stor^ of this water, you shall also in sundry parts
of those upper grounds which are above the meadow, in places most convenient,
dig large Ponds or Pits, which both of themselves may breed, and also receive
all such water as shall fall near about them, and these Ponds or Pits being
filde (as in the Winter time necessarily they must needs be at every glut of
rain) you shall presently by small draynes made for that purpose, let the
water out from them into the ditches and so into the meadow ditch, and so
stopping all the draynes again, make the Ponds or Pits capable to receive more
water.

When you have thus made your ground rich with When and how to water.
water, and that you see it flow (as in the Winter time necessarily it must) in
plentiful manner through all your ditches, you shall then twice or thrice in
the year, or oftener, as you shall think meet in the most conuenientest
places of the meadow ditch, stop the same, and make the water to rise above
his bounds, and to ouerflow and cover your meadow ground all over, and if it be
a flat leuel ground; if you let the water thus covering it to lie upon the same
the space of 4. or. 5. days or a week, it shall not be amiss; and then you
may water it the seldomer, But if it lie against the side of a hill, so that
the water cannot rest upon the same, then you shall wash it all over, leaving
no part vnmoystned, and this you shall do the ofner, according as the weather
shalfal out, and your water grow more or less plentiful.

Now for the best season or time of the year for The best season for watring.
this watering of meadows, you shall understand, that from Alhallontide, which
is the beginning of November (and at which time all after-growth of meddowes,
are fully eaten, and cattle for the most part are taken up into the house)
until the end of April (at which time grass begins to spring and arise
from the ground) you may water all your meadows at your pleasure without
danger, if you have water enough at your pleasure, and may spend or spare at
your will, yet to do it in the best perfection, and whereby your ground may
receive the greatest benefit; you shall understand that the only time for
watering of your meadows, is immediately after any great Flux of rain,
falling in the Winter any time before May, when the water is most muddy, foul
and troubled, for then it carries with it a soil or compass which being left
upon the ground, wonderfully inricheth it, and makes it fruitful beyond
expectation, as daily is seen in those hard countries where almost no grass
grows but by this industry; And here you must observe, that as you thus water
one ground, so you may water many, having ever respect to begin with the
highest, and so to let the water pass out of one ground into another until it
come unto the lowest, which commonly is ever the most flat and level, and
there you may let the water remain so long as you think good (as was before
showed) and then let it out into other waste ditches or rivers. And here you
shall know that this lowest ground will ever be the most fruitful, as well
because it lies the warmest, moystest, and safest from storms and tempests,
as also because what soil or other goodness this ouerflow of water, or the
rain washes from other grounds, it leaves upon this, and so daily increases
the fertility, from whence you shall gather, that at the first making of these
meadow grounds you may bestow less cost of meanure and other charges upon this
lowest, flat, level ground, then on the higher; and so by that rule also
observe to bestow on the highest ground, and the highest part of the highest
ground ever the greatest abundance of meanure, and so as you shall descend
lower and lower, to lay your meanure thinner and thinner, yet not any part
utterly unfurnished and void of compass, yet as before I said you are to
remember that these meadow grounds need not this much use of meanure (having
this benefit of water, and the first years dressing as was showed in the
beginning of this Chapter) above once in twenty years; nay it may be not above
once in a man's life time.

And here also is to be considered, that the water which comes from clay or
marle grounds, being thick, muddy and pudly, is much better and richer then
that which comes from sand, gravel or pibble, and so runs clear and
smooth, for that rather does wash away and consume the goodness of the
ground, then any way add strength thereunto.

And thus much touching the dressing and enriching of all sorts of barraine
meadow or pasture grounds.

CHAP. XI.
Of the enriching and dressing of barraine grounds, for the use of Hemp or
Flax.

Having showed you thus how to better and enrich all sorts of barren grounds of
what temper soever they be, as whether they be claies or sands, or whether
mixed or unmixed, and that as well for Corn as for Grass: It rests now,
that I show you how to enrich and make any soil whatsoever fit to bear
abundance, either of Hemp, or Flax, a thing of no mean or small use in this
our Kingdom, as witnesses the abundance of all manner of cordage daily used
for ships and other purposes; the infinite store both of course and fine linen
cloth, and a world of other things, without which families cannot be sustained.

You shall then first understand that there are two Grounds ill for Hemp or
Flax.
sorts of grounds which out of their own natures utterly refuse to bear Hemp
or Flax; that is the rich stiff black clay, of tough, solyd, and fast mould,
whose extreamefertility and fatness gives such a surcharge to the increase of
the seed, that either with the rankenesse, it runs all into Bunne and no
Rind, or else the seed being tender, and the mould sad and heavy, it burieth
it so deep therein, that it can by no means get out of the same, but lies
choked and consumed without profit: the other is the most vilde and extreme
barren ground, which by reason of the climat wherein it lies, is so exceeding
sterrile and unfruitful that it will neither bear these seeds nor any other
good seed; and of these two soyles only I purpose in this place to entreat,
for with such soiles as will naturally and commodiously bear these seeds, I
have nothing to do in that I have sufficiently written of them in mine English
Husbandman, and English Huswife, which are books only for good grounds, but
this for all such grounds as are utterly held without cure.

To begin then with the stiff black clay, which albeit, be very rich for
Corn, is most poor for these Blaoke clay for Hemp, etc,
seeds, when you would reduce and bring it to bear Hemp or Flax, which near
unto the sea-coaste, is of greater price and commodity then Corn any way can
be, especially adjoining unto any place of fishing, in respect of Nets and
other Engines, which is to be made of the same, and which being daily washed
and consumed, must likewise be daily replenished: You must first with astrong
plow, fit for the nature of such land, plow up so much ground as you intend
to sow Hemp or Flax upon, about the midst of May, if the weather be
seasonable, and the ground not o hard: if otherwise, you must stay till a
shower do fall, and that the earth be moystened, then shall you hacke it and
break the clottes in small pieces, then with the salt Sea sand, you shall sand
it very plentifully, but if that be not to be gotten, and that you be very well
assured of the natural richaesse of the earth, you shall then sand it with the
best red sand you can get or find near unto you, and upon every aker of ground
you thus sand with fresh sand, you shall sow three bushels of Bay Salt, and
then plow up again the earth, sand and salt together, which would be done
about thelatter end of the year, as after Michaelmas and so let the ground
rest till seed time; at which time you shall first before you plow it, go
down to the low rocks on which the sea beats, and from thence with dragges
and other Engines, gather those broad leaued black weeds, which are called
Orewood, and grow in great tufcs and abundance about the shore, and these
weeds you shall bring to your Hemp-land, and cover it all over with the same,
and then you shall plow it again, burying the weeds within the earth: And
herein is to be observed, that in any wise you must lay these weeds as wet upon
the land, as when you bring them out of the Sea, provided still that you add
no other wet unto them but the salt water, for so they are of all soiles or
meanures whatsoever, the only best and most fruitfullest, and most especially
for these seeds, and breed an increase beyond expectation.

When you have thus plowed over the ground you shall then back it again, then
sow it with either Hemp or Flax seed, which you please, and after it is so
sown, you shall then harrow it (and not before) and you shall be careful to
harrow it into as fine mould as you can, and this mould is likely to run fine
enough, as well by reason of the fertility, as also of the mixture; yet what
clottes you cannot break with your Harrowes, those you shall break with your
clotting beetles, and such like Tools, then after the first great shower which
shall fall after your sowing, you shall run over your Land thus sown with
your back harrowes, that is with a pair of large Harrowes, the wrong side
turned upward, to wit, the teeth turned from the earth, and the back toward
the earth, and if need be, you shall lay upon the harrowes some indifferent
heavy piece of wood which may keep the back of the harrowes closer to the
ground, and so go over all the earth, and lay it as smooth and light as is
possible, without leaving the smallest clot that may be unbroken.

Now if the ground be sown with Hemp, you (...).
shall not think of weeding it at all, because Hemp is so swift a grower, and
such a poison unto all weeds, that it ouer-runneth, choaketh, and destroys
them; but if it be sown with Flax or Line, which is a much tenderer seed, and
brings forth more tender leaves and branches, then you shall watch what weeds
you see Spring up, and in their first growth pluck them up and cast them away
till you behold your Flax or Line to be grown above the weeds, and then you
may let it alone also, for after it has once gotten height, it will not be
ouergrowne with weeds.

Now touching the other soil, which through the extreme barrenness thereof,
refuses to bring forth Making of ill earth bear hemp etc.
any good fruit at all; you shall in all points dress it as you dressed your
plain clayes discribed in the second Chapter of this book, beginning at the
same time of the year that is then appointed, or (if more necessary occasions
hold you) if you begin latter it shall not be amiss, and then at Michaelmas
you shall plow it over the second time, and meanure it with the sea weeds, and
so let it lie at rest until March (which is seed-time) and then plow it
again, and meanure it with the sea weeds again, and after the plowing you
shall hacke it, and if in the hacking you find the earth stiff and tough then
you shall harrow it before you sow it, then fow it and harrow it again,
breaking the earth so small and laying it so smooth as possible you can, using
the help both of the clotting beetles and all other tools which may be
available for the breaking of the earth, and making the mould as fine as any
ashes, then after the first great shower of rain, perceiving the ground to be
well moystned, you shall instead of the back harrowes (which upon this earth
may be to light) take the great rouler which is discribed in the book of the
English Husbandman, being a great round piece of Timber of many squares, drawn
either by Horse or Oxen but a single Horse is the best, both in respect of much
treading the ground, as also for the swift going away or drawing of the same;
for the swifter it is drawn, the better it breaks the ground, and the
lighter it leaves the mould: and with this Rouler you shall run over and
smooth your ground very well, leaving no clot unbroken, and so let it rest.

As for the weeding of this ground, you shall not respect Weeding.
it at all, for naturally it will put up no weed, the very ground of it self
being a very great enemy thereunto, nor shall you need to dress this ground in
the form beforesaid, above once in eight or ten years; only every seed-time
when you plow it, (as you shall not need to plow it at any time, but seed-time
only) you shall before the plowing, cover or meanure the land with the sea
weed before spoken of, which will give strength enough to the ground, without
any other assistance.

And thus much touching the enriching, plowing, and dressing of all manuer of
barren earths, of what nature or quality soever, whereon you would sow Hemp or
Flax.

CHAP. XII.
The manner of Stacking of all kind of Grain or Pulse with greatest safety,
and least loss.

IN these barren and hard countries of which I have formerly written, all
sorts of buildings are exceeding costly and scarce, both in respect of the
clime which is commonly most extreme cold mountainous, and much subi^ct to
storm and tempest, as also through the great want of Wood and Timber, which in
those hard soyles does hardly or never prosper; and therefore in such places
building must be both small and dear, so that it will be very hard for the
Hnsbandman to have houseroome for all his Corn, but that of necessity he must
be enforced to Stacke much or the most part of his Corn without the dorcs,
which albeit it be a thing very usual in this Kingdom; yet is it in many
places so insufficiently done, that the loss which redounds thereby (partly by
the moisture of the ground, which commonly does rot and spoil at least a yard
thickness of the bottom of the Stacke next the ground, and partly through
myce, Rats and other vermin, which breeding in the Stacke, do eat and
devour a great part thereof; as also through many such like negligent causes)
is greater then a good Husband may with his credit be guilty of, or a
profitable Husband will by any means suffer to be los^ so negligently.

To show then the manne^ how to Stacke or Moow your Corn without the doors, in
such sort, as neither the ground shall rot it, nor these vermines destroy it,
nor any other loss come to it by way of ill husbandry, you shall first cause
four pieces of timber, or four stones to be hewed broad and round at the
nether end and somewhat narrower and round at the upper end like the fashion of
a Sugerloafe, or this figure,



And these pieces of wood or stone shall be in length three foot or thereabouts,
and in compass or breadth at the bottom, two foot, or a foot and a half, and
at the top not above one foot, these four pieces of wood or stone, you shall
place in your stack-yard, or other convenient place near your thrashing-sloore,
and you shall place them apiece, of an equal distance one from another,
then you shall cut out four smooth boords of two inches and a half thick at
the least, and full three foot square every way, and these boords you shall lay
upon the heads or narrow tops of these stones or pieces of timber according to
this figure.



Then shall you take strong ouer-lyars of wood, and lay them foure-square from
one board to another, according to this figure.



And then upon those ouer-lyars you shall lay other smaller poles cloffe one by
another, and then upon them you shall Moow or Stacke all your Corn whether it
be Wheat, Barley, Oats, Pease, or any other kind of Grain, and be sure if
you make your Stacke handsome and upright, which consists in the Art and
Workmanship of the Workman, you shall never receive loss in your Corns, for
the raising of it thus two or three foot from the ground will preserve it from
all moisture or hurt thereof, and the broad boards which cover the four
ground posts will not suffer any Myce orother vermin to ascend or come into
the same.

Now for the manner oflaying your Corn into the Stacking of Grain.
Stack, you shall be sure to turn that part of the sheafe where the ears of
the Corn lie ever inward into the Stacke, and the other which is the straw end
you shall ever turn outward, and by that means you shall be assured that no
flying foul as Pygions, Crows and such like, can do you any hurt or
annoyance upon the same; Lastly you shall understand that you may make these
stacks either round, square, or long-wise, yet round is the safest, and if you
do make them longwise, then you shall set them upon six ground posts or eight,
according to the length and proportion you would have it, and after your Stacke
is made, you shall then thatche it very well to keep out the wet; also if when
you do stacke your wheat, you do top your Stacke with Oats or other course
Grain, it will be so much the better, and the Wheat will lie in greater
safety, for no part of a Stacke well made, especially a round stacke will so
soon take wet or hurt, as the top thereof.

And thus much as touching the Stacking of Corn without doors in greatest
safety.

CHAP. XIII.
The diseases and imperfections which happen to all manner of Grain.

ALbeit the manner of stacking and laying up of Corn or Grainein the form
before showed, may to every one give an affurance for the safe and profitable
keeping thereof as long as it endures therein, and abides in the ear,
yetbecause diverse necessities may compel the Husbandman to thrashe out his
Corn, as either for present use of straw, chafe, garbadge or other
commodities needful unto him (as the season of the year shall fall out) I
think it most necessary in this place to show how all manner of Grain and
Pulse, of what nature soever may most safely and profitably be kept from all
manner of annoyances, or corruptions whatsoever, being a work of that vtility
and goodness, that not any belonging to the Husbandman does exceed it; Nor
shall it be sufficient to show the offenses and diseasses of Grain with their
cures and healthful preseruations, whilst it is in the Husbandmans possession,
but also whilst it is in the earth, and at the mercy of cold, heat, moystnesse
or dryness, and not only subject to the malignant influ^nces of stars and
planets, with the increasing and decreasing of the Moon and her operations.
but also of diverse other hurtful vermines, as birds, worms, pissmires, dorres,
snailes, moales, and other such like; some whereof consume and devour the
grain ere it sprout, others in sprouting when the kernel is rotten turned to
a sweet substance, and others after it is sprouted by devouring the first
tender leaves before they have strength to appear above the earth, being as
itwere but soft white threads not changd into the strength of green because the
air and Sun has not yet looked upon it. To begin then with the first enemies
of corn or grain Crows and Birds.
after it is thrown into the earth, there is none more noisome then crows and
choughs and other smaller birds, which flocking after the seeds-man, will in a
manner devour and gather up the grain as fast as it is sown, for as according
to the old saying, That many hands make ^ht work^ so many of their mouths
(being creatures that ever fly in flocks together) and their much nimblenes in
devouring, soonerob the earth of her store, and deprive the laboring
Husbandman of very much profit, and the grain which these creatures do most
consume, is all manner of white corn, as wheat of all kinds, barley of all
kinds, rye and oats, as also hempseed, linseed, rapeseed and such like: Neither
are they only offensive during this time of sowing, but also after it is sown
and covered, digging it with their strong bills out of the earth, and so making
the wast greater and greater.

The prcuention or cure for this evil, is diverse, as the The cure.
affections of people and customs of countries do instruct them, for some
(especially the French men) use when they sow these grains or seeds, first to
sprinkle it with the dregs or lees of their bitterest oils, which when these
devouring fowls do taste, they refuse to do any further hurt: Others use to sow
Pigeons dung or lyme with their seed, which sticking unto the grane, the
vnsauorines thereof will make the soul caft up the grain again, and leave to
do further hurt; But for as much as these medicines cannot ever be had, nor are
cuer wholesome for every ground, the only best and safest means to prevent
this evil, is to have ever some young boy with bow and arrows to follow the
seedsman and Harrowes, making a great noise and acclamation and shooting his
arrows where he shall see these deuourers light, not ceassing but chassing
them from the land, and not suffering them at any time to light upon the same;
and these servants are called field-keepers or Crow-keepers, being of no less
use and profit (for the time) then any other servant whatsoever, nor is it
sufficient to have these field-keepers for the bare time offeed only whilst
the Grain is in sowing, but he shall also maintain them till such time as you
see the Grain appear above the earth, which for Wheat or Rye, because they
are Winter seeds, and so longer in sprouting, will ask a full month, for all
other seeds which are sown in the Spring or Summer, a fortnight is full
sufficient; and this field-keeper shall not fail to be in the field an hour
before Sun in the morning, and so continue till half an hour after Sunset
in the evening; for at the rising and setting of the Sun, is ever done the
greatest mischief, for then are all creatures most eager and hungry: and
though the indurance may promise much pain and trouble, yet questionles the
labor to any free spirit, is both easy and pleasant, and not without much
necessary use, in as much as it makes him expert and cunning in the use of his
Bow, which howsoever musket shot in these days seems to disgrace, yet sure
the very nature and quality of our Kingdom, (being so muchplaine champion and
unfenced, and our best strengths in our men, not towns) will challenge it as a
matter of great worth and consequence.

The next great destroyers of Corn unto these, are Pygeons.
your Pygeons, which the wisdom of our nation, has so well found out that
they have provided many wholesome Laws for the restraint of the great
multiplicity thereof, for they are not only great destroyers of Grain when it
is going into the ground, but also when it is gathered and Stackt, tearing the
thatche and other couerings, and digging such hoales into Stackes and Reeks of
Corn, that the loss is most plain and apparent; Now the Grain to which
these Pygeons are most offensive, albeit they are generally hurtful to all
kind of Corn, yet they are especially most mischievous unto all sorts of
Pulse, as Beans, Pease, Fetches, Lentiles, Lupyns, Tare and such like.

The cure or prevention against these kind of foul, The cure.
when the Corn is going into the ground, is the same formerly showed for
Crows or Chouges, without altering any circumstance, only if instead of the
bow and arrow, you do use a musket, harquebush, or fowling piece, the report
or noise where of is more terrible and fearful, you shall find the profit
thereof a great deal more, and that a shot or two of Powder will save more
Corn, then a whole weeks hooping and showting; only you must observe by all
means that your field-keeper shoot neither bullet nor haileshot, for so he may
turn scaring unto killing, and that may breed unkindness from, and injury to
your neighbors: Now touching the destruction that they make of Corn after it
is stackt up, by tearing of the thatche, and digging hoales and pits therein,
you shall observe that as your Thatcher thatcheth the same, that forthwith he
throw great store of ashes of any kind, as either of wood or coal, upon the
thatch, orinstead of ashes to sprinkle all the thatch over with Lyme, that as
the foul (whether it be Pygeon, Crow or any other) teareth up the straw, the
lyme or ashes may sparkle into their eyes and-nares, and by the noisomnesse
thereof make them forbear their wicked labors, as for those parts of the
Stacke which cannot be thatcht, as the sides and ends thereof, upon them you
shall prick diverse scar-crowes, as dead crows, or dead Pygeons, or the
proportion, or shape of a man, made either of thumb-ropes of hay or straw, or
else some old castaway apparel stopped with straw and so with stakes fastened
to fundry parts of the stack, there be others which to remedy these evils, make
little clap mils of broken trenchers, which blown and turned about with the
wind, do make such a continual noise, that not any bird whatsoever dare
come near it.

Now to conclude, for the general offense of these birds or any other
whatsoever, if you want ability to maintain a field-keeper, or think his
labor might be better imploid in other services, then the only way to rid you
of the loss and annoyance, which come by these dcuouring birds, is to take
long lines of packthred, and in them to knit diverse feathers, especially white
ones, and with little stakes so to fasten them over the Corn you would save,
that with every breath of wind the feathers may dance, turn and move about,
and the nearer that these blinks or strawes come to the ground, when the Corn
is new sown, so much the better it is least the foul finding away to creep
vnderthem, begin not to respect them, so that a hand or two from the ground is
sufficient, provided that the feathers, and scarres have liberty to play.

But if it be to save Corn in the ripening, that is to say, a little before it
be reapt, when the ear begins to To save Corn rea^ to reap.
harden, or when it lies in single sheafe upon the land for then foul and
birds do as great mischief, as at any other season, it shall then be fit that
you raise these lines or scarres upon higher stakes, so as they may play as
much above the tops of the ears of corn as before they did above the earth:
and amongst these scars thus made upon lines in sundry parts of the field, you
shall upon other stakes place many other bigger scars, as dead crows, pies,
gleades, pigeons, or such like; as also the proportions of man formerly showed
you, or any rags of cloth being black, foul, and ugly like bakers malkins, and
than this; there is no saffer way for the defense of grain or corn from these
birds; and such like.

The next great deuowrers or consumers of grain Of Pismiers
are Pismiers or Ants, which although it be but a little creature, yet it is so
laborsome, that the grain which they carry away or destroy by eating,
amounts to a great quantity, and the mischief which these little vermins
do, is after the corn is covered in the ground, and before it sprout, for they
creeping in at the little chinks of the earth, and finding the corn, either
drag it out, or eat it; so that it cannot grow, and the grain which they most
hurt, is all manner of white corn, especially your finest and smallest wheat,
for the skin or hull is thinnest, and the kirnell whitest and sweetest: also to
barley they do much hurt, especially, that which is fullest and best, and
likewise to rye, hemp seed, lin seed, and rape seed; as for oats, because it is
double hulld, and also your great hole straw wheat and polard wheat which is
thick huld, their hurt is not so much to them, and unto pulse nothing at all,
because they are too heavy, too thick skind, and too bitter in taste.

The best cure or prevention for these pismires is to The cure.
search your corn fields well, especially under hedges and old trees, and on the
tops of moale-hilles, and if you find any beds or hills of Ants or Pismyres,
presently after Sunsetting with hot scolding water to drowned the beds or hills,
or with wet straw and fire to make such a smoke upon them as may smoother them
to death, also if you meanure your Corn lands with ashes, lime or salt sand,
you shall be well assured it will never breed Pismires.

Next unto these your Doors, or great black Clocks Of Do: es.
are vehement destroyers of all kind of Corn both white corn and Pulse,
whilst it lies dry in the earth, and before it sprout, for after it begins
to rot, they do no more touch it, and these Doors destroy it in the same
manner as the Pysmyres doc by creeping in at the small crauies of the earth,
and finding the grain do as long as it is dry feed thereon, and though they
are no hoarders or gatherers together of the grain, keeping it in heaps in
dry places as the Pismyres and other vermin doc, yet they are great feeders
thereon and that continually, besides they will ever choose out the fullest and
best Corn, and leave the leaner; whereby they do the Husbandman a double
in^ury, as first to devour, and then to devour but the best only.

The care or prevention for these Doors or black The Care.
Clocks, is in seed-time to make great smoakes in your corne-fields, which will
presently chase them from thence, for they are the greatest enemies that may be
to all manner of smoke; but if that be not sufficient, then immediately before
you sow your Corn, you shall very lightly sow your land with sharp lime, and
whenever the Door shall find the smell or taste thereof, presently he will
depart, or if he eat of the grain that touches the lyme, it is as present
poison unto him, and he there dies.

After these your field Rats and Myce, are very vehement Of field Rats and Myce.
destroyers of all manner of Grain or seeds before they sprout, especially all
sorts of wheat, and all sorts of pulse, because for the most part those kind
of grains in many soyles are sown under furrow, and not harrowed, so that the
furrows at first lying, a little hollow, these vermines, getting in between
the earth and them, will not only devour and eat a great part of the grain,
but also gather together great heaps thereof into their nests, as is often
seen when at any time their nests are found, some having more, some less,
according to their labors; And albeit in other soyles where the grain is
sown above furrow, and so harrowed in and laid much more closse and safe,
they cannot do so much hurt as in the former, yet even in these they will with
their feet dig out the corn in great abundance, and though in less measure,
yet do hurt that is insufferable; so that to conclude, neither Rye, Barley,
Oats, nor any other smaller and more tender seeds are free from their
annoyance and destruction.

Now the cure and prevention for these field Rats and Mice are diverse,
according to the opinions of diverse authors, and diverse of our best experienst
Husbandmen; for some use in the Dog days, or Canicular days when the
fields are commonly bare, to search out the holes and nests of these Rats and
Mice, which are easily known, being little round holes in the earth made so
round and artificially as if they were made with an Auger, no bigger then the
body of the Creature that was to lie in it; and into these holes they use to
put a few Hemblock seeds, of which when the beast tastes it is present death
unto them: Others use to sprinkle upon the land, Hellebere or neesing powder
mixed with Barley meal, of which the myce and Rats will greedily feed, and it
is deadly bane and present death unto them; Lastly, (and which is the best
medicine, if you take a good quantity of ordinary green glass beaten to
powder, and as much copporas or vitriall beaten also to pound and mix them
with course honey, till it come to a paste, and then lay it in the holes, and
most fuspicious places, and it will neither leave Rat nor Mouse about all your
fields, but fodainely destroy them.

The next great destroyers of Corn and Grain, are Of worms.
worms, and they destroy it in the sprouting, then when the ground has rotted
it, and the white or milky substance breaking open the upper husk, shoots
forth in little white threads at both ends, upon which whilst it is so moist
and tender the worm feeds extremely, and so devouring up the substance or
sperm, is the cause that the Corn cannot grow or get out of the ground, and
these worms being as it were the maine citiz^ns within the earth are so
innumerable that the loss which is bred by them is infinite.

Now the cure or prevention for these worms is diversely The Cure.
taken; for some husbandmen use, but only to strike into the plow rest, and
under the lowest edge of the shelbord certain crooked spikes of iron or great
nails half driven in, and turned back again, with which as the plow runs
tearing in the ground, and turns up the furrow, those pices of iron kill and
tear in pieces all such worms as are either within or under the furrows that
the plow castsvp, and this is sure a very good husbandly practice, but not
sufficient for the destroying of such a secret hurtful vermin which is so
innumerable, and lies so much concealed; therefore more curious husbands use
besides this help of the plow, to take ox dung and mix it with straw, and
then to burn it upon the land, making a great smoke over all the land,
immediately before you plow it for seed, and it is thought that this will kill
all the worms which lie so hie in the earth, as to hurt the Corn; Others use
before they make either the mixture or the smoke to wet the straw in strong
lie, and then adding it to the dung, the smoke will be so much the stronger
and the worms killed the sooner, or if you Sprinkle strong lie up on your seed
before you sow it, there is not any worm that will touch the grain after; Also
if you take hemp and boil it in water, and with that water sprinkle your seed
before you sow it, not any worm will come near to touch it. Yet it is to be
observed in this rule of wetting Of Rye not to be wet.
your seed Corn, that by no means you must wet your seed Rye, for it is a
grain so warm and tender that it will neither endure cold, wet, nor stiff
ground insomuch that the plowman has a proverb, that Rye will drowned in the
hopper, that is to say, it must neither be sown on wet ground, nor in a wet
day, since present shewers are apt to destroy it; lastly, it is thought that often
plowing of your ground in the wane of the mooneis a very good means to destroy
worms, touching that practice which many use, to gather the worms from their
lands at Sunrise, and sunset in bright dewy mornings when the worms coople
above the earth, I hold it more fit for small gardens then large Corne-fields.

The next great destroyers of Corn are Snailes and Of Snailes.
they destroy it after it is sprouted, seeding upon therender white threads and
rions which start from the seed and woldrise above the earth, being the stem or
stalk on which the ears should grow (were it not devoured and eaten up by
these Snailes, and such like vermin) as so one as it begins to peep up, or as
it were but to open the earth, whereby it is driven back and forced to dye in
the earth: for these creatures sucking upon the tender sweetness, deprine it
both of life and nourishment.

The cure and prevention for this euillis to take the The cure.
soot of a Chimney, and after your Corn has been sown a week, or ten days,
or within two or three days after the first shower of rain which shall fall
after the Corn is sown; you shall sow this soot of the Chimney thinIy over
the land, and not a Snayle will endure to come thereon: Others use (especially
in France and those more fertile Countres) to take common Oil lees, and after
the Corn has been sown and is ready to appear above ground, to sprinkle it
all over the Lands, by which means no Snaile or such like creature will endure
to come near the same.

The next great destroyer of Corn is accounted Of Grashop pers.
the Grasshopper, and he also destroys it after it is sprouted and appears
above the ground as the Snaile does, but somewhat more greedily, for he not
only feeds on the tender white strings, b^t upon the first green leaves
that appear also; by which means the Corn is not able to spring or bring
forth a steme or stalk to bear the ear upon; or ifit do put forth any, yet
it it is so small, weak and wretched, that the ear growing on the same, is
withered and lean, and the grain dry and blasted, and no better then chafe;
nor is there any Corn that scapeth the destruction of the Grashoper, for he
generally seedeth on all: first, on Wheat and Rye, because they are the
earliest, then on Barley and Oats, and lastly on Pulse, upon whose leaf and
blossom he feeds whilst the first is sweet and pleasant or the other green.

Now the cure or prevention for these Creatures The cure.
is according to the opinion of some Husbandmen to take Wormwood and boil it
well in water, 'till the strength of the Wormwood be gone thereinto, and then
with that water in the month of May to sprinckell all your Corn over when the
Sun is rising or setting: and not any Grasshopper will come near or anoy the
same. Others use in steed of wormwood to boil Century, and to use the water
thereof in the same manner as before said, and findean equal and like proffit
in the same, but it is most certain that any bitter decoction whatsoever used
and applied as aforesaid will not leave one Grasshopper about your fields, for
any bitterness is such an enemy unto them that they cannot live where they
feel any taste thereof.

The last offense of living Creatures belonging to Of Moales.
Corn or Grain are Moales, which not only feed upon it after it is sprouted
and spindled by eating up the roots thereof, and so consequently by killing the
whole Corn: but also by their digging and undermining of the earth, do not
root up the Corn and destroy it, in most wonderful manner, for where they
make their haunts, or are suffered to dig, there they will destroy almost
half an acre in a day, neither make they choice, either of ground or Grain,
for all grounds and all Grains are alike, if the ground be not too wet, or
subject to inundation or ouerflowes (as for the most part Corn grounds are
not) for above all things moales cannot endure wet ground or earth of too moist
quality.

Now the best cure or prevention against these creatures The cure.
is to find out their trenches and passages which are most plain and casie to
be known by the turning up of the new earth, and digging cross holes in the
same, to watch either the going forth, or the coming back of the Moale, and
when you see her cast to strike her with an iron forke made of many grains, as
eight or fix at the least, and so to kill and destroy them; which still is so
generally known amongst Husbandmen, that it is become a trade and occupation
amongst them, so that it needs no further description, and the rather in as
much as for iii. d. or iiii. d. a score, you may have any ground cleansed of
Moales whatsoever; Now there be some others which have not this art of killing,
or catching of Moales, which only do take brimstone and wet stinking straw or
any thing else that will make a stinking smoke, and putting fire thereto,
smoke all the places of their haunts, and by that means drive them all clean
away from the Corn lands; many otherpractices they have, but none so good,
certain and probable as these already declared.

Thus far I have spoken of those offenses which proceed Offenses from the
influence of the heavens.
from living creatures, I will now entreat of these which come and grow from
the influence of the heavens, being malignant vapors which striking into the
erathdo alter the sweet and pleasant nourishment thereof, and change in into
bitterness and rottenness, whereby the Corn is either ssaine outright,
withered and made lean and unkindly, or else the kernel turned to a filthy
blackness being bitter, dry and dusty like unto Of smutinesse and mildew
smoke, which the Husbandman calls smuttines or mildewing, and yet this
smuttinesse or mildewing comes another way, as namely by ouerrankenesse or to
much fatness of the earth, and this happens most commonly only to wheat, for
if blacknes happen to any other grain, it comes of blastings or other malice
of the stars, for rankness of the ground in Barley, Rye or Oats only makes
them lie flat to the ground, the stalk not being able to support the
multiplicity of the ears, and so by that means the grain wanting his true
nourishment, grows light, withered, and of no validity; now that this is most
easy to be found out, the ranknes of the growing corn, rising as it were in
close bundles together, and the deep blackness of the green blades will with
small travel show you. The Cure.


This to cure and prevent it shall be good before you sow your Grain, to sow
your land lightly over with fine chalk for that will abate his ouer-ranknesse.

To proceed then to the other imperfections Of hail
which do happen from the skies, I hold hail in the foremost rank, which with
his violence beats down the Corn flat to the ground, and bruiseth the reed
so in pieces that the Corn not able to rise up again, there lies and rotteth,
or else withers to nothing.

The cure and prevention of this evil (according The cuee.
to the opinion of the French Husbandmen) is to take the white Vine, and to
plant it in diverse parts of your Corne-fields, and it will deffend the Grain
from this annoyance of hail; or if your soil be such as the white vine will
not grow therein, if then you take but branches thereof, and strike them in
diverse parts of your lands, it is thought that no hail will at any time do
offense to your corn; Others use to take an Owl, and to fasten her legs into
a post in the midst of your Corn field and her wings extended and spread forth
to the uttermost, and so abiding whilst the Corn grows, no hurt shall come
to your Corn by hail.

The next mischief which commet^ to corn, is by ^ning
lightning, which is a violent opening or flashing of the air, being an
erruption of swift fire which dar^eth out his beams so sharply, that
sometimes it burns or scorcheth the corn, sometimes breaks the reed in
pieces, and sometimes withers and slays it outright.

The cure and prevention of this cuill, according The cure.
to the opinion of some husbandmen is to take a hedge Toad, and to close it up
fast in an earthen pot, and then digging a hole in the midst of your Corn
field there bury the pot with the Toade, and lightening will never ^damage your
corn, there be others which use to take the feathers of an Aegle, and to hang
them up in the four corners of your corne-field, or for want of them to hang
up the skin of a Seal, and either of them will prevent the hurt of
lightning; lastly, some use to plant the Laurel or Bay Tree in their
corne-fields, and hold it a certain prevention from lightning, or where the
trees cannot conveniently be gotten, if but some branches thereof be but stuck
up in sundry places, it is thought to prevent all hurt that comes by lightening.

Next unto lightning is the hurt which comes to Ofthunder.
corn by Thunder, being a sharp and fiery exhalation or meteon closed within
the body of cold, moist cloud, every way contrary both in nature and quality to
the thing in which it is imprisoned, whereby a most violent contention growing
betwixt the fire and the water; at last the fire getting the upper hand,
breaks from his cold bed with such violence and noise, that many malignant
qualities follows it, and it does much hurt both to grain and all other
growing things whatsoever.

The cure and prevention for those evils which happen The Cure.
by Thunder, is many times to ring loud and great Bells, or now and then to
shoot of a Cannon or Culuerin shot, or any other great shot whereby the
acquaintance with these great noyses may make the grain more apt and able to
endure the violence and suddenness of the Thunder whenever it shall happen,
for it is the suddenness of the crack which breeds all the imperfection,
there be others that in this case use to gather up all the stinking and filthy
smelling weeds and seeds which can be got, and mixing them with any other
filthy matter that stinketh most, to burn them in their corne-fields, and it
is a most safe preservation from any hurt which shall happen by Thunder.

The next evil which happens to corn or grain Of frosts,
is that which comes by frosts and sharp nipping colds, which staruing the
root, and binding up all nourishment marketh the corn dry, wither and never
prosper, and then the violence of the frost, there is nothing more bitter to
plants and seeds, for ever rasorlike it cutteth the veins and sinews in
pieces, and as sharp needles pricketh the heart of every growing thing, for as
the fire which is most hot, when it rages burns and consumes all things, so
the frost which is most cold when it continues, starueth and choaketh or
stifeleth whatsoever it imbraceth.

Now the cure or prevention for those evils which do happen to grain by these
great frosts is as some The cure.
husbandmen sappose to cover the land over when it is sown with ashes, others
spread straw or rotten litter upon their corn, and not any of them but is
sufficient to pre^ent the worst injury that the frost can do.

The most malignant quality which offends grain Mists and fogs.
is mist and fog, which being naughty vapors, drawn from the infected parts
of the earth, and falling upon the corn, do not only make the grain
leprous, but also infecting the better earth alter the kindly nourishment there
of, and as it were distilling corruption into the veins, makes all that depend
thereupon most leprous and unwholesome, and thereby alters the quality, quite
turning sweetness into bittenesse, fullness into emptiness, and goodness
into badnesse, to the great loss of the husbandman, and the much disreputation
of the ground.

Now the cure and prevention of this eiill, according The c^re.
to the opinions of all the best husbandmen, is to take weeds green, the twigs
of brambles and other bruth wood, wet straw or any such like stuff, and
binding them in great bundles, to p^t fire there to, making a great and violent
smoke, and then taking the advantage of the wind, to walk up and down the
field and smoke it, which is thought a certain remedy to take away those
inconveniences which happen by violence and poison of these mysts and fogs.

The last and not least hurt (for indeed it happens oftest, O^sting.
and is most dangerous, which ^als on cornfieldsd, is that which proceeds
from blasting, or (as some call it) planet struck; This blasting is diversely
distinguished, as proceeding from diverse occasions, as sometimes from the evil
aspects of the Stars, sometimes from the rotten corruptions of the air,
sometimes from the contagion and infection of the winds, and sometimes from the
cuill habits of dewes, and other pestifferous serenes which fall upon the
earth; of all or any of which, if a man be desirous to read, let him look into
Pliny, in the first book of his natural history, and he shall find them set
down and decyphered at large, with an abstract of all such Stars and Planets
as are most propitious and helpful to all manner of grain, as it were guarding
and defending it from the casual malladies which do come from the sky; so
that in this place to enter into the large field of so well written a
discourse, were much needless, and a good man's work much worse repeated.

Touching the cure and prevention of those evils The cure.
which happen unto corn by blasting, they are sundry according to the sundry
opinions of husbandmen, yet the best and most approved, are these two only, of
which I mean to write in this place; the first, to take the right or far
horn of an ox, and mixing it with a good quantity of his dung, add fire unto
it, so as the horn and dung may make a great smoke or smother, and this do in
diverse parts of your corn-field, the operation or virtue where of, is, that
this smoke will purge and dissolve the evil qualities of the air and other
influences, and reduce them to their proper goodness and virtue: The second,
is to take the boughs or branches of the Bay Tree, and to plant them in sundry
places of the Corne-field, so as they may stand a pretty distance or space
above the height of the standing corn, for it is held a maxim amongst the
best husbandmen, that all blastings will fall upon those boughs and branches,
and the corn will remain safe and vnstriken or blemished.

Now to conclude the diseases and infirmities which Corn reapt wet.
happen to corn, whilst it is in the field, there is not any formerly spoken of
more dangerous or of vilder quality then the reaping, mowing or gathering in of
corn, wet or too green, and vnhardened, for such moisture when the corn is
either sheaffed up close together, or stackt or mowed up, forthwith gathers
heat, and either sets the corn on fire, or else the moisture being of less
quantity, and not apt to flame, yet it corrupts the grain and straw, and
breeds a stinking mouldinesse or rottenness about it, so that the grain
either becomes dung and dirt, or at least so stinking and unsavory that it is
good for no use or purpose as is daily seen where careless husbands gather in
their grain without respect or government, making the old proverb good, that
have ever brings waste.

The cure and prevention of this evil, is the well The cure.
husbanding and managing of the harvest, as first with a careful and well
judging eye to look upon your corn, and to know by the hanging downward of
the ear (looking as it were back to the ground) and by the hardness of the
grain, whether it be ripe or no; then to look into the cleanness of the
corn, as whether it be full of greenes, as grass, weeds, and such like or
clean of it self without any mixture, if you find there be many weeds mixed
with it, then you may reap it so much the sooner, though the kernel be not so
well hardened as you would wish, and above all things have a care never to
sheare corn in the rain or wet, no not so much as with the mornings or
euenings dew upon it, but even in the heat and brightness of the day; then
having reapt your corn so full of grass and weeds, you shall by no means
sheafe it, but sprcading it thin in the Sun, let the grass wyther all that
day, which when you perceiu to change color and grow dry, then bind it up in
sheaffes, and let it lie single a day that the wind and Sun may get into it,
and dry the greenes more sufficiently, then lay it in stuckes of six and eight
sheafes a piece, and turn the cares so inward that the other bigger ends may
defend them from all rain, wet or dew that may fall upon them; then a day or
two after lay them in stoucks of twenty or four and twenty sheaues a piece,
and in those stoucks let them take a sweat, then break them open in a bright
Sunshine day, and letting the air pass through them to dry them, forthwith
lead the grain home, and house it or stacke in such sortas was showed in the
former chapter, and be sure the grain thus ordered and dried can never take
hurt, but if the season of the year fall out so extraordinariy evil, and full of
wet, that by no means you can get your corn dry home (which although it be
seldom seen, yet it is possible to be seen) in this case you must bring it
home as well as you can, and having your kilne well ordered and bedded, you
shall lay as many sheaues thereon, as it can contain, and turning and tossing
them over a very gentle fire, by slow degrees dry them very perfectly as near
as you can, with no greater a heat then that which the Sun gives, and then
moow and stacke them up at your pleasure, for the air will sweeten them again
and take all smell of smoke or other annoyance only observe not to stacke
them vp-whilst the fire or heat is in them, but when they are cold, and so they
will be as sweet as may be.

Now it is not amiste that I speak here a word or Of w^ht Corn.
two of washed corn, or the washing of corn; true it is (as before I have
written) that all sorts of wheat whatsoever are subject, or by the rancknes of
the ground, blasting or else mildewing to a kind of filthy sooty blacknes, as
is already showed; and this sooty corn is taken two ways, generally, and
paticularly; generally, if the whole land be stricken, and no corn saved but
all spoiled, which is called mildewed; or particularly, where but some special
ears are struck, or some special part of the grame, as when it is black at
both ends, yet full and sound in the midst, and this is called smutcht corn,
being disfigured in part, and not in all: this smutcht corn which is stricken
here and there, if the blasted ears be not culld out from the other (which to
do, is an husbandry exceeding good and very worthy) when it comes under the
flasile, the dust of those black blasted ears will so defile all the rest of
the corn, that it will all look black and ill-fauoured, and so become
unserviceable and vnmarkeable, for the blasted corn is both bitter and
unwholesome; In this case you must of force wash this corn, and you must do it
in two or three waters, till you see all the blacknes quite gone, which done
then draine away your water clean, and laying the corn on fair window
clothes or couerlids, lay it in the heat of the Sun, and so dry it again till
it be so hard that it will grind; But if the time of the year will not serve
for the Suns drying it, then you shall dry it on a kelne with a very saft and
gentle fire, and then cool it in the air to recover the sweetness again, and
then the corn is as serviceable as any other, only for seed it will by no
means serve, both by means of the blasting which makes the kernel imperfit
at both ends, where it should sprout, as also the too much drying thereof, by
which it is so much hardened that the ground has not strengh to resolve it,
therefore it is the offense of every Husbandman when he chooses his seed corn,
to eschew by all means this washed corn as a grain that is lost in the earth,
and will by no means grow.

Therefore that you may know washed corn from all To know washed corn.
other corn, and so not be cosoned by any deceit in the ill Husbandman, you
shall take it up into your hand and if the corn look bright, clear, and
shining, being all of one entire color without change or difference, then be
sure the Corn is unwashed and perfect.

But if you find it look whiter at the ends then in any other part of the
Corn, and that the whiteness is black and not shining, so that there is a
changeable color in the Corn, then be assured that the Corn is washed, and
then by no means apt for seed or increase.

Again, put three or four grains into your mouth and chaw them, and if then
the taste be sweet and pleasant, and grind mellow and gently between your
teeth, then is the Corn not washed, but if it have a bitterish, or flashy raw
taste, and grind hard between your teeth, or with much roughness, then has
the Corn been washed and dried again, and is not good for seed, also when
Corn is more then ordinarily moist, or more then ordinarily dry, both are very
ill signs, and show either imperfit Corn, or imperfit keeping; for the best
and good Corn indeed ever holds an indifferent temperature betwixt drynes
and moisture.

And thus much touching the diseases and imperfection of all sorts of grain
within the field, with their certain cures and most approved remedies, being a
work hitherto unwritten, yet worthy of all knowledge and usefulness;

CHAP. XIIII.
How to keep all manner of Grain, cither thrasht or unthrasht with least
loss the longest time, and how to prescrue it from all infirmities mities and
vermin in the house or garner.

SOme may imagine it an unnecessary Objection.
work to teach men these extraordinary secrets and skill touching the keeping
and preeseruing of corn, in as much as it leans so near unto hourding and
uncharitable keeping up of grain, which occasioneth dearthes and other
scarcities, by which many times the commonwealth is hurt, and the poor almost
famished.

But they are therein deceived, for to the cormorant and devouring myzer whose
sins are his substance and whose mind is ever laboring on the evils he
inte^ds to practice, though these rules were buried in the center of the earth,
yet could his inventions produce a thousand others to fit the wickedness of his
purpose, nor was it cuer seen that ignorance ever made a wicked man good; but
the truth is, that there is nothing The needful use ofpreseruing corn.
more needful and necessary then this knowledge for all sorts of people, as
well the poor as rich, for every man does not sow corn, yet every man must
eat corn, and what thing can be more husbandly and good then for a man to buy
his provision of corn and meal at the best and cheapest time of the year, in
which no small thing is saved, where the family is of any greatness: as thus
for example, if a man dwell either in the city or other market town, being a
Trades man or other which sows not any corn, and yet he spends weekly in
his house, of wheat one bushel, of Rye two bushels, and of malt four bushels;
wheat in October, November and December is worth iii. s. iiii. d. a bushel,
Rye worth ii. s. iiii. d. and malt worth ii. s. in the Spring Wheat is worth v.
s. Rye worth iiii. s and malt worth iii. s. iiii. d. but in the Summer, wheat
is worth vi. s. and vi. s. viii. d. Rye worth v. s. and malt worth iiii. s: now
if a man know how to keep his corn, or meal sweet and sound all the year, and
buy his provision at the best hand, and at once, there is the price of a
quarter of his provision almost saved in the bargain. Again the poor
husbandman that is to make the best profit of his grain that he can, is
peradventure in great need for fodder for his cattle, and must of necessity
thrash up his corn to get the straw to feed with: in this case, if he know not
how to preserve and keep his grain wholesome and sweet, he must of force sell
it, and it may be at that time markets are full and all corn at very low rate,
so that he cannot choose but be a wonderful looser, whereas on the contrary
part having skill and knowledge how to keep it sweet and without shrinking, he
may take his best markets at his best leisure, and so put off his corn to his
best advantage, so that to conclude both to the Farmer and the Grazier, the
good town man, and the village man, this is an Art and skill right good and
necessary.

To proceed then to the keeping and preserving of Keeping of corn twofold.
Corn and Grain, it is to be understood that it is to be done two several
ways; that is to say, in the ear and out of the ear, in the Stack when it is
joined with the Straw and Chafe, or in the Garner when it is cl^nfed and
dressed.

Touching the keeping of Corn in the Ear or Keeping corn in the ear or in
chafe.
in the Stacke, there is no better or safer way then that already described in
the twelfth Chapter, being free from all offenses whatsoever that can come to
hurt it.

Now, there be others that cut off the ears of their Corn, and then put them
into great Chests or Hutches of wood, (such as are very frequent and much in
use in Ireland and other Countries where war rages) and so keep it sweet and
good many years: Others use to beat it out of the Ear, but not separate it
from the Chafe, and then laying a leare of Straw more then a foot thick, to
lay a good thick leare of the thresht Corn, then another leare of Staw, and
so a leare of thresht Corn, and thus lay leare upon leare, till you have made
up your Stacke, in such proportion as you shall think convenient; and this
will keep all kind of Corn, or Grain, or other seeds, sound, sweet, and fit
for any purpose, at least a dozen year, or more as some have supposed, without
either too much drying, whithering, moystening or moulding; and sure this is a
very excellent way for the storing up of much Corn in a very little room, and
may as well be done with Corn as with Srtawe; only it is not to be done in
Barn nor House, because Mice, Rats and other kind of Vermin will work much
destruction thereupon, but on a Stacke or Houell made and proportioned in such
form as was showed before in the twelfe Chapter, and so it will stand in safe
without alannoyance, as long as it shall please the owner to keep it; sure I am
it will last thus fully twelve years, yet some Authors affirm it will last
fifty years, but that is a space of years beyond my trial.

Touching the keeping of Corn after it is thrasht Keeping of corn out of the
ear or dressed.
and dressed, it is diverse ways to be done, as by stoage or place of leare, as
garners, hutches, and such like: by labor and industry, as with the shouel, or
else by device or medicine.

For Garners they be made diverse ways, according Of Garners.
to the nature of the Country and custom of the people.

Some are made with clay and lome trodden with hair, straw chopped, and such
like: but these are the worst and do soonest corrupt Corn, for although they
are warm, which is a great preservation to Corn, yet they yield dust, and
from that dust is bred fleas, mytes, weauels, and other vermin which spoil
Corn, and make it easily rot.

Others are made of stone and lyme, but they are subject against wet weather,
to yield fourth a moist dew which corrupts and rotteth corn.

Others are made of brick and lyme, and they are very good against the weauell
and other small vermin, but the lime is sharp and so consequently very
unwholesome for all manner of Grain. The best Garner then that can be made to
keep all manner of grain in, is made of plaster burnt and brought into
mortar, and so raising it up with the help of small stones hidden and placed
in the midst of the wall to make both the inside and the outside of the
Garner of smooth plaster, no stone being seen but hidden at least two fingers
thick on each side, and all the bottom also must be made of plaster for no
floor keeps corn so well, of what kind soever it be, and these Garners
would be placed as near as you can to the backs or sides of chimneys, or as
near the air of the fire as you can conveniently, for as there is nothing
more cold then plaster, yet is it ever so dry and free from moisture, that with
no change of the air or weather it relenteth, but keeps the corn ever in
one state of goodness, whilst the warm standing thereof is such a comfort in
the Winter, and the natural coolness of the thing so sovereign in Summer
that the grain ever abides in one state without alteration.

Now for hutches or great chests, byngs, dry-fats Of hutches.
and such like, they are made of old dry and well seasoned oake-bords, plained
smooth and close joined and glewed together, with couers and lids made also
very close whereby little or no air can come in; Some of these great byngs or
hutches made of dry boards are made open and without couers, but they are not
so good for the air cooling the upper part of the corn, and the middle part
sweating, breeds corruption, or mustinesse, which hurts and spoileth the
corn; besides they are somewhat too warm, and thereby make any green corn
apt to corrupt and smell.

Touching the use of Garners and Hutches, they are The use of Garners and
hutches for malt,
principally to keep malt after it is dried, or Barley which is for the use of
bread or meal; and here is to be noted that the best manner of keeping malt, is
to keep it in the come, that is to say in the dust and other filth which
comes with it from the kilne, as thus, when first you lay your malt on the
kilne to be dried you know there is at one end a certain sprout or small trids
which grows from the corn, and is called the come, which by the rubbing and
drying of the malt falls away and leaves the corn clean and snugge of it
self, and when you trim and dress up your malt for the mill, is windowed and
cleansed away; this you shall preserve and put altogether into your garner or
hutch, which will so mellow and ripen your malt, that in the spending thereof a
pecke will go further then a pecke and a half kept of a contrary fashion, and
although some are persuaded that this come or malt dust, is a great breeder of
the worm or weeuell, by reason of the much heat thereof, being indeed of the
purest of the heart of the corn; yet it is not so unless some danknesse or
moisture do get to the corn, and then it breeds weeuels in infinite abundance,
and therefore by all means be sure that your garners and hutches do stand
exceeding dry, and then there is no fear of the loss of corn, nor shall you
need to dress or window your malt but as you spend it.

Lastly, here is to be noted, that although I hear join garners, hutches,
chests and byngs together, yet I make them not all of equal goodness, for the
plastergarner is absolutely the best of all, the close hutch or chest next, and
the open bing last; yet any or all sufficient enough to keep malt, barley, or
small seeds, diverse years without imperfection.

It is written by some of the ancientest Authors that wheat has been kept in
these close hutches or chests sweet, the space of fifty years, yet I hold the
rule somewhat doubtful, both because wheat of it self lying so close packt
together, is apt to heat and sweat, and that heat commonly turns to
faughtinesse, and the sweat to corruption; but that it may thus be preserved
from worms, weauels, mytes and other vermin, breeding in corn: it is
doubtless and infallible, there be other husbandmen, which for the
preservation of their corn, take a land Toade and tie it fast by the hinder
leg, and hang it before the door or entrance of the garner, and by the virtue
thereof, suppose that no hurt can come to their corn; tie venom of the best,
as it were drawing away all other venom or evil that may come to the corn;
many other experiments there are, but none so certain as these, and therefore
these for malt or barley, shall suffice in this place.

Now for the preservation of wheat, which is the To preserve wheat.
most principal grain, of greatest use, and greatest price, and therewithal
most tender, and aptest to take hurt: the experiments are diverse as men's
fancies and practices have found out, for some husbandmen hold opinion,
especially the French and Spanish, that if you take the lees of common oil (so
it be sweet) and sprinkle it upon your wheat as it lies, either in the garner
or upon the floor that it will preserve it from all corruption and annoyance
whatsoever, not does it save wheat only, but all other manner of grain
whatsoever; nor does preserve corn alone from mischief, but if corn by
casualty be tainted or hurt, it does recover it again and brings it to the
first sweetness, and if either worms or weauels be bred in it, the oil
presently kills them, and makes the corn free from that mischief: as for
smaller feeds as hemp, line and rape, this oil does not only keep them long
and sound, but also feeds and nourishes them, and makes them better, either for
the ground, or for use either in the mill or in medecin, there be others that
use to take chalk, and beat it to powder, and then scatter it amongst their
wheat, when they put it into the garner, and have found that thereby their
grain has been wonderfully preserved from all imperfection and surely there
is great reason for the same, because the dryness of the chalk drinks up
the moisture which sweateth from the grain, and is the first breeder of all
putrefaction: also it cools and asswageth the immoderate heat which is
engendered in the Corn by reason of the pack and close lying together. Again,
there be others which use to lay great store of wormwood amongst their wheat,
which likewise preserves it from all anoyances, especially from worms and
weauels, as also from Mice, Rats, and such devouring vermin; neither will the
Corn corrupt or grow faugthty, as long as the wormwood remains amongst it:
In Italy the careful Husbands use to take a certain dry earth or clay, called
earth of Olnithus or Cernithus, and this earth they beat amongst their wheat,
and then put it into the garner or hutch, and it will keep it sound and sweet
diverse years together; then when they have occasion to use it, with small
reding siues to dress it from the Corn, and so preserve the dust, which will
last and serve you many years together, even almost an age as some have
reported, and is at this day to be seen in many parts of Italy and other
places.

Again, I have for mine own part seen in the Islands of the Axores, which lie
lowest from Spain (and it is a great practisealso in Spain) certain very
great and large caves or pits made under the earth, of the fashion of a Spanish
earthen Jar, that is to say, great and spacious in the midst, and narrow both
at the top and bottom, like a brass pot or great glass vial, and made as
smooth within as may be, and in these caves or pits, they first lay chasse, and
then their thrasht wheat filling it up full to the top, or within a handful
thereof, which they fill again with chafe, and then closing the top with a
broad stone, they cover it over with earth so close and vnperceiueable, that
you may walk or travel over it without any suspicion; and for mine own part,
I have my self dug up many of these pits, and found great store of wheat,
both in the high ways, and other most in suspicious places, and surely it is
thought, and experience in those places makes it good that in these caves or
pits you may keep wheat as long if you please as Pliny speaks of, which is
an hundred or an hundred and twenty years without hurt or putrefaction either
of heat, moisture, worms, weauels or any other vermin whatsoever which
consumes or deuoureth Corn; yet how I may recommend this experiment to our
nation I am uncertain, because the much moisture of our climat, and the cold
rawnesse thereof promisseth a contrary effect for the great enemies unto
grain, are violent cold and moisture, and with us it is very difficult to make
any cauerns under the earth but they must be subject; unto both; therefore
only to those which live in hot sandy countries high and free from springs or
waters, or in dry and rocky grounds, where these mines or hollow places may be
hewed out, as in a maine and firm quarry, I recommend the trial of this
practice, with this assurance, that where the ground is fit for this purpose,
as in any of your sand grounds or grauelly earthes, as in Norfolk, Middlesexe,
Kent, and many other sandy climats; or in rocky situations as in Nottingham,
Bathe, Bristol, and such like, you may keep your wheat, good, sound, firm and
free from all annoyances, even as long as you shall please to keep it, both
without putrefaction in it self, or waste made by other deuoring worms and
vermin: but if in a more moist place, as in a clay or other mixed earth which
ever is vomiting wet and dewish humors, you are forced to approve this
experiment: then you must necessarily lime all your cave or hallow mine within,
at least half a foot thick with tyle shred and plaster laid wall-like
together, and then the plaster dawbde at least three fingers thick above all,
and so you may keep your corn as safe and as sound as in any hot soil
whatsoever, but without it your corn will not endure a week without
rottenness, faughtinesse, mouldinesse and stinking. To conclude, having showed
you all the most approved and best experiments, for the keeping and preferuing
of wheat, there is not any better, or so good as this last poor silly plain
one, which I will hear deliver; and that is, first (as near as you can) reap
your wheat at the change of the Moon, for wheat which is so reaped, is sedome
or never subject to loss or putrefaction (being gotten dry and in husbandly
manner ordered and handled) because that celestial body has such a power and
influence in the growth of corn and seeds, that as she grows, so they grow,
and as she waneth, so they abate and wither, and truly for mine own part in
my poor husbandry, I have made this observation, that I have reaped corn at
the beginning of the wane (to mine eye and judgment) great, full and bold, (as
the Plowman calls it) and within few days after when it came to thrashing, I
have found it most poor, hungry and small Corn, no^ could give or find any
other reason for the sam but that it was reaped in an ill and most unseasonable
time, for on the contrary part, I have ever found tha Corn reaped upon the
change, being ripe, full, and every way fit for the barn (and the weather
fair and dry above head) it has never altered but kept his first and perfect
goodness, so that I cannot choose but in this case think the observation of the
Moon, to be a thing of great effect and validity, appointed by God as a
secondary means for our help and profit; when therefore your Corn is thus
seasonably and well got, you shall thrash it, window it and dress it so clean
as you can, then carry it up into your chambers or lofts appointed for that
purpose, and whose floores by all means, I would wish to be cast of the best
plaster, for boards are too hot, and clay is to apt to breed vermin: On this
plaster floor, you shall spread your wheat not above a foot d^pe at the
uttermost, and so let it lie; observing once in four or five days at the
most, with a large wooden shouell, to turn the wheat quite over and over, and
thus doing, you shall be sure to keep it as sweet, found and good as when it
came first into the barn; for neither can the heat, sweat nor coldness offend
it, the first being cooled and tempered by the opening and dipersing; the
second dried up by the air which has free recourse into it, and the last
comforted by the labor and tossing of the shouell, casting it up and down
from one place to another; and though some curious husbands may object that
this manner of keeping Corn dries it somewhat too much, and thereby disableth it
for some particular purposes as for seed, and such like; yet in that they are
much mistaken; for this stirring and moving of grain, is not a drying of it,
but rather a great comforter and strengthener of it dispersing back into the
Corn, those wholesome vapors which should do it good (by way of
communication and fellowship with the Grain) and expelling those ill humors
which sweating out of it would otherwise confound and hurt it, so that in
conclusion for the true and long keeping of wheat, sweet, sound and perfect
without loss or corruption, there is no way more safe or easy then this last
expressed, being of all other the best, although in show it appear slight and
triuiall, as for the most part things of greatest moment in this nature do;
but to the judicial Husbandman I referrc it, whose aim is at the worth and
substance not at the words and curious gloss, set forth in strange ingredians.

Touching the keeping of Rye or Massine, or as To preserve Rye.
some call it Munck-corne or Blend-corne, being part Rye, and part Wheat mixed
together, that which preserves Wheat will also preserve it, for they are
Grain of like nature, only the Rye is somewhat hotter and dryer, and
therefore will endure somewhat more moisture, yet to speak particularly
touching the preservation of Rye, there is nothing better then the Plaster
floor and often turning; the closse Hutch is also excceding good, so is the Pipe
or Dryfatte, but being once opened and the air entering into the Corn, except
it be soon spent, it will soon putrify, for though in the close keeping it
last long, yet when it comes to the air, it quickly receiucs tainte. Lastly,
for the profit in keeping of Rye, indeed there is nothing better then to pile
it and tread it hard into dry vessels or barrels, wherein Salt has been much
ledged, or other brine or salt matter; provided always that the vessels be
sweet and untainted, no ways subject to faughtinesse, or other unsavory smells,
from which there is no preservation.

Concerning the preservation and keeping of Beans, To preserve Beans.
which are indeed a more gross and fatter Grain then any heretofore written
of, and out of the fulnees of their substance, more subject to moisture and
those dankish humors which corrupt corn: the careful Husbandman observes two
rules; first, not to thrashe any Beans or Pulsse, more then for necessary use
(as for the Stable or the Mill) before it be midde March, at which time the
Grain having taken a kindly sweat in the mow, Stack or houel is become so dry,
firm and solid, that no floare, wall, or other place of leare, can make it
relent or give again (except great abuse and too much moist keeping: for it is
to be understood, that this sort of Pusse or Grain is of it self so exceeding
moist and apt to sweat in the moow, that all Husbandmen endeavor by no means
to house it, or lay it within doors, but seek to make it up in stacks and
houels without doors; not so much that houseroome is wanting, as that the
benfit of the Sun and Air which pierces through the same, dries and
ripeneth the corn in such kindly manner, as makes it as serviceable as any
other: and indeed, the first invention of Stacks, Houels, Reeks, and such like,
did not spring so much from the want of housing, as from the good and profit
which the Husbanman found to acrue to this kind of Grain only by reason of
laying it abroad; for it is certain, that Beans and Pease neither grow
together, nor ripen together, but put forth their increase one after another;
for you shall see upon one Stake, bloomes, swads, and ripe cods; so likewise in
the gathering of Pulse (when it is reaped from the ground) you shall see some
dry and withered, some ripe, some half ripe, some absolutely green, and as
but new in growing.

Now all these must be reapt together, and if you stay them in the field till
all be of like dryness, questionless the oldest will shake and shed upon the
ground before the youngest be ripned, and what that loss will redound to, every
husbandman can judge; so also to house and moow up in closse moow, the dry
pulse with the green, surely the green cannot choose but inflame and heat the
dry, and the dry so heated, give fire to the green till both be either rotted
or consumed: and hence it came, that expert husbandmen devised to lay their
pulse for the most part ever without doors in Stacks, Reeks and Houels, that
the Sun and wind passing through them might bring all the grain to an equal
dryness and hardness.

Again, Pulse being of all Grain the coursest and fullest of substance in it
self, and the Straw ever big and substantial, and full of broad thick leaves
ever moist and sappy; it must needs follow that this Grain must ever be most
apt to sweat in the moow, and so necessarily craves the greatest store of
air, and the longest time in drying; so that to return to my first purpose,
it must needs follow, that no Beans or Pease can be fully ripe or seasoned in
the moow, til it be mid March at the least; for it is an old saying amongst the
best husbands, I hat March wind is a salt which seasoneth all Pulse: And if use
or necessity compel men to thrash their Pulse before that time the grain is
so imperfect, that of force it must be kilne dried, or else it is fit neither
for the use of bread nor prouender.

Now herein is to be understood that Pease or Beans which are kiln dried may
be kept sound, sweet and good, either on plaster floores, boarded floores, or
earthy floores, the space of many years without turning or tossing; nor need
you to respect how thick the heap lie, since Beans after they are once dried
on the kilne, or in the Sun, never after will thawe, give again or relent,
butremaine in their first soundness. But if you preserve your Beans for other
uses, as to boil in your pot and feed your servants withal, as is used in
Somersetshire, and many other Westerly parts of this Kingdom, then it shall be
good for you to take oil Barrels, oil Caske that is sweet, and first chalk
them all over within and without with ashes, and then put your Beans therein,
and close up the heads, and as it is affirmed by diverse great Authors of
Husbandry, it will keep Beans sound, sweet, and good, twenty years: nay,
some give instances of Beans which have been thus kept and preserved the space
of one hundred and twenty years; and surely I am persuaded that if Beans be
well and dry got, and thrasht at a seasonable time of the year, as in March or
April, that then thus kept, they will last the uttermost of a man's pleasure.

Now for the keeping and preserving of Pease or Preserving of Pease or ^tches.
Fetches, which of all other Grain whatsoever, is most subect to rottenness
and imperfection, because out of it own nature it is apt to breed worms,
weauils and mytes, by reason of the much lushious sweetness of the kernel of
the Grain; you shall in all things observe the same courses that you do with
your Beans, both touching their gathering, drying, stacking, and also
thrashing, for as they are most aptest to grow together being near of nature
and condition one to the other, so it is fit that unto them you do apply one
and the selfsame medicine or remedy.

And herein is to be noted, that as Pease are of more general use ^hen Beans,
as for horse-prouender, feeding of Swine, Pigeons, Pullen and such like; as
also for bread, pottage, to boil with or without meat, for certainly it is a
most wholesome and strong food as may be seen by the people of Deuon-shire,
Cornwall and Sommerset-shire, to whose great strength of body not any reason
can be given more probably then their much feeding on this grain, and theit
acquaintance with much and strong labor, so they ought with more care and
circumspection to be preserved from all those anoyances that naturally are apt
to hurt them, as worms, rottennes, mould, mustinesse, and such like.

And first there is nothing better for the long and well keeping of Peasse,
then the very well drying of them, either in the Sun or on the kilne,
especially those which you use for bread, prouender or feeding of Swine, and
although some Husbands use to feed their Swine with vndryed pease, nay many
times both vndryed and undressed, that is to say the pulse or chafe not taken
away, and are of opinion that the Grain so given sooner feeds and puffs up
Swine then the other, yet they are deceived; for albeit it swel and puff up a
beast, yet is the flesh and fat neither so good sound and long lasting, as
that which is gotten with dry food, nor does it make a Swine so thirsty, and
the Husbandman is ever assured that when his Swine drinks not well, he feeds
not well; therefore what Pease you keep for bread or feeding of Cattle, by all
means dry them well, and lay them either in Garners or Floores, and they will
last sound and good without breeding worms or weauils, as long time as you
please. But those which you keep for food at your own table, as in pottage,
or other uses, which must by no means be two much dried, because then they ask
a double time in boiling, and spend a double quantity of fuel in their
preparing. Some use after they be clean thrasht and dressed to lay them in a
cool close Garnor, either of Plaster, earth or boards, of which, Plaster is
the best; as for any thing that relenteth or yields moisture, as Lime, stone
walls, or such like, it is most hurtful, and immediately makes pease mould and
rot: also it is good to lay your pease in thick heaps in you garner, for that
will preserve them moist the longest time, but to spread them thin upon the
floor by which means the Sun, Air, and Wind may pass through them is not
so good, for it dries them too so are, and takes from them much of their
sweetness and goodness, which ought most carefully to be preserved. There be
others which preserve these tender meat Pease by thrashing them up, and then
letting them lie in their own pulsse or chafe, and not dressing them but as
they have occasion to use them, and questionless this is a very good and
laudable way, for the pulsse or chafe does mainetaine them sweet and moist,
and yet keeps them withal so warm and comfortable, that they last much
longer then any other way wha^soeuer, and in this manner of preserving Pease is
to be noted, that by all means you must let them lie upon a dry earth floare,
so long as they are in the chafe, rather then on the boards or on plaster, and
yet in this case the boards are better then plaster.

Lastly, and which indeed is the best experiment of all other, if you intend to
keep Pease any extraordinary long time, you shall take Barrels or dry Caske,
well and strongly bound, and pitch them within exceeding well, with the best
pitch or bytumen that you can get, and then sprinkle the pitch al over with
strong vinegar; then take your Pease, being clean and well dressed, and put them
into the Barrels, pressing them down closse and hard, then head up the
Barrels, and let them stand dry and cool, and they will preserve your Pease
sonnd, sweet and good for any use whatsoever as long as you please, be it for
ten, twenty, or thirty years, according to the opinions of ancient Husbandmen
and other prouant masters that have lived and commanded in towns besieged, and
towns of Garrison; neither shall any worm, mite or weauell, ever breed in it
or offend it, nay if any have in former time been bred in them, this manner of
keeping the Grain, kills them and destroys them for ever.

Now there is another sort of Pulse which are called Preserving of Lentils or
Lupins.
Lentils or Lupins, which albeit they are not so generally used for the food or
sustenance of man, yet they are for horse, swine, and other cattle as much in
request as any Grain whatsoever, and indeed do feed fatter and sooner then
other ordinary Pulse, and the flesh so fed is sweeter and pleasanter both to
the eye and to the taste, then that which is fed with Beans or Pease; also
they are a Pulse very Physical and good for many; medicines, as may appear by
the works of many learned Physicians; and these the longer they are kept, the
better they are, and fuller of profit. To preserve them then in good and sound
estate, it is meet to reap them in very fair weather, and to Stacke them up
exceeding dry, and if they be laid in the Barn, or any close house, it is not
amiss, for they will endure houssing better then any other pulse, yet the
sooner you beat them out of the straw or thrash them up, the better it is, for
husbandmen suppose there is no greater hurt to this kind of Grain, then the
long keeping it in the straw, for it is of such rankness, that the very straw
and cods breed in it much putrefaction; and I my selse observed both in Spain
and in the neighbor Islands, where is great abundance of this kind of grain,
that they do no sooner gather it and bring it home, but immediately they thrash
it; nay, some thrash it in the fields upon the lands where it grows, and so
bring it home, then spread it on fair boarded floores in very great heaps, or
else lay it up in close hutches, or bings, such as wheat and other white
grain is to be kept in: If you dry this kind of Pulse in the Sun, or upon a
kilne, with a very moderate and soft fire, and then lay it up either in close
garner, or close hutch, it will last many year sound, good, and without
corruption; there be other husbandmen which mix with this grain when it is
thrasht, a half part of hot, dry, white sand, or at least cover the whole
heap of Pulse with the sand, and do find that it keeps the grain very sound
and good many years together. But to conclude, if you take strong vinegar, and
a good quantity of L^cerpitium, and dissolve and mix them very well together,
and then having laid your lentils or lupins together on a fair boarded floor,
in large, broad and flat heaps about two foot, or two foot and a half thick
with the vinegar and Lacerpitium sprinkle over all the heap and not any change
of weather, frosts, worms or other vermin shall do them hurt, but they shall
remain sound and good as many years as you please to keep them. There are
other husbandmen that instead of this before rehearsed, take only sweet oil,
and sprinkle it all over the grain, and find the same virtue and effect, for
neither worms nor other vermin will touch it, nor will the radical humor
thereof at any time waste or decay, but remain strong, full and found without
any kind of diminishing, nor shall you find any abatement of it, shrinking in
the measure, but that which was a bushel, this year will be also a bushel,
the next year, and as many years after as you please; which is no small profit
to the owner: whereas on the contrary part if the grain be either dried in the
Sun, on the kilne, or by the wind, you shall hardly have of every such bushel so
dried, three pecks and a half again, which is by computation at every quarter
which is eight bushels full one bushel lost, and yet this Pulse thus preferued
as before said shall be as good for any use whatsoever fit for such Corn to be
employed in, as any other dried grain whatsoever, and yield as much every way,
and altogether as good meal, and as good meat,

Now touching the preserving and keeping of Oats Preserving of Oats.
it is to be understood that of all Grain it is least casual, because of it
self naturally it breeds no evil (...), and is again preserved and
defended with a double husk; whereby neither cold, moisture, heat, nor
dryness is able so soon to pierce and hurt it as other grains which are more
thin clad and tender, yet because it is of great and necessary use both for
cattle and pullen, and that neither the husband nor houswife can well keep
house without it, you shall know that the best way to preserve it longest, is,
after it is thrasht to dry it well either in the Sun or on the kilne, and
then either put it into close Garner or close case, and it will keep many
years sound and sweet.

Touching the preserving of Oate-meale, which is Preserving of oatmell.
the inner kirnell of the Oats, and a grain of most special use in the
husbandmaus house, as in his pottage, in his puddings, and in many other meats
necessarily used for the laboring man. It is an experiment not altogether so
curious as any of the rest formerly written of for no oatmeale can be made, but
the Oats must be exceedingly well kilne-dried, or else the kirnell will not part
from the hull, and being dried, as is fit that drying is sufficient to keep and
preserve the oatmeale diverse years: provided ever that presently after the
making of your oatmele, you put it into dry closse cask or dry closse garner
(but caske is the better) and so as it may remain exceeding dry (for any thaw
or moisture corrupts it) and as near as you can let it have, if it be
possible, some air of the fire, for the warmer it stands, the better and
longer it will last as experience shows.

For the preserving or long keeping of any sort of Preserving of any meal.
meal, there is no better way then first to boult and searse him from his
bran, for the branne is very apt to corrode and putrify the meal, and to
bring it to a faughtinesse or mustinesse, then into very sweet and clean dry
caske closse and well bound, tread in your meal so hard as you can possible
tread it, and then head it up closse, and so you may keep it either by land or
water as long as you please, and when you have any occasion to spend of it, be
sure to loos^n no more of the meal then you presently use, for the faster and
closser the meal lies together, the longer and sweeter it will last, for it
is the gathering in of the air that only corrupts it.

And here is also to be noted, that you should not presently as soon as your
meal is ground, boult it from the bran, but rather let it lie a week or
fortnight, in the branne in some closse bing or trough, and then after that
time boult or searse it, and you shall find it to afford you in every bushel,
more meal by at least half a pecke then if you should boult it presently
as soon as it comes from the mylne, whence it proceeds, that the cunning and
skillful Baker will ever have a week or a fortnights provision of meal before
hand, which lying so long in the branne, paies double interest for the
continuance.

Now if it fall out so, that either by trade of Merchandise, or other occasion,
you buy any meal by way of transsportation which is caskt up (as much meal is
should by the barrel) you shall then presently as soon as you have bought it
(if it be for your own use or expense) break open the heads and empty the
meal upon fair sheets on a clean floor, and then spreading it abroad, let
the Sun and Air pass through it which will dry up the sweat, and if there be
any taint or faughtinesse, take it away, and bring the meal to his first
sweetness, and then immediately boult out the course branne, and after as was
before declared, tread it hard into freesh and sweet caske: and thus you may
keep your provision of meal all the year long; nay, if need require two or
three years, for after the first sweat is taken away and kindly dried, there
is no doubt to be made of any that shall follow after.

Lastly, touching the preserning and keeping of all Preserving of all small
seeds.
manner of small seeds of what nature or quality soever they be, whether hemp,
line, rape, musterseed, or any other garden-seed whatsoever, though truly and
properly they last never above one year, nor are fit for seed or increase
after that date expired, yet in as much as they are medicinable after, and a
much longer time, therefore you shall understand that the best way to keep
them safe and sound, and the fittest for use and profit, is first to gather
them as soon as you perceive them to be ripe, and the weather being bright,
clear and dry, then shall you dry or wither them in the shade and not in the
Sun, especially upon a plasterfloore, where the light looks to the South,
and be sure that as little Sun and moisture come to them as you can, for both
are maine enemies; which done, bind them up in bundles without thrashing, and
so hang them up and keep them in their own cods, and they will last for all
uses, a full year, and for some particular uses two or three years; and in
this manner you may also preserve all manner of herbs, weeds, flowers, roots,
and the barks or rinds of all manner of trees.

And thus much touching the preservation of all manner of Grain, Pulse, or
meal, with smaller seeds and other things thereunto appertaining.

CHAP. XV.
How to keep Grain, either for transportation by Sea, or for use in a town
of War or Garrison, from one year, to one hundred and twenty.

OF the necessity of this knowledge there needs small disputation both in
respect of the daily use thereof, and the continual benefit is found thereby,
as also in as much as travel and long voyages grow with us in these latter
days still more and more; our forefathers knew but three parts of the world,
we are acquainted with four, and there is constant promise that surely our
children shall inhabit five: so excellent are men grown in all the Art of
discovery and Navigations; neither comes these discoueries unto us empty handed
or in mean garments, but with infinite bounty, and such wealth, that industry
never thinks himself so happy as when he is in the employment as our frequent
trade can witness, and our many Plantations, all like most rich flocks
bringing their fleeces to our Island, and clothing it more rich then any
neighbor Nation whatsoever: then since our trade is so honorable and gainefull
and no way to be continued and preserved but by seafaring and sea iournes what
can be more fit, for any good husband to know, then that which is the strength,
sinews, nourishment and ability of such labor, which indeed is victual, and
of all victual none so good, sound, sweet, and long lasting, nor so wholesome
for man's body, as grain and pulsse, for all (God be thanked) our land is
excellently stored, nay far exeeding most of the Nations in Christendom,
with Beef, Bacon, Porke, Fish, Butter, Cheese, and many such like, most
excellent prouissions, all which are able to endure the sea, yet seeing they
are ever falt, and preserved in falt, they do not only breed in men the
Scuruy, Iaundise Dropsy, and such like; but many other contagious, as
Calamtures, hot Fevers, and other sicknesses proceeding from adust and choler,
which being well corrected with fresh meats, such as are made of grain and
Pulse, for they are all the fresh meats that a man can well or certainly carry
to the Sea in a tedious long voyage) they keep men able and in strength fit
for any employment.

To speak then of the Grains and Pulses which are Thevse of Grain, Pulse at
Sea.
meetest for the sea, and their several uses.

It is to be understood that the best and principallest Grain which is indeed
both most sweet, most fresh, most pleasant in taste, and most long lasting, is
Ryce, which although it grow not much in our Of Rice, and the vs^.
kingdom, but that we are beholden to our good neighbors for the trade
thereof, yet it is in such plenty, where we fetch it, that we need neither
complain of the scarcity nor the cost, and so much the rather in that a pecke
thereof will go further then a bushel of any other Grain; of this Ryce is
made many good and wholesome dishes, some thick, some thin, some baked, some
boyld, as thus: if you take a quarter of a pound of Ryce, and boil it in a
pottel of water, til it come unto an indifferent thickness, and then put into
it a good lump of potted or barrelled butter, and ^s much sugar as shall
salt-wise season it to an indifferent sweetness, it is a dish of meat, meet
for an Emperor at Sea, wholesome, good, and light of disiesture, and will be
as much as four reasonable men can well eat at a meal; for the nature of the
Rice is such that it will swell in boiling and grow to that bigness, that in
an instant it will thicken a pottle; some use the night before they boil it,
to steep it in so much water as will only cover the Rice all over, and then
the next day boil it in a pottle of water more, and the Rice so steeped will
so swell, that all the first water will be drunk up, and a great deal of
less boiling will serve to make it ready, and sure then this a man cannot
find a cheaper way to feed men, since one pint of water and the fourth part of
a quarter of a pound of Rice (which comes not to above a half penny at the
dearest reckoning) is a meele sufficient for a man's eating, having biscuit and
drink proportionably. And this dish of meat being but thus thin boiled, is
called at Sea Lob-lolly, and after salt-feeding is wondrous wholesome and
comfortable to any man, whether he be sick, sound, or diseased, and both
abateth infirmities and hastneth the healing of all wounds. There be others
that after they have steeped this rice (as aforesaid) do then boil it in like
manner, till it be so thick that a spoone may stand upright in it, and no
liquidnesse of the water perceived, then put a good lump of butter into it,
and boil it with it, and stir it about, and it will make it come most clean
out of the pot in which it is boiled; then season it with sugar and a little
Cynamon and it will be a dish of meat, right good and delicate, and meet for
any man of what quallity soever, that is worth goodness or preserving, nor need
the quantity exceed the proportion already described. Again, if you have meal
in the Ship, if you take of this Rice steeped in water, and a little lightly
boiled and seasoned with Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger, and a good quantity of
butter, and then bake it in little Bastics, you shall find it a most delicat,
pleasant, and wholesome meat, and that a penny in it shall go further and give
better contentment then four peniworth of Beese, Bacon, Fish, or any other
hard salt meat; yet do not wish any man on Shipboard to make this a continual
feeding dish, for it is both too pleasant and too strong, and where cuacuation
of some humors are wanting, may breed inconvenience in strong bodies; but
rather to use it once a week as a physical nourisher, or for the comfort of
sick and diseased men, whose stomachs are taken away or else weakened; there
may be also made of this Ryce in time of necessitic (being ground to a fine
mcale) an excellent good Bread or Ruske, which is pleasanter, sweeter and much
longer lasting then any made of Wheat or any other grain, whatsoever, besides
many other secdes which would in this place show but too much curiosity to
repeat.

The next Grain unto Rice which is of estimation Wheat and the use.
and great service at the Sea, is Wheat, of which although there be diverse
kinds; yet they are all alike for the sertling of this purpose; only the large
and thick huld Wheat (being well dried) will last the longest, but the smaller
and fine skinde Wheat, yeeldes the purer slowre and makes the better meat.
Now of this wheat is to be made diverse dishes of meat, for some do take it and
bruise or beat it in a bag, till the upper skin be beaten off, and then
having dressed and winnowed it, boil it in clean water till it burst and grow
as thick as pap, then take it from the fire and being hot put it into several
dishes of wood or traies, so much in every dish or tray as may serve four men,
and so let it cool; then give it to the sick or sound, as you shall be
directed, and it is an excellent wholesome good meat either cold or else hot, and
a little butter melted with it or being again boild in fresh water, and
seasoned with salt and a little sugar, it makes an excellent grewell, or
lob-lolly which is very sovereign at Sea; also your parcht wheat is a very
good food at Sea, and of much request and estimation, being sprinkled with a
little salt, and of this food a little will serve a man at a time, by reason
that the much sweetness thereof, soon silleth and cloieth the stomach, yet it
is wondrous light of digestion and breeds great strength and much good blood as
we daily find by experience.

The next Grain unto this which is to be recommend Of Oatemeale and the use.
to the Sea (and which is indeed not any thing inseriour to either of the other
going before, both for strength and lasting) is Otemeale, which by reason of
the great dryness and drying thereof feels little or no imperfection at the
Sea, as being unapt to suck or draw in any of the ill or moist vapors
thereof. Of this Oatemeale is made many good, fresh and comfortable meats at
Sea, as Grewell or loblolly by boiling it in fresh water and seasoning it with
salt, and (if you have it conueuiently) sometimes with sugar and a few
currants, and a little mace, which is meat of great strength and goodness;
especially for such as are sick and weak, for it is a great restorer of nature
and purger of the blood; also to stecpe the whole Grotts of Oatmeale a night in
water, and then draining them, and putting it unto a bag boil it til the
grotts break, then putting it out of the bag butter it with butter, and it is
an excellent food; also boiling Oatmeale in fresh water with barme, or the
dregs and hinder ends of your Beer barrels, makes an excellent good pottage,
and is of great use in all the parts of the West Country, especially, where
Marryners or Seamen live, and are called by the name of drousson pottage. Also
of Oatemeale is made that meat which is called in the West, Washbrew, and may
be made at the Sea at you pleasure, being a meat of that great account amongst
Devonshire and Cornishmen, that they will allow it no parallel; and for my own
part I have heard a most famous and well learned Physician in those parts allow
it to be a meat of singular great strength, and goodness, and withal so
light of disiestion, that a man can very hardly surfeit upon it at any time;
and I am the rather induced to believe the same, because I have observed and
seen many of the laboring men of that Country to eat such an unmeasurable
quantity thereof, that in mine eye one man's supper would have served a whole
family.

But you will say, hunger and labor, are such excellent sawces that they will
digest any thing: To that I answer, that I have seen the best Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen of that Country, of whom as much curiosity has attended, as is
liable to the City, nay such as have had sickness their best familiar, yet
eat of this with great and sharp appetite, and when health was most to be
feared, then to boast of most soundnes: This washbrew is to look upon like
Painters cyze, or new made Ielly, being nothing but the very heart of the
oatmeale boiled and drayned to that height and thickness having neither hull
nor branne in it but the pure meal and water, and it is to be eaten either
with wine, strong bear, orale, or with fine clarified honey, according to men's
stomachs or abilities: Now this the eaters thereof affirm, that by no means it
must be chaw'd but rather swallowed by the spoonfuls whole because chawing like
a pil makes it taste unpleasantly; There is again another meat to be made of
oatmeale, which is called Gertbrew, and is somewhat more course, and less
pleasant then wash-brew, having both the branne and huls in it, yet is
accounted a food of a very good strength, and exceeding wholesome for man's
body, and of my knowledge much used and much desired of all laboring persons
that are acquainted with it, many other foods there are to be made of
oatemeale, but these shall be at this time fully sufficient.

The next grain to this I account Barley, which may Of Barley and the use.
be every way used like unto Wheat, either to make Grewell, to be creyed,
parcht, or boiled; and of Barley for this purpyse of food, the best is French
Barley, the next is barley byg, or bear barley, and the worst are the spi^ke
or battledore barley, and our common English barley.

And as Barley or Wheat, so you may use you Buck Bucke or the use.
and your Indian Silligo, for they are of like nature, only ask a longer time
in their beating, steeping, and boiling, because they are naturally more hard,
and more dry, by reason of the heat of the climat in which the best grow; and
it is ever to be observed for a rule, that the dryer you keep your corn at
Sea, the better it is, the sweeter and longer lasting.

Now having showed the use of these lighter grains Of Pulse and first of
Beans, the use.
I will come to Pulse, and show their use and benefit at the Sea, or in
besieged towns; and of Pulse, I will first speak of Beans as a principal
food, wholesome and strong, and though not so fine and light of digestion as
any of the former, yet exceeding hearty and sound and a great breeder of good
blood, they are for the most part to be boiled whole, till such time as they
apeare soft and tender, or begin to break, and then drained from the water,
are served in traies, and well salted and so eaten; a pottell whereof is
thought a full proportion for four men; and of these Beans there are diverse
The French Bean.
kinds: as the common garden Bean, or French bean, which is great, broad, and
flat, and these are the best to boil, either with meat, or by themselves, and
ask the least labor, because their outer skin is most tender, and the
inward substance most apt to be mollified, and softened: they may also be boiled
both when they are young and green, and when they are old and dry, and the meat
at both times is good and sauory.

The next bean to these are the Kidney bean, which The Kydney Bean.
is flatter, and lesser, and nearer the proportion of a kidney then the French
Bean is, and this is also a garden bean, and whilst it is young and green is
to be eaten sallet wise after they are boild, both the cod and bean together,
and it is certain a better sallet cannot be tasted; for the cod or husk is
every way as excelent in taste as the bean is; but after they grow old and
dry and that the moisture is gone out of the cod, then it is meet to thrash
them, and then boil them like the French bean, and they are every way as good
meat and as soon boyld and as tender.

The next Bean to these are your common and ordinary Common Field beans
thevse.
Field beans, which having tough and hard skins ask more boiling then the
other beans, and are somewhat harder in taste, yet a good souud food also:
there be many that parche them in the fire and think them then the best meat,
because the fire sooner breaks the skin and softneth the kirnell; but they
cannot be done so abundantly, and therefore are not so much in use.

After this great sort of Pulse, I will speak of the Of Pease and the use.
smaller sort as Pease and their like: and of Pease there betwo kinds, the
garden Pease and the field Pease, and for this use (albeit both are good) yet
the garden Pease are best, for they are soonest boyld, are most tender, and
serve for most use, as for pottage, boiling, parching or spelting; and of these
garden Pease, there are diverse kinds; as white Pease, French Pease. hastings
rounsiuals and such like; the first being the longest Several sorts of garden
Pease.
lasters, the second the pleasantest in taste, the third the earlyest and
tenderest, and the last largest and fullest.

The field Pease are only of two kinds, as the white Pease and the gray Pease,
and they seldom make pottage, because they are unapt to break, but are only
for boiling and making of leap Pease, or for patching, yet a good and a strong
food also, and as we use Pease, so in other countries they use Lupins,
Lentils, Tares, Fetches, and such like smaller Pulse, but they are neither so
good, wholesome nor sauoury in taste, being a kind of Grain more rank,
fulsome and breeding of ill blood and infection within, these cases of Seafare
and warrefare ought principally to be eschwed and shunned.

Now it rests after this long digression of these Totransport Grain.
several Grains, and their uses with the meats and profits which are made
from them, that we come to the safe manner of keeping and preserning them
either by land or water, for victual or transportation, so as they may last
and endure without ill smell or rottennes.

And first for transportation of Grain by Sea, it is two ways to be done, as
either in great quantities for trade and the victualing of other Nations, or in
smaller quantity for victualling the men in the ship, prepared for a long and
tedious voyage.

For the transporting of Grain for trade in great quantitics, it is to be
intended the voyage is seldom Transporting grain for trade.
long, but from neighbor to neighbor, and therefore commonly they make closse
decks in the ships to rereceiue the Grain, fair and even boarded, yet if such
decks be matted and lined both under and on each side it is much the better,
and this matting would be strong and thin; there be some which make the decks
only of mats, and sure it is sweet but not so strong as the board, therefore
the best way of transportation is to have strong boarded decks well matted, and
then spreading the Corn of a reasonable thickness, to cover it with matting
again, and then to lay Corn on it again, and then mats again, that between
every reasonable thickness of Grain a mat may lie, the profit whereof is that
when the Corn with his own heat and the working of the Sea shall begin to
sweat; which sweat for want of air to dry it up would turn to putrefaction,
then these mats thus lying between, will not only exhall and suck up the
sweat, but also keep the Corn so cool and dry that no imperfection shall come
unto it, and here is to be noted that these mats should rather be made of dry
white bents, then of flags and bul-rush, for the bent is a firm^, dry, crispe
thing, and will not r^ent or sweat of it self, but the flag or bul-rush is a
spungy and soft substance which is never empty of his own and others moystures.

Now for transporting of Grain for victual for the ship which is in much
smaller quantity, because it Transporting grain for victual.
is but for the private use offew within the ship; the only best and safest way
is to take salt fish barrels, or any caske in which any salt fish has been
piled, as Cod, Herrings, Salmon, Sprats, or any other poudred fish; and whilst
the vessels are sweet you shall calke them both within and without with
plaster, daubing them all over, then into them put your Grain of what kind
soever it be, and head them up closse, and then stow them in such convenient
dry place of the ship as you shall think fit, and questionless, if belief
may be given to the worthiest Authors which have writ in this kind, you may
thus keep your Grain sweet, sound, and in full perfection from one year to
one hundred and twenty years, but certainly daily experience shows us, that
all kind of grain thus put up and kept, will remain sound and sweet, three,
four, and as some say, seven years, for so far has lately been tried: and
what here I speak of Shipboard, the like maybe done in any town of War or
Garrison, whether besieged or not besieged, or in any other place where any
necessity shall compel; the proof of this manner of piling or putting up of
grain, serves as well for Land as Sea.

And thus much for the transportation and preservation of Corn and Grain.

CHAP. XVI.
A general computation of men, and Cattels labors; what each may do without
hurt daily.

TO make an exact or severe computation of men and cattels labors, so as it
might stand for a president not to be altered, is a thing almost impossible,
because countries alter, customs alter, and people are incertaine: countries
alter, so as one may work more in half a day in some then in a whole day in
othersome; as where one may plow two akers in the sand, he shall hardly plow
one in the clay; customs alter, for in some countries they plow but from
seven or eight a clock in the morning, till two or three in the afternoon;
and in other countries they plow from before Sunnerise, till Sunneset: and
people are incertaine, for some are painful and conscionably industrious, not
desiring to eat more then the work, and others are so full of floath and
greediness, that in the prime labors as in harvest and seed-time, they spend
more time in eating and drinking, then in their work, for I have observed both
in those places where I was bred, and in those where I have lived, that the
harvest man's hours of repast have much run beyond either his work or
honesty: as thus for example, within the compass of mine own knowledge, I
have seen harvest men come into the Farmers house, between five and six a
clock in the morning, and there eat bread and cheese and drink, then go to
the field, and at nine of clock have breakefast, at eleauen the dinner, at one
a nooning, at four a drinking, and at seven Supper, besides an hours sleep
in the heat of the day for refreshing, now what time is left for labor may
easily be judged, so that to measure true proportions to these vncertaineties
is a travel too difficult. But to come to the honest industrious workman
which craves to the sorest labor, but reasonable repost, as breakfast, dinner,
nooning and supper, with drink at such convenient times as he is thirsty,
according to the violence of his labor and the heat of the day: To these I
say may be proportioned a reasonable computation how work may with least loss
or vexation be compassed and governed; to speak then generally of all
husbandly works where the country is tolerable Plowing and sowing.
without any extraordinary difficulty, you shall understand that a man may well
in stiff ground, plow an aker, or an aker and a half, and in light sand
grounds two or three akers with one Teame in a day, and he may plow and sow in
stiff ground two akers and a half each day, and in light ground four at
least with one Teame, and a ways what he sows, that he may harrow the same
day also. Mowing.


A man may well mow of good and deep loggy meadow, or of rough uneven meadow
every day one aker, mowing clean and making a smooth board, of well standing,
and good smooth meadow, an aker and a half each day, and of very thin and
short grass, or vpland medowe two akers at the least every ^ay.

Also he may mow of Corn as Barley and Oars if it be thick, loggy and beaten
down to the earth making fair work and not cutting of the heads of the
ears, and leaving the straw still growing one aker and a half in a day, but
if it be good, thick and fair standing Corn, then he may two akers, or two
akers and a half in a day, but if the Corn be short and thin, then he may
mow three, and sometimes four akers in a day, and not be over labored; Also
of Beans he may mow as much, and of Pease mixed with Beans, having a hook to
follow him, no less; for they are works in this nature most easy and least
troublesome.

One man with a binder may well reap an aker of Reaping.
Wheat, or Rye in a day, if it be principal good and well standing, but if laid
or beaten down with weather, then three roode is fully sufficient for a days
labor; but if it be thin and upright standing, then he may reap and bind
five roods in a day of small Pease, Fetches and such like, a man may well reap
two akers every day.

Now for as much as it is a custom in diverse countries Binding of Barley and
Oats.
(and truly is exceeding profitable and worthy imitation) to sheafe and bind
up both Barley and Oats as well as Wheat or Rye, and that it both saves much
Corn, and also makes it take a great deal less room, and that this labor
is to be done after the mowers, as the other was after the reapers by gathering
the Barley or Oats up with a sickell or hook, as it lies in the swath and so
binding it in sheaues, you shall understand that one man in a day will bind as
much as one mower can mow, and if the men be any thing skillful in the labor
two binders will bind as much as three mowers can mow.

For the gathering or inning of Grain, no man can Gathering in of grain.
proportion the number of loads, or quantity of ground shall daily be brought
home, since the iourneyes are uncertain, some going a quarter of a mile, some
half a mile, and some a mile; therefore it is the husbandmans best way, the
first day to go with his Teame himself, and both to observe the labor and
distance of place, and by that to compute what may be done after without hurt
to his cattle, and where he fails of any hope, there to take a strickt
account of the error, for it is either ignorance or carelessness, which brings
forth mischances, speaking of husbandry, as overthrowing the Teame, over
loading the Teame, breaking necessary instruments, or not respecting the ways
and passage, any of which may in a day hinder more then half the days labor.

Again, a man may in a day ditch and quick-set of Ditching.
a reasonable ditch four foot broad, and three foot deep a rod or poll a day,
allowing sixeteene foot to the rod, and so of larger measure less ground, and
of less ground larger measure, according to the sufficiency of the fence which
you purpose to make.

A man also may hedge in a day, if the hedge be good Hedging.
and substancial, that is to say, five foot high, well bound, thick stackt, and
closse laid, two rod in a day, and if the work be lower or thinner then
double so much, according to the former proportion.

For the plashing of hedges, or making a quick fence Plashing.
if he do it workmanly, and that the quick growth be high and well grown, and
then he lay it thick, closse, and strongly bound on the top, turning the
quick downward and inward, to plash a rod a day is as much as any man can
well do, but if ye plash it after the West country fashion, that is, only
cutting it down, and laying it a long closse to the ground, seeking only
thickness, and not much guard or comeliness, then he may well plash a^od and
a half in a day without trouble, and sure in this work is great care and art
to be used as well for the preservation of the quick as the goodness of the
sense, being a thing of worth and validity to every husbandman.

Again, a man may delue or dig, as for garden mould Deluing,
hempe-yard, Flaxeyard, or for the setting of Corn, or leuelling of uneven
places, one roode in a day, and the ground so dug and delued, he may rake
dress and level in the same day also, but if he dig it deep, and trench
it, and meanure it, as is meet; either for garden, orchard, or cornsetting,
then to delue half a rood in a day, is a very great proportion, because
ordinarily to delue, as to receive ordinary seeds requires but one spade
graf^in depth, but extraordinarily to delue, as for enriching and bettering of
the ground, and to cleanse it from stones, weeds and other anoyances, will
require two spade graft at the least.

Lastly, a man may thrash if the corn be good and Thrashing,
clean, without some extrordinary abuse or poverty in the grain, inone day
four bushels of Wheat or Rye, fi^e bushels of Barley or Oats, and five bushels
of Beans or Pease, but the Pulse must then be imagined to be exceeding,
otherwise a man shall thrash less of it, then of any other kind of Grain, for
as when it is well laden, it yields plentifully, so when it is poor and
lightly laden it yields little or nothing, and yet has not one stroke less
of the slaile, nor any labor saved more then belongs to the best Pulse
whatsoever being ever at least three times turned and four times beaten over.

Having thus generally run over (in a short computation) the labors of the
husbandman. I will now The particular expense of a day.
as bricfly as I can, go over the particular days la bours of a Farmer or
aPlowman, showing the particular expense of every hour in the day, from his
first rising, till his going to bed, as thus for example; we will suppose it to
be after Christmas, and about plow day (which is the first letting out of the
plow) and at what time men either begin to fallow, or to break up Pease earth
which is to lie to bait, according to the custom of the country; at this time
the Plowman shall rise before four of the clock in the morning, and after
thanks given to God for his rest and the success of his labors, he shall go
into his stable, or beast house, and first he shall fodder his cattle, then
cleanse the house, and make the boothes neat and clean, rub down the
cattle, and cleanse their skins from all filth, then he shall curry his
horses, rub them with clothes and wispes, and make both them and the stable
as clean as may be, then he shall water both his Oxen and Horses, and housing
them again, give them more fodder, and to his horse by all means prouender,
as chafe and dry Pease or Beans, or Oat-huls, Pease or Beans, or clean
Oats, or clean garbadge (which is the hinder ends of any kind of Grain but
Rye) with the straw chopped small amongst it) according as the ability of the
Husbandman is.

And whilst they are eating their meat, he shall make ready his collars, hames,
treates, halters, 'mullens, and plow-geares, seeing every thing fit and in his
due place, and to these labors I will also allow, full two hours, that is to
say, from four of the clock, till six, then shall he come into breakfast,
and to that I allow him half an hour, and then another half hour to the
gearing and yoaking of his cattle, so that at seven of the clock he may set
forward to his labor and then he shall plow from seven of the clock in the
morning, till bet wixt two and three in the afternoon, then he shall vnyoake
and bring home his cattle, and having rubbed them, dressed them, and
cleansed-away all dirt and filth, he shall fodder them, and give them meat,
then shall the servants go in to their dinner, which allowed half an hour, it
will then be toward four of the clock, at what time he shall go to his
cattle again and rubbing them down, and cleansing their stalles, give them
more fodder, which done he shall go into the oarnes, and provide and make
ready fodder of all kinds, for the next day, whether it be hay, straw, or
blend-fodder, according to the ability of the husbandman; this being done and
carried into the stable, oxehouse, or other conuenicnt place, he shall then go
water his cattle, and give them more meat, and to his horse prouender as
before showed: and by this time it will draw past six of the clock, at what
time he shall come in to supper, and after supper he shall either by the fire
side, mend shoes both for himself and the family, or beat and knock hemp, or
flax, or pick and stamp apples, or crabs for cider or verdiuyce, or else
grind malt on the quernes, pick candlerushes, or do some husbandly office
within doors till it be full eight a clock; Then shall he take his lantern
and candle, and go to his cattle, and having cleansed the stailes and
planckes, litter them down, look that they be safely tied, and then fodder
and give them meat for all night, then giving God thanks for benefits
received that day let him and the whole househould go to their rest till the
next morning.

Now it is to be intended that there may be in the household, more servants then
one; and so you will demand of me what the rest of the servants shall be
employed in before and after the time of plowing; to this I answer, that they
may either go into the barn and thrash, fill or empty the malt fat, load or
unload the kilne or any other good and necessary work that is about the yard,
and after they come from plowing, some may go into the barn and thrash, some
hedge, ditch, stop gaps in broken fences, dig in the orchard or garden, or any
other out work which is needful to be done, and which about the husbandman is
never wanting, especially one must have a care every night to look ^o the
mending or sharpning of the plow yrons, and the repairing of the plow and plow
geares, if any be out of order, for to defer them till the morrow, were the
loss of a days work, and the worst point of husbandry that might be, besides
the example.

And thus from this brief and compendious computation, may a man compute and
direct the works of his family, how great soever it be and keep every one to
his true and distinct labor, without amazement or molestation.

Now for the particular labors of cattle, though it Particular labors of
cattle.
be already inclusiuely spoken of in that which is gone before, where I show
you how much a man may conveniently plow in a day with one Teame or draught of
cattle, yet for further satisfaction, you shall understand that in your
cattle, there are many things to be observed, as the kind, the number and the
soil they labor in, for the kind which are Oxen, bulls, or horses, the best for
the draught, are Oxen, and the reasons I have showed in my former works, the
next are Horses, and the worst Bulls, because they are most troublesome; the
number fit for the plow is eight, six, or four; for the Cart, five or four,
and for the Weine never under six, except in loading home of harvest, where
loading easily, four very good oxen are sufficient, for the soil of it be of
the toughest and deepest earth, eight beasts can do no more but fallow, or
break up Pease earth, no nor sooner surre, if the season grow hard and dry,
for soyling; winter rigging, and seed furrow, six beasts may dispatch that
labor: if the soil be mixed and haffel, then six may fallow and sow Pease,
and four do every other ordure; but if it be light and easy sand, then four
is enough in every season; for the quantity of their work, an ox plow may not
do so much as a horse plow, because they are not so swift, nor may be driven
out of their pace, being more apt to surfeit then horses be, so that for an ox
plow to do an aker, and a horse plow an aker and a rood, or an aker and a half
in good ground is work fully sufficient. And thus much for a brief and
general computation of men and cattels labors, how they ought to be employed
for the best use and profit.

CHAP. XVII.
The applying of has bandry to the several countries of this Kingdom, where
in is showed the office and duty of the Carter or Plowman

IT is to be understood that Husbandry does vary according to the nature and
climats of countries; not one rule observed in all places, nor all places to be
governed and directed by one rule, but according as the earth, the air, the
much or little heat, moisture or cold does increase or diminish, so must the
skilful husbandman alter his seasons, labors and instruments; for in stiff
clayes, as are all the fruitful Vales of this kingdom (of which I have named
most part in a Chapter before, as also Huntington-shire, Bedford-shire,
Cambridge-shire, and many other of like nature, all manner of errable works
must be begun at early seasons, and betimes in the year, and the plowes and
instruments must be of large size and strong timbers, and the labor great and
painful; so also in mixed soiles that are good and fruitful, as Norhampton
shire, Hartfortshire, most part of Kent, Essex, Barkshire and countries of like
nature; all errable toils would begin at latter seasons, and the plowes and
instruments, would be of middle size and indifferent timbers, and the labor
somewhat less then the other, but the light sandy grounds which have also a
certain natural fruitfulnes in them, as in Norfolk, Suffolk, most part of
Lincolneshire, Hampshire, Surry and countries of that nature, all errable
toiles would begin at the latest seasons, and the plowes and instruments would
be of the smallest and lightest size, and of the least timbers, and the labor
of all other is most easy.

Lastly, for the barren and unfruitful carthes (of which only I have written
of in this book) as is Devonshire, Cornwall, many parts of Wales, Darbyshire
Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, and many other like or worse then they; the
errable toiles would have certain set time or sit season of the year, but
only according to the temperatnes of the year, which if it happen early, then
you must begin your labors early, but if it fall lower in the year, then you
must begin your labors at later seasons, and for your plow and instruments,
they must not keep any certain proportion, but be framed ever according unto
the ground, the stronger and stiffer ground having ever the strong and large
plow with instruments of like kind, and the lighter and more easy earth, a
plow and instruments of more easy substance; as for the labor, it must be
such and no other then that which has been already declared in this book.

And hence it comes that the office and duty of every The Carters office.
skillful plowman or Carter, is first to look to the nature of the earth, next
to the seasons of the year, then to the customs and fashions of the place
wherein he lives: which customs although they be held as second natures
amongst us, and that the best reasons of the best workmen commonly are, that
thus I do because thus they do; yet would I wish no man to bind himself
more strictly to custom, then the discourse of reason shall be his warrant, and
as I would not have him to preiudicat in his own opinion, so I would not have
him too great a slave to other men's traditions, but starding upon the ground of
reason made good by experience, I would ever have him profit in his own
judgment. Now of these matters I have written sufficient both in this book,
and in my former, and also for the election, ordering, tempering, and making of
all sorts of plowes or plow yrons, together with the Teames, dranghts and other
advantages, of which whosoever is ignotant, let him look into the English
Husbandman, and he may be satisfied: Now the further office and duty of the
Husbandman, is with great care and diligence to respect in what sort or fashion
to plow his ground; for although I have in the former Chapters showed how he
shall lay his furrows, what depth he shall plow them, and how he shall be able
to raise and gain the greatest store of mould, yet is there also another
consideration to be had, no less profitable to the husbandman, then any of the
former, and that is how to lay your lands best for your own profit and ease, as
also the ease of your cattle, which shall draw within your draught, as thus for
instance: if your erable land shall lie against the srde of any steep or
mountainous high hill (as for the most part all barren earthes do) if then you
shall plow such land directly against the hill, beginning below, and so
ascending straight upright and so down again, and up again; this very labor
and toyling against the hill wilbreed such a bitter wearisomnesse to the
cattle, and such a discouragement, that you shall not be able to compass one
half part of your labor; besides, the danger of ouer-heating and surfeiting
of your beasts, whence will spring many mortal diseases. Therefore when you
shall plow any such ground, be sure ever to plow it side-wayes overthwart the
hill, where your beasts may ever tread on the leuel ground and never directly up
and down, so shall your cattle be better able to endure the draught, and you
with much case and comfort be able to compass and finish your labors, Besides
the compass and meanure which you shall lay upon the ground shall not be so
soon washed away from the top or upper part of the ground, because the furrows
not lying straight down in an even and direct descent, but turned crosse-wise
upward against the hill, it must necessarily hold the soil within it, and not
let it wash away as it were through liberal channels, as I have often seen in
diverse places where the corn has been as rank as might be at the bottom,
and not any growing at the top; only for want of well ordering of the Lands,
and knowledge how to prepare, both for a man's own ease and his cattels.

Again, it is the office and duty of every good Plowman Of cattle for draught.
to know what cattle are meetest for his draught; as whether Oxen, or Horse, or
both oxen and horse: wherein is be understood that although of all draughts
whatsoever within this kingdom, there is none so good to plow withal, both in
respect of the strength, stabilitie, indurance and fitnes for labor, as the
oxen are, in whom there is seldom, or never, any loss, because whensocuer his
service fails in the draught, his flesh will be of good price in the shambles;
yet not withstanding in this case a man must necessarily bind himself much to
the custom of the Country, and fashion of his neighbors; for if you shall
live in a place where fuel is scarce, and far to be fetched as commouly it is in
all barren Countries, which for the most part are stony Champaines or cold
Mountains; and your neighbors as well for the speed of their Iourneis, as for
the length keep Horse draughts: in this case you must also do the like, or
else you shall want their companies in your Journey, which is both discomfort
and disprofit if any mischance or casualty shall happen, or being inforst to
drive your Oxen as fast as they do their Horse, you shall not only ouerheate,
tire, bruise and spoil them; but also make them utterly unfit either for
feeding or labor: and therefore if your estate be mean, and that you have no
more but what necessity requires, then you shall sort your plow or Teeme
according to the fashion of your Country, and the use of your neighbors: but
if God have blessed you with great blenty, then it shall not be amiss for you to
have ever an Ox draught or two to till your Land; and a Horse draught to do
all your foreign and abroad businesses; so shall your work at home ever go
constantly forward, and your outward necessary provisions never be wanting.

Now for the mixture of Oxen and Horse together, it falls out oftentimes,
that the plowman must of force be provided with cattle of both kind, as if he
happen to live in a mountanous and rocky country, where the steepness of the
hills, and narrowness of the ways will suffer neither Cart, Weine, nor
Tumbrell to pass; in this case you shall keep Oxen for the plow to till the
ground with, and Horses to carry pots or hooks: the first to carry forth your
meanure, and the other to bring home your hay and Corn harvest, your fuel and
other provisions which are needful for your family; as they do both in
Cornwall, and all other mountainous countries, where Carts and weines and such
like draughts, have no possible passage.

Again, it is the office and duty of ^uery good plowman to know his several
labors, for every several month through the whole year, whereby no day nor
hour may be misspent, but every time and season employed according as his
nature requires, as thus for example.

In the month of January, the painful plowman if January.
he live in fertile and good soyles, as amongst rich, stiff, simple cleys, he
shall first break up, or plow up his pease earth, because it must lie to take
bait before it be sown; but if he live in fruitful well mixed soyles, then in
this month he shall begin to fallow the field he will lay to rest the year
following; but if he live upon hard barren earths (of which chiefly I write)
then in this month he shall water his Meadows and Pasture grounds, and he
shall draine and make dry his errable grounds, especially where he intends to
sow Pease, Oats, or Barley, the feed-time following.

Also he shall stubbe and root up all such rough grounds as he intends to sow
the year following; in this Month you shall meanure and trime up you garden
moulds, you shall comfort with meanure, sand, or lime, or all three mixed
together, the roots of all barren fruit trees: and also you may cut down all
fuch timber as you would not have chinke or riue, but hold firm and close
together, only there will be loss in the bark, for the time is something to
early for it to rise.

Lastly, you may transplant all sorts of Fruit trees, the weather being open,
and the ground cafie: you may rear Calves, remove Bees, and for your own
health, keep your body warm, let good diet and wholesome be your Physician,
and rather with exercise, then sauce, increase your appetite.

In the Month of February, either set or sow all sorts of Beans, Pease, and
other Pulsle, and the stiffer February.
your ground is, the sooner begin your work, prepare your Garden mould, and
make it cafie and tender, prune and trime all sorts of Fruit trees from moss,
cankers, and all superfluous branches; plasse your hedges, and lay you
quicksets closse and entire together, plant Roses, Gooseberies, and any fruit
that grows upon small bushes; graf^ at the latter end of this month upon
young and tenderstockes, but by all means ouerlade not the stocks: Inaugurat^in
in this month, or any other, as soon as the bark will rise, and also set any
slips, branches, or young syens.

Lastly, for your health, take heed of cold, forbear meats that are slimy and
flegmatique, and if need require, or purge, bathe, or bleed, as art shall
direct you.

In the month of March, make an end of sowing of March.
all sorts of small pulse, and begin to sow Oats, Barley and Rye, which is
called March Rye; graft all sorts of fruit trees, and with young plants and
syens replenish your nurcery, cover the roots of all trees that are bared and
with fat earth lay them close and warm, if any tree grow barren, boar holes
in his root, and drive hard wedges or pins of oak wood therein, and that will
bring fruitfulness; transplant al sorts of Summer flowers, and give new
comfort of meanure and earth to al early outlandish flowers, especially to the
crown Imperial, Tulippos, Hyacynth and Narcissus of all shapes and colors,
cut down underwood for fuel or fencing, and look well to your cwes, for then
is the principal time of yeaning: And lastly, bathe often, bleed but upon
extremity, purge not without good counsel, and let your diet be cool and
temperate.

In the month of April finish up all your barley seed April.
and begin to sow your hemp and flax; sow your garden seeds, and plant all
sorts of herbs; finish grafing in the stock, but begin your principal
inauguration for then the rind is most plyant and gentle; open your hiues and
give the Bees free liberty, leave to succor them with food, and let them
labor for their living: Now cut down all great Oak timber, for now the bark
will rise and be in season for the Tanner; Now scowre your ditches, and gather
such meanure as you do make in the streets and high ways into great heaps
together, lay your meadows, fleight your corn grounds, gather away stones,
repair your high ways, fet Ozyers, and Willowes, and cast up the banks and
munds of all decayed fences.

Lastly for your health, either purge, bathe or bleed, as you shall have
occasion, and use all wholesomerecreation, for them moderate exercise in this
month, there is no better Physic.

In the month of May sow Barley upon all light May.
sands and burning grounds, so likewise do your hemp and flax, and also al
sorts of tender garden seeds as are Cucumbers and Mellons, and all kind of
sweet smell ling herbs and flowers; ^allow your stiff clayes, Sommer-stirre
your mixed carthes, and foil al light and loose hot sands. In this month begin
to prepare all barren earths; for Wheat and Rye, Bourue bait, Stubgorsse or
Furs, and root out Broom and Fern, begin to fould your sheep, lead forth
meanure, and bringhome fuel and fencing, weed your winter corn, follow your
common works, and put al sorts of cattle to grass, either in pasture or
teather; put your mares to the horse, let nothing be wanting to furnish the
Dairy: and now put off all your winter-fed fat cattle, for now they are
scarcest and dearest, put young steares and dry kine now to feed at fresh
grass, and away with all Pease fed sheep for the sweetness of grass, mutton
will pull down their prices,

Lastly for your health, use drinks that will cool and purge the blood, and al
other such Physical precepts, as true Art shall prescribe you; But beware of
Mountebankes and old wives tales, the latter has no ground, and the other no
truth but apparent cosenage.

In the month of June, carry sand, marle, lime, June.
and meanure of what kind soever to your land; bring home your coals and
other necessary fuel fetched far off, sheare early fat sheep, sow all sorts
of tender herbs, cut ranckelow meadows, make the first return of your fat
cattle, gather early Summer fruits, distill al sorts of plants and herbs
whatsoever.

And lastly for your health, use much exercise thin diet and chaste thoughts.

In the month of July, apply your hay-haruest, for July.
a day slackt is many pounds lost, chiefly when the weather is un constant,
sheare all manner of field-sheepe, Sommer-stir rich stiff grounds, foil all
mixed earthes and latter soil all loose hot sands, let herbs you would
preserve, now run to seed, cut of the stalks of outlandish flowers, and
cover the roots with new earth, so well mixed with meanure as may be, sell all
such Lambs as you feed for the Butcher, and still lead forth sand, marle,
lime and other meanure, fence up your Copses, gaze your elder underwoods, and
bring home all your field-timber.

And lastly for your health, abstain from all Physic, bleed not, but upon
violent occasion, and neither meddle with Wine, Women, nor other Wantonness.

In the month of August apply your Corn August.
harvest, sheare down your Wheat and Rye, mow your Barley and Oats, and make
the second return of your fat Sheep and Cattle; gather all your Summer
greater fruit, as Plumes, Apples, and Pears, make your Summer, or sweet Perry
and Cider; fet slips and scyens of all sorts of Gilly-flowres, and other
flowers, and transplant them that were set the spring before, and at the end
of this month, begin to winterrigge all fruitful soyles whatsoever; gueld
your Lambs, carry meanure from your doue-coats, and put your Swineto the early
or first mast: And lastly for your health, shun feasts and banquets, let
physic alone, hate wine, and only take delight in drinks that are cool and
temperate.

In the month of September, reap your Pease, September.
Beans, and all other Pulse, making a final end of your harvest; now bestow
upon your Wheat land, your principal meanure, and now sow your Wheat and Rye,
both in rich, and in barren climats; now put your swine to mast of all hands,
gather your winter fruit, and make sale of your wool, and other summer
commodities; now put off those stocks of bees, you mean to sell or take for
your own use; close thatche, and dawbde warm, all the suruiuing hyues, and
look that no droanes, mice nor other vermin be in or about them, now thatche
your stacks and reekes, thrash your seed Rye and Wheat and make an end with
your cart of all foreign iourneyes.

Lastly, for your health in this month use Physic, but moderately, forbear
fruits that are two pleasant or rotten, and as death shun riot and surfeit.

In the month of October, finish up your Wheatseed, October.
scower ditches and ponds, plash and lay hedges and quickset, transplant,
remove, or set all manner of fruit trees of what nature or quality soever; make
your winter cider and perry, spare your private pastures and eat up the
corne-fields and commons, and now make an end of winter-ridging, draw furrows
to draine and keep, dry your new sown Corn, follow hard the making of your
malt, rear all such calves as shall fall, and weane those foales from your
draught mares, which the Spring before were foaled; now sell al such sheep as
you will not winter, give over folding, and separate Lambs from the Ewes which
you purpose to keep for your own stock.

Lastly, for your health refuse not any needful physic at the hands of the
learned Physician, use all moderate sports, for any thing now is good which
reuiueth the spirits.

In the month of November, you may sow either November.
wheat or Rye in exceeding hot soyles, you may then remove all sorts of fruit
trees, and plant great trees, either for shelter or shadow; now cut down all
sorts of timber, for plowes, carts, axeltrees, naues, harrowes, and other
husbandly offices, make now the last return of your grass fed cattle; bring
your swine from the maste, and feed them for slaughter, rear what calves
soever fall, and brake up all such Hemp and Flax as you intend to spinne in
the winter season.

Lastly, for your health, eatc wholesome and strong meats well spiced and dressed
free from rawnesse, drink swect wines, and for difiestion ever before cheese
prefer good and moderate exercise.

In the month of December, put your sheep and December.
swine to the Pease reeks, and fat them for the slaughter and market; now kill
your small Porks and large Bacons, lop hedges and trees, saw out your timber
for building, and lay it to season, and if your land be exceeding stiff, and
rise up in an extraordinary furrow, then in this month begin to plow up that
ground whereon you mean to sow clean Beans only, now cover you dainty fruit
trees al over with canuase and hide al your best flowers from frosts and
storms with rotten old horse litter; now draine al your cornfieldsd and as
occasion shall serve, so water and keep moist your medows; now become the
Fowler with piece, nets and al manner of engine, for in this month no foul is
out of season: Now fish, for the Carpe, the Breame, Pyke, Tench, Barbel, Peale
and Salmon. And lastly for your health, eat meats that are hot and
nourishing; drink good wine that is neat, sprighty and lusty, keep thy body
well clad, and thy house warm, forsake what socuer is phlegmatic, and banish al
care from thy heart, for nothing is now more unwholesome, then a troubled
spirit.

Many other observations belong unto the office of our skilful Plowman or
Farmar; but since they may be imagined too curious, too needless, or too
tedious, I will stay my pen with these already rehearsed, and think to have
written sufficiently touching the application of grounds and office of the
Plowman.

FINIS.

