To the right honorable and virtuous Lady, Anne Gray, Theodore Basille wissheth
long ^yfe, contynual health, and prosperous ^e^ licitie.
IT is not without an urgent and most necessary cause that we are so often
commanded in the most sacred and holy Bible to match and pray. Man xxvi*
Mar. xiii^. i. Pet. iiii. Ephe. vi.
For if we that profess our selves to be soldiers of Christ's arm^ do
seriously and without saynynge ponder, weye and consyther our state and manner of
living in this world, we shall shortly be occasione^ to confess and grant
with the holy and pacient man Job, Job. vii*
that the life of man is nothing else than a very knyghthode or warrefare upon
the earth, full of misery and trouble, replete with little io^e and pleasure.
(...) christen man has many enemies i this world.
To whom is it unknown what a great multitude of mortal ennemies every one
has ^ this world, that does profess Christ aright? Among al other have we not
three capital and chief adversaries, the dyuell, the world, and the flesh,
which cease not daily to assail us after the most crafty and subtyle manner?
How does Satan spread his nets in every Forreste and Park, The deuel.
y^ no dear may escape his deuouryng teth and rauenyng paws? How many ways
seeks he to destroy, kill and s^ay the innocent sheep of Christ? ^en. iii.
Even from the beginning of y^ world has he exercised his tyrannical fury,
and furious tyranye against man^^d. Who has at any time ben free, were he
never so good and perfect, from his subtle and to much craftye assaults? He
is so bent and ferue^tly addict to the destruction of man, that so sone as we
are regenerate and borne anew ^n Christ by the holy Ghost, and y^ most blessed
and honorable Sacrament of Baptism, he straight falls in hand with us,
labouryng by one means or other utterly to allure and entise us from our
profession, as we may se in our savior and LORD Jesus Christ, Mat. iiii. Mar
i. Luke, iiii*
whom after his Baptism Satan did not fear to assail and to te^pte unto
much absurdity and wickedness. ^f the son of God were not free from his
craft, subtilite and gyle, how shall we than miserable creatures eschew his
tyranny, which are ready to faull at every hour, except we watch and pray.
Our strife is not, Ephe. vi.
says S. Paul, against blood and flesh, but against rulers, against the
powers, against the Lords of the world, I mean, the governors of ye darkness
of this world, against spiritual subtilities in heavenly thiges. Therefore
says S. Peter: i. Pet. v.
Be ye sober and watch, for your adversary the dyuel goes about like a roryng
Lion seeking whom he may devour.

The world
Moreover what an extreme enemy is the world to so many as profess Christ?
How many occasions have we through the entysementes and vain pleasures thereof
to faull from the true godlynes? How does it allure us to the love of
transitory things? How does it delyghte us with the beholding of the vain
spectacles thereof? How does it draw us to the love of mundane things, and to
the utter contempt of things celestial and heavenly? ^ea how almoost does it
win us altogyther on her side? Wha^ the scripture not withstandyng says: i.
Joan. ii.
Love not the world, nor those things that are in the world. If any man
louethe the world, the love of the father is not in him. For all that is in
the world, as the concupiscence of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of the life, is not of the father, but it is of the world. And the
world passes away, and ye lusts thereof. But he that does the will of God,
abide the for evermore. Jacob. iiii.
S. James also says: O ye adulterers and alulteresses, do ye not know that
the frendeshyp of ye world, is emnite with God? Who soever therefore will be the
freende of the world, he is become an enemy of Gods.

The flesh.
Furthermore what a cruel adversary is the flesh unto a christen man? ^al. v.
How does it at all times lust contrary to the spirit? How does it
continually fight with the heavenly mocions of the holy Ghost? How does it
move us to the love of our selves, to pride, uncleanness, glotony,
covetousness, wantonness of living, unmercifulness, crudelite, and all that
ever naught is? And this enemy do we norysshe in our own breasts. He is a
domestical aduersarye and one of household as they use to say. He is ever at
hand to do us displeasures. He is never from home, but always within the
doors, so that we are in danger of destruction at every hour, except we
delige^tly watch and take heed. O the unspeakable miserye of man, without y^
grace of God.
Whyther so ever we turn us, our enemies mete with us and so cruelly assail
us, that except the grace of God assyst us valeauntlye, we are at every
moment of an hour ready to be cast into hell fire. O the unspeakable misery of
man in this most miserable world. Take h^de o pastorn^r^ of Gods word.
Where are they now y^ so live in all worldely joy and pleasure, that they
take no thought for the cruel assaults of their enemies* Where are these
wicked ^dolaters, Idolaters.
supersticious Hypocrites, abominable blasphemers of Gods most blessed name,
and brekers of y^ Sabbath day, which setting aside al love and fear of God,
throw the^ selves headlong into al kind of ungodliness? Rebellio^s.
Where are these dishonorers of our most excelie^t and most redoubted king,
and of the other publigue magistrates, sent by him for the punisshement of
evil doers, but for the praise of them that do well. Where are the
disobediente to their parents? Blood ^oupers.
Where are these mans^ayers, which daily thyrst inoce^t blood, no less then
the thyrstye heart pantynge for hette, desires the lyuysh springes of waters?
Whoremo^gers.
Where are these abominable adulterers, unclean fornicatours, and stynckyng
whoremongers, which conte^nyng ye bond of honorable wedlock, the law of ye
undefiled bed, and the chaste living we their own wives, He^. xiii.
do daily hunte after whores, defile virgins, pollute married women, corrupt
wydowes, as I may pass over much other detestable uncleanness, O extreme
abhominacion.
which it shameth not the^ to perpetrate and do yea and that so boldly that
this sin of fornicacio^ is among many at this present recou^ted no sin, but
a natural inclinacion, a token of love, a puttyng away of emnite and discord?
I think if it be not redressed shortly, it will grow up into such freedo^e and
liberty, that it shall be counted no sin at all, but rather a virtue, or at
the leest a spur and prouocacio^ to virtue. O the abhominacion of the world.
O intolerable wickedness. O uncleanness more detestable, then it may any longer
be suffered. Beware ye abominable who remo^gers betymes.
The great displeasure, the fearce wrath, the extreme vengeance, the fearce
and cruel plages of God hang over our heads, if this to much detestable vice
be not shortly removed from the bounds of Christianite. Again, where are
these malicious Thieves, Thieves.
which despisyng labor, live of the sweat of other men's faces, and of ye
labor of other men's hands, after an unjust and wrong manner? Where are these
false witnesses, False witnesses.
which for very malice or else for monye are redye to the utter damnacion of
their souls for to swear and give evidence against the innocents and
gylteles? Where are these Catarpillers and Extorcioners of the poor people,
which do nothing all ye whole day but gape after brybes and pol^ynge fees,
Extorcioners.
no less than the hungrye Lion does after his pray. Psalm. xiii.
They devour my people, says GOD, as a piece of bread. Rytch me^.
Where are these rytch men, to whom God has committed the goods of this
world, which like in^aciable dogs having never enough, do continuallye hunte
after the augmentacion of mu^dane treasures, O insa^iable covetousness.
as by ioynynge Lordeshyp to Lordshyp, Ferme to Ferme, land to land, pasture to
pasture, house unto house, ^enefyce to benefyce, College to College, Prebende
to Prebende, Chauntry to Chauntry, office to office, promocion to promocion,
yea and promocion for a vauntage, as they say? and yet are they unmercifully to
y^ poor people, Heb. xiii. i. Pet. iiii.
despise the mayntaynaunce of hospitalite, which y^ holy scriptures co^me^d so
highly in every place, and do noth^g less then exercise themselves i^ y^
works of mercy. Where are these spiritual rulers, Spiritual Rulers.
which gyuyng them selves to volupteous living, neglecte to feed christ's
flock with Gods most blessed word? Antechristes.
Where are these Antechristes which labor to suppress Christ's most sweet
and confortable Gospel? Papists.
Where are these Papists, which desire the old papisticall and ungodly
supersticion to reygne again among us? ^aptiues of Satan.
Where are these captives of Satan which wallowe and tu^ble the^ selves in the
dung hills of sin? To conclude where are al these wicked pa^so^nes, which
trangresse Gods commandments, and solyue as though there were no God at all?
O the ungodly and wicked fasshions of this world. O the countenance of the
christen publigue weal, not a little deformed through the pernicious manners of
the false christians. Thus se we what a number of mortal enemies reigns every
where among us, and yet is there no man that lame^teth his sin, Awake, awake.
de^esteth his wickedness, bewaileth his misery, desires amendment, seeks for
grace, prays for the favor of God, that through the holy Ghost we may be
restored to our old puri^e and cleannes. Prouer. xi. i. Pet. iiii.
If the righteous man shall scarsly be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? Who se^th not in how miserable a case we ^re? Who perceives
not how great ^^ede there is of amendment? Who does not se as it were in a
thing lyuyshly painted before his face, that except we amend shortly, and
correct we shall triumphantly ha^^ the ^ictory over the^ all. Be ye obedie^^ to
God, Jacob. iiii.
says S* James, resist ye d^^e and he shall ^^ye from you. Draw nigh to God,
and he shall draw nyghe unto you. Make clean your hands O ye sinners, and
purify your hertes, O ye that are double minded. Be ye troubled, and mourn,
and weep, let your laughyng be turned ^to mournyng, and your joy into sorrow.
Show your selves humble in the sight of y^ LORD and he shall lift you up.

O that we would follow y^ godly counsel of this holy Apostle, and so
redress our wicked manners, y^ the christen publigue weal might be restored to
her old amiable beauty and glorious pleasaunce. Ways to obtain Gods fa^oure.
How many ways has God left here among us, whereby we may make him a
merciful father, and a gentle savior unto us? As I may leave of to speak of
fasting and alms deed, what a goodly and godly mean is true and christen
prayer. Of prayer Note well.
for to obtain the favor of God, and to provoke his most tender mercy toward
us? Has any thing ^ times past so greatly apesed the divine wrath? did not y^
holy fathers ^ times pas^^^ (...) their troubles adversity fly unto Prayer, as
unto a holy Anchore, or sure Asile, and strong Bulwark? Whom would it not
delight to talk with the Kings grace, if he were amytted thereto? What a
treasure than is it to talk with ye King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in
comparison of whom all earthly creatures are more vile then the worms? This
thing comes to pass by true and christen prayer. What p^a^^ (...)
For what other thing is prayer, than a familiar co^municacio^ with God, wherein
we may freely power out the troubles of our hertes, and declare all our matters
boldly to him, as the child does unto his father, and obtain at his hand all
good things. Uerely we are our own enemies, if we neglecte and despise this
great commodite and singular pleasure? We can not excuse our self by
ygnorancy, in as much as we have plenty of prayers prepared for us in the
English tongue both in y^ holy Bible, and in other godly treatyses, which are
now in this most floryshyng Realm of England publyshed universally unto y^
great glory of God, and y^ exceading consolacion of al true christen men, in
as much that as S. Paul says: ii. Cor. iiii.
If the Gospel be yet hyd, ^t is hid in the^ that perysh, in whom the God of
this world has blinded they senses and wits of the unfaithful, that the
light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ, which is the Image of God,
should not shine unto them. Thanckes be to God for this his incomparable
benefyte given unto us by his well-beloved and faithful servant He^^pe our
most redoubted King. That LORD might also grant that we abuse not this his
most gentle gift, but rather use it unto the glory of his name, y^
edificacio^ of his church, and the conforte of our souls.

^owe for as much as there is sufficie^cy of prayers prepared already and set
forth by other, whom God might also prosper in their most godly affairs. A
thought it a vain thing to increase the number of the^, and to acumulate
prayers upon prayers, where by wexines rather then cherefulnes should be
brought to the Readers* I therefore couetyng in this behalf to work somewhat
ye might make unto the auauncemente of Prayer, whereby the devout Christians
might receive knoweledge, and be the better instructed in the true manner of
praienge, have now of late compyled a work entiteled, A pathway unto prayer
A pathwaye unto Prayer. I was the gladder to take it in hand, because no man
has as yet perfectly entreated of this matter, neither in the Greek, The cause
of making this work
Latin, nor English tongue, that ever I could se. What does it avail or
profitte a man being of a debyle and weak nature to have a Pomegranate or oni
other thing that comforts nature, restores strength, Mark well
and brings again the perfeccion of health, if he knows not y^ use of it,
and wherfort it serves. Uerelye even so of prayer. If there be never so many
prayers prepared for men, if they know not y^ use of them, nor wherefore they
serve, nor yet after what manner they should be exercysed, what profytte
receive they of the^? It is but an easy thing to pray, but to pray aright and
according to the will of God, is a thing of great difficulte and much labor.
We think it an hard thing to speak unto a terrestiall Prince with words
convenient, apt and decent, and is it but a trifle to speak to the most
high Prince, in whose sight the most eloquent is very barbarous, and the
most holy, profane? I have therefore in this my treatise followynge declared
what prayer is, The conte^tes of this Book.
wherefore it serves, and unto what end we should use it. I have also declared
of what virtue and strength the true and christian prayer is, and how we should
prepare our selves to prayer, that we may pray aright, and according to Gods
pleasure. And for as much as some men are of so scrupulous, I had almoost said,
supersticious conscience, ye they think no prayer to be herd, but that only
which is prayed in y^ chirch, or some other sacred place, as they call it, I
have declared both by Scriptures and ancient Doctors, in what place it is
lawful to pray. Again I have declared after what manner men should pray,
that God may accept their prayer, and for what things they should pray, yea
and at what time. And in as much as this word Prayer does contain in it not
only Peticion, but also thanks gyuyng for the benefyte that is received,
therefore have I also declared my mind concerning gyuing of thanckes to God
the Father through Jesus Christ. Colos. iii.
All these things have I done in this little work according to the true vain
of ye holy scriptures and the judgment of the best learned Doctors, seking in
this my labor only the glory of God, and the profit of his holy
congregation. Which thing if it shall may come to pass, I shall not only not
repent me, but very much rejoice in the LORD of this my travail, and shall
hereby be encouraged after this, to take in hand other arguments of no less
vtilite and profit.

Now gentle and prudente Lady, disdain not to take this little gift, which
your Basille does with most gentle heart offer unto you as a testimonye of his
obsequious will toward your good Ladyship. I doubt not but that as you your
self shall find much pleasure and profit by y^ reading of it, so shall all
the reders of the same obtain so much godly fruit and christian knowledge by
it, y^ they shall render herty and immortal thanks to God, that such a work
comes forth dedicated to your Ladyshyppes name. I again on my behalf shall
most instantly desire almighty God to assyst you at all times with his holy
Spirit in ye reading not only of this my little treatise, but also of al other
works that make to the glory of God and ye health of your soul, and chefely
in readyng y^ most comfortable Gospel of his derely beloved son Jesus
Christ our LORD and omnisufficient Savior (wherein the whole study and
pleasure of a true Christian ought principally to be) ye you having your whole
meditacio in y^ law of y^ LORD both day and night, Psalm. i.
may fi^d such swetenes and pleasure i^ his most delectable word that you
wantynge at this present the company of a corporal husband, may be married to
the most glorious and beatifull King Jesus Christ Gods own son in your
soul by faith in this world, and after the departure from this vale of misery
to live with him presentlye in the fullness of perfect joy, worlds without
end. AMEN.

The grace of our LORD Jesus Christ be with your good Ladyshyppe, and with all
your household. So be it.
The pathewaye unto Prayer.
What prayer is.
The first Chapter.
PRayer after the common diffinicion of the Doctors, The diffinicion of prayer.
is a lyftinge up of a pure mind to God, wherein we ask somewhat of him.

This diffinicio^ of prayer seems unto me so godly and in every part agreeable
to the holy scriptures that I thyncke it my bounden duty to search out every
word of it in order, and to compare it with the most sacred Scriptures, and
the sayenges of y^ ancient Doctors.

First it teaches us that prayer is a lyftynge up of a pure mind. Note
first of all that he says, a liftynge up, Lyftynge up, what at signifyethe.
What other thing means this word, lyftynge up, than to show that who
soever entendeth to pray, must utterly seclude and put out of his heart all
vain cogitacio^ ^ and wordly thoughts, all carnal fantasies, all ungodly
ymaginacions, to conclude al such things as might make the heart of him that
prays to crepe upon the ground, to alienate and estraung his mind from the
meditacio^ of celestial and deuyne matters? And this is y^ very same thing
that Christ teaches in y^ Gospel of Mathewe, Math. vi.
where he says: When y^ prayest, thou shalt not be like to y^ Hypocrites. For
their manner is to stand prayenge in ye Synagoges and in the corners of the
streets, that me^ may se the^, Certes I say unto you they have their reward.
But wha^ thou prayest enter into thy closet, and when y^ have sparred thy door,
pray to thy father which is in secte^e, and thy father which sees i^
secret, shall ^eward the openly. In theyse words Christ does not only rebuke
y^ false and ^ayned manner of prayenge, which the Hypocrites use huntyng only
after vain glory, and sekyng the praise of men more then the glory of God and
the health of their own souls, but he also declarethe how we shall prepare
our selves for to pray, that we may be heard. He commands us to enter into
our closet, and to sparre our door. What other thing means Christ by this,
but that, as I have said before, we should expulse all te^porall things out
of our hearts, whansoeuer we entend to pray, and have our minds altogyther set
upon celestial and heavenly things? Mark well and follow.
Therefore ought so many as entend to pray with fruit to seek an occasion to
be seguestred from all temporal affairs and from the troubles of wordely
things, which might be an impediment to them in their holy meditacions, and
so to be free from all external and mundane things, y^ their prayer in deed
may be a very lyftynge up, according to the beginning of our diffinicion.

The second Chapter.
ANd that this thing may the more conveniently be brought to pass, it shall be
expedient for such as intend to exercise prayer to repose them selves and to
set their hertes quiette from all the troubles of the world, yea and to
subduce and conuaye the^ selves from the company of the worldely people into
some secret and solitarye place for the time of their prayer, that they may
the more freely give their minds to devout and holy meditacion, as the manner of
many holy men was in times paste. Examples have we of diverse in the holy
Scripture, which used this trade. The gospel shows how Christ was won^ many
times when ^e would pray to go into the feldes and there being alone upon a
moun^ayne utterly secluded from all other ^ompany, Luke. vi.
to persevere and continue in ^he prayer of God al y^ whole night. Again a
little before his passion we ^ead that he entendynge to pray unto his celestial
father forsook the co^^any of other, Mat. xx^^.
yea and although he ^oke with him only three of his disciples at that instant.
Peter, John, and James, yet notwithstanding wha^ ^e was in the mount of
Oliuete, y^ accustomed place of his prayenge, he ^ent away from the^ also
about a ^ones cast, and he kneling down, prai^d so hertely and so long to
God his father, that for very anguysh, pain and ^orow the sweat of his most
blessed ^ody was eue^ as y^ drops of blood ^unnynge down upon the earth.
Act. x.
Peter also being in the house of Simon the Tanner went up into y^ upper part
of the house to pray, tha^ he might not be troubled with y^ other company. ^ii.
Re. iiii.
Helyseus also, wha^ he shul^ pray to God for a certain chylde^ was dead,
went alone into the chamber, where the child lay, and sperre^ the door and so
prayed. ^ob. (...).
Again Sar^ the daughter of Raguell, desyryng^ to be delivered from the^
improper^ and imbraydyng, as it would appear, of a certain default, wherewith
on^ of her fathers ha^dmaydens did imbrayd and cast her in the teth, forsook
all company, and went straight into an^ upper chamber of her house, and there
being alone, did nether eat nor dri^ke by y^ space of three days and three
nights, but continued in prayer, and beseched God even with tears ye he would
deliver her from this imbraydyng and rebuke. Iu. x. xii.
Judith i^ like manner, wha^ she should put herself in ioperdy for the health of
her people, went first in to her Oratory and secret place, where ^he was wont
to pray, and so desired the help of God. At certain other times also before
she slew Holofer^us she went forth i^ the night time for to pray quietly by
herself. Queen Hester also puttinge of her Pryncelike garments, Hest. xiiii.
prayed for her people to God secretly i^ her chamber. Again Daniel, Dau. vi.
when certain Dukes and Earls for the hatred and evil will that they bare
unto him, had caused king Darius to make an Act that who soever asks any
Peticion of their God, yea or of any man but of the King alone for the space
of thy^ tie days, he should be cast into the den of Lions, ceased not to
pray for all ye Act of y^ king, but still as he was wont to do, prayed boldly
to his LORD God, being in his chamber secretly by himself alone. Thus se we
that both Christ^ and other holy men also, sought evermore an occasion to be
quiet and sollitary, that they might the more ^^^ly talk with God in their
prayer, and so came it to pass that their prayer was unfeignedly a lyftynge up.

The third Chapter.
Psalm. xxi.
IT is not without a cause y^ Prayer in the holy scripture is compared to a
sweat perfume, whose nature is always, if it be once ince^sed or set on fire,
Prayde compared to a perfume.
to lift up it self and still to go upward so long as it lasts I^ like manner
the true and christen prayer ought to lift up it self with deuynd
co^templacion, and still to go up so long as it lasts with the medi^acion of
celestial things, and not to ^repe upon the ground with ^am^ thoughts and
wordely ymaginacio^s. For so is that prayer no lyftyng up of mind or of him
that prays, unto heaven, but rather a thrustynge (...) to hell, yea and
works s^nne ^ dam^nacion to him that prays as the ^salmograph^ says: (...)
Oration (...) fiat in peccatum. ^f you be risen again with Christ says S.
Paul seek for those things ye are above, Colos. iii.
where Christ is sittyng on the right hand of God. Set your minds upon the
things above and not upon ye things of the earth. For you are dead, and your
life is hyd with Christ in God. Wha^ so ever Christ our life shall appear,
then shall we also appear with him in glory. So that not only prayer but
also the whole life of a Christen man ought to be a lyftyng up, that is to
say, a fervent desire and diligent sekyng of supernal and heavenly things.
But let us proceed with our diffinicion. Hitherto have we heard that Prayer is
a lyftyng up. Whereof I pray you? of hands or eyes? Nay verily, but of a
pure mind. For as touching the ^yftyng up of hands and eyes, it may ^lso be
used so well of Hypocrites as ^f true Christians. (...)
Therefore says Chrysostom, De oratio^e
thouhg thou do not bow thy knees, nor knock thy breast, nor strecthe out
thy hands unto heaven, yet if thou only show forth a ferue^^e mind, thou
shalt make a perfect prayer. Note of external gestures in Prayer.
Not wtstandyng if such things be done i^ time of prayer procedyng from y^
fervent and inward affeccion of ye spirit, they are not to be discu^mended.
Psa. ^xxii.
For David says, I have lyfted up mine eyes unto the, which dwell in heaven
And S. Paul says, ^. Tim. ii.
I will y^ men pray in every place, liftyng up your hands wtoute wrath and
contencion. We read also y^ Christ used to knele when he prayed. Luke. xxii.
And the humble and poor Publicane knocked his breast when he prayed, Luke.
xviii
saying: O God be thou merciful to me a sinner. Therefore as touching ye
external gesture and outward behauour, as ye lyftynge up of hands or eyes, the
knelyng o^ knocking on the breast, in as much as they are mean and
indifferent things, they are to be left to the judgment of devout and well
disposed people, either to be done or to be left undone, as their minds shall
serve the^. And for as much as they pertayne nothing to our matter, I will
le^ the^ pass and go forth with our diffinicio^.

The fourth Chapter.
PRayer, say the holy Doctors, is a lyftynge up of a pure mind. These words
are not to be gone over with a light foot, as they use to say, but depely to
be weyed, and seriously to be pondered. For in them does consist in a manner the
whole efficacy, virtue, strength, power and pith of prayer. Prayer* is ^ wor^
of the mind.
First we shall note ye prayer is not the work of y^ mouth, but of the mind,
yea and that not of a corrupt, flesshely, malicious and sinful, but of a
pure, immaculate, clean, unspotted, faithful and charitable mind. But I will
first show by the scriptures and holy fathers, yt prayer is the work of the
mind according to our diffinicion, and afterward somewhat declare of y^
purite of y^ mind.

That prayer is the work of the mind, it is manifest by diverse places of holy
scripture. Exo. xiiii.
For when ^oses at the commandment of God led y^ people of Israel out of
Egipte, and Pharao with his cruel army followed, purposynge unmercifully to
slaye the^, he being in great thought and care how he might safely co^du^^^
the Israelites, and yet still trusting and having his whole affiaunce reposed
in their LORD God, prayed nothing at all with his mouth, but only uttered his
cause secretlye in his heart unto God, and he was heard. For the LORD God
said unto him* What cryest you unto me* His cryeng was not the voice of the
mouth, but the affeccion of the heart. He cried with a pure mind to God, and
therefore was he heard, though the mouth kept silence. ^. Reg. i.
In like manner Anne the wife of Helcana, when she had been long baren and without
fruit, prayed God, that he would take away from her opprobry and shame, and
give her children, which thing she obtained. And yet says the scripture she
spoke in her heart. Her lips only moved, Luke. vii.
but her voice was heard nothing at all. Mary Magdalene also prayed, not with
her lyppes and mouth, when she washed Christ's fete with y^ tears of her eyes,
and wyped them with the here of her head, kissing and anointed the^ full
tenderly in the house of Simon the Pharyse, she only lamented in her heart her
sinful living and dissolute co^uersacion, desyryng in her mind to have
remission of her sins, and she heard this sweet voice of Christ. Her sins
are forgyne^ her, because she has loved much. ^ea and immediately after Christ
said to her. Thy faith has saved the, Joan. iiii.
go thy way i^ peace. Christian also the self truth and wisdom of his father
said to the woman of Samaria, when they talked together of worshyppyng God.
Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when neither in this mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem, ye shall worship the father. ^e worship that ye know not, we
worship that we know. For health is of the Jews. But the hour comes and
now it is, when the true worshyppers shall worship the father in spirit and
truth. For the father sekethe such yt should worship him. God is a spirit,
and they that worship him, must worship hi^ in spirit and truth. Here christ,
Joan. xiiii Titus. i.
which is y^ very truth and can not lie, shows us two notable things. One
that God his father is a spirit, another, that as he is a spirit, so will he
be worshypped in the spirit, Note.
who perceyueth not tha^ that it is the Spirit, the heart, the mind, I mean
the inward and spiritual man, that must worship God* It is a common saying
among us, like will to like. And every one desires such as he is himself.
Truth it is. Now is God a spirit, therefore requires he a spiritual manner
of worshyppynge, which doubtless proceeds from the heart, and not from y^
ste^toreous voice of the mouth. The pure affeccion of the heart, and not the
whysperynge noise of y^ lyppes does God require. God which is the searcher of
the heart, seaketh to be worshypped in the heart, as he says by Salomo^, Pro.
xxiii.
son give me thy heart. Moreover S. Paul says, Romans i.
God is my witness, whom I worship in my spirit. In my spirit, says he, and
not in the vnfruytefull bablyng of my lyppes. Ephe. v.
Again, Speak among yourselues in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs,
syngyng and making melody in your hertes to the LORD. Lostyll he makes
mention of the heart, willing y^ all praises, songs and melody be done in our
hertes to ye LORD our God. As though he should say, all that ever is done
without the heart, is vain, vnfruytefull, yea and plain abhominacion before
God, rather workynge da^nacio^ then salvation to the doers of it, as Christ
says: Mat. xv.
This people honor me with their lyppes, but their heart is far from me.
Uerely they worship me in vain. Thus se we proved by the scripture, that
Prayer is the work of the heart, of the spirit of the mind, and not of mouth
and lyppes. But let us hear what the Doctors say to this matter.

The fyfte Chapter.
In oration* Dom. Ad transismund. Lib. it.
Saint Cipriane y^ blessed martyr says, which Fulgentius also recyteth, that
God is not the hearer of the voice, but of the heart, neither is he to be
admonysshed with exclamacions and outecryes, which sees the thoughts, as the
LORD proves and says, what do ye think wyckednes in your hearts* and in
another place, All congregacions shall know, that I am the searcher of the
raynes and heart, that is to say, of the inward part. Libro de Cain et Abel.
cap. ix.
Also S. Ambrose says, take heed that thou doste not babble out rasshely the
mysteries of the Creed, or of the LORDS prayer. Doste thou not know, how
grievous a thing it is to heap up sin in Prayer, where thou trusteste to
have remedy* Certes y^ LORD taught by the Prophet ye this is a grievous curse,
Psa. ^viii.
saying: His prayer is beco^e eue^ very sin. Except peradventure thou
recou^test it but a tryfle to mistrust. It is surely a great incredulite and
unfaithfulness to think thus of y^ power of God, y^ thou canste not be heard,
Mark this well.
except thou cryest out. Let thy work cry, let thy faith cry, let thy mind
cry, let thy passions and suffrynges cry, let thy blood, as the blood of holy
Abell, cry, whereof god said to Caym, Genesis iiii.
the voice of thy brothers blood cry unto me. For he hears in secret, which
makes clean in secret. We can not hear a man except he speaks unto us,
but unto God, not words but thoughts do speak. Moral. lib xxii. cap. xviii.
Again, S. Gregory says, undoubtedly true prayer consysteth not in the voice
of the mouth, but in the thoughts of the heart. For our words do not make
the voices the more pythethy and valeaunt to come unto the most secret ears
of God, but our desire and affeccions. Therefore says the LORD in y^ Gospel:
Enter into thy closet and sparre Mat. vi.
thy door. Note.
He sparreth y^ door, and prays in his closet, which holds his peace with
his mouth, and powers out the affeccio^ of his mind in y^ syghte of God
above. Lib. de mag. i.
Moreover S. Auste^ ^ayeth: Thou know, I am sure, y^ ^t is commanded us for
none other thing that we should pray in our closettes* being sparred (whereby
the secret parts of the mind are signified) but that God seaketh not to be
monyshed or taught by our speaking of that thing, which we co^uyt that he
should give us. For he that speaks gives outwardely a sign or token of his
will by some articulate, plain and euidente sound. But God is both to be
sought and to be prayed unto, even in the very secret parts of a reasonable
soul, which is called the inward man. For he wylleth that these be his
Temples. Wherefore we need no speaking when ^^e pray, that is to say, no
words that shall make any sound, except peradventure as y^ prestes do, for
to utter their mind, not y^ God, but that man should hear the^, and with a
certain consent be drawn to co^te^placion by reme^brynge the^. Here^ to
agrees the saye^g of S. Jerome^ In Epist. ^d Ephe.
we ought, says he, to sing, to make melody, and to praise ye LORD rather in
mind then in voice. And this is it that is said, singing and making melody to
the LORD ^ your hertes. Ephe. v. A good lesson for our musi^ions and ^haunters
Let young men hear these thyr^ges, yea let them hear, whose office it is to
sing in y^ Church, that they must singe to God not in the voice but in the
heart, neither must their throat and chawes be anointed after y^ manner of
Gameplayers with sweet oyntementes, that in the church syngyng more fytte for
game places should be heard, but in fear, in work, in knowledge of the
scriptures ought they to sing unto the ^ORDE. ^d Roma. Lib. vir. cap. v^^^.
Drigen also says, God in prayer does not so much weye and ponder our words,
as he does the heart and ye mind* For he it is, which searchethe the hertes
and the raynes.

Although I could rehearse many no notable saye^ges of these and other Doctors,
Psalm. vii. Sap. i. Apo. ii. Jere. xvii.
which prove manifestly ye ^rayer is not the work of ye mouth ^ut of the
heart, not of ye voice, but ^f ye thought, not of ye lyppes but of ^he mind,
yet these at this present ^aye seem abundantly to satisfye. ^eyther do I
recyte ye testymonies ^f ye old fathers to confyrine and make ^ur matter the
more strong, which ^redy is sufficiently establysshed by ^he holy Scriptures,
neither need ^hey the confyrmacion of any man^es doctrine, which of them
selves ^ught to be believed without hesita^on or doubting of the faythefull, ^
as much as they be y^ Oracles and in ^llible spech^^ of God, in whom al
^ecessary truth for our salvation is ^prehended, The cause of ^^hersynge the
Doctors ^ this ^oke
and without the authori^ whereof all that ever is taught or ^ritten, be but
mere fantasies and h^^ayne inuencions: but I have called the holy and catholyke
Doctors t^ witness, because they reach the sam^ thing yt the Scripture does,
and t^ stop the mouths of certain wicked and ignorant persons, which thick^
no truth to be truth except by m^nes authority it be establyshed, an^ that
men seeing and hearing the iudg^ment of such as are learned, should^ be the more
ready to cast away they^ Hypocrisye and acco^modate the^ selves to the true
manner of worshyppyng^ and prayeng to our LORD God.

The syxte Chapter.
VUell of these things tha^^ heretofore rehearsed is it easy to learn that
such as will pray to God with fruit, must pray in heart, in spirit, in
mind, in thought, in affeccion, in the soul, in the inward^ man, or else the
noise of the mouth, ^ mu^blynge of the lips, the roryng^ of the throat, the
shaking of ye head the knocking on the breast, the kne^lynge on the ground,
and what soever can be rekened more is vain, un fruytful, and nothing to y^
purpose, rather bringing damnacion then salvation, as we have heard heretofore.

What is than to be thought of such persons, which wha^ they are in the
temple or else where, never leave ^ablynge, their minds being utterly drawn
from their prayers, and altogyther set upon transitory and wordely things*
Some streatche ^ut their prayers into an innumerable number of leaves,
thinking so to do God an high sacrifyce. Against y^ vain beblers and
supersticious worshyppers of saynctes
Some also upon their bedes taly up, I cannot tell how many Lady Psalters,
^heynge persuaded ye by that menes they shall se our Lady corporally before
they dye, and that when they are once dead, our lady and all the. xi. M virgins
with other saints mo, whose number is infinyte, shall mete with the^, every one
having in their hands a brennynge taper of wa^e, and so receive the^ ito
glory, putting upon their heads a crown of gold garnysshed, I can not tell
you, with how many red Roses. Some again worship daily a great number of
saints every one hauige to their part an hundred Pater nosters, with as many
Aues, besides ye Credes, and that for diverse causes. These things be more
openly known than ye they need here to be rehearsed, except we be so blind
that we will se nothing, and so ignorant that we will nothing know. I fear
greatly unless that may justly be spoken of such vain bablers, which is
spoken by the Prophet Esaias, Esa. xxix.
and rehearsed of our savior Jesus Christ in the Gospel of Mathewe: Math. xv.
This people, says he, honoreth me with their lyppes, but their heart is far
from me. Uerelye they worship me in vain. Yea I fear unless that they
through such unfaithful bablyng do acumulate and heap up to them selves the
greater da^acion, as Christ witnesses in the Gospel. Mat. xxiii.
Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, sayethe Christ, which eat the
houses of wydowes, yea and ye under the pretext of long Prayer. Luke. xx.
For this shall ye be punyshed ye more grievously. Again he says: Beware of the
Scribes, which have a pleasure to walk in long roobes, and love to be
saluted in the Markettes, and to have the chief preminence in the Synagoges,
and the high seats at feasts, which devour ye houses of wydomes fayning
outewardely long Prayers. They shall receive the greater damnacio^. Mat. xii.
If we shall at the day of judgment render an accountes of every idle word
yt we speak, as the holy scripture testifyeth, what is then to be thought of
those words, which we unfruitfully waste, when we pretend outwardly to pray,
and yet inwardly have our minds enta^gled with ye care of worldly things, or
else entysed from the affeccio^ of prayer with vain cogitacions of things
carnal. It is to be feared unless we i^curre and run into greater damnacion,
then they which pray nothing at all. For is such prayer any other thing
than plain mocking of God* Our external pretext is as though we prayed and
desired to have our prayers heard of God, but i^ deed our manner of prayeng is
nothing else I speak of the vnfruytfull bablers, but only a desiring of God
that he should hear us and our prayers nothing at al, seeing we our selves do
not hear them, nor yet mind them in our hertes, yea we desire hi^ that he
will take vengeance on us for our mockyng and idle bablyng. And this is it that
S. Ambrose says, Lib^^. de Cain et Abell. cap. ix.
take heed y^ thou doste not babble out rashly the mysteries of the Creed and
of the LORDS prayer. Doste thou not know how grievous a thing it is in prayer
for to heap up sin, where thou trustest to have remedy* Certes y^ LORD
taught by ye Prophet, Psalm. cviii.
that it is a grievous curse, saye^g: His prayer is become to him even very
syn. ^. Gregory also says. Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas. Feigned
holiness is double iniquite. To pray nothing at al is iniquite and plain
sin, Note.
but to pretend outwardly an holy manner of prayenge, and yet not pray in deed
in our hertes, is double iniquite, and increases much da^nacio^ unto us, as we
have heard heretofore, in as much as we are dissemblers both before God and
man. But let us hear what S. John Chrysostom says: Homel. xii. Demul. canan.
Many coming into the church do extend and streytch out their prayer unto a
thousand verses, as though the multitude of words were nedeful unto God as
unto one that does not know what y^ arest, which knows the matter, before
thou thynkest. For they the^ selves also do not know what they say. Their
lyppes are moved only, but their mide is without fruit, and therefore are y^
ears of God deaf. Thou heareste not thine own prayer, and wylt thou that y^
LORD should hear thy prayer? I have bowed, you say, my knees. Thou have
bowed in deed thy knees within, but thy mind wa^dreth abroad. Thy body is
within, but thy thought is without. Thy mouth in deed spoke, but thy mind did
thike upon vsuries. It did count the revenues of thy possessions. It did
behold the descripcions and valowynges of houses. It remembered the words of
thy friends. It looked upon y^ negligenses of thy servants. It laughed at the
pleasant iestyng of the Pharasites. It considered the beau^ty of women.
Therefore know that these things are done. Follow thou being a man the woman
of Canane, which very diligently and with high wisdom prayed unto yc LORD and
therefore deserved to obtain her requests. But thou will say peradventure, I
have no daughter, which is replete with the dyuell, but you have a soul,
which is stuffed full of sin. Homil. lxxix. De oratione.
Again he says, If when ye body lyghtethe prostrate upon the ground, and
the mouth bableth vaynly, the mind goes about the house and market, how may
such one say that he has prayed in the syghte of God. For he prays in the
sight of GOD, which gathers altogyther his mind quietly, and has nothing to
do with the world, and lyfteth up himself even unto heaven, and puts out of
his mind al humayn thoughts. For he yt prays, must so pray, that he
settethe his mind at quiet from worldly things, and calls on God with a
sorrowful and contryte heart. Neither may he use many words, nor draw out his
prayer on a great length, but speak few words, yea and those simple, plain
and homely. For not in the multitude of words, but in ye quycknes of mind does
the whole matter consyst, that we should be heard. Ibidem.
Once again he says: In prayer there is not so much need of the voice as of
the thought, nor of the stretchyng out of ye hands as of the intencion of the
mind.

Thus se we also proved by ye Doctors, that it is the mind, where with a Christen
man must pray. The mu^blinge over multitude of prayers, y^ cryenge out of the
voice, ye yellynge of the throat, the lyftynge up of the hands, the knocking
of the breast, the shaking of the head, the knelyng on the knees, and whatsoever
can be in ue^ted or rehearsed besides these things, are i vain, if the mind be
not present in the time of prayer. I will pray in spirit, says Paul, i. Cor.
xiiii.
and I will pray also in mind. I will sing in Spirit, and I will sing also
in mind. Therefore ye it may be prayed aryght, let every man say, farewell to
al humayne affairs and worldely matters, and so quietly repose himself, while
he prays, that according to our diffinicio^, his prayer in very deed may be a
lystynge up of the mind.

The seventh Chapter.
BUt some man will say peradventure, is it enough, if I pray with my mind,
the heart ^eynge semoted from mundane affairs and worldly businesses? I
answer: Our diffinicion teaches us not only to pray with the mind, but
also with a pure mind. For Prayer is y^ lyftyng up of a pure mind. Pray ^ a
pure myn^
So few yt it is not enough to pray we ye mind, except it be pure. It will be
objected, than shall we never pray. For who can say, my heart is clean and I
am pure from sin? Pro. xx. i. Joan. i.
I answer: If ye say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us. But if we confess our sins, God is faithful and
ryghteous to forgive us our sins, and make us clean from all
unrighteous. The scripture says, Psalm. xxxi. Romans iiii.
blessed are they whose iniquities are forgyuen, and whose sins are covered,
blessed is that man to whom the LORD hathiputed no sin. It says not Blessed
are they, which have no iniquities, or which have no sin. For S. James
sayethe: Iaco. iii.
In many things we sin al. So long as we are in this mortal flesh we can
never be pure and clean from the dregs of sin, if from the sin it self.
We can never in this life aspyre unto so great perfeccion of innocence, that we
may appear pure and gyltelesse in the syghte of God, Job. xxv.
in whose eyes ye very sterres and Angels be not clean. How than may we
pray with and pure mind? Learn here how we may pray* with a faithful
mind.
Uerely if our mind be faithful to God, and charitable to our neighbor, God
does dissemble all our faults, and in as much as we are faithful unto him,
and loving to our christen brothers, he counts us all pure, i. Joan. iii.
as S. John says: He y^ is borne of God, sins not, that is to say, he that
believes in God, Mark well.
his sin is not imputed unto him, in as much as he consents not to the
sin, but hongreth and thyrstethe after the perfeccion of true innocence. Our
hertes be purifyed by faith says the scripture, Act. xv.
so that who so ever prays with a faithful and charitable mind, he is
counted before God to pray with a pure mind. God and the world iu^geth not
alphe. The world.
For God judges not as the world does. The world thinks him to be a good
devout man that goethe up and down with a coggyrnge pair of Bedes in his
hands, or knelethe down in his stole sole^ly with a great Matters book in his
hand, making such a noise with his lyppes and tongue, that all the whole church
ryngethe of it, although his heart be far from God, and his mind occupied
about worldely businesses. God.
But God beholds the mind, the heart, ye inward man, and looks whither he
prays in purite and cleanes or not. If the heart be stuffed with faith and
charity, then is God well pleased, and accepts the prayer for an high and
pleasant Sacryfyce. Who being in the temple hearing the proud Pharise, Luke
xviii.
and the poor Publicane prayeng together would not have esteemed the Pharise to
be more ryghteous and pure in y^ sight of God, then ye wretched Publicane* For
the Pharise confessed no syn, but virtues many. He gave god thanks ye he was
not like other me^, which are extorcioners, unrighteous, adulterers, and as
the Publicane was. He fasted twyse in the weke, and gave the tents of all
things that he possessed. Dangelyke righteousness and seraphical perfeccion.
Who would not have thought this holy religious father worthy to be canonysed
and related into the number of Saints* ^et says Christ plainly that the poor
Publycane, which brought forth no good deeds, but stood a far of and
durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but humbly knocked his breast, saye^ge:
O God be thou merciful unto me a sinner, went home more ryghteous i Gods
sight then the Pharise. Why so? For the Pharise had no true Faith in him but
an arrogant presumpcion, bostynge and cra^yng of his good deeds, as though God
were in his det, and he not in Gods. And that he had no christen charity in
him, it is evident seeing yt he despised his neighbor. For Charity, (...) x.
i. Det. iiii.
says the Scripture, covers the multitude of sins.

That the Publica^s prayer came from a pure mind, that is, from a mind
faithful and charytable, it is manifest. First because that with an humble
heart he came to God for remission of his sins, beleuyng to obtain it.
Secondely, seeing that he accused no man but himself only. Therefore went he
home more justified, says the holy Scripture. Therefore to all such as
outwardly pretend holiness, Mat. xxi.
and yet are vnpure in their mind, Christ says. The Harlottes and Publicans
shall go before you into the kingdom of heaven. Again, ^uk. xvi.
ye are they y^ justify your selves before me^, but God knows your hertes.
For yt which is praise worthy before men, is plain abhominacion before God.

Abell also and Caym offered both sacrifices to god, Genesis iiii.
and the scripture says that God looked unto Abell and unto his gifts, but
unto Caym and unto his gifts he looked not. God judges not y^ person of the
act but the art of the person.
It is here to be noted, that God not after the fasshyon of the world judges
ye person of the act, but the act of ye person. He first looks to the
person, and afterward unto the act, as the holy scripture says here. He
looked unto Abell, and unto his gifts. First unto Abell, and afterward unto
Abels gifts. If the person be good, that is, faithful and charitable, tha^
does God accept the gift, not for the dignite of the gift it self, but for
ye faith of him that offers. Psalm. xv. Psalm. xxiii.
For as ye Psalmograph says, God has no need of our goods. The earth is y^
LORDS, and all yt ever is contained in it.

As concerning that the Scripture says, God looked unto Abell, it signifies
that God favored Abel, i as much as his heart was both ^aithful and charitable.
And yt God looked to ye gifts of Abell, it she wethe ye God was well pleased with
the^, seeing they proceeded from the heart of such one as was enfarsed with faith
and charity.

As touching that the scripture says, God looked not unto Caym and unto his
gifts, it sygnifyethe that God neither favored Caym, nor yet accepted his
gifts, seeing that Caym had in him neither faith nor Charity. For his heart
was stuffed full of ire and wrath toward his brother Abell, in so much that
shortly after it came to pass according to his pretensed malice, that he
slew his brother. And wherefore did he slaye him* 1. Joan. iii.
verily because his own works were evil, and his brothers ryghteous. Thus
sewe, that be our gifts never so precious in ye sight of men, Ec. xxxiiii.
yet if the gyuer be wicked, that is, unfaithful and vncharytable, God
utterly conte^neth and sets the^ at naught, as the wise man says: The
gifts of the wicked, y^ most high does not allow and approve. S. Iuste^ also
says, Det. ccxxvi. De te^pore.
the prayer of an envious man is wont to be put a back from the ears of God.
Hereto agrees the saying of Chrysostom: Let us, Dom xxvii. in Genesis cap. viii.
sayethhe, in every place bring forth a pure mind. For that is the cause of
al good things. The good LORD is not wont to attend and give head to those
thing that are done of us, but unto the inward mind, whereof we are moved to
do these things. And good lokynge to this mind, does either approve or turn
away those things that we do. Therefore whythe^ we pray, or fast, or give
alms (for those are our spiritual Sacrifyces) or whyther we do any other
certain spiritual work, let us do that, beig moved thereunto with a good mind
Therefore says Christ, Mat. v.
when thou^ offrest a gift at the Aultare, and the^ doste reme^^er that thy
brother hath^ any thing against the, leave thy^ gift there before the
Aultare, and ga^ thy way, be first reconcyled to thy^ brother, and tha^ come
and offer thy gift. In like manner when we pray, we may not only provide ye
we may pray with the mind, al humayne thin^ ges and worldly affairs semoted and
laid a side, but also we must given earneste diligence, that we pray with a
pure mind, that is, with a mind stuffed ful^ of faith and charity. For as
Dauyd says: Psalm. ixv.
I perceive any unrighteousness, ye is to say, unfaithfulness, in my heart,
God will not hear me. Psa. cxliiii
Again: The LORD is ny^ to all that call upon him, yea to all that call upon
him in truth. And the wise man says: Sap. i.
Into a man lycious soul wisdom will not enter, nor into a body subject
unto sin. 1. Tim. ii.
S. Paul also says, I will ye men pray in every place, lyftynge up pure
hands without wrath and contencion. So that he which bears a heart faithful
toward God, and charity toward his neighbor is fytte to pray in ye syghte
of God. Therefore let us labor seryously, ye when we i^tende to pray, we may
exclude and put out of our hertes all infidelite wrath and co^te^cio^, and be
so ple^teously enfarsed with Faith and Charity, that our prayer may justly
seem to be a very lyftynge up of a pure mind. And that this may be done the
more conveniently, it shall be necessary for us to pray with David. Psalm. 1.
Create in me O God a pure and clean heart, and a right up spirit make thou a
new in my inward parts. But ^et us hear more of our diffinicion. It
follows.

The eight Chapter.
Unto God. Note that he says, unto God, not unto Jupiter, Apollo, Mercurius,
Bacchus, Juno, Minerua, Pallas Uenus and such other Gods and Godesses, yea
rather dyuels, Ps. lxxxx^.
as the Psalmograph says, the Gods of the Neythen are dyuelles, unto whom the
Ethuyckes and Gentyles did fly in their prayer for succoure, nor unto Baal,
Astaroth, Moloch, the Queen of heaven, and such other Idolles, as the old
Idolaters the Jews, worshypped and cried unto for help, no nor yet as our
new Idolaters were wont to do, Against y^ supersticious Inuocacion of Say^nctes
as unto Luke for ye Ox, unto Job for the pox, unto Anthony for the pyg, unto
Loye for the horse, unto Apoline for the to thake, unto Rooke for the
pestilence, unto Sith for things lost, unto Gertrude for the ratonnes and
myse, unto Blase for the Ague, unto Agues for the fire, unto Barbara for the
the thonder, unto Christopher for continual health, unto Annes for a husband,
unto Margarete for women with child, unto Kateryne for learning, unto Crispyne
and Crispiniane for shoes makig unto Cosme and Damiane for Physic, unto
Clement for bruing beer, and such other i^numerable, but unto God. For Prayer
is a lyftyng up of a pure mind unto God. Unto God ought we to lift up our
hearts, when we pray, Psa. cxxii.
as ye Psalm. says, unto ye have I lyfted up mine eyes, which dwell i^ heaven
Agein, I have lyfted up mine eyes into the Mountains, from whence help may
come unto me. Psalm. cxx.
My help comes from ye LORD which made heaven and earth. Also in another
place, Psalm. cxix.
when I was in trouble, I cried unto the LORD, and he favorably heard me.
Psa. xxxiii. 1. Pet. iii. Psa. xxiiii.
The eyes of the LORD are upon the ryghteous, and his ears are bent unto
their prayers. Mine eyes, says David, are cried Adam, Abell, Seth, Enos,
Enoch, Nohe, Their, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaharon, Ietro,
Eleazar, Phinees, Iosue, Caleb Othoniel, Gedeon, Helcana, Samuel, Nathan,
David, Solomon, Helias, Micheas, Elizeus, Ezechias, Esaias, Josias, Job,
Mathatias, Thoby, with all the other ancient fathers and holy Prophets of the
old Testament, but unto GOD alone. Again unto whom prayed Joseph John^
Baptiste, Lazarus, Nicodemus, Gamaliel, Cornelius, Apollo, Dionisius, Aquilia,
Steven, Philip, Agabus, Ananias, Timothe, Titus, Ioses, Philemon, and all the
Apostles, with many other, which are contained in ye volumes of both
Testamentes, but unto God alone? The prayed, and were heard. Shall our Prayers
than be vain, Esa. xxviii
if we pray with that same purite of mind that they did? The scripture says:
Who so ever beleuethe in God, Romans x. Joel. ii. Act. ii.
shall not be confounded. For there is no difference between Jew and Gentyle.
For one is LORD of all, which is rytche enough unto all that call on him. For
whosoever shall call on the name of the LORD, he shall be safe, Let us
therefore trust in God, Psa. lxi.
pour out our hearts before him, lament our cause to him, desiring to have
his most gracious aid and help in all our trouble and adversity, and we
may be sure to obtain whatsoever we ask according unto his will, 1. Joan. v.
and to seal remedy so present, that nothing can be wysshed nerer.

Thus se we that Prayer is a lyftyng up of a pure mind unto God. It follows.

The nynthe Chapter.
VUheri^ we ask somewhat of hi^ He that entendethe to pray with fruit, must
before he begin to pray, consider with himself for what thing he has most
need to pray. If thou be proud, than haste thou need to pray for humility.
If thou be wrathful and enuyous, than haste thou need to pray for charity. If
you be a glotton or dronkarde, the^ haste thou need to pray for sobrtete. If you
be fault in any vice, than have thou need to pray for ye virtue contrary to
the vice. If thou be a magistrate and ruler of the people, than have you need to
pray unto God for grace, that you may govern his people committed unto thy
charge according to equite and mercy. If thou be a Bishop or spiritual
ouersear, tha^ have thou a great occasion to fly unto God with thy prayers, that
thou may faith fully give attendau^ce on the flock, over whom the holy
Ghost has made the an ouersear to govern ye congregation of God, ^ Act. xx.
whom he has purchased with his blood. To be short in whatsoever state of
living thou be, if you co^syderest and weyest depely with thy self thy manner of
lyui^g, y^ shall find sufficient occasions for to pray. They therefore which
pray but for a customs, Note.
and because they will exercise their lyppes, unless they should seem to ye
Co^gregacio^ but a little devout and holy me^, not cari^g what they pray so they
pray, and do not before they pray determyne with themselves wherefore they will
pray, certes though they spend whole worlds in such kind of prayer, yet
do they nothing less then pray. If we search ye holy volumes of the divine
scriptures we shall easily perceive, that they which prayed, did never pray
but for urgent and right necessary causes. As for an example: Exo. xxxii.
When Moses perceived the wrath of God to be whotte against the Israelites,
because they had worshypped the golden calfe, he streyghte ways for the health
of his people prayed, saying: Either forgive the^ this fault, or ^ thou do
not, wype me out of ye book of life, Psalm. l.
which thou haste written. King David prayed many times for diverse vrge^t
causes as we may se in the Psalms. ii. Par. l.
King Salomo^ his son prayed for wisdom, that he might govern the people a
right Ezechias hearing the blasphemies and proud crakes of Senacherib, ^^ii.
Re. xix Iudi. x.xii Hest. xiiii.
prayed to the LORD for help. Judith and Hester prayed for the delyueraunce
of their people.

Luke xviii. Mat. i^ii.
Again in the new Testament, the blind prayed for their sight, ye lame for
their going, the deaf for their hearing, the sick for their health. Luke
xviii Mat. xv. Mat. viii. Luke xxiii.
The poor Publicane prayed for remission of sins. The woman of Canane prayed
for the health of her daughter, as diverse other did for their children and
servants. Christ and Steven prayed for their enemies. Act. vii. Act. xii.
The church of Christ prayed for the delyuerance of Peter. Paul and all the
Apostles prayed for ye swifte and redye passage of the Gospel, and for the
fortunate conversion of the unfaithful, unto the faith of Christ. Thus se we
that all holy and devout persons did ever premeditate with them selves,
wherefore they should pray before they prayed. And so sone as an occasion of
prayenge was offered unto the^, they fell streyghtwayes unto prayer, and fled
unto God with most herty supplicacion for ye purchasing of their hertes desire.
So ought we to do, and not rasshely to mu^ble over a great multitude of Psalms
or other prayers after the manner of certain ydiots and unlearned prestes, we
care not how, nor ca^ not tell wherefore, but ponder, weye and consider depelye
our cause, and se what a great occasion we have to pray, and than with an
humble co^tryte and sorrowful heart lament our cause before God with most
bitter and heavy tears, never leaving until we have obtained that for the
which we pray. If we would do thus, tha^ should our prayers be modest, sober
and dece^t, and not temerarious, ^asshe, and babled out of order, and by this
means accepted of GOD, heard and granted.

Thus have I declared as I trust according unto the vain of ye holy
scripture, and the mind of the ancient Doctors, what prayer is. Now I will
haste to declare of what virtue and strength the true and Christen prayer is,
ye men knowing ye efficacy and dignite, yea and the necessite thereof, may we ye
more plansible and joyful mi^ des delyght in it, exercysynge them selves therein
both day and night to the great glory of God, and the utter confusion of
Satan, and the high consolacion of their own souls.

Of what virtue and strength the true and Christen Prayer is.
The. x. Chap.
IN declaryng the efficacye, virtue, strength, and power of the true and
chrishen Prayer, I would gladly wysshe unto me the pleasant speech and
sugared vtteraunce of the most famous and excellent Oratoure Pericles. whose
eloquence was so great and wondrous, as it is reported, that even of very
nature it seemed incomparable; and not of i^ any part able of any mortal man to
be followed and practiced, of so great admyracion, yea and estimacion in the
sight of all men was it recou^ted. But seeing that my wysshe in this behalf is
vain, and that there is no man more barbarous and of less eloquence then I am.
1. Cor. 1. Iaco. ii.
Again, seeing that God has ever chosen the fools and unwise of this world
to set forth his glory and to confound the wisdom of the worldelye wise,
and the understanding of the flesshelye minded, seeing also that the truth of
Gods wisdom has no need of or nate eloquence nor painted colors, which of
the faithful for all the simplicite of it, The prayer of the Author.
is ever amplexed and received joyfully, I shall most instantly desire God,
that he may so direct my pen and instyll on such manner into my breast the
knowledge of the most holy Hystories of the sacred scriptures, which
abou^dantly declare how mighty in operacion the true and christen prayer is,
that I by rehearsyng them, and Gods most holy Spirit workynge therewith also
may so accend, kyndle, inflame, and fette on fire Christen men's hertes with
ye love of faithful prayer, that they may unfeignedly rejoice in the continual
exercise and godly meditacion thereof.

By prayer Abraham delivered king Abimelech from death, Genesis xx.
which god thretened hi^, because he had taken to him Abraham's wife. And where
as God had stryken the kings wife and handmaydens with the vice of sterilite
and barennes for the aforesaid fault, at Abraha^s prayer they were made whole.
Exo. viii.
By prayer Moses ceased and turned away the plages of Egypt. Exo. ^vii.
By prayer Moses caused ye water to flow out of ye hard rock. By prayer
Moses obtained the victory for the Israelites against Ameliche, but when he
ceased to pray, than did their enemies prevail and get the victory. Exo.
xxxii.
By prayer, when god was full determined to slaye the Israelites, because they
worshypped the golden caulfe, Moses apeased ye divine wrath, and reco^cyled the
people to the favor of God. By prayer Moses caused the fire suddenly to be in
allowed up, which devoured the tents of the murmurers. Num^. xi.
By prayer Miria^, which spoke against Moses was delivered from her leprosi.
Number. xxi.
By prayer ye people which were grievously stryke and wounded of ye fyry
serpe^tes for their disobedience, were delivered from the^ and made whole.
Iosus. x.
By prayer Jesus caused the Son and ye Moon to stand still by ye space of
an whole day, until he was revenged of his enemies. 1. (...). i.
By prayer Anne ye wife of Helcana being baren long before was made as a
fruytfull vine. By prayer the people of Israel did baleauntly overcome their
enemies y^ Philistines. ii. Reg. xii.
By prayer David obtained the favor again of God, although he had committed
ye most heinous sin both of man slaughter and whoredom. iii. Re. xvii
By prayer Helias raised from death to life the son of the wydowe of Sarepta.
By prayer he in like manner caused yt great plente of rain came down from
heaven upon the earth, Iaco. v.
where as before it had not rayned by the space of three years and six
months. By prayer Iosaphat obtained god mercyful to him, ii. Pat. xx.
so ye easelye he had ye victory over his enemies By prayer Ezechias overcame
his proud adversary Sennacherib and all his army. iiii. Re. xx.
By prayer the same Ezechias did prolonge his life. xv. years, By prayer
Manasses was delivered out of captivity, Esa. xxxiii. ii. pa. xxxiii
and restored again unto his kingdom. ii. Eso. ii.
By prayer, Nehemias obtained of the King all his desire. Job. viii.
By prayer all good things chaunsed unto Thoby and Sara the daughter of
Raguell. By prayer Judith overcame Holofernes and his army. Iudit. xii. Hest.
xiiii.
By prayer queen Hester had her desire for ye Israelites of ye king Assuerus.
Da. vi. xiiii
By prayer Daniell was preserved from the cruel fearcenes of the Lions. Dan.
xiii.
By prayer Susa^na was delivered from the most bitter death pretensed against
her. By prayer Jonas was delivered out of the whales belly. Jonas. ii.
By prayer Judas Machabeus gatte the victory over his enemies, i. Mat. iiii
but in two battayles when he should fight with Antiochus, and prayed not, i.
mat. ix.
he fled away. And when he did syghte with Bachides and Alcimus, he was
slain, because he did not pray, as before. By prayer Ionathas, i. mat. xi.
wha^ al had forsaken hi^ except a few, obtained ye victory. By prayer ye
Jews were delivered from death and trouble, ii. mat. iii.
and ye goods of temple preserved. Diverse histories there be more of ye old
testament which declare of how great virtue and strength ye true and christen
prayer is, but these at this present may seem abu^da^tly to satisfy: I will
therefore rehearse a few of the new testament, co^cerninge this matter also, and
than make an end, that me^ in few words may se of what efficacy and power
faithful prayer is.

The. xi. Chapter.
BY prayer the Lepers were delivered from their leprosy. Luke xvii. math. ix.
By prayer the blind were restored to their syghte. mat. ii.
By prayer they yt were sick of ye palseye, were made whole. By prayer the
woman of Canane obtained health for her daughter. mat. xv.
By Prayer diverse men obtained math. viii.
health for their sons and servants By prayer the lame were restored to the
right use of their lymmes. math. iiii.
By prayer ye deaf were made to hear. mat. xxi.
By prayer the dumme recovered their speech. mat. xii. mat. ix. mat. xi. Lu.
vii. xviii.
By prayer the dead were restored to life. By prayer sinners obtained remission
of their sins. By prayer Mary Magdalene had seven dyuelles cast out of her.
Luke xviii.
By prayer the Publycanne went home more justified then the Pharise. By prayer
the faith of Peter sailed Luke xxii.
not. Joan. xv.
By prayer the holy Ghost was purchased for the Apostles and all the
faithful. Mat. xxvi. Act. vii.
By prayer Christ and Stephen obtained remission for their enemies. Act. ^x:
By prayer Peter he led Aeneas of the palseye. By prayer he raised by Tabiths
from death to life. Act. x.
By prayer also he learned ye all meats are pure, and none comone or unclean.
Act. x.xi.
By prayer Cornelius deserved to receive the holy Ghost before he was
baptized. Act. xii. Act. xxvii.
By prayer Peter was delivered out of pryso^. By prayer Paul saved so many as
were with him in the ship from the danger of drownynge. ^. Tim. ii.
By prayer we live under the magistrates and head officers of the publigue
weal peasably and quietly with all godlynes and honesty. By prayer the Gospel
of Christ has ever had felyce and fortunate progress. ^a^o. v.
By prayer we ^^ made safe in our syckenes. By (...) ex the conuersyon of the
Gentyles came fortunately to pass. By prayer the glory of God has ever be
promoted. By prayer ye church of Christ has ever had the victory over
Antechristes Sinagoge. To conclude, by prayer all good things chaunse unto us,
and without prayer nothing prospers with us fortunately. If I should go
forth to recyte all ye Histories of the holy Bible, ye make to the auau^cement
of prayer, I should contexe and make a work longer tha^ the Iliades of the
Greek Poet Homere. But of these few Histories heretofore rehearsed, the
faithful and Christen reader may right well deprehende and perceive, what
efficacy, virtue, strength and power is in ye true and Christen prayer. How can
prayer be onye otherwise then a thing of great excellency, seeing that the
holy Ghost was the Author of it, seeing also that so many i^co^perable things
by it haueben obtained and so many divine matters brought to pass? Luke xvi:
mat. xxvi.
No man therefore ought to doubt of ye dignite of it, seeing ye Jesus Christ
godsowne son did both very dilligent lyat al times, and in all fortunes and
chau^ses, yea and ye both night and day exercise it, and also not only comaund
other to pray, mat. vi.
but likewise taught and prescribed the most godly way of praye^g. Christ's
Apostles also with Marye the mother of Jesu, Act. i:
and other holy women perseuered together very much in fasting and prayeng
after Christ's Ascencion, as we read in the Ac^es of the Apostles.

I could gather here many thiges out of ye old Histories, which should declare
unto us how greatly ye ancient fathers of Christ's church delighted i this
godly exercise of prayer, Df^. James Note
as we read in S. James, whose knees through the continual use of knelynge in
his prayers had great wrattes or wennes, call them what ye will for all me,
growing upon them after the manner as Camelles have, but my mind is not to
set forth ye co^mendacio^, praise and auau^ce me^t of prayer by any
Histories, but only those, which are contained in ye holy scripture.
Notwithstanding seeing that hitherto I have fortressed this my treatise with the
sayenges of ye godly learned Doctors, I will therefore now rehearse a sentence
or two of the golden mouthed Doctor S. John^ Chrysostom, which shall not a
little make to the auaunceme^t of ye true and christen prayer.

The. xii. Chapter.
DErely beloved prayer undoubtedly, Hom. lxxix. De oratio^e
says he, is an exceading good thing and great treasure. For if he that
talks with a virtuous man receives by that means no small profytte, how
many commodities then shall he enjoy, to whom it is given to talk with GOD? It
is impossible forsooth it is impossible for that man which prays aryght and
makes continual supplicacion un to God, for to sin at any time. For the
fountains of water do not make gardyns so fertyle, and fruytfull, as the
fou^taynes of tears wateringe the plant of prayer, make it to exercise and
grow up unto a bery great heyght, and set him ye prays before the LORD.
Hereof comes it to pass yt he must neded (...) heard.

Ser primo De o^a.
Again he says, as the Son is the light unto the body, so is prayer unto the
soul. Prayer gets an holy life, and the congrue, decente and semely
worshyppyng of God, and after a meruaylous manner it lays up treasure for our
souls. For whither that a man will labor to keep virginite, By prayer al
things are easy.
or in marriage reuerentlye to maintain continencye, or to suppress wrath, and
to live mekely, or to repurge envy, or to do any other decent and comely
thing, prayer being his guide, and preparyng such a way to the life, he shall
undoubtedly have a quiet and easy passage unto Godlynes. For it is not
possible, but that they which ask of God pureness of living, justice, mekenes
and benignite, must needs obtain it by prayeng. Mat. vii* Luke. x.
For he says, ask and it shall be given you. Seake and ye shall find. Knock
and it shall be opened to you. For eueryone ye asks, receives, and he that
seaketh fyndeth, and to him ye knocks, it shall be opened.

Prayer receaueth us full of sins, Ser Serf^ do De o^^,
and streyghtwayes makes us clean. Prayer is the present remedy for ye
souls of the^ that are sick. Prayer does not only make clean from sin, but
also put a back great perelles. Prayer is and is truly called a celestial
panoply and heavenly armature, and that alone is able valeau^tely to preserve
the^, which have consecrated them selves unto it. So that with out prayer no
good nor wholesome thing shall chaunse unto us.

Ibidem.
Prayer is the head of all goodness and the conciliatryce and purchaser of health
and everlasting life. Prayer is the cause of all virtue and justice. Prayer is
the occasion of health, the purchaser of an immortal soul, the ^ure bulwark
of the Church, the in concusse, vnshake^ and puissaunt custody or watch of the
faithful, terrible to the dyuelles, but healthful to the godly. Prayer has
waiting on her all virtues. To be breue, look what the foundacio^ is in an
house, ye bery same is prayer in the soul.

Hitherto have I rehearsed ye words of the golden mouthed Doctor, which
declare manifestlye of how great virtue and strength the true and Christen
prayer is.

Of these things the^ heretofore rehearsed, have we sufficiently learned what
an exceeding and inco^pa^able treasure prayer is to ye soul of ^ christen man.
Certes whyther we ^aue respect to the commodity of ^ur body or of our soul,
prayer is ^he only means, whereby it is obtained and brought to pass. Dui^ius
martiali^s
Be God ne^ter so angrye with us, prayer apea^ed his wrath, as the Poet
says. ^lectitur ixatus, uoce rogante Deus. Et. Domi ^um mundi flectere uota
ualent. Behold what prayer does.
If we be si^ull, prayer purifyethe us. If we be^arre^, prayer makes us
fruytfull. ^f we be sick, prayer makethe us whole. If we be ygnora^t, prayer
engraffeth knowledge in us. If we be ^lynd, prayer illumineth our senses. If we
be co^fortles, prayer is ready to ^ssyst and help us. If we be sorrowful,
prayer comforts us. If we be poor, prayer entychethe us. If we be profane,
prayer makes us holy. If we be carnal, prayer makes us spiritual. If we be
captives of Satan, prayer makes us the derely beloved sons of god. If we
wa^te any thing Prayer is ready to get it for us. To conclude, if we be evil,
prayer makes us good. If we be good, prayer makes us better, and never
forsakes us until he has brought us unto the presence of almighty God in
his eternal glory. What would we have more? Seeing that so large commodities and
great profittes come unto us by the true and christen prayer, let us cast away
all sluggyshnes, and exercise our selves maynly in the most godly meditacion
of virtuous prayer. By this means doubteles shall vice decrease and minish in
us, and co^trarywyse virtue shall augment and increase very much both in
body and soul. And ye this thing may be done the more conuenie^tly, I will
now by Gods favor declare how a christen man should prepare himself to
pray, ye by no means he may abuse this great and syngulare treasure.

How a Christen man should prepare himself to pray.
The. xiii. Chapter.
ALthough there be so many things to be considered in the godly exercise of
prayer, Either things are to be considered in the repeparar^ ^n of prayer.
ye we may pray aryghte, yette me think that eyghte things chefely above all
other must be considered ^ observed in it, without the which ^o man can
prepare himself to pray according unto the will of God. Of theyse eyghte
therefore will I now speak in order by the assistence and help of Gods most
holy Spirit, whom I most insta^tly desire so to direct my pen, that I may
write all thing unto the glory of God, and the profytte of his holy church.
First it is requisyte, that he which entendeth to pray, consydereth deply with
himself his state and case wherein he sto^deth. If he does thus, tha^ shall he
find that to be true, which the Psalmograph writes: Ps. xxxviii
Every man that lives is nothing out altogyther very vanite. Psa. lxi.
Again, the children of men are vain. They are liars and false, in as much
that if you put the^ and vanite together in a ballaunce, vanite will surely
wey them up. Esal. xi.
All flesh is grass, and all his glory is like a flower of the field.

Genesis vi.
Moreover he shall easily perceive that all his senses and thoughts are prone to
evil, and that he is not able of him self to thike a good thought. Again,
ii. Cor. iii.
he shall shortly understood that his heart is wicked and inscrutable, Iere.
^vii. Esa. i.
and that there is no whole part in him from the top of the head to ye soole
of the foot, but that in all his thoughetes, words and deeds, he is a very
sinner and grievous offender of the divine majesty. Thus must he first of all,
wha^ he ente^deth to pray, consider with him self what he is, even a very
sinner, a trangressoure of Gods precepte, a breker of the divine law, and a
wicked doer in all his acts.

This consideracion first of all is very necessary. For it brings a man to
the knowledge of him self, and makethe him desirous for to pray, that he may
be delivered from this great enormite. Mark this well.
Certes except a man does first of all on this wise judge, understood and
perceive of himself, he can never be truly bent for to pray. For who
desyrethe the color and warmenes of clothe, that feleth no cold? Who longs
for meat and drink, that is not hungry and thyrsty. Who wyssheth health that is
not sick? Who prays for remission of sins, that fealeth not himself to be
a sinner? iiii. Reg. xx. Esa. xxxiii.
Would Ezechias have prayed for health and long life, if he had not felt
himself sick and at the point of death? ii. Para. i.
Would Solomon have desired wisdo^e for the right governance of his people,
if he had not perceived, ii. Re xii. Psalm. i.
that he had had need of it? Would David when he had played the adulterer with
Bethsabe ye wife of Urias, so greatly have lamented his sin, if he had not
known him self to be a grievous sinner? Luke x viii.
Would the poor Publican contrary to the ma^ners of the proud Pharise have
stand a far of, being afraid to lift up his eyes, and knockyng his breast,
saying: O God be thou merciful unto me a sinner, if he had not known himself
to be full of sin, misery and wretchedness? Luke vii.x.
Would Mary magdalene have been so desirous of Christ's company, if she had not
known herself to be a miserable siner, and Christ a bounteous Sauyvor? Nay
verily.

Therefore the next and most ready way for a man to prepare himself to pray
aright, and with a fervent spirit and hungry mind, is to know and grant
himself to be a sinner, and ye therefore he has great need to pray.

The. xiiii. Chapter.
Secondly, when he has once thoroughly debated and beaten we hiselfe his own
misery, wretchedness, sin, and abhominacio^, and perceyuethe that to be
delivered thereof, there is no other way, but only by the mercy of God through
prayer, he must streyghte ways set before his eyes the Commandment of God,
which after ye knowledge and confession of his sin commands him to pray.
And here ought he not a little to rejoice. For who, wha^ he has ones offended
God, durst be so bold as once to desire pardon of his offense, and to pray
unto God for mercy, if God himself had not commaundes him so to do? Uerely no
man. Behold what sin both.
For the transgression of Gods commandment does so confound the consicience
of ye tra^sgressour, that it sooner dryueth him unto desperacion, than to any
hope of help or favor. Genesis iii.
This is well proved by Adam, which, when he had once broken Gods precepte in
Paradyse, fled streyghtwayes from ye face of God, hyd him, and sought all
means possible no more to come i^to his sight. Genesis iiii.
How was Caym also confounded in his conscience when he had killed his brother
Abell, though there was yet no law raygnynge? Was he not so consternate and
stryken with such fear, that he said: Every one that fyndeth me, will kill
me? was he not ashamed so greatly of his man slaughter, that he said, mine
iniquite is greater the^ I may deserve for gyuenes? Did he not fly from ye
face of the LORD, so far as he might. Again, Mat. xxvi
was not Judas so ashamed of his deed when he had sold Christ to the
Bysshoppes and head prestes, ye he brought the money again to the^, and said,
I have sinned, betrayenge the innocent blood? Act. ii
Did not sin so co^fou^d and slay his conscience at ye last, that he went and
hanged up himself, and when he was hanged, did not he brast a su^der in the
mids, and all his bowels gusshed out? Who being a Traytoure dare come before
the Kings majesty to desire pardon of his offense? Yea who rather being fauty
in that detestable sin, fieth not from his graces presence in to strange
countries, that he may be free and without punishment? For the reward of
sin is death. Romans vi.
Therefore I say ought he that knows and grau^teth himself to be a sinner
very much to rejoice that God for his offense has commanded him to pray,
which else durst nothing less than once to atte^pte for to approach before
the divine majesty we onye kind of prayer, The nature of sin
and when sin shall labor according unto ye nature thereof for to condemn
the conscience, and to expel from the heart all says, confidence, and trust
in God, tha^ to erecte, eleuate and lift up himself by gyuyng sure and
undoubted faith to the commandment of God, which commands him to pray, we
this persuasion, that God has not commanded him for to pray in vain. He
must therefore put these and such like Comaundementes ever before his eyes,
Mat. vi. Psalm. xlix. Mat. xi.
Ask, Seek, Knock, watch pray. Again, call on me in the day of trouble.
Come unto me al ye that labor and are lade^. All ye that thyrst come unto the
waters. Esa. xliiii.
And ye that have no money make have, by and eat. Come and bye without money,
and without any marchaundyse, wine and milk. These most gentle and loving
commandments of God comfort the sorowefull mind of the sinner greatly, and
engraffe in him a certain gladness and hope for to obtain remission of his
sins, seeing ye God so bou^teonsly commands him to pray.

The. xv. Chapter.
THyrdely when he has on this manner poudered the commandment of God, wherwt
he is provoked to pray, than does convenient time require that he also
consydereth the most loving, gentle, and bounteous promises of God, in the
which he promyseth for to hear us, and to grant us our peticions. For what
does it profyt for to ask and not to obtain? If God had only commanded us to
pray, and not also promised for to hear us, and gentelly to give us our
desires, what great pleasure had he done for us? what had he done for the
which we had need once to say, LORD God a mercy? What syngulare benefit had
we received of hi? But although ye Commandment to pray puts us i good
confort, yet wha^ we are promised also graciously to be heard, this makes us
unfeignedly to rejoice and seriouslye to triumph. This makes us to put our of
our heart all doloure and sadness, and to be replete with all myrthe and
gladness. The promyses of God bring quietness to the conscience, The promysce of
God.
huarite to the heart, tranquillity and peace to the soul. No man is able to
express how much and how great joy lies buried up in the divine promises,
and how fervent consolacion the sinner takes by the hearing of the^. Genesis iii.
What joy think ye was this unto Ada^ for to hear after his offense, that ye
son of GOD should be borne of a pure maid, and tread down the Serpe^tes
head, that is, subdue Satan and deliver Adam with all his posterite from his
tyranny, bring the^ again into the favor of God, and make the^ heirs of
eternal glory? Genesis xxii.
What comfort I pray you was this to faythefull Abraham for to hear that in
his seed all nacious of the earth should be blessed? What a great pleasure
was this to ye Israelites, Number. xxi.
when they were grievously stynged and slain of the fyry serpents for their
disobedience, to hear this promise of God: make a brase^ serpent, and set it
up for a sign He that is stryken and looks upon it, shall live? Iosue. i.
What exceadyng comfort received Iosue by this promise of God unto him: I will
not leave the neither will I forsake the. Be therefore strong and take a good
heart unto the? As I may come nerer to our matter, Joel. ii. Act. ii. Romans x.
how much joy, consolacio^ and pleasure have the faithful fealte of this one
promise of God: Every one that callethe on the name of the LORD, shall be
saved?

Therefore in this behalf the promises of God must be earnestly wayed, pondered
and considered. The promyses of God are our only conforte.
In them must we rest, and dailye as in a most pleasant Herboure. In the^
must we repose our selves. In them must be all our delyghte, pleasure and
felicite. The chief promises concerning Prayer are these. Psa. xxxvi.
Delyghte thou in the LORD, and he shall give the, the peticio^s of thy heart.
Psalm xlix.
Call on me says God in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver the, and
thou shalt honor me. Psa. ixxxx
Again he says: Seeing that he has put his trust in me, I will deliver him,
and I will defend him, in as much as he has known my name. He cried unto me,
and I will graciously hear him, I am we him in tribulacion, I will deliver him
and glorify him. With the length of days will I replenysh him, and show him
my saving health. Christ also says: Mat. xi.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I shall refresh you. Every
one that is a thyrste, let him come to me and drink. Joan. vii. Mat. vi.
Again, ask, and it shall be given you. Seek and ye shall find. Knock and
it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives, and he that
seeks, fyndeth, and to him ye knocks, it shall be opened. If the sone asks
bread of any of you, which is his father, will ye profer him a stone? or if he
asks fysh, Luke. xi.
will ye give him a Serpent? or if he ask an Egg, will ye profer him a
Scorpion? If ye than which are evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more shall your father celestial give the holy ghost to
them that desire it of him? These and such like promises of God, must he that
inte^deth to pray set before his eyes, that he comforted with the remembrance
of them, may with the more fra^cke courage give himself to godly and devout
prayer at all times.

The.xvi. Chapter.
Faith given unto the promyses of god
FOurthly when he has on this manner confyrmed and establyshed his mind with
the conte^placion and beholdynge of the divine promises, he may not dout any
thing at all of them, but faithfully believe and undoubtedly persuade himself
ye they are true, in as much as they are the promises not of man but of GOD,
which ca^ not lie, Cit. l. Psa. cxliiii
which is true, yea which is the self truth, which is faithful in all his
words, and holy in all his works, whose word and truth also abide for ever
and ever. Esaias. xi.
For though God be never so merciful, and bounteous in gifts, Note well.
yet if we do not believe that his mercy and bounte pertayne also to us, we are
never ye better. Let it so be, that wha^ a tray tour for his offense committed
agenst the Kings majesty, Mark this Example
flies beyond the sees into a straung country by cause he will eschew the
danger of the law, and escape ye pain due for his offense, the Kings grace
has pity on him, pardon his fault, and send over his letters unto him,
wheri^ is declared the kings great mercy and gentleness toward him, and wylleth
him to return into his natyue country, and there again to enjoy the
benefytes of the same, and of all other that he possessed before, yea and that
with no less favor, than he did in times paste, when he was most
estraunged from that fault of treason: if the Traitor not beleuynge the
words of the most gracious and free pardon, would conte^ne and despise it,
recountyng it to be but a vain gloose, and of no truth, what should the
kings gentleness in this behalf profytte him? The king is merciful, but the
traytoure is unfaithful. Therefore receives he no commodity by the kings
pardon. And yet is not the fault in ye king, but in the traitor, which
believes not that glad and merye tidings.

Another example.
Again: Be it in case, that a cunnyng and learned Phisicio^ come unto a sick
man, promisynge him help and delyueraunce of his disease, and yet if the sick
parso^ believes him not, but sets naught by him, and despyseth his medicines
what does it profytte him? What is he helped by the presence of the Phisicio^,
be he never so cu^nynge? What does the redines of help profyt him, if he
refuses to take and enjoy it? Uerely nothing at all. In like manner be God
never so merciful and bou^teous, and never so ready to help us, yet if we
believe him not to be so, his mercy, bounty and assiste^ce profyt us nothing
at all. Psa. cxliiii
The Psalmograph says not only, the LORD is nygh to all that call on him, but
he adds, to all that call on him in truth. To call on God in truethe, what it
is
What is it to call on God in truth, but to believe earnestly that he will
truly perform his promyses, and do in all things as he has promised? Psa.
lxxxiiii.
Again, David says: Mercy and truth have met together, ryghteousnes and
peace have kyssed one another. Mark this Exposicio^
What is this, mercy and truth have met together but that as God is
merciful in making his promises, so is he true in perfourmynge them? Again,
what means this, righteousness and peace have kyssed one another, but only to
show, that the ryghteousnes of god in fulfyllynge his promises, and the
tra^quilite of conscience have joined them selves together in the hertes of the
faithful.

Therefore if we do not obtain ye high treasures and great pleasures ye God
has promised let us impute it to nothing else but only to our unfaithfulness.
Heb. xi.
For S. Paul says we out faith it is not possible to please God. He that
comes to God, says he, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder to
the^ that seek h^. Romans v.
Again, we being justified by faith have peace toward God through our LORD
Jesus Christ, by whom also it has chaunsed unto us, that by faith we should
be brought i^to this grace, wherein we stond, and praise under the hope of the
glory of GOD. S. James also says, Jacob. i.
If any man wants wisdom let him ask of him that gives it, I mean God,
which gives to all men without doublenes, and casts no man into ye teth, and
it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith and waver not. For he ye
doubts, is like the waves of ye see, tossed of the wind, and carried with
violence. Neither let that man think yt he shall receive any thing of God
Christ also says, Math. xi.
Who soever shall say to this mountain, take away thy self, and cast thy
self into the sea, and shall not waver in his heart, but shall believe that
these things which he says, shall come to pass, what soever he says, shall be
done unto him. Therefore I say unto you, what soever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done to you. Again he says have ye
ye faith of GOD, ye is to say, asure pswasio^ and confydence of the promyses
of the grace and mercy of God, and learn ye to assent and agree to the divine
promise which thing if ye shall do, verily I say unto you, all things that ye
ask when ye pray, believe ye ye shall receive them, and they shall chau^se to
you, as he says, all that ever ye ask when ye pray, believe that ye shall have
the^, and they shall chaunse unto you, Math. ix.
We read that when two blind men desired Christ to make the^ for to se, he
said unto the^, do ye believe ye I am able to do this thing? They aunswared, we
believe LORD. Tha^ said Christ unto the^, according to your faith, be it to
you. And their eyes were open. Again wha^ a certain man brought his son to
Christ for to be healed, Christ said to him: If thou can believe yt, al
things are possible to hi^ yt believes. In diverse other places we read, Mat.
ix.
that Christ said to the^ who^e he heled. Be it unto the according to thy
faith. And thy faith has saved the. For by faith are we mary to God. Lull.
vii. Mat. xv. Oze. ii. Joan. i. Gala. iii.
By faith are we made the sons of God. By faith all good things chaunse
unto us. Therefore that we may be partakers of the comfortable promises of God,
let us ear nestly believe the^, being perfectly pswaded that what soever God
has promised, he will surely fulfill it. For he is that truth, which can
neither lie nor deceive, but grants all things abosidantely to the^ that
ask in faith. In Luca^ Lap. xviii.
Theophilacte has a very golden and notable saying, which is this. The
foundation and ground of all prayer is faith. For except a man does believe,
that he shall receive that to his profyt, which he asks, the prayer that he
makes is vayn.

But if it be so that we are yette weak, and have no sure trust of ye
clemencye and great goodness of God toward us, nor can not persuade ourselves
that our prayer is heard, but double and waver peradventure of the divine
promises, Luke vii.
than after the example of ye Apostles let us pray, LORD increase our faith.
Yea let us with tears cry out and say with the father of a certain child.
Mar. ix
I believe LORD, succor and help mine incredulite and unfaithfulness. And ye
mighty ruler, which is a merciful and gentle God, Exo. xxxiiii.
pacient, long sufferynge and true, which keeps mercy, which takes away
iniquite, wickedness and sin, will surely have mercy on us and increase faith
in us. Eco. ii.
For the power of the LORD shall be with the^, which seek him with all their
affect, heart and mind.

The. xvii. Chapter.
FYftely when we ask any thing of God, we may not ask it in our own name,
in our own dignite and worthynes, in our own justice and righteousness, in our
own good deeds and merits, in our own innocence and pureness, What it is to
ask in the name of Christ.
but in the name of Christ. What is it to ask in yt name of Christ, but only
to confess that for our own dignity and worthynes, we are not worthy to be
heard, and therefore desiring to obtain mercy, grace, favor, and remission
of our sins, we approach unto the throne of GOD with our faythefull prayers,
not in our own name, but in the name of Christ, that is to say, in Christ's
dignite, worthynes justice, righteousness, innocencye, pureness, good deeds and
merits. And for his sake and for his goodness do we desire to be heard, and to
have our Peticions granted:

This is a great comfort for them that shall pray, A confortable saying for
(...).
yt though they be imperfecte, yet is Christ perfect, and his perfeccio^ is
their perfeccio^, though they be unrighteous, yet is Christ ryghteous, and his
righteousness is their righteousness, though they be unholy, yet is Christ
holy, and his holiness is their holiness, though they be void of perfect good
works, yet has Christ perfect good works, and his good works are their
good works, if they leave their ungodliness, turn from their wicked ways, and
study to live innocently, and therefore need they not fear for to pray, but
boldly to ask all things in the name of Christ.

Our righteous advocate, In Czech. Lib. i. Nom. vii.
says S. Gregory, shall defend us ryghteous in the judgment, because we do
both knowledge and accuse our selves unrighteous. Therefore not in our own
wepiges, not in our own acts but in the allegacion of our advocate let us
trust. Hereto pertayneth the saying of S. Austen, In Psalm. ^viii.
the prayer which is not made by Christ does not only not put away sin, but
also the prayer it self is made very sin. Christ says, whatsoever ye shall
ask in my name, that will I do, that the father may be gloryfyed by ye son.
Joan. xiiii
If ye ask any thing in my name, that shall I do. Again If ye abide in me, and
my words abide i^ you, ask what soever ye will, and it shall be done to you.
In another place also he says: Joan. xvi.
Uerely verily I say to you, what soever ye shall ask the father in my name, he
shall give it you. Nytherto ye have asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be perfect. Thus so we yt in Christ's name
we must ask all things. Act. iiii.
For there is none other name given unto me^ under heaven, wheri^ we must be
saved but only this name of jesus christ. Every one yt calls on this name
shall be saved. Joel. ii. Pro.xviii.
For the name of the LORD is a strong tower and valeau^t Bulwark, unto that
does ye righteous, that is, the faythefull man fly. Psalm. xxxix.
Blessed is that man, which trusts in the name of the LORD, and has no
respect unto vanities and false mad fantasies.

Moreover David, David.
although God prayseth him greatly, and says, that he has found David his
seruau^te even after his own heart, yet did not he, when he prayed, desire to
be heard for his own name, and for his own ryghteousnes and virtue, but he
prayed on this manner, Psalm. cxiii.
LORD hear my prayer, hear my request for thy truths sake, yea fauourablye
hear me for thy righteousness, Again, in the O LORD have I trusted, Psalm. xxx.
let me never be co^fou^ded, but deliver me in thy righteousness. My strength
and my refuge art thou, and for thy names sake shalt thou led me forth and
norish me. Psalm. xxiiii
For thy names sake LORD shalt thou be merciful to my sin, for it is much. O
god for thy names sake save thou me, Psalm. iiii.
and in thy virtue deliver me. Ps. lxxviii.
Help us O God our savior, and for the glory of thy name O LORD deliver us,
and be merciful to our sins for thy names sake. Behold he desires not the
favor of God for his own sake, for his own name, righteousness, truth and
virtue but for Gods name, for Gods ryghteousnes, truth and virtue. Now who
is the righteousness of God, The righteousness of God, is Christ. is Lord.
but Jesus Christ the son of God, which alone is found righteous among
men? As Paul witnesses, he is made of God our wisdom ryghteousnes,
sanctificacion and rede^cion, that as it is written, he that rejoices, may
rejoice in y^ LORD Who is the truth of GOD, The truth of God.
but he which says of himself. I am ye way the truth and the life. Joan.
xiiii. The virtue of God. i. Pet. ii.
No man comes to the father but by me? Who is ye virtue of God, but he that
has done no sin, nor in whole mouth any gile was found, which is Christ ^.
Auste^ writes of Christ on this manner, Tract. xxii. in Io. cap. v.
I am, says he, ye way, truth and life. No man comes to the father but by
me. As though he should say, will thou walk? I am the way. Will thou not be
deceived? I am the truth. Wylt thou not die? I am ye life. This does thy
Savior say to the, there is none other, to whom thou may go, but unto me.
There is no way that thou canste go, but by me.

So that for Christ's sake and not for his own did David although both godly
and virtuous, yea and dearly beloved of God, d^^^re to be heard, and to have
the peticions of his heart granted. ^^ objection.
But it may be objected, David also prays on this manner. Hear O LORD my
ryghteousnes, Psalm. xvi.
and give attendance unto my prayer. Let my judgment come forth from thy face,
let thine eyes se equite. Thou have proved my heart and visited it in the
night, thou haste tried me with fire, and yet has there none iniquite be found
in me. Psalm. xvii.
Again, I will be without spotte with him, I will keep me from iniquite, and the
LORD shall reward me according to my righteousness, and according to the
purity of my hands in the sight of his eyes. Also in another place, Psalm. xxv.
Judge me O LORD, for I have walked in my innocency. In these and such like
David lays out his own innocence, purite and ryghteousnes, 'and seems to
desire to be heard for them. ^n answer
I answer if David desired to be heard for his own ryghteousnes, than should
he fight with himself wherein many and diverse places he confesses his sin, and
cleueth only to the mercy of God, desires to be heard for the righteousness,
truth and virtue of God, and not for his own sake. (...)
Enter not in to judgment, O LORD, says he, with thy servant, for no man
that lives shall be justified in thy sight. Now tha^ could he set out his own
ryghteousnes before GOD, that he might be justified by it? What shall we then
say to this matter? Note this Solucion:
I answer, yea and that not without the authority of the holy scriptures
and the mind of the aunciente Doctors, that as in diverse other places of the
Psalms, so in these and such like he speakethe in the parsonne of Christ, and
not in his own. He speaks of Christ's innocence, puryte, ryghteousnes and
virtue, and not of his own. He represents Christ's parson, and not his own.
When he speaks in his own parson, he grants himself always a sinner,
seeks health of God, and desires not to be heard for his own ryghteousnes but
for Gods ryghteousnes, which is Jesus Christ. So that i^ Christ's name he
offered up his prayers unto God the father, Exo. xii. Joan. i.
as all the faithful ought to do. For Christ is the lamb without spotte. Christ
is that lamb of God, which takes away ye sin of the world. Mat. iii.
Christ is that dearly beloved son, for whose sake God the father is well
pleased with men. Christ is that Bishop, Heb. vii.
which is godly, innocente, undefiled and segregate from sinners. Joan. x.
Christ is the door, by whom alone we must come to the father. Math. i.
Christ is that savior which saves his people from their sins. Christ is he
by whom grace and verytie is showed unto us. Joan. 1. Colos. 1.
Christ is he, which by his most precious blood has reconciled us to Godye
father. Christ therefore is he, in whose name that is, in whose dignite,
ryghteous^nes, innocence, virtue, and purite, we must offer up our prayers to
God ye father. Esa. lxiiii.
For all our ryghteousnesses ^ampared to the justice of God, are ^yke a cloth
polluted with me^strue. That we are not able to obtain any thing of God for
our own righteousness, it is manifest by these words which God himself
speaks by his Prophet Esaye, Esa. xliii.
I am, I am he, which puts away thine iniquities, yea and that for mine
own sake. (Mark ye he says, for mine own sake.) And will remember thy
sins no more. Put me in remembrance, and let us be judged together. Tell me
if thou have any thing whereby thou may be justified. Esa. xlviii.
Again: For my names sake, will I put away mine anger. For mine own sake, yea
for mine own sake will I do this, that I may not be blasphemed and euel spoken
of. In the name of Christ therefore let him ask, that ente^denth to obtain
onye thing of God the father, as S. Paul says, Col. iii.
whatsoever ye shall do in word and deed, do an^ things in the name of the
LORD Jesus, gyuynge thanckes to God the father by him. And so doing let him
not doubt, but that he shall obtain all good things accordyng^ unto his
hertes desire.

The.xviii. Chapter.
All thing must be ashed according unto ^ will of God.
SYxtely, he that inte^deth to pray, must earnestly provide that he asks all
things according unto the will of God. He may not ask af^ ter his own
fantasy, will and pleasure, but after the will of God. For our will in
comparison of Gods will, is never good, but evil or prone to evil. For we
know not what we should pray, Romans viii.
as it becomes us. Therefore what so ever we ask, we must refe^ce it unto ye
will of God, and be contented to be ordered in all things according unto his
most ^olye will, as Christ taught us to ^raye in the Pater noster. Let thy
will be fulfilled as in heaven, Mat. vi.
so like wise in earth. Christ also himself for to give us an example, when
the ^oure of his passion began to draw ^igh, prayed unto his father on this
manner: My father, if it be possible, ^et this cup go away from me: Math. xxvi.
Not withstandyng let not mine but thy will be fulfilled. mat. viii.
The Leper also ^ayd to Christ, LORD if thou wylt, ^hou may make me whole
Here the Leper desired to be cleansed of his le^rosye, yet he referred his
requests unto Christ either to be granted or denied. Nota.
So it becomes us i^ like manner to ask all things according unto the will
of God, and what soever we desire, ever to submyt and refer ^t unto Gods
will, which knows ^este, what we have need of, and what ^s most necessary
for us, math. vi.
before we pray. For we have not a greter war^ re nor an harder fight i^ this
world than ye battle and strife of the Spi^ ryte, and of ye flesh, which two
are al^ ways so at debate, ye the hatred be^ twene the^ can never be apeased.
Gal. v.
For as ye flessh lusts against ye spirit so does the spirit fight very
valea^t ly against the wicked, fearce and cruel violence of the flesh, and are
evermore as the Apostle witnesses, one age^s^ another, Romans vii.
so that we can not do those things ye we would, in as much that we are
compelled to cry out we the Apostle, o wretched and unhappy that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body bond unto death.

How evil it is to follow our own will, neglecting in ye mean season the
good pleasure of God, diverse Histories of ye holy scriptures show. King Saul
thought that he had done well, 1. Reg. xiii.
when he perceyuyng the people to go away from him, offered burnte offrynges to
ye LORD in the absence of Samuel, saying, that he did it to pacifye the
LORD, and that he was compelled to do so. But Samuel said unto him, thou have
done folisbly, neither have thou kept the commandments of the LORD thy God
which I commanded the.

Again God commanded Saul i. Reg. xl^.
to stay Amelech, to destroy all that ever there was, not to spare one, not to
couyt any thing of their goods, but to kill man, woman, child, sue king
babe, ore, sheep, camel, ass, and what soever could there be sound besides.
But Saul followi^g his own will more than the will of God, spared Agag the king
of Amelech alive with the best flocks of sheep, ores, cattle, and all that
ever was fair he spared, and would not destroy them, but what soever was
vile and of no price, that he destroyed. When Samuel came unto him and said,
what of beasts do I hear here? He auswe^ red, the people has brought them
from Amelech. They be the best and fattest of all the flocks, and they be
reserved to be offered unto the LORD. But Samuel said unto him. Because thou
have cast away the word of ye LORD, you LORD has cast away ye that thou be no
more king. Will the LORD burnt offringes and sacrifices and not rather that it
may be obeyed un to his word? Obedience is better then Sacrifyces, and to give
ear to ye LORDS commandment is more tha^ to offer the satte of wethers.
What godly excuses had king Saul here to cover his fault, and to make his
will unto carnal judgments to appear very virtuous and godly? For all that
ever he did, was done to honor God, A point for their li^^nge.
to sacrifice and offer oblacions to God. Yet God casts away that will,
which is contrary to his will, seem it never so godly, virtuous and good in
the sight of fleshly wise me^. Yea cursed be all good wylles, all good zeeles,
all good inte^tes, that fight we the words of God.

Oza also thought he had done well ii. Reg. vi.
when he seeing the ark of God in iopardy of falling out of the wayne, steyed
it we his hand, yet for all his good voyl, because he touched it, was he
stryken of the LORD, and streyghte way dyed.

King Ozias in like manner of a ii. Pa. xxvi.
good intent would have taken upon him to burn incense unto ye LORD but
Azarias the priest said boldly unto him, it is not thine office Ozias to burn
ince^se unto the LORD, but it pertayneth to prestes the sons of Aaron, which
are consecrated to such ministry and service. He com, maunded him also to go
out of ye sanctuary, and told him ye that which he had done, should not turn
unto his praise of the LORD God. And immediately after for his disobedsente
presumpcio^, he was stryken we leproly, and so being cast out of the house of
the Lord, he continued a Leper even unto his death.

Good intentes not grounded on Gods word, are the authore of al evil.
The Jews did put Christ and his Apostles to death of a good zele, will intent
and purpose. The tyrauntes which did slaye the holy martyrs thought they did
well. The blood soupers also, which at this time persecute Christ's gospel
under ye name of Heresye, and cruelly slaye and shed the blood of the true
Christians under the pretexte of persecutynge Heretics, persuade themselves
that they do well, and think they merit greatly in ye sight of God, Joan. xvi.
as Christ says the time shall come that they which kyl you, shall thike ye
they do an high service unto God.

While we follow our own will, we commyt many absurdities and unsitting
things. Therefore whatsoever we do we must have a respect to the will of God,
and make ours conformable unto it, unless we hepe up da^nacion unto our selves
in all our peticions, prayers and requests. We must ask according to the
will of God. He that does otherwise, does evil, and therefore he obtayneth not
ye which he desires, Iaco. iiii.
as S. James say ethe: Ye ask, and have not, because ye ask amysse, for to
consume it upon your volupteousnes. If he does obtain it, undoubtedly it is
to his greater damnacio^. Therefore let us ask according to the will of God.
So may we be sure to have our her tes desire, i. Joan. v.
as S. John^ says, This is the truth that we have in God, that if we ask any
thing according unto his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears
us, what so ever we ask, we know that we shall have the Peticions that we
desire of him. And that we may do it fruytfully, Psalm. ^xlii
let us pray with the Psalmograph, teach me O LORD, to do thy myl, for ye art
my God. So shall God work his good pleasure in us.

The nynetyne Chapter.
We may appoynte God no time.
Moreover although i^ our prayers we ask all things according unto the will of
God, yet may not we appoint God the time of obtaynynge these things. We must
pray and ask, but our peticions we must refer and commyt to God for to be
granted, when it shall be his most godly pleasure. For he knows what is
most fit for us better than we do our selves, and he will undoubtedly grant
us those things that we ask, or else much better, wha^ he sees his time.
Psalm. cxxii
Therefore let us lift up our eyes unto him, which dwellethe in ye heavens. And
as the eyes of servants are ever on the hands of their masters, and as ye
eyes of the handemayde are all ways on the hands of her maystres, so let
our eyes be bent ever unto ye LORD, until he has mercy upon us. Let us ask,
and pacie^tly abide his divine will, and surely we shall not be deceived of our
desires. But if we shall appoynte him the time, and will that he be obedient to
our will, rather tha^ we to his, than do we tempte him, and provoke his anger
against us. Example have we in ye History of Judith, Ju. vii, viii.
where we read that when the Israelites had been long oppressed of Nolofernes
and his army, and had continued manny hours in their prayers, cryenge unto the
LORD for help, and yet perceived none at all at ye hand of God: They all
consented that if God did not help the^ within five days, they would give
over both themselves and their city unto Dolofernes and his people. But when
Judith that virtuous woman heard of it, she said: Why have ye consented to
gyne over the city unto the Assyrianes, if help comes not unto you from the
LORD within five days? What are you that thus tempte the LORD? This is not a
saye^g for to provoke mercy, but rather to store up ire, and to kyndle furor.
Daue ye appointed ye time of the LORDS mercy? and have ye appointed him a day
at your pleasure? But seeing the LORD is pacie^t, let us repent, and be sorry
for this thing, and let us desire his savor with weeping tears.

Thus se we that it is no s^iale of fence, be our peticions never so righteous,
for to appoynte God ye time. For that appoyntement of time declares us to be
vnsaythfull. It shows that we have no right persuasion of God. It is a
manifest argument, that we depend and hang upon Gods goodness and mercy only
for our carnail profytte and auau^tage. It makes euydent, that we do no longer
regard God, than he satisfies and fulfylleth our lusts, pleasures, and
desires. Good cou^se^
Therefore let us do, that we are commanded, that is, hu^blye offer up our
prayers to God, myth all submission of mind, power out our hertes before him,
and with unfeigned tears lament our cause unto him, nothing doubting, but
that according to his most godly promise he will hear us, grant us those or
else better things, when it shall be his pleasure. And if God seems to withdraw
his help from us at any time and not streyghtwayes to grant us our requests,
let us not despair, nor fall from the true confidence, trust and hope in
the most confortable promises of god therefore, but rather be the more earnest
and importune in asking, being persuaded that God only differs and
prolongeth the accomplyshme^t of his most faithful promise, because he will
try our faith, whyther it be right constant, and steadfast or not. Dearly
beloved, says S. John^ Chrysostom, wha^ I say, pray unto God, beseech him,
and wait upon him, thou say: I have prayed once, twyse, and thryse, yea and
ten times and twenty times, and what have I received, say thou? Go not thy
way, till thou receyuest, for the end of the thing asked, is the receyuynge of
him that prayethe. Than cease thou, when thou have received yea rather neither
cease you than, but still perceive and continue, giuig thanks for that which
thou have received, ye that which thou have taken, may continually remain with
the.

Mat. xv.
Let us follow the woman of Canane, which, as it would appear, being denied
of her peticio^ diverse times, at the leeste receyuynge but small comfort at
christ's hand, would not cease, but still continued in making suyte and
supplicacio^ for ye health of her daughter, till at the last she heard this
sweet and comfortable voice, O woman great is thy faith. Be it unto the, as
thou will.

The. xx. Chapter.
THe last of all, which is to be co^sythered in the preparacion of prayer, is
so necessary, that without it, all the other are but vain, and nothing to the
purpose: And it is this that wha^ soever we entend to pray, we do first forgive
such as have offended us, or else by no means can we obtain remission of our
sins and favor at the hand of God. Therefore do we on this manner pray in
the Pater noster: Math. vi.
Forgive us our dettes, even as we forgive our detters. And Christ says
forgive, and it shall be forgyuen you. Yea he gives us a plain commandment
ye we should forgive so many as have offended us, before we pray, or else
our prayer works us rather damnacion than salvation. Mark. xi.
When ye prepare your selves to pray, says Christ, forgive if ye have any
thing agenst any man, that your father, which is in heaven, may forgive you
also your trespasses. Math. vi.
Again he says: if ye forgive men their faults, your heavenly father will
also forgive you. But if ye do not forgive men their faults, nether will your
father forgive you your faults.

We read that Peter came unto Christ, Mat. xviii.
and said, LORD how often shall my brother sin against me, and I shall
forgive him? Untyll seven times? Christ answered, I say not unto the, until
seven times, but until seventy times seven times. And ^ Luke he says: Luke
xvii.
Take heed to your selves. If thy brother synneth against the, rebuke him, and
if he repent, forgive him* And if he synneth seven times in a day against
the, and shall seven times in a day turn again unto the, saying: It
repents me, forgive him. Math. xviii^
And in Mathewe to make the matter more plain, that we shall not be forgyuen
of God, except we forgive the^ ye offend us, he puts for the a similitude
or parable of a certain king, which when he called his servants to a
countes, had one brought to him, which ought him ten thousand talentes. When
he was not able to pay, his Lord commanded him to be fold, and his wife,
and his Children, and all that ever he had, and payment to be made. The
servant fell down, and worshypped him, saying: LORD be pacient toward me,
and I will pay the all together. The LORD had pity on that servant, losoned
him, and forgave him all that he ought. But that servant going forth found
one of his fellow servants, which ought him an hundred pence, and layenge
hand on him, and tahi^g him by ye throat he said, pay that thou ^west. His
fellow servant fell down, and desired him, saying. Be pacie^t toward me,
and I will pay the all together. He would not, but went his way, and cast him
ito prison, until he should pay the debt. Dhan his fellow servants saw
that which was done, they lamented very sore, and came, and openned unto their
Lord all those things that were done. Than did their LORD call him, and
said unto him, thou ungracious servant, I forgave the all that debt, when
thou desyredst me, had it not ben convenient also, that you should have had
pity on thy fellow servant? And his LORD being angry, committed him to the
Ialours, until he should pay all that was due unto him. Christ concludethe:
So likewise shall my heavenly father do unto you, if every one of you even from
y^ very heart does not forgive his brother their offenses. Hereof does it appear
more clearly than the light, that except we forgive, we shall never be
forgyuen, Prayers done out of charity please not God.
neither can any thing please God that we do, if it be done out of charity.
For the word of God abides fyrme, sure, and constant for evermore. And this
saying of Christ can not be mocked by onye means, nor made frustrate, so
likewise shall my heavenly father do unto you, if every one of you eue^ from y^
very heart does not forgive his brother their offenses. What S. Paul wrytethe
of those works, which are done out of charity in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the thyrtene Chapter, it is not unknown to them ye read the holy
scriptures. God louethe no uncharitable, malicious, wicked, envious, and bloody
prayers. Every one that hates his brother, is a ma^slayer. i. Joan. iii.
And ye know says S. John, ye every manslayer, has not everlasting life
abydyng in him. Again If any man says, i. Joan. iiii.
I love God, and hatethe his brother, he is a liar. For he that loves not his
brother, who^ he has ser^e, god, whom he has not seen, how can he love? And
this commau^deme^t have we of hi^, ye he, which loves God, do also love his
brother. But let us hear what our golden mouthed Doctor says to this matter.

The. xxi. Chapter.
Hom. lxxxix De ora^ione.
IF that we be commanded not only to pray for the faithful but also for the
unfaithful, consider thou how great and evil it is to desire euel against ye
brothers. What do thou o man^ Come thou to God for to make him merciful
unto the, and do thou wysh euel to another? Except thou doste forgive,
neither shall it be forgyuen the. Thou doste not only not forgive, but thou
also desire God, that he will not forgive* If it shall not be forgyuen the,
which do not forgive, doste thou not alonlye not forgive, but also desyrest
GOD not to forgive? If it be not forgyue^ him, that does not forgive, how shall
it than be forgyuen him, which prays the LORD, that he may not forgive? If
it be a shame to have enemies, consyther thou than, how great a sin it is to
desire evil to them, when thou oughteste to pourge thy self, because thou
have enemies, do thou also accuse the^? What forgyuenes shalt thou obtain,
detracting and reportyng evil of thy neighbor, thefely at such time, when
thou have need of no mean mercy. For thou ta^mest also to pray for thine
own sins. Note well^
Remember not therefore other men's fautes, unless thine own be reserved. Thou
art a man, vomyte not out the poison of adders. Thou art a man, play not
the cruel wild beast. Thou haste a mouth made unto the for this cause, not ye
thou should byte, but that y^ shou^ dest heal. Remember what God manifestly
has monysshed the to do, even that you should spare and forgive.

De co^^u^e. cordi^. li. i.
Again in another place he says as concerning that which is written: Forgive
us our dettes, as we forgive our detters, who is he among us all, that dare
boldly say theyse things to God? For although we do no evil to our enemies
and detters yet have we within us a wound of offense, that is incurable, and
can not be made whole. But Christ will not only that we forgive them that
offendethe us, but also that we love them and pray for them. For if only thou
do not hurt him, which has hurt the, and yet turneste away thy self from
him, and would not gladly se him, without doubt there abides a wound in
thy breast, and sorrow increases still in thy heart. If it be so, certes that
is not fulfilled, which Christ has commanded. Will thou that God be
merciful unto the o^ such sort, that he should not hurt the, and yet turn
him self away from the, and remember thy sins, and have no mind to se the?
Therefore even such one as thou would that god should be unto the, when thou
desyrest forgyuenes of thy sins, such one ought thou to show thy self
unto them, which have offended against the. As a certain wise man writes,
saying, he that seaketh ven geaunce, shall find vengeance of y^ LORD, which
shall surely keep him his sins. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has
done the, and so shall thy sins be forgyuen the also when thou prayeste. A
man that bears hatred against another, how dare he desire forgyuenes of God*
He that shows no mercy to a man which is like himself, how dare he ask
forgyuenes of his sins? If he that is but flesh, bears hatred, and keep
it, who shall itrete for his ^ines

Seeing therefore that except we do forgive our detters, De co^pu^^ cordi^. li.
our dettes shall not be forgyuen of God, and in as much as we shall find God
such one to us, as we are to our neighbors, let us follow Christ and
Steven, which prayed to God for their enemies in the mids of their
torments, that they might be forgyuen. For let us know this to be true and
nothing more truer, that as a Surgion can not heal perfectely y^ wound so
long as any iron is in it, so likewise can not prayer profyt so long as the
mind is canchred, and defiled with gyle, fraud, deceyte, simulacion,
rancoure, hatred, malyce^ emnite, and such other wyckednesses. There is
nothing, layth Chrisosto^ that makes us more like unto God than if we be
gentle and easy to be entreated of them that be euel, and d^ hurt us. God is
ready to forgive at al times, if we forgive. God makes his son to shine both
upon ye good and evil, and sends rain upon ye righteous and unrighteous.
Let us therefore after the example of our heavenly father love not only our
friends, but also our enemies, yea and that from the bottom of the heart. Let
us forgive so many as offend us, and show our selves of such affeccion toward
them that offend us, as we desire y^ Christ should be toward us. Let us be
so feruentely given unto the preseruacion of fraternall concord and mutual
charity, that if through humayne infirmite it chaunseth at any time that
co^tencion ryseth up among us, we may notwythstandynge so shortly put it
away by reconcylynge one to another, that all displeasure taken away, the
son may not faull down upon our anger. Let us ever set before our eyes
this saying of S. Paul* As y^ elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender
mercy, kyndenes, hu^blenes of mind mekenes, De co^^u^ cordi^. li.
long sufferynge, forbearynge one onother, and forgeuynge one another (if o^^e
manne have a quarrel to another) as Christ forgave you, so do ye. But above al
things put on love, which is the bond of perfeccion. And the peace of God
might rule in your hertes, unto y^ which peace ye are called in one body, and
se that ye be thanckefull.

If we will do thus when soever we pray, we may be sure to pray with fruit,
we may be sure to obtain what so ever we ask of God the father through Jesus
Christ, we may be sure to have forgyuenes of all our sins, and ever to have
God the father a bounteous and gentle father unto us.

Hitherto have I declared, what prayer is, of what virtue and strength the true
and christen prayer is, and how we ought to prepare our selves for to pray.

Now it remains that I declare in what place a Christen man should pray, and
after what manner. Again for what things, and at what time he ought to pray.

In what place a Christen should Pray.
The. xxii. Chapter.
ALthough God in y^ old law was called upon, and prayed unto of ye Jews in
the temple of Jerusalem, which Salomo^ builded, and although God had chose^
that place, where chefely they should call upon his name, offer Sacrifyce unto
him, read and learn his most holy law, and do such things as he had
appointed them in his word, yet both at that time, yea and also many years
before, we read that diverse holy me^ prayed in other places besides that
Temple, and were hard. Neither did God so institute that temple to be a house
of prayer, as though it should only be there lawefull to call on his divine
name, Why the temple of Salomo^ was builded.
but yt by that means he should keep the gross Jews in an order, which else
would have inverted new kinds of worshyppyng God after their own fantasy,
and resorted to such places, where Idolles were worshypped, and by this means
be provoked unto Idolatrye, where unto they were very much bent, as we may se
in the holy Scriptures. Therefore god appointed the^ to pray in that temple of
Solomon, not taking away yet for all that the liberty of prayeng in every
place from the faithful. Gene. iiii.
For we read ye Enos y^ son of Seth did first begin to call on the name of
the LORD, before any temple was builded. And it is to be thought, that Abell
also prayed unto God, when he offered in crisyce, Enoch, Nohe, Their, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph with many other of the ancient Patriarchs worshypped and
prayed unto God, one in this, another in that place, before any one peculiar
house was appointed and dedicated unto prayer, yea and God heard those
prayers, accepted them, and granted the peticions asked in them. What other
thing do the examples of all these holy men teach us, than that it is lawful
for a faithful man to pray without any differency in every place. Exod^* ii.
Did not the children of Israel pray to God, wha^ they were oppressed with
miserable captivity in Egypt a land full of Idolatrye, supersticion, and all
kind of wickedness? Did not Moses and Aaron many times pray unto ye LORD in
wyldernes? Iosue. ^
Did not Iosue pray unto God in his watres before, we read that diverse holy
me^ prayed in other places besides that Temple, and were hard. Neither did God
so institute that temple to be a house of prayer, as though it should only be
there lawefull to call on his divine name, Why the te^^ple of Salomo^ was
builded.
but yt by that means he should keep the gross Jews in an order, which else
would have inverted new kinds of worshyppyng God after their own fantasy,
and resorted to such places, where Idolles were worshypped, and by this means
be provoked unto Idolatrye, where unto they were very much bent, as we may se
in the holy Scriptures. Therefore god appointed the^ to pray in that temple of
Solomon, not taking away yet for all that the liberty of prayeng in every
place from the faithful. Gene. iiii.
For we read yt Enos ye son of Seth did first begin to call on the name of
the LORD, before any temple was builded. And it is to be thought, that Abell
also prayed unto God, when he offered sacrifyce, Enoch, Nohe, Their, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph with many other of the ancient Patriarchs worshypped and
prayed unto God, one in this, another in that place, before any one peculiar
house was appointed and dedicated unto prayer, yea and God heard those
prayers, accepted them, and granted the peticions asked in them. What other
thing do the examples of all these holy men teach us, than that it is lawful
for a faithful man to pray without any differency in every place. Exod^ ii.
Did not the children of Israel pray to God, wha^ they were oppressed with
miserable captivity in Egypt a londfull of Idolatrye, supersticion, and all
kind of wickedness? Did not Moses and Aaron many times pray unto ye LORD in
wyldernes? Iosue. ^
Did not Iosue pray unto God in his wars, when he made the Son and Moon
to stand still, until he had revenged himself of his enemies? (...). Reg.
xvii.
Did not Helias pray in the house of the wydowe of Sarepra, wha^ he restored
her son from death to syfe? Did not he again pray in ye top of the mount
Carmelus, and obtained after long droute ple^te of rayn? (...). Reg. ^^. Esaie.
^^xii^.
Did not Ezechias the king when he heard that he should dye, pray to the LORD
in his bed, and obtained to live. Nehem. ^^
xv. years longer? Did not Nehemias but lare unto king Artaxerzes both do
service unto his Lord, and also pray unto God? Toby. viii.
Did not Toby and Sara his wife pray unto God in their houses? Did not Job pray
upon ye dungehyll? Judith. xii.
Did not Judith pray unto the LORD in her Oratory, and diverse other places?
Dani. vi.
Did not Daniel, when he served the wicked king knele down and pray unto the
LORD thryse every day in his chamber? Did not he pray to God, Dani. xi^^.
wha^ he was cast into the den of Lyo^s? Did not Jonas pray in the whales
belly? Jonas. ii. Hester. xiiii.
Did not queen Hester pray secretlye in her chamber? Daniel. xiii.
Did not Susanna pray in the streate, as she went for to be stoned unto
death? Did not Ieremye pray unto God, when he was in prysonne? Luke. vi.
Did not Christ customably pray on ye mountains in the feld? Math. xxvi.
Did he not pray in the gardyns? Did he not pray hanging upon the cross?
Math. xxvii. Actum. vii.
Did not Stephen pray to God, wha^ ne was stoned unto death? Actum. ii.
Did not ye Apostles with certain women, and Mari the mother of Jesus and his
brothers pray together after Christ's ascencion in a parloure? Actum. x.
Did not Cornelius the Centurion pray at home in his house? Did not Peter pray
in the over part of the house of Simon the Ca^ner? Actum. xxi.
Did not Paul with his co^panyons pray in diverse places, as cities, towns,
field s, see ba^ckes, ships, prysons. etc? Were not all these heard? yes
verily, and their peticions granted them mercifully. What do we learn of all
these Histories? Certes that a faithful christian is bound to no place. Where
soever a faithful man prays, he shall undoubtedly beheard. Christ said to the
woman of Samaria: Joan. iiii.
Woman believe me, ye hour comes, wha^ neither in this mountain, nor at
Jerusalem ye shall worship the Father. Ye worship ye know not what. We worship
that we know. For health is of the Iues. But the hour comes, and now it is,
wha^ true worshyppers shall worship the father in spirit and truth. For ye
father also seeks such ye may worship him. For God is a spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. Saint Paul also
says, i. Tim. ii.
I will that men pray in every place, lyftynge vppepure hands without wrath
and conte^cion. But let us hear what Chrysostom says.

The. xxiii. Chapter.
LEt us not excuse our selves saying, Home. lxxxix de oratione.
that it is no easy thing for a man being enta^gled with worldly businesses to
pray, seeing that he has no oratory nor house fytte for prayer nygh unto him.
For where so ever thou be, thou may make and appoint thine altar. For the
place hyndereth nothing, neither does the time let, but though thou doste not
bow thy knees, nor knock thy breast, nor stretche out thy hands to heaven,
yet may thou pray aright and make thy prayer perfect, so that thou only
show and bryngest forth a fervent mind. For thou may wha^ thou go unto
markette, and walk by thy self alone, make long prayers. Thou may also
sitting i^ thy shop, and sowynge skynnes dedicate thy soul unto the LORD.
The servant also that byeth, or goes up and down, and the Cook doing his
office when he can not go to church, may make a prayer long and discrete. For
God disdaineth not the place, but requires one thing, that is to say, a
fervent mind, and a pure soul. For Paul also, not in an Oratory, but in the
prison lyenge wide open, nor stondynge right up, nor bowynge his knees, for
the clogge, wherwyth his feet were bound, did not suffer him, yet seeing that
he lyenge prayed fervently, he shaked the prysonne vnlosoned the foundacions,
and did bynd the keeper of the prison, and afterward brought him unto holy
religion. And Ezechias not sto^ding right up, nor bowynge his knees, but lyeng
wide open in his bed because of his syckenes, wha^ he turned himself unto
the wall, in as much as he called upon God fervently and with a pure soul, he
both called again the sentence pronounced, obtained much benevolence, and was
restored to his old health. And the these being stretched out upon the cross,
with few words purchased the heavenly kingdom. And Jeremy in the mire and
lake, and Daniel in the prysone and among the wild beasts. And Jonas in the
belly of a whale, prayeng unto God, did both dissolve all manner of euels,
wherewith they were beseged, compassed and set about, and also found favor at
the hand of God, what than oughteste thou to say, when thou prayest? Uerely
even the same thing that the woman of Canane did. For eue^ as she said. Have
meroye on me, my daughter is grievously vexed of a dyuell, so say thou likewise,
have mercy upon me, my soul is very grievously vexed of a devil. For sin is
a great dyuell, she y^ had the dyuell did find mercy, and yet was she hated;
wha^ she did syn? Have mercy on me, is but a short saienge, yet does it
contayns an whole see of mercy. For where soever mercy is, there are all good
things. Though thou be without the church, cry, saying, have mercy on me
though thou do not move thy lyppes, but only cry in thy mind. For God also
hears them that hold their peace. There is no place to be sought, but a
beginning of a place. Jeremy was in the mire, and he made God bounteous unto
him by prayer. Job was on ye dunge hill, and he made God merciful unto him.
Jonas was in the whales bellye, and he had God gentle to him. Though thou be in
a vain pray. Where so ever thou be, pray. Thou art the temple, seek no
place. The sea was before the Jews, and the Egipcians behynd at their backs,
and Moses in the mids speking nothing, for he was greatly troubled in his
prayer, yet said God unto him, what cryest thou to me? In like manner thou
therefore, when soever temptacion shall come upon the, fly unto God, and call on
the LORD. Is he a man, that thou should seek after a place? God is ever at
hand. For thou yet speaking, he will say: Behold here I am present. Thou
have not yet made thy prayer, and he bryngethe help. For if thou haste a mind
pure from unclean mocio^s, though thou be in the market, or in way, or in the
consystory, or in ye see, or in the ynne, or in the ship, or in onye other
place of the world, look where so ever thou calleste on God, there may you
obtain thy peticio^.

Hitherto have I rehearsed ye words of S. John Chrysostom. De bet a innocen.
cap. cccxiii.
Like unto this writes Sayncte Auste^, saying: Why do you seek for a fytte
and holy place, when thou should make thy supplicacio^ to God? make clean
thy inward parts, and all eue^ lusts expulsed from thence, prepare thy self
a secret place in the peace of thy heart. Thou wyllyng to pray in the temple,
pray in thy self, and so behave thy self always that thou may be the
temple of God. For God hears there, where he dwells.

Thus se^we both by the authoryte of the holy scriptures, and the ancient
fathers, that a faithful and Christen man may pray lawfully in every place,
1. Cor. iii. ^. vi 11. Cor. vi.
in as much as he is the temple of God, as S. Paul says: Do ye not know that
ye are the Temple of God, and the spirit of God dwells in you? The Temple of
God is holy which you are. Math. vi.
And this is it ye christ says: When thou shall pray, enter into thy
closette, and the door sparred, pray to thy father, which is in secret.
Therefore let him ye shall pray, nothing fear to pray unto God in every place
boldly, with this persuasion y^ God will hear hi^, and grafit hi^ his hertes
desire i what soever place he be.

The xxiiii. Chapter.
I Have not spoken these things to make any pso^ for to have ye less devotion
to go unto the Church and accustomed place of prayer, Slander not ye syco
phantes.
when time requy^eth (which thing God forbid that any man contrary to my
meaning should gather of these my words, or thereby be occasioned the less to
observe and keep the commendable order of this Realm now a days used among
us) but to show that a faythefull Christen man may lawefullye by Gods word
pray in every place, with this persuasion ye God will also hear him in every
place, Mat. xxi. Marc. xi. Luke xix.
yea and that when soever he prays, so that his prayer be made according
unto the will of god, and as I have taught heretofore. For we read that Christ
at diverse times did so approve and allow the temple of Jerusalem, Joan. ii.
Esa. lvi. Iere. vii.
that of the very same place he rehearsed this text of the holy scripture, my
house shall be called the house of prayer. Again he drove out with whyppes such
as did bye and sell in the temple, declaryng thereby, that it was a place of
more holiness, and of greater price in ye sight of God, than that any profane
businesses might lawfullye be in it exercysed. He also many times preached in
the Temple, and it is not to be doubted but that he also used there to pray.
Again, we read that the Apostles after Christ's ascension repared thither
oftentimes both to preach and pray. Act. iii.
Places therefore dedicated to prayer ought not to be despised nor abhorred, but
used unto ye end for ye which they were instituted

Mat. xviii
Christ says, where soever two or three shall be gathered together in my name,
there am I in the mids of them. Now in Chyrches it is to be thought that
many are gathered together in Christ's name, therefore is Christ there among
them. Seeing that he is so, every man ought ioyefully to repare thither, when
they may conveniently, but chefely when the time and publyque order does
require, and there both faithfully to pray devoutly to be present at ye
ministracio^ of the most blessed Sacrament of the altar Christ's very body
and blood, and dilygently to read or hear the word of God, and furthermore to
do such things, as the place and time shall than require. At all other times
when so ever a christen man shall be desposed to pray, let him pray boldly,
and although he be not in the church, yette let him nothing doubt, but that
his prayer shall there also be heard and granted.

After what manner a christen man ought to pray.
The.xxv. Chapter.
Now it remaynethe to declare after what manner a Christian man ought to pray.
In the declara^ion hereof it shall be necessary, that he which will pray
aryght, does first consider what he is to whom he must pray. Who it is unto
who^ we pray.
Again, what he him self is that prayethe. It is no man nor Aungel, but God
which is prayed unto, whom the angelike potestates do reuere^tly fear, whom
all the whole company of heaven do magnify, commend, praise, worship and
honor, Jacob. ii. Phil. ii.
whom the devils do fear, tremble and shake for dread, in whose name every
knee both of things in Heaven, of things in earth, and of things under the
earth do bow, which is of puyssaunt power i holiness terrible, Exo. xv. Deuteronomy.
iiii. Heb. xiii.
al praise worthy, and doing meruaylous things which is a consumynge fire,
which is a great LORD above all ye Gods, ii. Pat. ii. ^ester. xiii. Job.
xxxvi^. Iere. xxxii. Exo. xxxiiii^.
which is the LORD of all things, and no man can resyst his majesty, which is
great in strength, judgment and ryghteousnes, whose eyes are open upon all the
ways of the sons of Adam, and in whose sight no creature is innocent.

When he has on this manner considered of God, than must he ponder what him
self is, even a very miserable si^ner, What he is, that prayer^^
destitute of all goodness, void of all godlynes, and unworthy to approach
unto the throne of ye divine majesty. For this humiliacion of our selves
helps greatly to the auau^cement of our prayer. For the more that any man
deiecteth and throws down himself, the nerer is he made unto God. Luke
xviii.
The Pharise was far of from god, although he stood next unto the
Propiciatory, reme^brynge his good deeds, and despisynge other men in
comparison of himself. The Publicane, which stondynge a far of prayed, came
nygher unto God. For the LORD is high, and yet does he behold humble
things, he knows high things a far of, he despyseth the hawty, and looks
on the prayer of ye humble, and the prayer of the^ does not he despise. Will
y^ hear, how high a thing the prayer of a man, which humbles himself, is?
The wise man teaches this thing saying: Eccl xxxv.
The prayer of him that hu^bleth himself, shall pearse and go through the
clouds, and till it draws nyghe, it shall not be conforted, and it shall not
comme down until the most highest does look upon it.

This humility do we read to be much used among holy men, Dan. ix.
in times past. Daniel prayed on this manner, not in our own ryghteousnesses O
LORD do we power out our prayers before the, but in thy great mercyes. Hear
us, O LORD, LORD be merciful unto us. Hear us, and do these things that we
ask, yea and that for thine own sake. Baruc. ii.
Also Baruch, the soul, says he, that is bered for the multitude of her
sins, which goes on heuely and wekely, whose eyes begin to fail, surely
such a soul ascrybeth praise, glory and ryhhteousnes unto the O LORD. Not for
the ryghteousnes of our fathers do we power out our prayers in thy sight, and
ask mercy before thy face, O LORD our God, but because thou art merciful.
Have therefore mercy on us, for we have sinned before the.

This co^sideracion once had both of god and of himself, whereby he has
learned God to be ryghteous, himself unrighteous, God to be good, himself
euel, God to be holy, himself profane. God to be honorable, him self
miserable, God to be pure, him self vnpure, God to be immaculate himself
spotted with all kind of sin, God to be high, and nothing more high,
Means to provoke ye mercy of God toward him y^ shall pray
himself to be vile, and nothing more vile: than must he before his prayer
use some menes whereby, he may excyte and stoore up the benevolence and good
will of God toward him, and so adourne and garnysh himself with ghostlye
operacion, ye both he and his prayer may be ye more acceptable in the sight of
God. An example.
For who dare come unto a Kings or Emperoures presence for to desire onye
thing of them, except first of all he so composeth himself, yt nothing may
offend their eyes? He puts on clenly apparel, he kymbethe his head, he
wassheth his body, yea and also perchaunse annoynteth it, and so appoynteth
himself in every condition, that nothing may displease them, but rather
allure them to the sight of him, and the hearing of his peticion. Semblablye
it shall be convenient for him that will pray unto God with fruit, and has
truly with him self considered the highness of god, and the humblenes of
himself, to give diligence that he on such sort co^poseth himself, that
there be nothing in him that may offend ye eyes of god but ye his prayer may be
favorably accepted and graciously heard. And that this thing may come to
pass, it shall be necessary that he follows the aunciente and holy fathers in
times paste, which when they offered their prayers unto god. Used continually
both to fast and give alms. For as Thoby says, Toby. xii.
prayer is good with fasting and alms, better than to hyde up treasures of
gold. For alms does deliver from death, and it is that which purges sins.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
First as concerning fasting, Behold of what occasion fasting
we must know that it ought to proceed from a contryte, humble, and sorrowful
heart, ought to rise, and what it is to taste.
and from such a soul as takes displesure with it self that she has been no
more circu^specte in the acco^plysshment of Gods will, for y^ which she being
sorry and dolorous, casts away the delectation and pleasure of worldely
things, as eating, drinking, banckettyng, wearynge of gorgious apparel, with
all other mundane vanities, and streyghtwaye with all humilite of mind and
submission of heart approchethe by syncer faith and true repentance unto the
most glorious throne of almighty God, and there lamenteth her miserable state,
bewayleth her to much sinful condition, powers out the secrets of her
heart, desires remission of her sins, hungre the and thyrstethe for
strength to do the will of God. This kind of fasting accompanyeng prayer does
very much eleuate, extol, and lift up the prayer of the humble sinner unto
the presence of GOD And this is it that Tobye says, Toby. xii.
prayer is good with fasting.

We read that when Jonas at the commandment of God came unto y^ Ninevites,
Jonas. ii.iii.
preached unto the^, rebuked their sinful living, threatened them subversion,
destruction, and the utter decay both of themselves and of their city, Note
and follow.
they consternated with the reuolucio^ of their iniquity did streyghtewayes
deteste and abhor so greatly their abominable living, y^ they utterly laid
aside all their vain pleasures, wherein so much before they delighted, and
fell immediately unto fasting and prayer with such other godly exercises of
the spyryte, so that by this means God beholdynge their true and unfeigned
conversion had pytie on them, saved them, and received the^ into the number of
his well-beloved people. iiii. Eso. v.
Esdras also at diverse times did both fast and pray seven days together, yt
he might understand the high mysteries of God. We have fasted, i. Esd. viii.
sayethe he, and prayed unto the LORD for a fortunate and quiet journey, and
it has chafised unto us prosperously. ii. Reg. xii.
Again David for the life of his child, which was sick, did both fast and
pray a long season, and would eat no meat nor drink. I have prayde says
Daniel, to the LORD my God in fasting, Dan. ix.
sackeclothe, and ashes. Judith also fasted and prayed the most part of her
life in the vppermooste part of her house, Iud. viii.
and before she slew Holofernes, she many times fasted and prayed. Moreover
Queen Hester for the delyuerance of her people did fast and pray three days
and three nyghtes, He^. iiii.
before she went unto the king. Sara the daughter of Raguel did fast and pray
three days and three nights, that she might be delivered from a certain
impropery and rebuke. Toby. iii.
Paul before he was baptized did continue in prayer and fasting at the City
of Damascum three days and three nyghtes. Act. ix. Luke ii.
Luke also in his gospel shows how that a certain woman called Anna the
daughter of Phanuel being a Prophetysse went for ye most part never out of
the Temple, but gave her mind to fasting and prayer both night and day. Mat.
ix.
Again Christ says, this kind of dyuelles is not ^aste out but by prayer
and fasting. And it is not to be douted, Mat. iiii.
but that Christ himself, when he fasted the forty days and forty nyghtes,
did also pray unto God his father, as at many other times. The same also is to
be thought of the Apostles and other holy men.

Thus se we how necessary a thing ^t is to join fasting with prayer, Therefore
sayethe Peter: ^ Pet. iiii.
Be ye sober, and watch in prayer. Also S. Paul, let us walk honestly as in
the day, not in excess of eating and dronckennes, not in chambrynge and
wantonness, Romans xiii.
not in strife and enuyenge, but put ^^ on the LORD Jesus Christ, and make not
prouysion for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. Hom. xv. super illud Mat.
vi. Cum ierunatio.
Hereto pertayneth^ the saying of our golden mouthed Doctor S. John^
Chrisostom, fastig^ says he, is an help to prayer. For prayer without
fasting, is but gra^^ cyle, slender and weak. The prayer is valeaunt and
strong, which is made in an humble spirit and a troubled heart, as the
Prophet says, a Sacrifyce to God is a troubled spirit, a contryte and humbled
heart God will not despise. Psalm. i.
But an humble spyryte and contryte heart can he not have, which eats and
dryncketh, and sets all his mind on delicious fare. For bread makes
strong the heart, and wine makes it merry. The strength that comes of bread
suffers not the spirit of the flesh to be humble, and the merines that
comes of wine, does not suffer the heart to be con^rite. Therefore when
soever the holy men would pray to obtain any thing of God whereof they had
need, they ever joined fasting with prayer, as Daniel and other did. And in as
much as fasting is ye virtue of prayer, therefore are they never separated a
sunder, but are ever put together. Prayer is good with fasting. Cob. xii. Mat.
ix.
Again, This kind of dyuels is not cast out but by prayer and fasting. Therefore
as a Souldioure is nothing with out armoures, nor armoures without a
Souldioure, so is prayer nothing without fasting, nor fasting without prayer.
Hither to have I rehearsed ye words of S. John Chrysostom, whereof we may
easelye gather how necessary fasting is unto the auauncemente of prayer before
God. Ser. de Ieiu et Cent. Christi.
Here to pertayneth the saying of saint Cipriane, prayer is mighty in
operacion, so that fasting goes before. To be brefe concerning this matter,
fasting must needs make hyghly to the auau^cement of prayer seeing yt he which
fasteth aright, co^t^ meth worldly things, Note what it is to fast a right
despises pleasure, hates rytches, abhorrethe the works of the flesh,
mortifyeth carnal affectes, and is utterly given, fyxed and bent to the
fruytes of ye spirit. Therefore he that entendeth to pray with fruit, shall
not a little ana^ice and set forward his prayer, if on this manner he applies
himself for to pray.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
Of Alms
Moreover as this kind of fasting does very much promoue a christen man's
prayer, and makes it greatly to be accepted in the sight of God, so does alms
and the glad distribucion of worldly goods upon the poor members of Christ in
like manner garnysh, adourne, and make very pleasant the humble supcacion of a
sinner in the eyes of the divine majesty, as we read of Cornelius, to whom the
angel said, thy prayers and thine Almesses are come up into remembrance
before God. Act. x.
Behold how he joins prayer and alms together. Toby in like manner says,
Tob. xii.
Prayer is good with fasting and alms. Lo, here is combyned and joined
together prayer, fasting, and alms, as things necessary concurren. The wise
man also says, Eccl. vii.
to pray and give alms, despise not. Blessed is he, Psalm. xi.
says David, that consydereth the nedy and poor, the LORD shall deliver him
in the day of his trouble. Christ also says: Give ye alms, Luke xii.
and behold al things are clean unto you. Nyther to pertayneth the ^ayenge of
Chrysostom, Hom. xv. in cap. vi. Math.
It is wryt^en, says he, in the law: Enter not unto the syghte of y^ LORD
thy God ^oyd or empty. Uerely he enters in ^mpty before God, which coming
unto prayer, Math. this well.
does no alms. Again he says, he prepares his soul before prayer, which
doing alms comes unto prayer, For as oil does kyndle the light of a
lamp, so does good works excite and store up y^ faith of the heart, and give
boldenes to pray unto God.

An obieccion.
But it will perchance be objected, eueryeone can not give alms, for they
want substance, shall not they therefore pray and be heard? I answer, as by
fasting, The answer.
I do not only understand the abstine^ce from meats and drynckes, but also the
mortificacion of carnal affectes, and the contempt of mundane pleasures
(without the which the external and outward fasting is nothing else thi^
diabolical Hypocrisye and wicked dissimulacion) so likewise by alms I mean
not only the benificence toward the indigent, Note here of fasting and alms
poor and nedy, which without doubt is a singular and much praise worthy
work before God, but also the desire of heavenly things, and a will utterly
estrau^ged from all carnal concupiscences and fleshly lusts. So that he which
entendeth to pray with fruit, if he can not do the one, yet ought he to do
the other of necessite, and to be enflamed with the desire of things
celestial, that he may say with y^ Psalmographe, Psalm. xii.
as the heart desires to y^ fountaynes of waters, so does my soul desire
unto the O God. My soul is a thyrst for God that living fountain, wha^ shall
I come to appear before the face of God? Again O how amiable are thy
dwellynges thou LORD of hosts, Psa. lxxxiii.
my soul has a desire and longyng for the court of the LORD. My heart and
my flesh rejoice in the living God. Phil. i.
This heuenlye mind was in S. Paul living here in this world, when he
said, I desire to be losoned out of this mortal body, and to be with Christ.
Fasting and alms are Y^ two wings of prayer.
Seeing therefore that fasting and alms are so necessary to the promocion and
furthera^ce, to the eleuacio^ and lyftynge up of prayer, and are called of
certain holy Doctors ye two wings of prayer, in as much as ^y them prayer
flies up unto ye throne of the divine majesty, and is the better accepted in
Gods presence, it shall be expedient for him that ente^deth to pray with
fruit, to exercise h^selfe somewhat before in fasting and alms, on such
manner as I have taught heretofore. So shall it come to pass, that God shall
the more thank fully accept his prayer, and grant him his hertes desire. Not
only the exercise of these two virtues, but also of all other, shall be
necessary for him that prays, that he may provoke GOD the more b^nygnely to
hear him. These things once done than let him pray, but after what manner I
will express i^ few words.

The. xxviii. Chapter.
First above all things, The heart must be see on ye praye^
let him give earneste diligence ye while he prays, his heart may be
seryously assyxed and set on his prayer, or els^ he prays in vain, according
to this old senience. Dum cor non orat, in uanum lingua laborat. That is to
say, while the heart does not pray, the tongue labors in vain. Esa. xxix.
Christ also says, this people honoreth me we their lyppes, but their heart is
far from me Uerely they worship me in vain For what great absurdite is this,
Mat. xv.
to desire god to hear our pray else, and we our selves do not hear the^:
What a kind of prayeng is this to babble with our lyppes, Note.
to ropo^t with our throtes, piteously to shake our head, to sytte bare
headed, to knele on the bare ground, to knock our breasts, and yet to have our
mind troubled and occupied about fyithye and unclean things? Is this a manner
of prayenge to make God the father merciful to us? Yea it rather excite the
and storethe up his anger toward us. A point for your learning
S. Austen fears not to write on this manner, as ye voice of a man without
modulacion or sweet armony, is as the voice of s^yne or hogs, so is prayer
without devotion as the bellowynge of Oxes. There are two verses publysshed in
the name S. Jerome, which seeing they are godly, and teach the true manner of
prayenge, I think it convenient to allege the^ in this place. No^ uox sed
uotu^, no^ cordula musica sed cor.
Non clamans sed amans cantat in aure Der,
That is to say, not the voice but ye desire, not the musical instrument, but
the heart, Not the crier but the lover sigeth i^ ye ear of God. Chriso. also
writes on this manner: It is ye duty of a devout mind to pray to God, not with
the voice or with the sound of the voice, Hom. xiiiii. D^ Joan. et Paul. Fe^o.
but with the devotion of the mind, and with ye says of the heart, Again he
says, thecrienge of the voice is not the work in prayer unto God, whom we
know ye he beholds the secrets of ye heart, but the cryeng of faith, and ye
deuocio^ of a religious and godlymi^d, therefore ye best way to pray is to pray
we ye heart mind, spirit, soul, and inward man.

Now it will be demanded, ^ Demau^dg
whither a christen man ought to pray with an open voice or not. Although I
have spoken sufficiently concerning this matter in the diffinicio^ of prayer,
yet I will here add three words as they say, Note when we may lawfully pray ^
^ voice.
touching this thing also. Although prayer be the work of the spirit, and
not of the voice, of the heart and not of the lyppes, of the mind and not of
the mouth, yet is not the external sound of the voice to be condemned, whyther
it be in reading or singing, so that it follows the affeccion of ye mind,
and does service unto that. For saying the glory of God ought to shine after a
certain manner in all ye parts of our body, Why she tongue was made.
it is convenient that the tongue chefely be addicte and given to this ministry
and service both in singing and speaking, which was chefely made to declare
and preach the magnificence, laud and praise of God. Therefore so that the
tongue and the heart do consent and agree together, being alyke occupied in the
effusio^ of the prayer, it is not only tolerable, but also commendable to pray
both with tongue and heart.

Of external gestures.
Now as concerning the external gesture in praye^ge, as knelyng, knockyng on
the breast, lyftynge up of the hands. etc. in as much as they be indifferent,
and we read that they were used of Christ and many holy men in times past,
they are not to be despised. Nothing is unsitting that proceeds from the
seruent affeccion of the mind. But I have spoken of this thing also before in
the diffinicion of prayer. Therefore will I haste to these things that remain,
as more necessary to be entreated of.

For what things we ought to pray.
The. xxix. Chapter.
FOr as much as we are so ignorant and blind of oureselues ye we know not
what we should desire, Romans viii.
as we ought, unless we should ask any thing unsitting, and otherwise than
becomes us, or that should not be acceptable to God, our savior Christ
wyilyng in this behalf to succor our necessite, Mat. vi.
and to help our ignora^cy and blyndnes, has appointed and set forth as it
were in a certain table the true manner of prarenge in the Pater noster, where
he has co^pendiously declared for what things we ought to pray either
pertaining to the glory of God, or to the profitte of so many as profess his
most holy name. And although every day and every hour does offer to us
occasions sufficiently for to pray unto God, yea and that for innumerable
causes, yet it may seem that Christ i that prayer which he taught his
disciples, has in sewe words comprehended whatsoever we have need to pray
for. The glory of God ought we to seake^t our prayers chefely
Therefore who soever at any time shall be minded to pray, let him above all
things seek the auauncement of Gods glory in his prayer. For the first
peticion of the Pater noster, with the next two that follow, pertayne only to
the glory of GOD, wherein we ask that the name of God may be sanctified, ye
his kingdom may reign among us, that his will may be done here in earth as
it is in heaven. So likewise did Christ a little before his passion, Joan. xii.
pray, saying: O father glorify thy name. Gods glory therefore ought we to
seek above all things in our prayers at al times

After that we have sought ye glory of God, Secondly for our souls health.
place requires that then we should ask those things, which pertain unto
the everlasting health and salvation of our souls. For the health of our souls
ought to be desired before the welthe of our body, as Christ monyssheth, first
seek ye kingedome of God and the righteousness thereof. Mat vi.
And all these things (he speaks of meat, drink and clothe) shall be cast
unto you. David also says one thing have I desired of ye LORD which I will
require, Psalm. xxvi
namely that I may dwell in ye house of ye LORD all the days of my life.

And in as much as the syncer prechynge Chyr^el^^ or ye promocion of gods word.
of Gods word helps much unto the salvation of our souls (for the Gospel of
Christ is the power of God unto salvation for every one ye believes, Romans 1.
Deuteronomy viii. Mat. iiii. Romans x.
and a man shall not live with bre^d alone, but with every word ye comes out
of the mouth of God, for faith comes by ^earyng, and hearing by y^ word of
God) it shall be necessary for us to pray ye Gods word may have fre passage
among us, and that all wicked doctrine, supersticious teaching, heresy,
^^strall opinions, sictes and all that ever is contrary to wholesome doctrine,
may be exiled and banisshed out of Christ's church. Pray for those things,
sal^ eth David, Psalm. ^xxi.
that make unto ye peace of Jerusalem, that is, unto the safe, quiet, lucky,
and prosperous preseruacion of Christ's church, that the doctrine of the
gospel, which brings peace and quietness to the hertes of the faithful, may
triu^phantly reygne among us. Luke i. Forthly for the ministers of Gods word.
But in as much as this Euangelion and glad tidings of christ ca^ never be
ministered to ye christen congregation without syncer and true preachers of the
word, therefore ought ^e also pray, ye at Ante christ's, Papists, Heretics,
Schismatyckes, and sedicious praters submoued and put aside, true Euangelystes,
Romans xi
faythefull Prophets, and sync^r Preachers, may reygne among us universally.
For how shall they preach, mat. ix.
except they be sent. Therefore says Christ, pray unto the LORD of ye
Heruest, that he may shoreforth workmen into his Heruest.

Moreover seeing that we have ^uot only a soul but also a body, Fy^tely for ^
magistrates o ye public weal.
and God has appointed ministers for them has, it shall alio be convenient
according to the admonicion of S. Paul, to pray for the magistrates of ye
public weal, as for our most ^edoubted and most excellent king, and for
all other that are in authority, that we may lead a peasable and quiet life,
under their dominion with all godlynes and honestye. 1. Eim. ii. Syrtely for
corporal things.
After these things it shall not be unsitting to pray for things necessary
for our body, as meat, drike cloth, fre^dshyp, health, wisdom, knowledge,
reason. etc. yet in the request of al these things aforesaid, we must refer
the matter whollye unto the will of God, and be co^te^ted to receive as it
shall be his pleasure to give, either much, little, or nothing.

Of god a love we ought to ask all good things.
To be short, what soever we have need of, we must straight ways run unto God
and ask it of him only, why there it pertayneth to the soul or to the body,
which gyuethe to all men without doublenes, and casts no man into the tethe,
as S. Austen says: We ought to ask of none but of the LORD God, E^ench^. ad
Laure^cap. cx^ii.
what soever we trust that we either should work well, or obtain for good
works.

The. xxx. Chapter.
BUt this is to be noted in prayer that in as much as all that profess Christ
unfeignedly, have one common and heavenly father, and are brothers one to
another ye brothers to christ and fellow heirs with him, Romans viii.
and seeing that Christ also has taught us in his most godly prayer, not
only to pray for our selves, but also for all other in common, Mat. vi.
it shall be necessary that a christian man does so direct his prayer unto God,
that he may seem no less to seek in it the help of his Christen brothers,
than of himself. For true and unfeigned Charity, which proceeds from a pure
heart and a good conscience, and a faith not feigned, seeks not her own, i.
Tim. ^. i. Cor. xiii.
but rather that which pertaynethe to other. She rejoices no less in the
health of other than in her own. Behold what charity does.
She takes no less thought to profit other than her self. She rejoices with
them that rejoice, Romans xii. i. Cor. xiii.
and wepeth with them that weep. Yea she many times forgets her self, and is
wholly bent to seek the commodity of other, as S. Paul says, Exo. xxxii.
Charity seeks not her own. We read that such fervent charity was in Moses,
which when the people of Israel had grievously offended God by worshippynge the
golden Calfe, perceiving ye wrath of God to be whotte against the^, prayed on
this manner and said, oh this people have done a great sin, and have made
them Gods of gold. Now forgive the^ their sin, or else wipe me out of this
book, Romans ix.
that thou hasle written. S. Paul also wyssted himself to be cursed from
Christ for the Israelites. Christ commands to bless the^ that curse us,
mat. v.
to pray for the^ that do us wrong and persecute us how much more than ought
we, seeing there is one bo^y and one spirit, Ephe. iiii.
one LORD, one says, one baptism one God and father of us all, to pray one
for another generally in the unite of the spirit through the bond of peace. If
we search in the Histories of the most sacred Bible, we shall in manny places
find and evidently perceive with how gredy affeccion and fervent mind one
prayed for another, so ye there was in their prayers a certain godly
communion, and a l^ke thought or care for all me^. Note this similytude.
For as he that loves ye father of ye house hold unfeignedly, does also love
her tely all his whole familye, so in like manner they that love our celestial
father with a true affecte and mind, can none otherwise do but love also his
people, his householde. his heritage, Ephe. i.
whom he has so greatly honored ye he has not disdayned to call them the
plenitude and fullness of his only begotten son. Our prayers ought to be
common.
Therefore the prayer of a Christen man ought on such manner to be made, that
it may be common and co^prehende in it all me^ that are his brothers in Christ,
and pertayne to the household of faith. Yea he ought to pray for all men
living in this world, be they Turks Sarace^nes, Jews or any other of the
hethenysh and unfaithful sort, ye God may deliver them by this holy spirit
out of the darkenesses of ygnorancy, and bring them into ye meruaylous light
of his most blessed word, that in the unite of the Spirit they may also
confess with us one LORD, one God, one sauyoure, one faith, one Christen
religion, and one truth.

A question
But some men will say peradventure, is it not lawefull for a man to pray
severally for himself, and for his own private affairs? The answer.
Yies verily, so that the mind be not utterly deflected and turned away from
the co^templacion of this co^munite, but refers all things unto that. mat.
xxvi
For Christ prayed perticularely for himself unto his Father a little before
his passion. i^ii. Reg. xx Esa. xxxviii. Psa i. Luke. xviii math. xxvi
Ezechias prayed for his own health. David prayed for the remission of his
sin. The Publycane desired mercy and forgyuenes of his offense. The these
desired Christ to remember him, when he came in to his kyngedome. All these
prayed their own private affairs, and were heard. Semblably it is lawful
for every Christen man to lamente his own cause before the mercyful eyes of
the divine majesty.

Art thou a magistrate and gouernoure of the common weal, Magistrate
perceiving that thou wanteste wisdom to govern the people of God aright and
according to justice. iii. Re. iii.
Than may thou lawfully pray with Solomon to God for the gift of wisdom.

Art thou a minister of Gods word, Minister of Gods Lord
so may thou after the example of the Apostles pray for the influence of the
holy Ghost, that ye may be repleted with the knowledge of spiritual things,
Act. i.
and so feed the flock of Christ, Act. xx.
whom he has purchased we his most precious blood, i. Pet. v.
that thou may receive ye i^marcessible crown of glory, when that Prince of
sheep heardes shall appear.

Householder.
Art y^ an householder? tha^ may thou lawefullye pray unto God for grace,
that thou may govern and rule thy family according to Gods most holy
word.

Rytch man.
Art thou a rytch man, tha^ ought thou for to pray unto God, that thou
mayeste distribute his goods committed unto the according to his pleasure upon
the poor people. Art thou poor? Poor man
than pray to God that thou may patiently suffer the cross of pouerte, which
he has laid upon the. Bi^io^^.
Felest thou any vice to raygne in the* So mayeste thou be ^olde to pray unto
GOD for the suppression of that vice, and for the obtaynynge of ye virtue
contrary to the vice.

To be short, Christen man
art thou a Christian man? So may thou at al times be bold to pray that God
may so endewe the with strength from above, that thou may live in all
points according to thy profession.

The. xxxi. Chapter.
BUt in thus prayenge for our selves we must take heed, that we desire not
those things, which should turn to our own private advantage, and to the
hynderaunce or disco^moditie of other. For this is not acceptable in ye sight
of God. Math. xx. Mar. x.
The children of Zebedeus desired Christ. ye one of them might sit on his
right hand, and another on his lift hand. But Christ answered and said, ye
know not what ye ask. They desired the primacy, and to be alofte in
superioryte above a^ ye disciples, which made the other to have indignacion at
them b^ the. Nota
That Peticion therefore is not lawefull nor ryghteous, which has a respect
more to pryuate advantage the^ to public vt^ lite. Examples
As if a Physician should pray that many might faull sick or that they that
are sick, might so continue long, that he might have the more auau^tage. Or
if an heir did pray that his parents might dye wortly, that ye heritage
might quickly chaunse unto him. Or if a wicked Soldier did desire that many
temples might be spoiled, and diverse honest men robbed, ye he might come home
looden with proyes and robberies.

These and such like requests, in as much as they come for the from the
flesh, and not from the spirit, God, which is a spirit, Joan. iiii.
does not hear the^, Ia. iiii.
as S. James says, ye ask and receive not, because ye ask evil, ye ye may
consume it on your pleasures. And if he hears, certes he hears unto the
great evil and inco^moditie of them ye pray. For they store up and provoke
the anger of God toward them. Ser liii. de ver. Dom. secu^d, Joan
S. Austen says, think it no great thing to be herd at your own will, but
rather thyncke it a great thing to be heard unto your profytte. For the dyuels
were herd at their own will, and were suffered to go into ye swyne according to
their desire. matt. viii.
Their Prince also the devil was heard at his own will, which desired to
have Job and to tempt him. Job. i.
The Israelites also were heard at their own will, and when the meat was yet
in their mouth, Ex. xvi. Number. xi.
ye know what things followed. Thyncke it therefore no great thing to be
heard at your own will and pleasure. For God sometime being angrye gives
that, which thou ask, and God being merciful and well pleased, denies
that, which thou ask. But yet is their prayer much more wicked, which being
enflamed with the fire of malicious fury, and furious malice, do desire evil
to the^ selves, that worse may chau^se unto their brother, whom they hate.
Yea there want not, which not only could be content with all their hertes to
lose one of their eyes, so that he, whom they hate, might lose both, but also,
put their own lives in iopardy to bring death unto other. O cruel tyranny.
Such peticions be detestable, and are to the desyrers thereof, not only much
pernicious, but also very damnable, in as much as they stand not with the order
of Charity. This also is to be judged of them, which curse and banne such as
they hate. Let us therefore ask nothing, but that makes to the glory of God
the auau^ceme^t of his most holy word, the increase of virtue, the
destruction of vice, ye health of our souls, the conseruacion of the publigue
weal, and the profytte of our neighbor. Not^
In all our peticions let us submyt our selves to the will and pleasure of God
nothing doubtyng but that he will grant us that we ask, or else things of more
weyghtye importance and more profitable for our salvation. For it is not
always convenient that we should obtain what soever we ask of God. He
knowethe much better what we have need of, then we our selves do. It is many
times more expedient for us to have scasenes than abou^dau^ce, to be vexed with
wars and persecucions tha^ to enjoy carnal securite and flesshely quietness,
to be sick tha^ to be whole, to be te^ted tha^ to be without te^tacio^ Paul at
diverse times desired God yt he might be delivered from ye prych of ye flesh,
ii. Cor. xii^
but it was answered my grace is sufficient for the, and he rejoiced in his in
^yrmite and weakness. Therefore in all things let us pray for godly and honest
things, being always contented to receive, as it shall be Gods most holy
pleasure to give.

At what time we ought to pray.
The. xxxii. Chapter.
IF we consider the inexplicable and manifold miseries, wherewith in this vale
of calamite we are inuolued, wrapped and i^closed about on every side, we shall
without any great difficulte perceive y^ we have need of nothing so much as of
prayer, yea and that feruente, assiduous and continual. For the dyuell goes
about like a roaryng Lion, seeking whom he may devour. i. Pet. ^.
The world also with his vain pleasures is redye at every hour to seduce and
led us away from our profession, if we take not head. Again the flesh is
so domestical and nygh enemy unto us, that we can never be wtoute it. Gal. v.
It ever assaylethe us. It allwaye fyghteth and lusts contrary to the
spirit. It turns, as they say, every stonne to make us enemies with God. The
soldiour of Christ, says a certain Doctor, Par^^^par^ Crac. de Iusticia cap.
xii.
ought not to put away from him the shield of prayer so long as the battle
endurethe. But the battle endures, Job. vii.
so long as this present life endures, as Job says, the life of a man upon
y^ earth is a warfare, and perels do never fail therefore have we need
continuallye of Gods help. Miserye does never want in this life, therefore
have we ever need of Gods mercy and continual prayer. ii Tim. ii.
Whereof it follows yt we have great need of prayer at all times, if we will
be saved. For no man shall be crowned, except he warreth valeauntly. Apo. ii.
To him that overcomes, says God, will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in ^ mids of the Paradyse of GOD. Our savior Christ therefore
knowing our imbecillite and weakness to be no less than our miserye and
wretchedness, exortetth us principallye and above all things to pray. Mat. xxvi
Watch and pray, says he, that ye faul not in to tentacio^. And in as much
as our enemies cease not to fight against us by their craftye and subtyle
assaults, therefore ought we not to cease for to fight against the^ with
continual prayers. For the prayer of a righous man, Iaco. v.
sayethe S. James, avails much. Luke xviii.
Christ in the Gospel of Luke proponeth a certain parable of an unrighteous
Judge and of a wydowe, wherein he teachethe that we ought to pray always and
never to cease, nor once to be werye. Read the Chapter. A Christen man ought
to pray at all times, and never to desyst and cease from prayenge. Therefore
says S. Paul: Col. iiii^
Continue in prayer and wacth in it with thanks gi^yng. Again: i. These. v.
Rejoice always, pray with out ceasyng, in all things give thanks. Hereto
agrees ye saying of S. Peter, ^. Pet. iiii.
be ye sober and watch unto prayer. For continual prayer causethe yt our
enemies can not have the upper hand over us. Yea continual prayer makethe
that the love of celestial goods does ever encrese i^ us, which except it be
oftentimes suscitated and stored up with ardent desires and fervent prayers,
Not^
as fire is with wind, it first abateth, and afterward by little and little it is
utterly quenched and put clean out. For as he is unworthy to receive any
thing, which gives not thanckes for those things y^ he has already taken,
yt is, which does not knowledge and magnify the beneficence of God, so does
not he deserve to enjoy so great felicite, joy and pleasure, which either does
not desire it or else desires it coldly. Who ferue^tly loves a thing, and
does not continually wish yey^ thing which he loves, may chau^se to hi^. So
y^ it is manifest of these things aforsayde, yt we ought to pray at all
times, and never cease, in as much as we have at all times most vrge^t, weyghty
and necessary causes.

The. xxxiii. Chapter.
An objection.
BUt it will be objected, how is it possible for a man to pray at all times,
and never to cease? This is a thing not only of impossibilite, but also
contrary to the commandment of Christ, Mat. vi.
which says, when ye pray, speak not manny words. I answer, The answer.
Christ in this aforsayde place does not forbid the assiduite and continuance
of prayer, but ye multiloquie and manner of bablyng in prayers, which the
Ethnickes and Infidels did use, trustyng by y^ their to much babbling they
should the sooner be heard, as we read of those wicked Prophets, which
cried on the name of Baal from morning till night, saying none other thing
but this only, iii. Reg. xvi^^
O Baal hear us, O Baal hear us. But the prophet Helias mocked them, saying,
cry with a loweder voice. For he is a God, but peradventure he talkethe with
some body, or is occupied in pursuynge his enemies, or is gone some journey,
or happily he slepeth, and would be waked and raised up with your cryinge. They
cried therefore with a great voice, and cut themselves after the^r old manner with
sweardes and botkyns, until they were al on gore blood. But all in vain.

The words of Christ are these, when ye pray, math. vi.
speak not many words as the Ethnyckes do. For they think it should come to
pass, that through their babbling they should be heard. Be not ye therefore
like the^ For your father does know, what things ye need, before ye ask o^
him. Mark well
These words show manifestly that Christ does not condemn the assiduite and
continuance of prayer, Lu. vi. xxii mat. xxvi. Luk: xviii:
which both he hiselfe used, and also taught other ye same, but the vain
loquasite and vnfruytfull bablyng annexed with this persuasion, that our
prayers can not be herd, except we be ever inculkyng and beatynge the^ into
the ears of God after the manner of the Hethe^, as though God did rather hear
us for our loquasite and bablynges sake, than for his most loving and
gentle promise, or as though God were not so ready to give, as we are to ask, if
our peticions beaccordyng unto his will. The Ethnickes mult^loquy and hethenysh
babbling does Christ here not only forbid, but also conde^n^. Eccl: v:
Therefore says ye wise man, be not to rash in speaking, neither let thy
heart make have to bring forth a word in y^ sight of god. For god is in heaven,
and you art on the earth, and therefore let thy words be few. For as the dream
co^methe of manifold businesses, so is y^ voice of a fool in ye multitude of
words.

S. John golden mouth upon the aforsayd text writes on this manner, he
calls here Bathologian, In Math: cap. vi. Hom. xix.
loquacite, that is, babbling or much speaking, which we than verily use, when
we ask of God things yt are not profitable for us, as for an example, that we
should obtain power and glory, and that we should overcome our enemies, and
that we should abou^d with many rytches, to conclude, wha^ we ask those
things, ye should profyt us nothing at all. For he knows what so ever we
have need. Moreover he seems unto me to forbid long prayers. Yea verily, long
I say, not in time but in the multitude and prolixite or length of words.
Colos. iiii.
We must persevere in asking those things that are profitable. Continue, says
he, i^ prayer. For y^ LORD himself also sends us to the example of yt
wydowe and of ye unmercifully and cruel Judge, Luke. x^iii
that he should co^me^d the diligente continuau^ce of prayer by the importunite
of her interpellacion and hertye request. Luke. xi.
And wha^ he says y^ a certain man came unto his friend, when it was very
late in the night, and that he raised him being a sleep out of his bed, yea
and that he deserved this thing not so much for familiarite and acquaynta^ce
sake, as for sedulite and careful diligence: He wylled none other thing, tha^
that he should be called upon continually. Yet he did not command that they
should bring unto him a prayer of a thousand verses long, and recyte y^
unto him. For this has he already reproved. For they thyncke that in their
much speaking they should be herd. Mat. vi.
But your father, says he, knows, what ye have need, before ye ask. But
thou will say, If he knows, wherefore than need we to pray? Mark (...) well.
Uerely not ye thou shouldeste teach God, but that thou shouldeste make him
good unto the, that thou should be acquaynted with him, by reason of thy
frequent and often speaking unto him, that y^ should h^^ble thy self in
prayeng, and that thou should oftentimes remember thy sins.

Hitherto have I recyted the words of S. John Chrysostom, which as they
condemn the vnfruytefull babbling and vain jangling of words vaynly and
causses prolated, so do they hyghlye commend and approve the fervent
continuance of prayenge. So that hereof it is evident, that a thriste^ man
ought to pray at al times

The. xxxiiii. Chapter.
VUher as some man will say per adventure that it is not possible for men to
pray at all times, seeing that diverse other affairs and businesses must also
be done of the^ so long as they live in this world, as eating, drinking,
slepyng. etc. and men must also labor for their living, every man according
to his vocacion and calling, which things all must needs be an impedyment and
let to the continual exercise of prayer: I will in few words declare how a
christen man may pray without ceasynge at all times according to the precepte
of Christ and the Apostle Saint Paul.

How we may pray at all times and (...) ceasyng.
Some expositoures of the holy Scripture write that to pray all way and
without ceasyng, is nothing else than to pray seriously, earnestly and
diligently after the example of the wydowe, Luke xviii.
which would never leave cryenge and calling upon the unrighteous Judge,
until he had heard her request, that she might be revenged of her aduersarye.
They say it is a trope called Hyperbole, so that he is counted to pray always
and with out ceasyng, which pray usually, of tentymes, seriously and instantly,
and does not cease from prayers, until he has obtained that, Esa. lviii.
which he asks. After that manner is this spoken: Cry, cease not, lift up
thy voice as a Trompe.

Some say that to pray always and not to cease, is through out al our life,
feruentely to desire that high goodness, which is promised us in ye world to
come. After this sort, say, they, what soever me^ do in this life, whether
they eat, drink, sleep work, talk, bargayne, study, meditate. etc. so
long as this celestial desire remain in the^, all their whole life is a
certain perpetual prayer. De moda ora^^i.
The perpetual study of living godly, says Erasmus, is a continual prayer.
And Beda says, he prays always, y^ does good things always neither does he
cease to pray, but (...) he cease to be righteous.

Other affirm that to pray without ceasyng, is fervently and with an ardente
mind to pray at certain hours destinated and appointed unto prayer. Uerely
all these exposicions, in as much as they be godly, are not to be rejected nor
cast away. Therefore seeing that we can not for our imbecill^^e, weakness and
imperfeccio^ always and without ceasyng pray unto God, yet, besides the godly
meditacion of celestial things in our mind, and the perpetual desire of
living innoce^tly, which ought never to depart from a Christian breast, Certain
hours appointed every day for prayer
that has the fear of God before her eyes we ought to prescrybe and appoint
unto our selves certain peculiare hours every day which should not pass
away without prayer, and which should have the whole affectes of the mind
utterly occupied in this behalf. And when those hours shall come, than ought
we to lay aside all m^dane affairs and worldly businesses, and wholly to give
our selves to devout meditacion, and divine contemplacio^ of celestial
things. Tha^ ought we feruentely to pray with the heart and mind, and so with all
humilite to behave our selves, as though god were there present, and we spoke
unto him face to face, ye than ought we to watch, as the Scripture admonysshe
the, Mat. xxvi.
that is, so take heed and cast all pereis, that our adversary the dyuell,
which goes about like a rorynge Lion, i. Pet. v.
seakyng whom he may devour, do not once draw away our minds from talking
with God, but that quietly and attentely we may be occupied in offering up
our peticions unto GOD at that time of prayer.

The. xxxv. Chapter.
ANd because no man should be offended with the obseruaunce and appoyntme^t of
certain hours unto prayer, as a thing supersticious and repugnant to the
christen liberte: I will show that diverse holy men had their certain hours
also, wherein they used custumably to pray. ^^. cxviii.
We read that David did pray and give thanks unto God seven times in a day.
His words are these: Seven times in a day have I given praise unto the for the
judgments of thy righteousness. What seven times in a day these were, all are
not manifest in the holy scripture, but some are, which I will here rehearse.

As touching the morning he says, O LORD early shall you hear my voice,
Psalm. v.
betymes in the morning shall I make my prayer unto the, and I shall se that I
have obtained my prayer. Psalm. ci.
Now for the time of his repaste he says, as ashes did I eat my bread and
my drink did I myngle with weeping. Though here he make the none euydente
mention of Prayer, yet it is not to be doubted, but yt in this his great
sorrow, he also used at that present, prayers unto God. As for his prayer at
night, we read on this manner, Psalm. ciiii.
let my prayer, says he, be directed unto the as fra^kensence in thy syghte,
the lyftynge up of my hands as an euenyng sacrifice. Psalm. vi.
Again he says, I shall wash every night my bed, yea even with my tears will I
water my bed. That he prayed to God at mydnyght also, it is manifest by theyse
words, At myddenyght, says he, did I rise to give praise unto the.

Of these Scriptures aforsayd it is evident that David prayed unto God
customably these four times besides other, Psa. cxviii.
that is, in the morning, at his dynner, in the evening, and at mydnyght,
which all be very convenient times for a christen man to pray. As he prayed at
these times, so did he undoubtedly at other, though they be not expressed in y^
scripture.

Dan. vi.
Moreover we read that Daniel used customably to pray every day three times unto
his LORD GOD. The Evangelists also declare, that Christ preaching and
workynge miracles all the whole day, Luke v.
used often times to spend the whole night in prayenge unto his father. Act.
iii.
S. Luke also in the Acts of ye Apostles declares that Peter and John went up
into the Temple at the nynthe hour of prayer. Whereof it does evidently appear
y^ in the old law they had certain times appointed in y^ which they should
pray. Have not we also among us now a days certain times appointed for to
come together and to pray in the temples? What do we learn of all these
things* Uerely that a Christen man may lawfully and without any scripule of
conscience appoint certain hours in the day, wherein he may exercise himself
devoutly in godly prayer and spiritual meditacion. Not^:
But I would he should not so supersticiously be addicte to those hours, that
he should think it sin to break any of the^, when occasion of necessite is
given (for that were a wicked thing) but to use those times as means for to
bring him unto a more fervent manner of prayeng continually. Mat. ii.
For the Sabbath day was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath day. The
kyngedome of God shall not come with obseruacio^ and loking for, Luke xvii:
says Christ neither shall they say, behold here, or behold there, for loo,
the kingdom of god is wtin you. Ye observe days months, Gala. iiii.
times and years, says Paul, I am afearde of you, unless I have labored in
vain for you. Again, let no man judge you in meat or drink, or in part of an
holy day, or of the feast of the new Moon, or of the Sabbothes, which are the
shadows of things to come, Col. ii.
but the body of Christ.

The. xxxvi. Chapter.
Seeing than that the appoyntement of certain hours for prayer is very
commendable, yea and necessary for the traynynge up of our selves in the
godly exercise of prayer (so that supersticious obseruaunce be absent) it
shall be much dece^t and praise worthy for every man to appoynte himself such
certain hours every day for to pray, as wherein he shall perceive that he
may be most quiet, and most apt to talk we God in his prayers. And
although every Christen man knowethe what time is best for him to pray (in as
much as the vnccion of God techeth the^ all things, i. Joan. ii.
and they have no need that any man should teach the^) yet I will here assign
such hours to pray, as I may think to be most convenient and apt to
prayer, and that not only because they seem fytte in my conceyte, but rather in
as much as I se those same hours approved of godly learned men, as most
fyttyng and apt unto the true exercise of prayer.

David in his Psalms wrytethe on this manner, Psa. lilii.
I will cry to God, and the LORD shall save me. At night and in the morning
and at middaye shall I pray hertelye, and he shall hear my voice. Note wha^
we ought to pray unto God.
Here David prescribes three solemn times, when a man ought of duty every
day to pray. At night when he goes to bed, in ye morninge when he ryseth, and
at mydday when he goes to meat. He that leave the God unsaluted with his
prayers at these three times, verily he is much estrau^ged from the manners of
a true Christen man, as I may leave of to speak of his ingratitude and
unkindness toward our LORD GOD.

Libro de virginitate.
S. Ambrose appoynte the mo times of prayenge: Solemn prayers says he, ought
to be made with thanckes geuynge when we rise from sleep, when we go forth to
our business, when we make ready to take our meat and when we have taken our
meat and when we go to bed. Would God y^ all men would follow the doctrine of
this most holy and catholyke Doctor. Than should all things be replenyshed
with the blessing of God more plenteously than they are now a days. De
oratione. Det. ii.
S. John Chrysostom differs not from this, where he says, we must wha^ we
rise out of our beds prevent the son with the worshyppynge of God, and when
we come to the table, and when we should sleep. Yea at every hour ought we
to offer a lyuysh prayer unto God, and to run an equal course with the
day, and in ye time of Winter to spend also y^ most part of ye night in
prayers and bowi^g our knees with much fear to give atte^dau^ce to prayer,
recounting our selves blessed, wha^ we thus worship God. Tell me how dareste you
look upon the Son, Mark well.
wha^ you do not worship him, that sent that most sweet and comfortable
light? How shall thou use ye table, and not worship y^ gyuer and supeditatour
of so great good thiges? With what hope go thou to the time of the night,
what manner of slepes doste thou look for, when thou doste not confyrme, make
strong and defend thy self with prayers, but without any watch come to sleep
like a miser and wretch, ready to faull into the captivity and bondage of the
most ungracious devils, which continually go about waytyng y^ time, that they
may quickly catch any man that is bare, and not defensed with prayer? which
when they se us enarmed with prayers, ru^ne back straight ways as thieves and
malefactoures, which se a swearde hanged up at the hand of y^ Soldiour. But if
it cha^seth that any man be bare and not weponed with prayer, than is he straight
way plucked and toste of the devils, he is moved unto sin, and brought into
infinyte calamities and euelles. We therefore fearing all these things let us
enarme our selves always with prayers and hymns, that god having pytie on us,
may make us all worthy ye kyngedome of heaven through his only begotten son,
to whom be glory and rule, worlds without end.

Amen.
The. xxxvii. Chapter.
HItherto have I recyted y^ words of the golden mouthed Doctor, wherein we may
learn not only when we ought to pray, but also how necessary a thing
prayer is, and how that without prayer we can do nothing well, neither can any
thing without that chaunse unto us prosperously. Prayers in ^ morning.
Would God therefore that when we rise in the morning we would with hundle and
faithful hertes give thanks to God, for y^ sleep wherewith he has refresshed
one weary bodies that night, and (...) ly desire him that his (...) may have
the right gouernounce of us, all ye day followynge, that he defending us from
all evil may only his^, couy^^e, aspyre and go about those th^ges, which
shall may turn to the glory of God, the salvation of our souls, and the
profytte of y^ Christen publyque wea^e, not once offendynge the eyes of the
divine majesty neither in thought, word nor deed at any time.

Again in as much as we are all ^orne to labor, Prayers before labor.;
Job. v^.
every man in his office, ever as the bird is to fly, and seeing that we are
commanded of God to eat the labors of our hands

The. xxxviii. Chapter.
Prayers before meat.
Moreover when we shall take our meat before we sit down to taste any of it, let
us with al humilite and submission of mind desire God with our prayers, that he
will sanctifye those his gifts and benefits, that we may receive the^
according to his will, and by no means abuse them, either to the
distemperance of our bodies, or to the danger of our souls but only receive
them unto ye end, for the which they were created and prepared. Let us not
thyncke it enough to have corporal food, except it be blessed of God. Neither
ought we to think that our bodily suste(...) comes only of our own pol^cy
but much more rather of gods blessing, which except he did fortune our
trauayles, a^ou^e labors were but vain, Psa. xxxiii
(...) y^ Psalmographe says, fear ye the LORD all ye that be his Saints,
for there is no searsenes to the^ ye fear him. The rytche have wanted and
hungered, but they y^ seek after ye LORD, shall want no good thing. Psalm.
Again, cast thy care upon the LORD, and he shall noryshe the. i. Pet. v.
Also in another place, The eyes of all me^ trust in the, O LORD, and thou
gyuest them meat in convenient time. Psalm. cxiiiii.
Thou openest thy hand, and fylleste every living creature with thy blessing.

Thus se we y^ our corporal food is the gift of God, and he it is that
fedethe so many, as repose their affyaunce in him. Therefore ought we before we
taste any meat at y^ time of our repaste to pray unto God, y^ he may bless
the meat that we sha^ than receive, confessing ye what so ever we have, we al
together receive it of his bountyous hand. Nota.
O merciful God, we come now a days unto the table, as though we ware
Hethen, and knew no part of God, at the of the Altar, his beri body and
blood? (...) did he this ^a^^ely for our example, that we should knowledge and
confess that what so ever we have, we receive it altogyther at the (...)teous
and liberal hand of God. Does not S. Paul say, i. Tim. iiii.
that meats are sanctified by the word of God and prayer* We ought therefore
surely when we go to dynner, or take onye repast, to desire God for to bless
our meat, and to make it helthfull and profitable to our bodies, and to believe
that what soever is there present, we receive it altogyther of the grand
munificence and exceeding liberalytie of God, and so to behave our selves all
y^ time of our repast, not only i^ enioyi^g those gifts moderately and
soberlye, but also in our co^municacion, and external gestures, that we may
seem to sytte not at a profane, co^mme and unclean table, but at y^ holy
table of ye celestial and everlasting king.

The. xxxix. Chapter.
Again after we have thus godly and soberly taken our meat, Grace or
thanckes gyuyng after dinner.
let us not fail to give God herty tha^ckes for his benefytes, which so
bounteously of his own mere lyberalitie and great goodness has fed us at that
present, let us also desire him that he will go forth to be a beneficial
father unto us, Joan. vi.
and to give us meat, not only that meat which peryssheth, but much rather yt
which abydethe into everlasting life, I mean the most sweet Gospel of his
intierlye beloved son Jesus Christ our most gentle LORD and omnisufficient
Savior, y^ our bodies being fed with corporal meat, and our souls sustained
with the word of life, we may after this life be most happily fed with the
aspecte, beholding, and fruicion of the most blessed deite. Amen.

These things once done, let be return to our labors, every m^n according
to his vocacion and calling, workyng that thing that is pleasant in the
sight of God.

For supper Note.
When the time comes that we shall go to supper, let us we the same reverence
enjoy the good creatures of God, that we did at dynner, and as we behaved our
selves at di^ner both in prayer and thanckes gyuynge, let us so likewise do
at supper. So shall it come to pass undoubtedly, that we shall want no good
thing, but have plenty of all thiges according to onr hertes desire. We must,
says Chrysostom, De oratione.
both when we go unto the table and come from it, Ho. lxxxviii.
give tha^ckes to God. For that table, which be gynneth of prayer, and endethe
also in prayer, shall never want, but shall bring to us all good things more
largely and more plentiously than any fountain. But I have spoken of this
matter also in my Banckette.

The. xl. Chapter.
AT night when we go to bed, How we ought to be have ourselves wh^^ we go to
bed.
we shall before we give our selves to sleep, knele down upon our knees
secretly in our chamber, with all humilite and reverent fear, calling unto our
remembrance how we have spent all the whole day past. If we shall than
perceive that we have offended ye divine majesty in any thing, either in
thought, word or deed, tha^ let us not fail to confess our sin streyghtway
to God with a contryte and sorrowful heart, desyryng him most humbly for his
great mercyes sake to forgive us that our iniquite, and not to be angry with
us, but so assyst us with the influence of his most holy Spirit, that we may
in no point tra^sgresse his most divine will, but work all things that may
be pleasant unto him.

If we shall at that time perceive that we are at debate with any man, Mark w^.
let us no^t go to bed, before we be reconciled one to another if it be
possible according to the precepte of ye Apostle, let not the Son faull
down upon your anger. Cobe. iiii.
If that may not co^uenie^tly be done yt night, let us not fail the next
morning betymes, or so sone as we may, to go unto the^ that are offended with
us, or we we the^, and never cease till we have made an agreement between us,
being perfectly persuaded, that we can by no menes please God so long as we be
not in love and charity. i. Joan. iii.
For as S. John^ says he that loves not his brother abides in death. Every
one that hatethe his brother is a manslear, and ye know that every ma^slear
has not everlasting life abiding in him.

Look what we have offended god that day, let us so bewail our syn and take
such thought for ye commission of it, yt we may have no more pleasure to do
that offense again, but rather be made the more circumspecte ^ beware
afterward ye we be no more oppressed with the subtyle assaults of Satan. Let
us every day dye unto sin. Let us continually mortyfye the affectes of the
old Ada^. The longer we live, the lesser let sin remain in this our
mortal body. Let all our meditacio^, study and endeavor be nothing else than
a perpetual care to lead a pure and innocent life.

The. xli. Chapter.
BUt if it so chaunse, Nota.
that when we have co^sydered the spending of the day, we perceive no notable
crime and heinous fault committed neither against God, nor our neighbor, than
let us rejoice, give God thanks, and desire him so continually to aid us
with his divine help, ye we may not only continue in that purite of life,
Romans i. Psalm. lxxxiii
but also go forth from says to says, and from virtue to virtue, till we wax
ancient in christ, and become perfette me^ i^ our profession

Prayers before ^rape.
These things once done, let us than faull to prayer, desiring God for his
great mercies sake through Jesus Christ to give us a prosperous and quiet
night, and that neither Sat^ nor none of his Angels do trouble us, but that
though the body take rest and sleep, yet the mind, the heart, the inward
man, may always watch to him, and delight in hi perpetually.

After our prayers, let us commit our selves to the tuicion of God, and so
swetely give our selves to rest. And let this be our daily exercise. D LORD
God, if we would do this with a serue^t heart and burning love toward God, it
can not be expressed that great and singular commodities would ensewe. To do
thus, is ye duty of us all, but whyther we have done it or not, let every man
search his own conscience and amend.

Thus have I declared what times I thyncke most convenient for prayer, and how
we should behave ourselves in ye time of pray eng. I have not done this to
bind and snarlethe conscience of any christian man, which ought to be free to
serve God at all hours, but to help the infyrme and weak Christians, that
they first using these times, and certain introduccions, may afterward come
unto the perfeccion of worshyppynge God at all times. For a christen man shall
have abundant occasions at all hours to call on ye name of ye LORD for help.
Notwithstanding if any man shall look upon these things, ye I have here
written, with a syngle eye, he shall not find the^ altogyther superuncaneous
and vain. God give us all grace to so follow the^, or better, if we may.

Of thanks gyuynge.
The. xlii. Chapter.
Now begin the our work to draw unto an end. I have declared sufficiently
heretofore, as I trust, all things that most principally pertayne unto
prayer, that is to say, unto asking any thing of God. It remaynethe now
therefore that I entreat somewhat of thanckes gyuynge to God. For it is
convenient ye we also give thanckes unto God for the gifts and benefytes that
we receive of him, or else we may justly seem to be unworthy any part of Gods
kyndnes For what have we, ye we have not received? The wife man ought not to
^^oyse in his wisdom, nor the strong (...) his strength, nor yet ye rytch
(...) spiches, but only in our LORD God, from whom every good and perfect
gift descends and comes down. Jacob. i.
What haste thou that you haste not received, says Paul? If thou haste
received it, i. Cor. iiii.
wherefore doste thou rejoice, as though you had not received it? Let not ye
wise man, Iere. ix.
says God by his Prophet, rejoice in his wisdom, nor let not the strong man
rejoice in his strength, nor let not the rytch man rejoice in his rytches. But
let him that rejoices, rejoice in this, if he understood and know me. For I
am the LORD, which does mercy, judgment and righteousness in ye earth, and
these are those things that I desire, says the LORD.

Seeing than you all our glory and reioycyng ought to be in our LORD God alone,
Phil. iiii.
as S. Paul says, rejoice in the LORD al way, and again I say rejoice
feynge also ye what so ever goodness is in us, (...) ly of him, ^e^ely me oug^^
at all hours to rejoice in him, as the (...) blessed virgin Marye did,
sayenge^ my soul magnifyethe the LORD; and my spirit has reioysed in God my
savior, Luke. ii
and to give to him thanks, and to sing to his name, so long as our life
lasts, perpetual encomies, lauds co^mendacion and praises.

How we may be moved to give God thanckes.
If we will be moved to give god thanckes at any time, as we ought to do always,
it shall be first convenient to perpende, weye, and consider his manifold
goodness toward us. First how at the beginning he made us not like unto
brute bestes, Of our creacion. Note.
but like unto his own symilytude and Image. And he made us not to be fire
brondes of hell, but inheritours of everlasting glory. For he gave us a body
much more beautyfull and pleasant in aspecte, than any other lynynge creature
has. He gave us a mind ^^^rendued with wit, reason, discre^^^, wisdom,
virtue, knowledge, cunning, immortalite, godliness. etc He set us in Paradyse,
Genesis i.
and gave us rule, power, and dominion ouerall the fysshes of the sea, and the
birds of the air, and over all living creatures that move upon the earth.

Again when we in our pare^tes had tra^sgressed his most godly precepte, Genesis
iii.
and thereby deserved eternal da^nacion, ii. Pet. ii.
he did not streyghtwaye with the same rigor and fearcenesse, wherewith he
condemned the Angels for their disobedient arroga^cy, Esa. xiiii.
cast us away into the fire of Hell, but full gentely sent us into this vale
of misery for to repent, Genesis iii. Psalm. viii.
that afterward he might save us, yet constitutyng and appoyntynge us still
Lords and rulers oueral living creatures.

The. xliii. Chapter.
Moreover wha^ it was not possible because of the great enormite of our sin,
Of our fro salvation by grace and the mercy of God through Jesus Christ.
that we could of our own power, strength, merytes, deservings and good
works save and win our selves again into ye favor of God, how louyngly
wtoute any deserts of our part eue^ of his own mere goodness and free mercy
did he promise to save us by his derely beloved son our LORD Jesus Christ,
Romans i.
and at his time predefined and appointed from everlasting sent him down in
^ ^his world? Which for our sake unfeignedly by the wonderful operacion of the
holy Ghost took flessh of the most blessed, Luke. i. Math. i. Heb. iiii
most pure, and undefiled virgyn Marye, and became very man like unto us in
althynges, sin alone except. Which also after he had lived here certain
years, eue^ of his own free will without any compulsion for the fervent and
unspeakable love that he ever bare toward us, gave himself unto the very (...)
yea even the most spite full and (...) death of the Cross. He offered (...)
^oost blessed body a sweet smelling Sacrifyce to God the father for our
wickedness. Esa. liii. Phil. ii. Ephe. v.
He suffered his most precious blood to be shed upon the Altar of the Cross
to pay the rau^some for our sins. Mat. xxvi. i. Timo. ii.
He refused no kind of paynful grefe and grievous pain to apease Gods wrath,
and to reconcyle us unto his celestial father. Colo. i.
O good Jesus, sayethe S. Bernard, Sermon quidam.
how greatly were we endetted to the, and yet do thou pay our debt? We
have sinned, and thou art punysshed. This is a work without example, a grace
without merit a charity without measure.

Uerely verily not the prodicio^ and betrayenge of Judas, Note who did pure
christ to death.
not the furye and cruel malice of the Pharisees and Bishops, not the wicked
and false witnesses, not the unrighteous accusers, not the cruel and
unmercifully judges did put Christ to death, but we our selves, our sin, our
iniquite, our ungodliness, our abhominacion, our corrupt ma^ners did slaye him,
and put him to that most cruel death. We are they that did kyl him. We sought
his death. Mat. xxvi.
We did betray him. We did falsely accuse him We nailed him upon the Cross.
Mat. xiiii
We scourged his most blessed body. Luke xxii.
We shed his most precious blood. We did cleue asunder his most blessed
heart with a spear, Joan. xxii
out of yt which ra^ne both water and blood. Esa. liii.
We gave him Eysell and Gaull to drink. We scorned him, we mocked him, we did
spit on his most sweet face. We buffetted him, we bruised him, we were the
Authors of all yt tyranny, which was wrought against him. Yet for y^ love that
he bare toward us, did not he disdain to suffer all these in tolerable
pains, i. Pet. ii.
by whose passions and suffrynges we are perfectly made whose, by whose most
blessed blood all our sins are washed away, i. Joan. i.
by whose death, everlasting life chau^seth abundantly unto us. Romansviii.
O unmeasurable kyndnes. What a love has God to us, that he spared not his only
son, Joan. iii.
but gave him for us all, yt so many as believe in him, may not peryshe, but
have everlasting life.

And as God the father gave his son Christ unto death for our sins, Romans
iiii. Ephesians. ii. Math. i. Luke ii. Joan. xiiii. Joan. xi. Math. ix. Joan. vii.
Joan. v. Psel. xxvi. i. Cor. i.
so did he raise him up again by his most puissaunt power from death for our
iustificacio^. He is our peace, how than can we be sad and heavy? He is our
Savior, how the^ can we despair? He is our way, how than can we err? He
is our truth, how than can we be deceived? He is our life, how tha^ can we
dye? He is our Resurreccion, how tha^ can we sleep in sin? He is our
Physician, how tha^ ca^ we be sick and diseased? He is our light, how than
ca^ we walk in darkness? He is our bread, how tha^ can we be hungrye? He is
our defender, how than can we be afearde? He is our wisdom, how than can
we be ignorante? He is our righteousness, how than can we be unrighteous? Romans
x. Psalm. xliiii i. Tim. ii. i. Joan. ii. Col. i. He. iiii. vii i. Pet. ii.
Joan. x. Romans viii.
He is our sanctificacion, how than can we be profane and unholy? He is our
rede^cion how than can we be damned? He is our rytches, how than can we be
pore? He is our beautye, how than can we be deformed and ill favored? He is
our mediator and advocate, how than can our matters be unheard? He is our
head, how than can we his members perysh? He is our Bishop and Curate of our
souls how than can we want spiritual doctrine? He is our door, how than can
we but enter into the kingdom of heaven? To conclude, he is altogether ours,
and all that ever he has, how than can we but sail in a safe and quiette
haven? How than can we but have all things prosperous and fortunate? Thus se
we what an hye treasure Christ is to us. If any man desires to know more of
Christ, and what benefits we have received by let him read my work of ye
News out of heaven, Search ye News out of heaven
where he shall se Christ truly and lyuyshly painted as alone and perfect
redemer, and a plenteous and an omnisufficient savior for all the^ that
faythfullye repent and led a new life.

Would not all these so great commodities and large benefytes, which we
receive of God yt father through Jesus Christ, move any christian heart in the
world to be thankful, and to sing perpetual praises unto God? For we have
learned here, that al our salvation comes only from God ye father through Jesus
Christ, Tit. iii.
and that he saved us mercifully when we were lost miserablye. But let us
behold more of Gods kyndnesse, that we may learn that thanks ought to be
given unto him seriously.

The. xliiii. Chapter.
ALthough by Christ we be set again at lybertye, and receive our manumissio^
and fredome from that captivity, whereunto we were made hand by the sin of
Adam, so sone as we are regenerate and borne a new by ye honorable Sacrament of
Bap^tisme, Joan. iii.
and the holy Ghost, yet in as much as afterward through our fragilite and
weakness we fall again in to sin, and deserve thereby also to be^ cast from
the favor of God, and to be dampened perpetuallye, if God did not also healpe
us in this behalf, O^ LORD God, in how miserable a cas^ are we? Nota.
What should it profytte us, by Christ to be delivered from that wretchedness,
into the which Adam did cast us, if there were not also a remedy to expulse
that danger, into the which we cast our selves through sin after Baptism?
Therefore here also does the goodness of God appear very large and bountious
toward us. For though we sin after baptisms never so grievously, ye^ does not
he straight ways take vengeance on us, ii. Pet. ii.
and cast us headlonge unto he^ fire, as he did ye angels, but he pacie^tly
abides our co^uersio^, Job. iiii.
and looks daily when we will repent, and amend, as the Prophet says, y^
LORD long abides us, Esa. xxx.
ye he may have mercy on us. Also the Psalmogra\`ph, Psa. ^. liiii.
The LORD is gentle and merciful, pacient, and of great pity. The LORD is
good and gentle to all men, and his render mercies are stretched forth upon all
his works. Lament. iii.
Jeremy also says, It are the mercies of the LORD that we are not consumed.
Yea he exciteth and storeth us up by his holy spirit, and gives us grace to
repent, turn, and amend, as he says by his Prophet, I will give them an
heart and a new spirit will I give in their in ward parts, Ezech. xi.
and I will take away the stony heart from their flesh, and give them a fleshly
heart, ye they may walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments, and do them.
And they shall be my people, and I shall be their God. Eze. xxxvi.
Again, I will power out upon you clean water, and ye shall be made clean
from all your uncleanness, and from all your Idolles will I make you clean,
and I will give you a new heart and a new spirit will I put in the mids
of you, and I will take away the stony heart from the flesh, and give you a
fleshly heart, and I will put my Spirit in the mids of you, and I will make
you to walk in my precepts, and keep and work my judgments, and ye shall
dwell in ye la^d ye I gave to your fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I
shall be your God, and I shall save you from all your uncleanness.

Moreover he still calls upon v^ to come unto him, saying: Turn and repent
you of all your iniquities. Eze. xviii.
And your iniquite shall work you ^^spleasure.: Cast away from you ^l your
wickednesses, in the which ^e have offended, and make you a new ^erte and a
new spirit. Wherefore wy^ ^e dye O ye house of Israel? For I ^yll not that any
should dye, says ^he LORD GOD. Iere. iii.
Return and ^^ue. Again, it is commonly said ^f a man leave his wife, and
she going away marieth another husbod, ^hal he return any more again un ^o
her? Shall not the woman be pol^ted and defiled? But thou have play^d the whore
with many lovers, yet ^eturne again unto me, says the LORD, and I will
receive the. O most ^were and comfortable saying. i. Tim. i.
O most ^entle Savior, worthy all praise ^lory and honor.

Here may ye se how greatly we ^re bound to God, and how great ^hanckes we
ought to give him, se^ng that he so greatly desires our ^elth, life and
salvation, and wyllethe by no means our decay, death and damnacion. He is ye
gentle father, which ioyefully receives again his lost son, Luke. xv.
and most louyuglye enbrase the^ him. He is that shepehearde, which brings
home again on his should ders, that sheep that was wandered away. Mat. ix.
He is that Physician, ye heals the sick and diseased. He is ye Savior,
which came not to call y^ righteous but sinners unto repentance He is that
helper, Mat. xi.
which daily cries, come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I
shall refresh you. Seek therefore the LORD, Esa. lv.
while he may be found. Call on him, while he is nygh. Let the ungodly
forsake his way, and the wicked man his thoughts, and let him return to the
LORD, and he shall have mercy on him yea but let him not fail to turn unto
our God. For he is bounteous and very ready to forgive.

The. xlv. Chapter.
FUrthermore who is able to express how greatly we are bound unto God for his
diligent conseruacion and keeping us? By god are we preserved from guyl.
If we were not preserved and kept of him, into how many euels should we
faull? How were it possible for us to be fre from the captivity of Satan, to
be pure from the fylthynesse of the flesh, to be kept harmeles from the
tyranny of the world, if God did not defend us? How many kind of euelles do
we se daily perpetrated and done before our eyes, as theft, murder, treason,
adultrye, fornicacion, covetousness, glotony, dro^ckenshyp. etc. which all
undoubtedly we should likewise do, Nota:
if we were not preserved from the^ by the goodness of God. For the fragilite of
nature and the pronyte unto evil is all one in them and in us, if we be left
unto our selves. Our perdicion comes of our selves but our salvation comes
only of God, Oze. xiii.
as the Prophet says. Except y^ LORD, says Esaie, Esa. i. Romans ix.
had left unto us seed, we had been as Sodom, and we might well have been
lykened unto Gomorre. Therefore seeing that God keeps us from theyse great
enormities, we are very much bound to give him right herty thanckes.

The benefits of God toward us.
Again with how many gifts does he endu^e us daily? What have we, yt is not
his gifts, if it be good and godly? He engraffeth in us by his most holy
spirit, Faith, hope, charity, peace, joy, patience, long sufferynge,
mekenes, leuite, softenes, modesty, honest behauour. etc. He gives us health
for our body. He gives us spiritual gladness for our soul. He prepares all
things necessary for this our need life. He gets friends for us. He
defe^deth us from our enemies. He preserves us i^ all goodness. To conclude,
look what a most natural father is unto his most entierlye beloved son,
the very same is he unto us. So ye what soever we have being good either
pertaining to the soul or to the body, we altogether receive it of this our
celestial father. What great thanckes therefore he is worthi to have, who
perceives not? S. Bernarde says, let us give tha^ckes to our God for ye good
things ye we do, and let us humbly say to hi^ with Esaias the Prophet. Esa. xxvi.
All our works haste you wrought in us O LORD our God. Herto pertayneth the
saying of S. Gregory: It is convenient yt we give thanckes always to God, which
never ceseth to do well, except he be let and hyndred through the noughtines
of men. Therefore what soever work you shalt begin, first call on God, and
cease not to give thanks, when thou hait fynysshed it.

The. xlvi. Chapter.
ALthough it be so, yt all nations of ye world, even from the East to the
West, P^^. ^xii.
ought to praise y^ name of the LORD for his i^numerable benefytes, that they
without deserts receive of him daily, We Englysh men above all nations are
most bound to give God thanks.
yet I thyncke there is no Realm through out Christendom, that has so many
urgent weyghty and necessary causes to give God thanckes, as we English men
have at this present. To whom is it unknown with how miserable captivity we
have been detayned and suppressed theyse many hundred years through the usurped
power and grievous tyrany of yc Bishop of Rome? Who knows not how greatly
the consciences of Christen men were snarled, yea and almoost slain through
the decrees of that Bishop? How greatly was the Christian lybertye enclosed
and stopped up, so that no man could enjoy ye use of those things, which the
word of God determined free, without his lycense and dispensacion? How were
the singular merits of Christ's death, and the inestimable price of his most
precious blood adnihilated and set at naught, and the Bishop of Rooms pardons
trusted unto, and perfect affiaunce reposed in the^ for remission of sins
and eternal salvation? What a sort of Hypocritical and supersticious works
creptin through out Christe^stome almoost, which only were believed to be
thealone good works, and the true good works, which are commanded of God in
his holy scriptures, utterly neglected, despised and set at naught? Who thought
it not a more meritorious act to gylde an Image, than to cloth a poor naked
manne? Who thought it not a better deed to ru^ne gaddynge a pylgrimage into
diverse countrees for to seek dead Images, than to tarry at home, and to visyte
the poor members of Christ, which lay bedrede, sick, lame, feeble and
impote^t. O extreme blyndnes.

Again what an infinite mon^^^res, Monckes I would have said, and other
religious parsons, and God will as they desire to be called, did there arise in
his kyngedome? Who thought it not a better deed to put his child into an
Abbay, and there to live ydlely, swinyshly and irreligiously pampred up with
all delicious fare, that should provoke unto Iewdnes, than to let him live
abroad in the world, and there to practyse some honest art and occupacion,
that might turn to the commodite and mayntaynance of the common weal? What
blyndenes had invaded this Realm? Did not we thynck it rather our duty to
obey y^ proud Bishop of Rome than our own natyue king? Did not we esteem his
fa^tastica^ decrees, above the edictes, laws, and acts of our own king? were
we not more ready to follow his sensual lusts and beastlyke pleasures, than
to obey y^ co^ma^dementes of our own king and ruler? Into what perels would
not we cast our selves to do yt rammysh Bishop pleasure? Yea would God that
certain of this Realm in times paste had not rather had a mind to dye for
the mayntenaunce of the false usurped power of yt Bishop, than to live with
obedient and faithful hertes to our most Christen king. O LORD God, what a
blyndnes was this? where was this doctrine of Christ and his Apostle become,
that all men should be subject and obedient to the high powers? This sentence
of S. Paul lay buried: Romans xiii.
Let every soul be subject to y^ high powers. For there is no power, but of
God. All powers are ordained of God He therefore yt resists, Sap. (...)
resists the ordinance of God. And they yt resist, shall take to the^ selves
damnacion. Also S. Peter: i. Pet. ii.
Be subject to to every humayne creature for the LORDS sake, The king
supreme head
whither it be unto the king as supreme head, or to the rulers that are sent
by him to the punishment of the evil doers, but unto the praise of them that
do well. The Christen princes were not had in reverence and honor as they
ought. o miserable case, and detestable abusio^.

The. xlvii. Chapter.
Behold in what ^lid (...) we Englysh men were when the Bishop of Rome ruled in
th^e Realm
FUrthermore what ygnorancy and blyndenes was in this Realm, concerning the
true and christian knowledge? How many sauoured Christ aryght? How many walked
in the straight pathe ways of Gods ordinances? How many believed Christ to be
the alone Savior? How many trusted to be saved only by y^ merits of Christ's
death, and ye effusion and sheddynge of his most precious and blessed blood?
How many ran to God alone either in their prosperity or aduersite? How many
amplered Christ for their sufficient medsa to^r and advocate unto God ye
father? How many felt the efficacye and power of the true and christian faith
whereby a christian man is frelyiustified? How many could discern the feigned and
the true works asunder? How many did know what they professed at Baptism?
How many had knoweledge what their Pater noster me^t, and wherefore they
prayed? How many did perfectly understand the articles of the Christen faith?
How many did know what the ceremonies of the church mente, as holy bread
and holy water and such other? How many heard the Euangicall doctrine ever
preached purely and syncerly? O good Jesus, be mercyful unto us. If I should go
forth to rehearse all the abuses and all the ygnora^cy and blyndenes, wherewith
this now most free and florysshynge Realm has been oppressed this many
hundred years through the tyranny of that Babilonicall stro^pet, Apoc. xvii.
it would undoubtedly make a work much longer then the Iliades of Homere.

England is purged and made clean of her deformytyes.
But now are these enormities yea and deformities of this Realm of England
utterly exiled and banyshed. All false Religion is exterped and plucked up by
the roots. The miserable captivity, wherewith we were oppressed in the Popes
kingdom, is turned into delectable liberte. Dur conconscie^ces are restored to
their old fredome. Christ's death is believed to be a sufficient Sacrifyce for
them ye are sanctified. Heb. x.
All supersticious fantasies invented of idle brains are full godly put down.
The famous Images, wherewith the simple people committed sornicacion, I mean,
Idolatry, are justly plucked down, and conveyed out of the way. All the
monastical sects have put of their cowles and monstrous garments. Our most
Christian king is now according to ye verite of Gods word and his just and
right title, recognized to be supreme head of ye church of England next unto
Christ immediately here in earth. He is honored of us his subjects, as we
ought by ye law of God and had in reverence above all creatures mortal. Not
only his most noble grace, but also so many as he appoyntethe to rule over
us, we obey with all submissio^ and humilite of mind.

The. xlviii. Chapter.
Moreover ygnorancy and blyndenes are exiled and banysshed. Gods laws are
manifestly declared unto us. So that we may, if we will, keep his most godly
commandments. The most sacred Bible is freely permytted to be red of every
man in the Englysh tongue. Many savor Christ aright, and daily the number
increases, thanckes be to GOD. Christ is believed to be the alone Savior. ^.
Joan. i.
We now faithfully trust to be saved by the death of Christ, and that the
blood of Christ makes us clean from all sin. Christ is believed to be our
sufficient mediatoure and advocate. ^alv. Romans v.
The true and christen faith, which works by charity and is plenteous in
good works, is now received to justify. The good works that are appointed in
ye holy scriptures, are now only used, and put in exercise among the faithful.
What we professed, when we were baptized, many now know right well. The
twelve Articles of the christian faith, the LORDS prayer, called ye Pater
noster, and the te^ commandments are now rehearsed in ye English tongue
both of young and old, so that now all understand the^. Many of the
Ec^^^^^asticall ceremonies are now ryg^^ well taught and known. To conclude,
all old things are paste, and new things entered into y^ game place in stead
of them. And all these things has God brought to pass by his derely beloved
seruau^te Henry our king. If his grace goes forth, as he has begun, he shall
make such a florynshynge Realm both in spiritual and corporal goods, both
for the glory of God, and for the mayntenaunce of his Graces publyque meal, as
none shall may be able to compare with this Realm of England, through out
Christendom. And as his most excellent majesty shall easily overcome and
excel in the exercise of true godlynes all his ^re decessoures and leave a
memorable act unto his successoures, most worthy to be followed, so likewise
may his Grace be sure, that there is reposed and laid up i^ store for hi^ in
Gods treasure house the imma^cessible crown of glory, which, when his Grace
shall give over to nature, that most glorious king of all kings shall give to
him undoubtedly for his faithful walking in the divine precepts, and setting
forth of Gods glory.

The golden world
This thing brought to pass by his Graces diligence, ye all abuses plucked
away, the true godlynes may reygne, who shall not than iustelye think, yt
the golden world is come again, Duid M^ ^a. i.
whereof the au^ciente learned me^ disputed so much in their most eloquent
monumentes. Merely we shall than may well say, as the Poet writes. Eglo.
iiii.


Magnus al integro secloru^ nascitur ordo. I am redit eg uirgo, redeunt
Saturnia regna. God might assiste his most excellent majesty in all his godly
and virtuous enterprises. Amen.
The. xlix. Chapter.
THus se we how greatly we of the Englysh nation are bound unto God for the
restitucion and bringynge again of the knoweledge of his most divine will,
which so long has been hid under the busshell of men's tradicions. What
co^digue thanckes are we able to give unto him for this his i^estimable
goodness? Werelye if every one of us, as Wergyle says, had an hundred to^ges,
and an hundred mouths, yet were we not able sufficientelye to decantate,
singe, and set forth his praises. GOD grant us once to be truly tha^kefull.

Now where are these parsons, The aburtsaryes of Gods wor^
which have so little pleasure in this regeneracio^ and new birth, as I may so
speak, of Gods most blessed word and in this setting forth again of ye
Evangelical berite, our only life, health and salvation? Where are these
Dwles, which despisynge the most confortable light of Gods word, chose
rather continually to walk in the darkness of men's tradicions, than once to
approach unto this celestial light? Where are these Antechristes, which will
neither them selves read the Scriptures, nor yet suffer other, that would read
them, but to ye vttermoost of their power pluck men from redynge the most
sacred Bible, the word of life, of all joy, and spiritual consolacion?

Against these wicked Papists tho^d^eth Christ in the Gospel, saying: Do be
to you ye Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, Mat. xxiii.
for ye spear up the kyngedome of heaven before men, ye do neither enter in
your selves, nor yet suffer them that come to enter. Gerely if we do not
shortly repent amend, and enhalse with enbrasynge arms this most sweet word
of god we may be sure shortly to feale the most grievous plages of Gods
wrath faull upon us for our vnthancke fulness. And as Christ said to certain
Cities for their ingratitude and vnthanckefulnes. Do be to the Corazin, woe be
to the Bethsada^, for if ye virtues ye have been done in you, Math xi. Luke. x.
had been done in ye city of Cyrus and Sydo^, verily they would have repented
them of their sins in times paste, yea and that even in sackeclothe and
ashes. Notwithstanding it shall be more tolerable and more easy at ye day
of judgment to Cyrus and Sydon, than to you. And thou Capernaum, which art
exalted unto heaven, thou shalt be plucked down even to ye veryhel. For if ye
miracles which have been showed in the, had been showed in Sodom, it had
remained unto this day. Notwithsta^dynge I say to you, it shall be more
tolerable to Sodom at the day of judgment than to the: So may it be said
to England: Do be to the England, for if the light of Gods word, had come
into other nations so plenteously as it has done in the verelye they would
have repented and received it joyfully. But thou do neither repent nor amend
thy lyse, nor take any pleasure in the coming of it. uerely it shall be more
easy at ye day of judgment to Sodom and Gomorre than to the.

Let us not therefore doubt, but if we do not shortly repent, amend our
corrupt manners, and most joy fully enhalse with enbrasyng arms this most
sweet and confortable Gospel of our savior Jesus Christ, undoubtedly the
fears plages of Gods wrath will shortly faull upon us. Math ^ take (...).
The Scriptures show manifestlye that the vengeance of God is not far from
us. These benefytes, that are showed unto us, declare evidently ye ye plages of
god are at hand. This light of Gods truth, which now shyneth to al me^, if
they will receive it, proves openly ye Gods wrath is ready to faull upon us,
if we shortly do not repent and amend. For this is the property of God, even
to send before his most holy word, Note y^ properte of go^ in sendyng forth
his word.
as a messanger and Ambassador to them that walk in darkness and live
dissolutely. If they receive it, repent, and amend their lives, tha^ does his
grace and favor faull upon them, and they are Gods well-beloved dearelynges,
and shall want no good thing, as we read of the Diniuites. But if they
obstinately resyst it, Jonas. iii.
laugh the word of God to scorn, Beware (...) ^corners of Gods word vetymes
^sal, vi^
remain in their old infidilite and wickedness, tha^ does God ^yse v^^e like a
fearce ^yon, whette his swearde, bend his bow, and make ready his shaftes,
which shall pearse, the bodies of the wicked, as darts of iron fire whotte.

The. L. Chapter.
BUt come of I pray you hertely ^ tell me, did not God, Genesis vii. (...) ^x^.
ii.
when he saw the world replenysshed so abu^dantly we sin, that it could be
no more, send None to preach unto the^, and to exhort them unto repe^tasies
and amendment of life, or else synal destruction should chau^se unto them yet
for all this gentleness of God, which desired rather their salvation than
damnacio^, if they would have converted, they despised the most loving
admonicion of Gods messa^ger. They had the word of God in derisio^. They
continued still in their brutall and beastelyke living. They gave them selves
to eating, drynckynge, banckettynge, and all kind of carnal and volupteous
living. They oppressed ye poor people, for ye mayntenaunce of their fleshly
and insaciable lusts. To be short, they walked as persons full of carnal
securyte, and clean without all fear of GOD. But what followed this their
wicked and dissolute living, Behold ye end of the ^^at hate Gods word.
and co^tempte of gods word* Uerely utter destruccio^. For God saw that they
would by no means amend, but still persyste in their abhominacion, he
repented him, Genesis vi.
that ever he made man, and shortly after sent such a floude upon the earth,
Genesis vii. ii. Pet. ii.
that it ouerflowed and drowned all the world, Nohe with certain other only
reserved through ye great goodness of god. D terrible Hystory. Whose heart
quakethe not for fear at the hearing of this Historys' Certes it is a
terrible Hystory for the adversaries of Gods word, and for all wicked lyuers.

Wha^ the Sodomites lived so ab hominablye, Genesis xix. ii. Pet. ii.
that the uery uoyce of their sin came up unto heaven, and pearsed the
diuynerares, and cried for uengeaunce to faull upon them, not only Abraham
increaced for the^, but also Loathe preached unto the^, exhorting them to leave
their to much detestable and abominable uncleanness, and to take the fear of
God unto the^, and the study of a pure and innocent life. But they would not.
D abbo^^nacion.
For the more that Loath rebuked the^ sor their wickedness the more pleasure had
they in it. P^^. i. Psa. xiii.
They delighted in their nough tynes, and reioysed wha^ they had done evil.
They had no fear of God before their eyes. Yea they so lived, as though there
were no God at all. Therefore God ye ryghteous LORD, seeing their detestable
purpose still to remain in their abominable living, and no repentance, was
of uery justice compelled to destroy the^ by sendynge fire and brymstone from
heaven, so that both Sodom and Gomorre with all the inhabita^tes there o^^ and
all that ever pertayned to the^, were utterly co^slimed with fire and brymstone
from heaven. O dolorous spectacle, and h^^y fight. This is an example, as S
Peter says, for all the^ that do ungodly. ii. Pet. ii. Nota.
Oh what it is to contemn the word of God and the true preachers thereof.

The. Li. Chapter.
Again when Moses and Aaron at the commandment of God, preached to the
Egipcians, and myssed them to let the people of Israel^^go out of captivity,
Exo. iii.
that they might come and do Sacrifyce to their LORD God, how little was their
preaching regarded* god plaged the^, yet would they not amend. At the last
when he saw none amendment in them, Genesis xiiii.
did not he by strong hand deliver the^ out of captivity, and drowned al their
adversaries* This came to pass undoubtedly if they would have been or bedie^ts
to his voice by ye mouth of his Prophets, they had never been plaged nor yet
so finallye destroyed* Beware be times beware.
Let all ^^y^sers and kickers therefore ye spurn against the truth, learn
here what it is to despise the word of God and the faythefull preachers thereof.

Moreover as often as the children of Israel did forsake their true god, which
brought them out of ye lord of Egypt, and ra^^ne an whore hu^tyng after
straung gods, and followed their own fantasies contrary to the prescripte of
Gods word, God sent his Prophets unto them, for to admonysh them of their
duty and to reduce and bring them again into the true way. D cruel
murderers. ii. pa. xxiiii mat. v. xxiii ii. Re. xxv.
But they would not hear them, but persecuted them, entreated them ungently,
prisoned them, and never ceased from their crudelite, until they had slain
them. God therefore seeing how stysseuecked and hard hearted they were, sent in
their enemies on every side, which destroyed their Cities, spoiled their
goods, slew innumerable, and led the residue away captyue for their
disobedience and ingratitude.

Christ vngentylly entreated.
At the last God sent unto ye Jews his own son, that they might repent,
co^uerte and amend. But hew thanckefully they received his coming, the
Scriptures show more evidently than it need here to be rehearsed. What
followed? Uerely the utter destruction almoost of the^ all, as the Histories
make mention. Behold the end.
The end of them was so lamentable, yea and miserable, that no man can read
the History without tears and we pynge eyes. Are not all theyse terryble
Histories for the despisers of gods word? Let us not flatter our selves nor
make to much of our painted ^^ethe, as they say. For surely y^ God, which in
times paste sent vengeance upon the earth for disobeyenge and conte^nynge of
his word, will now also pour out his fearce plages upon us, if we repent not
shortly and amend. For after so great light of Gods word, if it be not
thanckefully received, obeyed and followed, comes undoubtedly always a great
and grievous plage, which is inevitable and can not be exchewed, except the
amend. Let us therefore with fo^efull hertes receive the doctrine of God,
fe^eah means possible to pro(...) (...) thereafter, practyse it in (...) wyn
other me to it by out godly conversation. Let us not only say^^ (...) we are
favorers of Gods wor^^ crake much of faith, but let us (...) soberly, Tit. ii.
righteously, and godly in this present world. For to read the Scriptures, to
talk of the^ to best our selves of faith is not^ig to the purpose, Mark this
well.
except we indicate our life daily according to Gods word. Joan. xiiii
He tha^ has my commandments, says Christ, and ^epeth them he it is that
love the me. Math. vii
Not e^erye one that says to me, LORD, LORD shall enter into the kynge^dome
of heaven, but he that does the will of my father, which is in heaven.

These things have I spoken to admonyshe men of their duty, that they may
not abuse this singular benefyte of Gods word, that is now come among us, but
live worthy ye kyndenes of God, give him right herty thanckes, and to be have
them selves, that God may not take away this his inestimable benefyte from
us, but rather increase it unto the glory of his name, and the health of our
souls. But it will return to our matter, and make an end.

The. Lii. Chapter.
THus se we what great causes ^e ^aue to give thanckes unto God, A brefere
hearfall of Gods benefits toward be:
if foe consider his many sold benefytes, where with he garnyssheth us daily.
He made us first of all not only like unto his own image, but also, when
through the sin of Ada^ we were lost and damned, he saved us ag^^yne freely
of his great mercy by Jesus Christ. And though we sin sometime through the
fragelite of humayne nature contrary to our promise at Baptism, yette ir^
has mercy for us, laid up in store, if we faithfully repent, and amend our
lives. He preserves us from many grievous enormities, into the which we should
undoubtedly faul^ headlonge, if we were not preserved by his goodness. He like a
most gentle father sedeth us, and sends us al thiges necessary for this
indygent and poor life. He appoyntethe his holy Jungell to wait upon us, that
we may be oppressed with no evil. He gyuethe us favor in the syghte of me^.
He se^deth to us health both of hody and soul. Joan. xvi.
He grau^tethe us what so ever we ask in the name of his son Jesus Christ.
What would we have more? Yea and that, which to a christian man would be most
acceptable and thanckefull, he has prepared for us an everlasting kyngedome.
full of all joy, Esa. lxiiii.
pleasure, glory and selicite. Do heart can thyncke, no tunge can express, no
eye has seen those treasures, that God has prepared for so many as love him.
i. Cor. iii.
Who has ever had so bounteous a LORD, and so gentle and louinge a father?
Romans v.
He loves, where he was not loved. He enrycheth, where he was hated. He does
good to the^, that despised his most holy will. D burning charity. D in
co^parable love. D kyndenes unspeakable. Do we will we now reco^pe^se this
excedyng bentgnite of this our bounteous and celestial father? What does he
require of us again? Byldynge of monasteries? Gaddyng on pylgrimage? Offringe
up of ca^dels? Payntynge of Tabernacles? Gyldynge of Images? Prayeng of long
Prayers without the affecte of the mind? May verily. For he has no need of
our goods, Psalm. iv.
as the Psalmographe says. What than? Forsothe thanckes gyuynge. He ye gives
hartye thanckes to God for the benefytes received, makes God amends largely.
Thanks ^yuyng. Note.
He only desires of his faith full people, lauds, praises and thanks
gyuynge. Only he desires that we be not unthankful, nor walk un worthy
his benignity and kyndenes. For as S. Bernarde says, In ca^tica Ser: (...)
there is nothing ye displeases God so much chefely in the Children of grace,
as ingratitude and vnthanckefulnes. That he delyghteth so much in praises and
thanks gyuynge it is evident, seeing that he distayneth not in his holy
Scripture to call at a S^cry^^^e, as though he should say, praise and tha^ckes
gyuynge is that, that pleseth me, and gives the sweet favor before my
presence. But let us hear the Scriptures. The Sacrifyce of praise, says he,
shall honor me. And a little before. Psalm. xlix.
Offer to God the sacrifyce of praise, and pay to ye most hygheste thy nowes.
Caull on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver the, and thou shalt
honor me. Do not all these faye^ges declare manifestly that the most
acceptable sacryfyce to God is the Sacryfyce of praise and thanckes gyuynge?
Canue therbe a greater glory given to god, than to confess that all goodness
and virtue comes only of him, and ye there fore al honor, laud, encomy,
praise and glory ought to be given to him alone? Undoubtedly the Sacrifyce of
thanckes gyuynge please the God hyghly. Neither is their any work that we can
do, that so hyghly exalts the name of God, as this Sacrifyce of thanks
gyuynge, or wherein God delyghteth more. If there had, undoubtedly it had been
prescribed and set forth in the most sacred Bible Did not all the holy
Patriarchs and so many as were before Christ's coming offer this Sacrifyce
of tha^ckes gyuynge to God, as a thing to to him most welcome and acceptable?
And although they also at diverse times offered external sacrifyces, yet were
these none other thing than a testimony and witness of their i^ward
Sacrifice, which they offered in their heart, praysynge the name of our LORD
God. Mat. xi. Luke. x.
Did not Christ also and his Apostles, as we read in the holy Scriptures,
offer this kind of sacrifyces to our heavenly father? And as they did thus, so
in like manner do they exhort us ever to be tha^kefull to God and to sing
co^tynuall praises to his most blessed name. Colo. iii.
S. Paul says, what so ever ye do in word and deed, do all things in the
name of ye LORD Jesus, gyuynge thanckes to God and the father by him. Again: Be
ye thankful. Also in another place, give thanckes always for all things in
the name of our LORD Jesus Christ to God and the father. Ephe. v.
To the Hebrews also be writes on this manner. By him, Heb. xiii.
he means Christ, do we offer the Sacryfyce of praise all way to God, that
is to say, ye fruit of the lyppes, that give glory to his name. Thus se we how
diligent the holy scripture is, for to move us unto this sacrifyce of thanks
gyuing, as a thing very pleasant, and much acceptable to the divine majesty.
But let us hear, what S. Auste^ says, ye we being instructed both with the
holy scriptures, and also with authoryties of the aunciente Doctors, may the
sooner be moved for to give god herty thanks at all times.

The. Liii. Chapter.
OFfer to God, In Pl. xlix
says he, the sacrifyce of praise. I may come to myself, where I shall find
that I may offer. I may come to my self, for in my self shall I find the
immolacio^ and offering of praise. Thy Altar is thy conscience. Offer
therefore to God the Sacrifyce of praise. Mark (...)
We need not take any thought, there is no cause why we should go unto Arabia,
to seek tra^kenfence, or to fetch the packes of ye covetous occupyer. For god
seeks of us the sacrifyce of praise. Luke. xix.
This sacrifyce of praise had Zacheus in his patrimony, had the widow in her
closet, had a certain poor hosts. I knew not what she was, ^ii. Re. xiii.
i^ her tune. Offer thou therefore to God the sacrifyce of praise. This is the
offering, Psa. xlix.
this is the sacrifyce to give thanckes unto him, of whom thou have, what so
ever good is, and through whose mercy is forgyuen, what soever evil is thine.
Offer to God the sacrifyce of praise, and pay to the most highest thy prayers.
For we this savor is god delighted

Behold how this most holy Doctor inculketh and bete^h in still the sacrifyce
of praise and thanckes gyuyng we says, yt we need seek none other gift or
present to bring unto god but only y^ sacrifyce of praise of tha^ckes gyuynge.
For in that above al other has God pleasure. The Psalmograph says, Psalm. lvi.
thy vows, O God, are within me, which I shall pay unto the, I mean praises
and thanks gyuynge unto the. For you have delivered my soul from death, and my
fete from slydynge. Psa. cxv.
Again, I shall offer unto the, the Sacrifyce of praise, and caull on the name
of the LORD. Psa. xxxiii.
Also in another place, I will magnifye the LORD at all times, and his praise
shall ever be in my mouth as though he should say, there shall no time pass
away, whyther it be troublous or merye, wherein I shall not praise ye LORD.
Both my youth and my age shall be bent to ye praise of him. Hereof may we learn
to praise our LORD God at every momente.

The. Liiii. Chapter.
THere ought no vice to be further from the breast of a Christian man, then
ingratitude and vnthanckefulnes. For as S. Bernarde faith, In Cant^ Ser. ^.
ingratitude is the enemy of ye soul the utter putting away of merytes, the
dispersion of virtues, the perdicion and loss of benefits, the fire ye
burns and dries up the fountain of godlynes, the dew of mercy, and the
sloudes of grace.

If we give our servants any thing, they render unto us right herty
thanckes for it. Is it not therefore convenient, that we be thanckefull to him,
Nota.
that gives all things and without whom we have nothing yt good is? With
what forheade dare we behold to ask and receive any thing of God, and
afterward not once to thank him for it? O barbarous inhumanite. O ingratitude
to much unkind. They that are of such churlysh nature, are of ye kind of
them, Psa. lxxvii
which, as the Psalmograph say^the, did forgette the benefytes of God, and the
meruay^ous tokens that he showed. They were filled, yea the^ were stuffed even
full, says God by his Prophet, and they than lyfted up their heart, waxed
proud, and forgot me. Oze. xiii.
And therefore I am become unto them as a Lion, and as the Catte of ye
mountain, that runs so swyftely. I will mete with the^ as a Bear that
has lost her young ones, and I will break asunder their obstinate heart.
Yea I will devour them as a Lion, and the beast of the field shall tear them
on pieces. O terible thretenynge for the ingrate and vntha^ckefull persons. This
will surely come to pass, if we put not away our in gratitude and
vnthanckefulnes. Psalm. cxliiii^ Titus. i.
For y^ LORD is faithful in all his words, and can not lie, in as much as he
is the self truth.

The. Lv. Chapter.
Therefore if we entende to have God the father a beneficial fat^^r to us, and
his son Jesus Christ ^^rcifull Savior, let us in all things give thanckes
to God at all times, yea and that not only in prosperity but also in
adversity, Job. i.
as the holy man Job did, saying: The LORD gave it, and the LORD has taken
it away, as it pleased ye LORD so is it come to pass, blessed be the name of
the LORD. Let us watch and pray that we faull not into tentacion. Let us fly
to God at all times with precordiall obsecracions and herty requests. Mat. xxvi
Let our prayers be continual. Let the^ proceed from a faithful and
charitable heart. In exhortacion to prayer and thanks geuynge.
Let us ask all things according to the will of GOD, yea and that in the name
of Christ. Let us in all our prayers seek the glory of God, the auauncement
of his most blessed word, and ye health of our own souls. Let us pray for ye
preseruacion of y^ kings most excellent majesty, and for the prosperous
success of his intierly beloved son Edward our Prince. (...) most angelyke
Impe. Let us pray for all the Lords spirytuall and temporal, specially those
that have the regiment of the publyque weal under the Kings graces highness.
Col. iiii^
Let us pray for the ministers of Gods word, that they may freely speak
the truth of Christ's Gospel, as it becomes them. Let us pray for all me^
universally, chefely for the inhabita^tes of this Realm of England, that they
may all bear a faithful heart hothe toward God and our king. To conclude,
let us pray that the will of God may be fulfilled in all things.

When we have thus prayed, let us all times give thanckes to God for his
benefytes. So shall it come to pass, ye he shall not only not turn away his
kyndenes from us, but also increase it daily unto the great consolacion and
conforte of us all.

If this thing shall come to pass that we both pray fervently, and a^ so
give thanckes to God her^^^ye, ^ shall not a little rejoice that I have taken
the labor and pain in compylynge this pathewaye unto Prayer, yea it shall
encourage me hereafter to attempt other enterpryses of no less importance
and vtilite.

Which thing (most gentle Reader) that it may come to pass, pray for me
unto our LORD God, that he may syng^^e that thing in me, which he has
begun, unto the glory of his most blessed name, ^ promocion of his most
godly word, and the profyt and edificacion of his most holy and catholyke
Church. Ame^.

Give the glory to GOD alone.

