THE Poem of Poems. OR, SIONS MUSE, Containing the divine Song of King Solomon,
divided into eight Eclogues.

Bramo assai, poco spero, nulla chieggio.

AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Saint Dunstones Church.

Unto the sacred Virgin, divine Mistres Elizabeth Sidney, sole daughter and
heir, to the ever admired Sir Phillip Sydney, Knight.
BOund to your eternal service, (diuinest of all Virgin creatures) both in
honor of your renowned Grandfather, to whom my Name was ever immortallie
obliged, and your excellence admired, as far as admiration has force to
convey true praises; and lastly, coniured by an irresistable edict, from them
to whom my life's course is all only enthralled, with humble reverence I offer
to your maiden censure, these hallowed lines, metamorphosed by mine unhallowed
senses; daine the^ (dear flower of dear virginnitie) with gracious aspect to
smile upon mine infant Muses devotion, and in dispight of tirannizing time,
lend life to my labor and love to Solomon. Then your self, no power is
greater, and with your power is equal no work of Nature; be then your self
the powerful Engine to sustain my fortunes, and my fortunes the first
created, to make known your power, that when mine unfeathered Muse shall be
impt by your graces, she may strain her untuned numbers to sing of you and
your adored Father, whom heaven holds to make happy her habitation, earth
wants to give wonder to her age, and men wish to make mighty their fortunes.

Happy enough if I please enough. I. M.

To the Readers.
RApt in admiration (Gentlemen) with the excellencies of our English Poets,
whose wondered spirits have made wonderful the works of profane love; I gave
my self over to the study of inchaunting Poesy, in which, I so much the more
delighted my self, by how much the farther I found me from attaining the
celestial secrets of her soule-pleasing Art, and in that amazement,
willingly became an eternal Prentise to the Muses. At length, finding Nature
an enemy to mine Art, denying me those affections, which in others make more
then immortal the most earthly imaginations; I betook me to Divinity, in
which laboring my sunne-burnt conceits, I found Poesy which I so much
reverenced, created but a hand-maide to attend Divinity: and that as Poesy
gave grace to vulgar subjects, so Divinity gave glory to the best part of a
Poets invention. Proud in this opinion, I made love to Salomons holy Song, and
dissoluing my spirits in applause of that excellence, sought to attract it
within the compass of our most usual stanzaes, which having done, (though
worse then Millions can do) I commit to your gentle censures. If the manner
displease, the matter was Salomons, if the descant dislike, the plaine-song was
Salomons, if the lines be vnsmooth, the words were Salomons, and how ever set
forth, the invention was Salomons. Be Solomon then my Rock, to defend me from
the railing of the envious; and my mediator to purchase favor with the
courteous, so shall the one kick against the pricks, and the other bring grace
to themselves in being gracious.

This Song was not tuned for vulgar Music, but thought to have been reserved
for a private Consort, only now commanded by those which may compel, it is
made public. Sweet Gentlemen, let it have gentle passage through your ears,
that it may be endowed with good hap, and I with good fortune, both with your
favors, and all with your praise.

Yours I. M.

To his dear Mistress, Mistress Elizabeth Sidney.
ALl the worlds glory, and the earths delight,
Created for to teach Phylosophie,
That there is a greater Essence of more might
Then Grandam Natures old-taught dietie,
Look on these lines, dear issues of a King,
The Song of Songs, that lent invention eyes,
Which great Iehouahs or Querrister did sing,
Unto the Sphearie Organ of the skies:
Learn not but learn by this celestial bride,
To entertain espoused happiness,
Yet let thy Virgine-Taper ever bide
Like midday Sun to light true holiness,
For though the world, and all things fade away,
Thy Virtues, and this Song shall nere decay.
E. W.

The Argument of the whole Book.
IN this Song, Solomon by most sweet and comfortable allegories and parables,
describes the perfect love of Jesus Christ, the true Solomon and King of peace,
and the faithful soul or his Church, which he has sanctified and appointed
to be his spouse, holy, chaste and without reprehension. So that here is
declared the singular love of the bridegroom toward the bride, and his great
and excellent benefits wherewith he does enrich her of his pure bounty and
grace without any of her deseruings. Also the earnest affection of the Church
which is inflamed with the love of Christ desiring to be more and more joined
to him in love, and not to be forsaken for any spot or blemish that is in her.

Faults escaped in the printing.
IN Ecloga tertia, the 10, stanza, and the last line, for lived with Syons
Love, read lined with Syons love.

In Ecloga quarta, before you read, O fountain of the garden, etc. read
Ecclesia for the Speaker in that place.

ECLOGA PRIMA.
Th'argument.
Between Thaumastos and his love dark lovely talk does pass,
She of her home-begotten woes bemoanes the wronged case.
ECCLESIA, THAVMASTOS. Ver^^ 1.
IMprint upon my lips pure liuorie
The honey pleasure of thy mouths dear kiss,
For why thy love, bounded in no degree,
Exceedes the sence-inchaunting sugared bliss
Which from the taste of wine attracted is.
2.
Like ayre-perfuming Odors is thy smell,
And like rich Unguents is thy glorious Name,
Powered divinely from a precious Well,
Whence lo a brand of kind affection came,
Kindling Ye Virgins hearts with thy loves flame.
3.
Draw me (my dear) entice me with thine eye,
Then shall my after flight Times flight ore-runne,
And when the King in pompous royalty,
Shall mine afflictions fetters have undone,
Inhousing in his Chamber my selfs son,
Then shall my joy in thee be complete framed,
And thine eternal happy-making love,
Then juice of swelling grapes; or what is named
By sweeter style; I will record above
All reach; because the just in thee do move.
4.
You Daughters of Jerusalem behold
The sable tinckture of my spotted face,
Yet note youths features in decaying old,
For I am lovely, rich in comely grace,
More the^ the twins which sprung from (...)
Kedar's race.
Kedar the large desent of I smaells line,
From whom the tent-inclosd Arabians sprang;
And of more beauty then the silken twine
Of Salomons curtain; when thereon does hang
Th'vnualued Iems of which all Syon rang.
5.
Disdain me not because of black attaint,
For why the scorching Sun has kissed my brow,
And with his eieballs, on my cheeks does paint,
What sinne-inflicting nature does allow
Through the corruption of her broken vow.
Not for my Brothers (dear in my pure sight)
Th'vnkindest offspring of my Mothers womb
Against me forced the hosts of wrath to fight,
Making me keep a foreign vine by dombe,
Whilst I mine own in lost regard intombe.
6.
O thou in whom my souls affections dwell,
That can recuer my fayrs disparagment,
Vnuayle to me thy being; dear heart tell
Both where thou feedst, and when the morn is spent,
In what calm noone-tide shade thy lims are pent.
For why should I their foote-steps immitate
Which turns aside unto thy neighbors flocks,
Whom thou have called to that divine estate,
And yet like long washed, sand-consuming Rocks,
By their fond dreams thy grace in prison locks.
Thaumastos. 7.
Most excellent of all the femall line, (...)

O thou the fairest women's only fair,
If where I am thou know not, then declyne
And by the mornings footsteps which appear, (...)

Trace forth my flocks, and figure their repair;
And by the Tents of those caelestiall Swayns
Which unto Edens pastors are thy guide,
Feed thy young Kyds; and on their flowrie playns
Sport with thy lambkins, in the Summers pride.
So shall thou learn, and know where I abide.
8.
I have (my Love) compard thine excellence,
Unto the managed troops of armed Steeds,
Whose crests, the seat of glories residence
Adorn great Pharo's Chariot; when with weeds
Of pomp; they hale his watch to martial deeds.
9.
Thy comely cheeks, the Jewels of my heart,
Are rich enchast with rare reflicting stone,
And bout thy neck where Beauty learnt his Art,
Hang lynke-vnyted chains which all alone,
Gyrdle thy beams from view of any one.
^^.
It Is we (my dear) that of the purest gold,
Tried in the flame from out The Arabian mine,
Will make thee borders; doubled many fold,
Imbosted, and intraild with curious twine,
Which shall with silver studs imbellisht shine.

Ecclesia. ^1.
Whilst in the concau'd palace of my dear,
My King, my Love shall take desired repose,
My Spyknards sacred fume shall then appear,
Imbalming all the places where he goes,
And by his sent my fervent love disclose.
^2.
My only one, beloved much more then most,
Like sweetning Mirrh, the seasoner of smell,
Such sacred sent thy sight in me does boast,
And thou my Love in whom all loves I tell,
Shall twixt my Maiden breasts for ever dwell.
1^
My Loues-ioy is like Cipresse clustred fruit
Planted amongst the vines of Engedi;
At whose rich bounds the Salt-seas humble suite,
Implores with kind embracing feruensie,
Respect of love, in his loves ecstasy.

Thaumastos. 1^
See, see, my Love thou art fair, (o fairest fair)
Fair is my Love, fair in my Love is fair,
The gentle Doves that wanton in the air,
And dally in our breath-bequeathing sphere,
Within thine eyes their beauties do appear.

Ecclesia. 1^
(Dearly beloved) double thou art as fair,
And more then fair pleasure conforts with thee,
Beauteous pleasant; pleasant beauteous dear,
To this thou addest all eternity;
And ever green our bridal bed shall be.
^6.
The stately beams of our fair Cytadell,
And costly coloms curiously wrought,
Are all of Cedar, rich in praise and smell,
And those fair walks th'inchanters of my thought,
Shall Be of vened Fur, with endless title bought.

ECLOGA SECVNDA.
Th'argument.
Under Thaumaitos wings to rest Ecclesia goes,
She unto Doves; to Fox deceit compared are her Foes.
ECCLESIA, THAVMASTOS. 1.
I Am (my dear) the glorious bashful Rose
Which on ye summer plains of 1. (...) 27.
Sharon grow,
Sharon the nurse of smells; food to that nose
That draws his breath where her sweet Rosiats flow.
I am that Rose, the pride of Libanon,
Beauty of Gardens, splendor of the field,
And I am that pale Lilly looked upon,
Whose virgin-colour'd pureness, pleasures yield.
I am the Rose, the hie fields ornament,
And Lillie-bloome, the Valleys blandishment.
Thaumastos. ^.
As stainelesse grows the staining Lillies blaze
Planted amongst the vndergrowing thorn,
And as she makes disliking like to gaze,
Praising her beams, chiding where she was borne,
So among the maiden daughters of the world,
Thornie infolders of the fairest rays,
Such is my love, so is thy beauty hurld
Into mine eye; gracing dispraise with praise.
As Lillies are with thorns environed,
Such is my love with maids ingirdeled.

Ecclesia. ^.
As among the Forests barraine shadowing trees,
The comlie Aple-bearing stock erects
His rich regard; beyond all mean degrees,
Such is my dear among other men's defects.
Under thy shadowing fruitful arms I sat,
Thither delight inticst my fervent zeal,
And in my rest, thy fruit to wonder at,
Unto my mouth all honie-sweets reveal.
Like the apple tree in vvoods, such is my love,
Fair shade, sweet taste, all sweetness far above.
4.
Into his feast-house streaming purest Wine,
Thither my King, my love has brought his dear,
VVauing the Ensign of his love divine,
Over mine head; defending me from fear.
O stay me (love) with flagons do support me,
5.
Raise my decline, sustain my down remove,
With taste of apples (dear heart) do comfort me,
For I am sick, o sick of mighty love.
Under loves Canapee, brought to thy feasting bliss,
Support and comfort me that loue-sick is.
6.
Under my head, (weary for want of rest)
My Loves left hand (o sacred hand) does lie;
Soft Pyllow-lyke making my temples blessed,
Infusing slumber in my closing eye,
And with his right hand learnt how to inlace,
And make his Love by his infoldings glad,
He makes me rich with kyndest kind embrace,
Such as the like no true love ever had.
Upon his left my head takes her repose
And with his right me does my Love enclose.

Thaumastos. 7.
Daughters of Judah, Twins of Jerusalem,
That with my Love my fairest one do dwell,
I charge you by the Hynds, and Roes, and them
That grace our fields with beauty, or with smell,
Not to stir up; or with confusions sound
To break the blessed slumber of my sweet,
But let her rest, with choycest calmes be found,
Until to wake her pleasure thinks it meet.
You Syons heirs do not my Love awake
Until her self, her self from slumber take.

Ecclesia. 8.
It is my best Beloueds voice I hear,
Hark how his words sweet Musicks notes resound,
See where he comes, mark how he does appear,
O how his words with rauishment confounds;
See where he comes, and by the Mountayns leaps,
^.
By Mountayns leaps my jolly capring Love,
See where he skyps by hyls, and earthy heaps,
Leaping, and skypping look how my dear does move,
The voice I hear issues fro my Loves lip,
Whilst by the Mounts he leaps, and hills does skip.
^.
Like a young Heart, or like a wing'd-foote Roe,
Chasing upon the Meadows and the plains,
Such is my wel-belou'd in self and shoe,
Such like my dearest dear one aye remains;
See how he stands veiled behind our wall,
From opened casments darting his pure raise,
And through the grats, and cranies made to thrall,
His own true splendor gloriously displais.
My love like Roes, and Hearts wal-clowded shines,
And shoes from grats, and windows him divine.
^^
My souls joy spoke, thus spoke his music words,
My love, my fair one rise, dear come away,
For see the stormy VVinter Spring affoords,
Past is the frostie seasons stubborn sway,
The showers of sin in rain drops numberless,
Is chaung'd and altered in this blooming time,
Fled is brem winters wrath held merciless,
And budding fruit does flower in our clime.
Thus says my sweet, VVinter does Spring obey,
Then rise my love, my fair one come away.
12.
The earths fair Arras carpet wrought in flowers,
Now comlie folds her cold dry carcass in,
Beauty now paints the face was marrd With showers,
And all the airs sweet quirristers begin
To chaunt their carrolling lays with hie regard,
Even from the tallest Cedars to the shrubs,
Whilst in our land the Turtles voice is hard,
Tuning grave Anthems in ye lower woods.
Earth boasts her flowers, birds brag their singing time,
And in our land the Turtles voice does chime.
^.
The elder Fig Tree bears the younger figs,
And Mother-like vnloades her womb of fruit,
So does the Vines with broad leau'd winged twigs,
Whose shadowing arms are rich in men's repute,
Now with their smallest grapes, times youngest borne
Clustred in bunches like a countlesse brood,
Casts forth perfuming sauors, which adorn
And odor all what ever near them stood.
Old Figs bear young, sweetness in vines bear sway,
Then rise my Love, my fair one come away.
14.
My dearest Bird, my choycest sacred Dove,
That now inhous'd, in hollow rocks appears,
From those dark clowdie places (sweet) remove,
And from the secret corners of the stayres,
Display thy comely sight within mine eye,
VVarble thy voice, (my choice one) in mine ear,
For all thy words are sweetest melody,
And thy well fauor'd sight is seemly clear.
My rock-pent Dove; show me, and let me hear,
Thy voice, and sight, one sweet, the other fair.
1^
My Love the old beguiling Foxes take,
And all the younger Foxes sweet destroy,
For they upon our vines foul havoc make,
And those which have young grapes they will anoy;
Mine is mine own, my best beloved is mine,
1^
His is his own, I and my self am his,
Amongst the white bloomd Lyllies in the pryme,
There feeds the darling of my best hearts bliss.
The Foxes take which makes our vines to bleed
Thou mine, I thine, thou do on Lyllies feed.
^7.
Until the early day break from the sky,
And chase the shadows with her brighter wings,
Return my best beloved, and with me lie,
Return and be like wanton Roes that flings,
Or like a young, and lusty stirring Heart,
Scaling the hie divided Mountain tops
Of (...)
Bether; which deep Iordans waves do part,
Washing his feet with Crystal water drops.
Return my Love till day-breake shadows kills,
And be like Roes, or Hearts on Bethcr hills.

ECLOGA TERTIA.
Th'argument.
A never to be changed conioyne the Nymph seeks of her dear,
And from the wilderness black walks, is brought to paths most clear.
ECCLESIA, THAVMASTOS. 1.
IN coale-blacke night, the nurse and dam of woe,
Within my bed, whence easefull rest should flow,
Him mine inamourd souls delight I sought,
But all in vain my busy care did tend,
For whom I sought I found not in the end,
Such bootlesse labor in my search was wrought.
By night I sought my souls Love in my bed,
But found him not; for he away was fled.
2.
Then did I rise, for no repose could please,
And search the City, Streets, and open ways,
All to find out my souls long lacking bliss,
Incessant suite, endless my quest remaynd,
And of my Loves loss mightily complaynd,
Yet found I not whom my desires did miss.
I rose and sought the City, Streets, and ways,
But found not him whose Love my soul obayes.
3.
The busy watchmen, hopes to my desire,
(Who round about our Cytties walks retire)
They in mine earnest seeking found me out;
To whom I said (down burdned with my wrong)
Have you not seen my souls Love pass along,
Nor through our streets, nor through our watchful scout.
The cities watch in searching found me there,
To whom I said; saw you not my souls dear.
4.
Then passing by and looking up and down,
Having new left the gardiants of our Town,
I found the only one my souls Love nursed;
Fast hold I took, and left not him I sought,
Till to my Mothers house I had him brought
Into her Chamber which conceiud me first.
Passing the watch, I found and took my King,
And him unto my Mothers house did bring.
5.
You Maiden brood of fair Jerusalem,
By Roes and Hynds, choice in the sight of men
I charge, command, and by them all I bind you,
Not with inkindled tumult to molest,
Or break my love from his diuinest rest,
Until his sacred pleasure be to mind you.
By Roes, and Hynds, Iudeans I conjure
That you my Loves awake do not procuer.
Thaumastos. 6.
What sacred one is she which does adresse,
And rise out of the vast shapt wilderness
Like smoakie pillasters to kiss the sky;
Perfumed with Mirrh burnt in the liquid flame,
And Incense seattred sweetly in the same,
With all the spice which Merchants use to buie.
What Is she like smoke from deserts does arise,
Sweetened with Mirrh, Incense, and Merchants spice?

Ecclesia. 7.
Behold my Love thy glorious bed alone,
Which Solomon erected for his own,
And builded for the last worlds memory:
Threescore strong men, about it armed stand,
Most valiant held in Israells happy land,
To shield it safe from private enemy,
About thy bed due to King Salomons name,
Stand threescore strong; vowed to defend the same.
8.
They all have skill in mannaging their swords,
And expert are, in War, and warlike words,
No one more seen in Martial deeds then they:
Each has his sword upon his manly thigh,
Fearing the nights sworn private enemy,
So much in them, their careful cares bear sway.
All expert are in War, and manly fight,
Bearing their conquering swords for fear by night.
9.
King Solomon, fair Sions blessed King,
Of whom the Heauen-vnfoulding Books do sing,
He for himself a stately palace framed
Of costly wood, and curious pleasing show,
Such as no after age shall ever know,
From Lebanon the comely trees were named.
Of those fair trees of fruitful Lebanon,
The King has built him self a stately throne
^0.
He whose inventions pureness cannot fade,
Of polisht silver has his pillars made,
The pauement gold, like an inchased Iem:
The hangings purple, delicatly done,
Upon whose midst the true Loves ever won,
Of all the dames of great Jerusalem.
Gold pau'd; with silver pyllers raysd above;
Purple the hangings, lyu'd with Sions Love.
^1.
Come forth you daughters Judah does infold,
And your great King, rich Solomon behold,
Crowned with that Diadem of sacred sway;
Wherewith his Mother in his nuptial feast,
Adornd his shyning temples glorious crest,
And in his hearts tryumphant Holy day.
Come Virgin-holy Mayds see Solomon crowned,
Upon that day when all his joys were found.

ECLOGA QVARTA.
Th'argument.
Ecclesia, spotles in his eye Thaumastos much commends;
And in the ardor of his Zeal his Love to her commends.
THAVMASTOS ECCLESIA. 1.
MY perfect love, behold thou art persit fair,
Fair is my Love, and beauteous is her face,
And thy bright eyes, pure chastities sole hair
Are like to doves unstained constant grace.
O thou art fair, fair is my sacred Love,
And thy chaste eye is like the chastest Dove.
Amongst thy gold-dispierced comely locks,
Thy tressed hayres delightful memory,
Are like the Goats gathered in goodly flocks,
Which from the Mountain Giliad casts their eye,
Thy hairs amongst their curles are like the slocke.
Which downwards casts their looks from Giliads rock.
2.
Thy milke-white teeth are like well orderd sheep,
Which bear their silver fleeces from the brook,
Al bringing twins; twins brought they safely leepe,
Whom barraines forsaking has forsook.
Thy teeth like well washed sheep in order stand,
All twinning; and none barraine in our land.
3.
Thy lips are like the sweet dyed scarlet thryd
And comlie is thy speech discovering talk,
Thy blessed temples in thy locks are hid,
Like a Pomegranat on his broad-leau'd stalk.
Thy lyps like Scarlet, all thy talk is fair,
Thy temples in thy locks Pomegranats were.
4.
Like David's stately Tower, built for defense,
Such is the towrie beauty of thy neck,
A thousand shields therein keeps residence,
And it the strong-mens Targets richly deck.
Thy neck like David's tower when hung along,
With thousand shields, and Targets of the strong.
5.
Thy two fair breasts, imboasted circular,
The cabinets of knowledge, and pure zeal,
As two young twinned Roes, such like they are,
Feeding where sweetning Lillies sweetes reveal.
Thy breasts are like two infant twinned Roes,
Grassing where all the white-facst Lillies grows.
6.
Until the day-breake beautify the morn,
And black-facst shadows fly before the Son,
Unto the hills where sweet-breathd Mirh was borne,
And to the Mounts of Incense will I run
To Mounts of Mirrh and Incense will I go
Till early day black shadows overthrow.
^.
All fair in thee, thou in all fair do dwell
My Love, my dear, my only souls delyght
Pureness him self, cannot thy pureness tell,
For thou art spotless, neuer-stayning white.
With all eternal fair my Love is crowned,
And no one spot about her can be found.
^.
My brydall spouse, my beds companion,
From fruitful Lebanon come walk with me,
With me (my souls soul) come from Lebanon,
Where grows rich Frankensence perfuming tree.
With me come trace from hie-topt Lebanon,
That all Arabias confines looks upon.
And from the top of Amanab look down,
From Shenir, and from Hermons holy hill,
Even from the dens where angry Lions frown,
And from the Mounts which Leopards do fill.
From Amanah, Hermon, and Shenir see,
From Lions dens, and where the Leopards be.
9.
My Sister, spouse, and all what in me lies,
VVounded thou have, wounded thou have my heart,
First with a look from one of thy fair eyes,
Then with thy necks chain glorying that part.
My Sister, spouse, by thee my hearts wound came,
Thy necks chain cause, and thine eyes brighter flame.
10.
How fair my spouse and Sister is thy Love,
O how much better then delightful wine?
And thy rare ointments savor I do prove,
Which from the tops of Lebanon do go.
O garden fount; o living waters well,
O spring which on Mount Lebanon does dwell.
^6.
Arise o North, and come o South and blow,
That my fair gardens spice may issue out,
And let my best Love to his garden go:
To eat the fruit; pleasure impales about.
Blow North, and South, my gardens spice out cast,
And let my Love his fruits sweet pleasure taste.
ECLOGA QVINTA.
Th'argument.
Thaumastos calls his Love, and she his voice does hear,
She does confess her nakedness, and highly lauds her dear.
THAVMASTOS ECCLESIA. IVDA. 1.
MY Sister, and my beds companion,
Into my garden am I com'd alone;
My Mirrh I gathered with my other spice,
(Perfuming planted in my Paradise)
My Honie-combe I ate with Honnie spread,
My wine I drank with sweet milk mingled,
Then o my friends and consorts of my love,
Drink, eat, and laugh, let solace only move.
Ecclesia. ^.
Slumber impaleth all my weaker sense,
But yet my heart keeps waking residence,
The voice which knocks at my closd up door,
Issues from him my greatest loves adore.

Thaumastos. Open to me my Sister and my love,
My undefiled faire-one, my hearts Dove,
For see my head with moistning dew is spread,
And all my locks with night-drops covered.

Ecclesia. 3.
My weeds put of (dear) naked I remain,
How shall I then the same put on again?
My feet are bathed, and washed from spotting sin,
How to defile them shall I then begin?
4.
My well-beloueds sacred hand was put
In by the doors hole when the same was shut,
And in that motion was my secret heart.
My inward bowels, and my private part,
Moved, stirred up, and mightelie inflamed
With love to him, in whom my love was framed.
5.
Then rose I up to open (but too late)
The long closd portall of my palace gate,
And rising dropped from my Iuorie hands,
And from my fingers (once affections brands)
Mirrh, and pure Mirrh, (no sweets more purer are)
Upon the sacred handles of the bar.
6.
Open I did unto my Love the door,
But he was gone; past was my love before,
Gone was my heart and from my breast did break,
When first I heard my dearest true-loue speak,
Long did I secke but could not find my friend,
I called but he no answer back would send.
7.
The Cities rounders, Watchmen of our town,
They found me how I sought him up, and down,
And finding me, with weapons of their scorn
They smoat, and wounded me; my loves forlorn;
And those which on our Cities walls did watch,
They from my beauteous face; my veil did catch.
8.
O holy Daughters of Jerusalem,
I charge and bind you by my true Loves Iem,
That if you find where my souls life does move,
You tell him I am mighty sick of Love.

Judah. 9.
O femall excellence; o beauties crown
Which art of women's fair, the fair renown,
What is thy well-beloueds honor more,
Then others well-beloueds known before?
Or whereby does thy loves love grow so large,
That thus thou bindst us by this mighty charge?

Ecclesia. 10.
Judah, my best beloved is lilly white,
Ruddie and pale; Vermilion silver bright,
Among thousands and ten thousands of the blessed,
He is the chiefest and the only best,
11
His head as to fine gold, bright rays assume,
His curled locks, black as the Ravens plume,
12.
His virgin eyes are like the silver Doves
Which on the watrie Rivers sing their loves,
Whilst washed within ye sweet milks pleasant stream,
They by the full filled vessels do remain.
13
His cheeks are as a bed of rarest spice,
Or flowers sprung up in heavens Paradise,
And his dear lips like Lillies; ceaselesse power
Of purest Mirrh, an everlasting shower;
14
His hands like rings of gold, whilst in them sit
The never equald shining Chrissolit.
His belly like pure Iuorie burnished,
With blew-veynd Saphirs richly covered.
15.
His legs are pillars wrought in Marble mine,
Grafted in golden sockets as divine,
As Lebanon such is his countenance bent,
And as the Cedars most, most excellent.
16.
His mouth as all the world of sweetness is,
And all in all he is delights best bliss.
O Daughters of Jerusalem attend,
This is my love, my lover, and my friend.

Judah. 17
Beauty of Beauties; excelling fairest one,
O whether is thy best beloved gone,
Whether is thy souls sovereign turned aside,
Where do his glories, and his triumphs bide?
Tell us that we may seek him out with thee.
Admird through heaven, and earths posterity.

ECLOGA SEXTA.
Th'argument.
Ecclesia in her soul assures, Thaumastos love vnfaind,
And among her praises does display, her single self unstained.
ECCLESIA, THAVMASTOS. 1.
GOne to this worlds fair Eden is my love,
Unto the beds of spices, and perfumes
In yt choice garden where delights do move,
There will he banquet till the day co^sumes,
Gathering pale Lillies to adorn his plumes.
My true-loue to the gardens spice beds came,
To feed and gather Lillies in the same.
^.
Exchanged I, to him, to me my dear,
Immortal intrest holds my love in me,
No less in him is my strong title clear,
Both having right of perpetuity,
Whilst he on Lillies feeds eternally.
I am his own, he is my proper right,
Who feeds on Lillies-food both day and night.
Thaumastos. 3.
As Tirza, is my true love beautiful;
(...)
Tirza which borders chosen Israel,
Whom Euphrates within his arms does cull,
As bright Jerusalem her looks excel,
And as an ensignd Army she is fell.
As Tirza or Jerusalem my star,
Is fair and stern, as bannerd hosts in war.
Turn from mine eyes, the beauty of thine eyes,
For their sun-darting splendours conquer me,
And as thy thralls, mine all affections lies,
The while thy net inclosing-tresses be,
Like Mountain Kyds, which to the Valleys see.
Turn thy victorious eye away, thy locks
Are like the down cast looks of hie climbd flocks.
The Iuorie gardiants of thy blessed talk,
Are like the double-bearing new washed sheep,
Whose fruitful wombes, plenties well laden stalk
Has now intombd in the unsearched deep
All the poor trophies barrennes did keep. (...)

As barrenlesse washed sheep are with their twinns,
Such seem thy teeths bright polisht garnishings.
Thy stately forehead clouded underneath
The sumptuous curtain of thy golden tresse,
Resembles those Pomegranats which deceive,
The passenger; whose eie-sight connot guess,
Where hangs the fruit through leaf-dark wilderness.
As great Pomegranats leauie shades allow,
So do thy hairs hoode-winke thy silver bow.
Threescore anointed gorgeous Queens there are,
And fourscore wanton Concubins for love,
And of the Maiden Damsels whom compare
Raises the greatest number far above,
In countlesse infinets their armies move.
Queens threescore, fourscore Concubins remain,
And Damsels whom no number can contain.
Yet is my love alone vnequalled
The only stainlesse issue of her mother,
Deerer to her then may be valued,
Seen of those Maids, and praisd before all other,
whose laud nor Queens nor co^cubins will smother.
My single love, in whom all things are pleased,
Of maids, of Queens, and concubins is praised.
But speak all ages, tell me who she is,
Which like the mornings glory looks abroad,
Fair as the full Moon midst her starrie bliss,
Pure as the Sun in highest heavens aboade,
And dreadful as an Ensignd armies load?
What Is she looks forth, fairer then Moon or star,
Bright like the Sun, fearful as men of war?

Ecclesia. Down have I gone into the nuttie walks,
To view the vallyes riches, and her fruit,
To see what buds sprang from the Vine trees stalks,
Or if the brave Pomegranate with repute
Were over florisht with a flowrie suit.
Down did I go into the nuttie bower,
To see the Vine buds, and Pomegranats flower.
But when I came, nothing to me was known,
Discording vnagreements raind therein,
Then did my soul with wings that well had flowne,
Adresse me like the Charriots that within
Swiftly to hale thy noble troops begin.
Nothing I knew, and my soul set me then,
Like to the charriots of thy noble men.
Return, return, o Shulamit return,
That we may see thy peace containing bounds,
What shall you see in her but cause of mourn?
Who like an Army pestreth all her grounds,
Promising nothing but dead-killing wounds.
Return o Shulamit, return Jerusalem,
Ha, she is nothing but an host of men.

ECLOGA SEPTIMA.
Th'argument.
Ecclesias naked linaments Iudeas praise displaies,
Sealing the assurance of the love, that lasts all lasting days.
IVDEA, ECCLESIA. ^
O Virgin, issue of a Princes bed,
How beautiful and comely is thy pace?
How glorious is thy feet with gilt shoes spread,
Yielding their measurd stepps vnmeasurd grace?
Thy thighs fair motive joints, by true bliss led,
Are like rich Jewels on a virgins face.
The happy work of that thrice happy hand,
Whose cunning art, does art from art command.
2.
Thy mountain navel, holy hill of peace,
Is like a globie cup made Sphearie round,
In which celestial liquor does increase.
Thy belly as fair heaps of wheat abound,
So is the rising and the down release,
Whilst pale-facst Lillies it impalleth round.
3.
Thy two dear breasts, chaste cabinets of power,
Are like two Roes twinn'd in a happy hour.
4.
Thy towrie neck (bright throne of Iuorie)
Looks like the silver coloms of the day,
And like the Pooles in Heshbon is thine eye,
Where liquid Crystal sports with sunny play,
Like those clear Ponds of Heshbon, which do lie
And at Bath-rabims gate moist tributs pay.
As Lebanons hie turret is thy nose,
Which walled Damascus for his object chose.
^.
Thy head upon the palace of thy neck,
Is as the scarlet absolute for die,
Thy bushy tresses which thy curles bedecke,
Are like to purple; grave in every eye.
The King the greatest great bows at thy beck;
Tied in gold-chaines unto thy company.
6.
O how much fair art thou my honey Love,
What pleasure in thy pleasures ever move.
7.
Like mounting palm that springs in pressing down,
Thy stature is; like clusters are thy breasts,
8.
Often have I said I would with hie renown,
Climb up the palm trees flowrie topped crests;
I said my hands should make her bows my crown,
Whilst on thy teats time bunching grapes inuests.
And that rare odor which thy nose expells,
Shall better much the apples better smells.
9.
Thy mouths celestial roof, shrine of delight,
Shall be like wine refiner of the wit,
Whose holy fume, flame like assends upright,
And in my best beloueds throne does sit,
Causing old lips locked up by silence spite,
To speak what speaking Angels might be fit.
1^.
Wholly I am my holy loves for ever,
Whose chaste desire from me remoueth never.
1^.
Come, come my Love, the best joy of my mind,
The only one is pleasing in mine eyes,
Let us go forth and frolike with the wind,
Sports with the air, and wanton with the skies,
Let us ore view the fields, love let us find,
Whence all the meadows beauties do arise.
Thence let us pitch our happy tents and dwell,
In Villages; contents true Citadall.
^2.
Let us rise up more early then the day,
Even when the night shall give the morning place,
And view the vines that ouerspread our way,
There let us see the florishe of his grace;
And whether his small buds their young graps pay,
Or if Pomegranats pride, all prides deface.
There will I give, what no gift else can give,
My love to thee; which love shall ever live.
^3.
The Mandrags vapor odorifferus smells,
The Honey nourishment of breathing sense,
And in our gates, and Portals ever dwells,
Even in our Cloisters, and our house defense,
All whatsoever sweetest sweetness tells,
Within the compass of sweets residence.
Both new and old, and all that pleasures steep,
For thee my love eternally I keep.
ECLOGA OCTAVA.
Th'argument.
Thaumastos must Ecclesia teach, whom he supports from fall,
His fervent love to her he tells, the Vine that bears all.
ECCLESIA, THAVMASTOS. IVDEA. 1.
OH that thou were (o holy happy prayer,)
As is my brother chaynd by kind to me,
who hanging on my mothers breasts, draws air
Of living life, from that eternity,
Then in the plains would I recover thee,
And see thee sport without upon the green,
There would I kiss thine hand, thy cheek, thine eye,
Thine every part where every praise is seen,
whilst none should scorn thy sweets, (fit sovereign for Quee^
2.
Then would I lead thee by a golden twine,
And bring thee to my Mothers dwelling place,
There shall thou teach me precepts most divine,
The learned Legends of eternal grace,
And I will banquet, feast thee, and embrace;
Causing to bathe thy temples and thy taste,
With spiced wine, the pride of pleasures race,
And with new juice, from sweet Pomgranats cast,
3.
Thy left hand on my head, thy right about my wast.
Thaumastos. 4.
I charge you Daughters of Jerusalem,
Awake nor stir my love until she please,

Judah. 5.
What sacted Maid, what holy Virgin Iem,
Is this that from dark shades her eyes does raise?
And on her love her lovely arms displaies.
Under an apple tree; I raisd thee down,
There where thy Mother, thy first date conceiues.
Even where she first attaind conceptions crown,
That bare, that bred, that brought, y nursed thee in our Town.

Thaumastos. 6.
Set my loves seal, upon thy tender heart,
And there imprint the Image of my zeal,
Or as a signet never vowed to part,
Unto thine arm let me for place appeal,
For love then death, does greater strength reveal,
And jealousy is fiercer then the grave,
Her kindled brands does fiery vigor steal.
And those bright flames which from her being have,
Are vehement, raging mad, and will no object save.
7.
Eternal rivers quench not burning love,
Nor can the worlds floods drown long lived desire,
Give all the world, all what in it does move,
Yet all conteind, abates not true loves fire.

Ecclesia. 8.
One sister (love) we have which does retire,
Yet wants she breasts to nourish hers withal,
What shall we do for her? let me enquire?
What shall I say? what scuse shall I let fall?
When others for our sisters loves shall loudlie call?

Judea. 9.
If she be vvall-like, we will build thereon
A silver palace burnisht as the Sky,
And if she be doore-like, or portall strong,
VVee'le lock her in on Cedar boords to lie.

Ecclesia. 10.
I am wall built by eternity,
For see, my breasts are like two well framed towers,
And I have layne within my loves quick eye,
Like one which in his sight finds peaceful flowers,
To trim new Eden up, and other happy bowers.

Thaumastos. 11.
A comlie Vine has mighty Solomon,
Which sundry keepers watch with coy regard,
It fruitful spreading, grows in Baal-Hamon,
Who of the fruit will taste, brings for reward
A thousand silver pieces well prepared.
12.
Yet my fair Vineyard lies before my face,
Thousands to thee o Solomon, are shard,
But unto him which keeps my sacred place,
Two hundredth appertain, reward of greater grace.
13
O thou which in the garden dwelst for ever,
Unto thy voice all thy familiars tend:
Exhalt it then, let thy sweet tunes persevere,
Teach me to hear, which taught'st me to commend.

Ecclesia. 14
O my dear Love, my souls desired friend,
If thou depart, or list away to fly,
Be like to Roes, or lusty Hearts that wend
And play upon the Mountains cheerfully,
Where spices grow, sweet fumes, and al to please the eye.

In summo felicitas.
FINIS.

