August. lib. 11. Super gens. Mayor est huius scripturae authoritas quam omnis
humani ingenij perspicacitas.

A CATHOLIC AND Ecclesiastical exposition of the holy Gospel after S.
Mathewe, gathered out of all the singular and approved Deuines (which the
Lord has given to his Church) by Augustine Marlorate.

And translated out of Latin into English by Thomas Tymme, Mynister.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Jmprinted at London in Fletestreate near unto S. Dunstones church, by Thomas
Marshe. 1570.

Quanto, magis quisque in sacris eloquijs assiduus fuerit, tanto ex eis
vberiorem intelligentiam capit.

Isidor. De summo bo. lib. 3. I have once already found such friendship at
your honors hands, tempered with liberality (which I cannot sufficiently
requite) that now again I am the more bold to moleste and trouble you.
Craving pardon that for your noble courtesy then, I now dare presume to
commit unto your honors charge the conduction of a drifte, and sea beaten
ship.

Matthew. 13
And although the very substance of the treasure and precious pearl contained
in my ship, of it self is so excelent that it needs not the commendation
and defense of man: yet notwithstanding because by Gods appointment man has to
do with the same for his salvation, and therefore I (being one among all other
most unworthy) having taken upon me to publishe the same by translation out of
Lattin into our vulgar tongue for the common profit of my countremen, must of
necessity, (my own unworthiness I say considered) humblely beseech your honor
to be a guard and defense of this my endeavor handled with as great diligence
as possible I could.

In so doing you shall not only promote the glory of God, and greatly further
this my simple labor, but also make me bound unto your honor while life does
last. Thus having bouldly required your honorable defense, and troubled your
ears with tediousnes, I cease, wyshing to your honor long life, increase of
nobility, and the perfect felicity of the life to come.

Your humble orator Thomas Tymme.

TO ALL THE BRETHREN DISPERsed here and there, that favor and love the
Gospel, Augustine Marlorate, wishes grace, mercy, and peace, from God the
father through the Lord Jesus.
WHen as, all men so long as they live in this present life, ought to level,
as at a Butte, at the knowledge of the truth which may nourishe them in the
hope of the true and eternal life, those men are to be judged unworthy
utterly the name of Christians, which being content with some art or
science, whereby to get their living, either do lightly regard, or else
altogether neglecte the knowledge of heavenly matters, the only means to
attain salvation.
Neither can there be found any greater ingratitude among men, then when they
do not endeavor to the vtmoste of their power to know God alone, which has
not only created, fashioned, and nourished them as a father in this life, but
incessantly calls them to the immortal, and incorruptible heritage which is
prepared for all them, whom that celestial father has eng^^fted by faith
into the body of his only begotten son. Moreover a true and singular way to
attain salvation, is by God propounded to us, namely, if we believe his
promises, which way iustefieth before God mankind, by nature prone unto
sin, and makes him the heir of God, and fellow heir with Christ. I mean
faith, not such as vein men and hypocrites boast of when they chance to
conceive some slender opinion of God: but that which alone deserves the name
of faith, and undoubtedly takes hold of the righteousness offered in the
Gospel, and so stays on the foundation of free remission of sins, that it
cannot be persuaded any other thing than that which is certainly known to
proceed out of the mouth of the Lord: for faith comes by hearing, ^a. 10.
^r. 1.
but hearing by the word of God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoke in the old time to our fathers by Prophets, but in these last days he
has spoken to us by his son. On whom he has powered out his spirit most
plentifully, in so much, that whosoever shall hear him teaching, and embrace
his doctrine by faith, they may assure them selves to have been rightly
instructed by the wisdom of God it self, and to be settled out of all peril
of error.

Now, when his vocation required that after he had opened the verity to his
elect, and finished al things, for the which he came into this world, then
he should return to his father, he would not that his spouse the Church
should lack that incomparable treasure of the Gospel, which he him self
brought down from heaven. For seeing the cause of his coming was to build
again the taberdacle of David which was fallen down, ^s. 9.
and to repair the ruin thereof (that is to say, that he might erecte and
stablishe his kingdom in the midst of his Church, which according to the
oracles of the Prophets, he should gather together out of all people and
tongues) he thought it not sufficient to offer the happy and glad tidinges of
the Gospel to the^ which were at hand, (namely to the Jews) but he would have
the benefit of the heavenly calling offered to them also which were far of
(to wit, (...). 3.
the Gentiles). For God had also determined from the beginning that the
Gentiles should be heirs knit in one body and fellowship of the promises in
Christ through the preaching of the Gospel.

Christ therefore rising as a conqueror from death, commanded his Apostels,
being endewed with heavenly virtue, ^h. 28.
to go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures, teaching
the Gentiles to observe all things that he had commanded them. But, because
the number of twelve did not suffice for so great a multitude of men, as the
king of all kings had decreed to call to salvation by the shryll trumpe of his
Gospel: after he had obtained of his father, and that the holy Ghost was
sent down on his Apostels, he enriched, increased, and adorned his Church
with men indewed with heavenly wisdom, whose ministry he would use to the
end of the world, in feading the flock redeemed by the sheading of his
blood. Therefore he ordained some Apostlels, some Prophets, some Pastors,
some Teachers, (...) 4.
to the gathering together of the saints to the work of the ministry, and
to the edefying of Christ's body.

But (alas) after the departing of those watchemen, there was in all the world
so great scarsitie of faithful ministers, that those heavenly riches wherewith
the Church was beautified, were not on every part so plainly set forth as the
worthynes of the thing it self did require. For it was brought to pass by the
wilines of Satan that fearce enemy of the Evangelical truth, that instead
of faithful Pastors, innumerable gredy and ravening Wolves did craftily
insinuate or wind in them selves in to the flock of Christ: which
straightwaye being disguised with those worthy titles of Pastors, did under
that pretense defraude the poor sheep of the holy food of Gods word, and instead of the same, brought into the world certain stinking and vain
traditions, which they had drawn out of the filthy puddel of carnal reason,
and would have them accounted (such was their arrogance) for divine oracles:
Moreover, men were grown to such madness and unfaithful dealing, that
whatsoever pleased them, the same also they did persuade the kings and rulers
of the world, whose duty it was to watch for the safety of all the people,
and before all thnges to take heed that they did not degenerate from the true
worship of God. But in this horrible waste and confusion of things the
celestial father vouched safe to preserve his Church by a certain miraculous
working, not to be attained by our understanding, for he daily calls back
his elect out of the bottomless pit of ignorance, and transposeth them into
the kingdom of his well-beloved son, that being partakers of the light of the
Gospel, or rather being made light it self in the Lord, they might walk as
children of the light, and submit them selves wholly under his obedience, 1.
Pet. 2.
which called them out of darkness into a wonderful clear light.

Which worthy and incomparable benefit is daily offered not only to private
men here and there dispersed, but also unto kings and rulers, so often as God
does stir up in their Costs, faithful Pastors, though never so cruel
persecutions storm every where, and Satan with his ministers, raginge, do
bend all the force of their strength to hinder the course of the Gospel,
either by man's authority, or else to break it of by the fear and intolerable
wayght of afflictions. Therefore seeing through the grace of God we have here
free liberty under right Christian princes to enjoy the light of the Gospel,
when as many other nations of the world are as yet buried in the deep dungeon
of ignorance, and seeing it has pleased God of his free mercy, certain years
paste to snatche us out of the jaws of Antechrist, that we might hear the
sweet voice of Christ continually sounding in the Church, we should be
twyse ungrateful, if we should not wyshe with ardent petitions that our
brethren might obt^^^e the like grace and favor, or if we should not reatche
out our hand to help them which make haste to get the same liberty. But
there can no way be found out more commodious to further their salvation,
then if beside our daily prayers in which we commend them to the Lord, we
reatche as it were into their hands some thing whereby they might well
fortefie them selves against their enemies, and be able to reprove and convince
such as resist the truth.

Neither do we need any great consultation to determine what this thing should
be, when as nothing can be more profitable unto them than the sound, sincere,
and plain exposition of the holy Scriptures, which heretofore was so obscured
by the fond commentaries and preposterous interpretations of those that knew
not (truly) the very elements of Christian religion, so that the word of God
gave place to profane writers, so far was it from retaining the force and
authority which of right she ought to have among men. For who knows not,
that those (who neglecting the authority of the word of God, did cite Plato,
Aristotel, Cicero, and other profane writers of that sort, in their
pulpettes) were had in great estimation and counted for chief deuines in
comparison of those that propounded the word of God simply and sincerety.

I therefore (wyshing to satisfy their desire which long earnestly for the
sound and plain exposition of the Scriptures, left unto us by the Prophets
and Apostles) applied ^y mind before these few years to collecte and gather
out of the doctors (such as might be gotten) both old and new, whatsoever
seemed to help to the exact knowledge of the new testament, hoping hereafter
(if the Lord grant me strength) to bestow the like diligence in the old
testament, to the end, that as the whole body of the Scripture is set forth
unto us by diverse organes of the holy Ghost, so being beutified with a plain
and perfect exposition collected out of sundry interpretours, it might be
read of all the godly to the glory of God and salvation of men.

Neither yet do we think that this our labor shall be improued by any, save
only by such as mislike all godly and divine things. For seeing many with
earnest affection desire to know the opinions of such as interpret the holy
Scriptures: and oftentimes it chances that what by one is pretermitted, that
is spoken by an other, and contrariwyse: yea, but few have the multitude and
variety of books, many also cannot enjoy them without peril: Who I beseech
you can condemn these our painful studies and good intent, but that also he
shall seem to improve their endeavor which would profit willingly by reading
or hearing sundry interpretours of the Scriptures.

Moreover, if their diligence be commended (and not undeservedly) which out of
the lectures and Sermons of the preachers of Gods word, note and gather what
they can and give it to be printed, to the end the whole Church might reap a
commodity of that which was spoken out of a Pulpet to a few in number: why
should it not be laweful to collecte and choose whatsoever seems to pertain to
the explictation of the sacred Scriptures out of their commentaries, whom God
has made overseers of his flock to feed and teach them, and has enriched
them with many gifts to the common edifying of his Church.

And as for such as think them selves so spiritual that being content with
the volume of the Bible only do carelessly and frowardly reiecte all
commentaries, those men I judge not worthy any confutation. For that which
they vaynely babble tends to no other end (except perhaps they know not
them selves) but utterly to abholishe the ministry of the word, that it might
be lawful for every one to dream or utter unadvisedly what he list of Gods
high mysteries, when nevertheless the Lord him self commends prophecy before
other things, 1. Cor. 14.
in so much that the Apostell Paul does not doubt to prefer the same
before certain other gifts of the holy Ghost, otherwise most excellent.

And in an other place he says, Despise not prophecies, try all things, keep
that which is good. Solomon also does witness in plain words that where
prophesying does fail the people must needs be scattered abroad. Pro. 29.


Let them therefore either bring to pass that all men may speak Hebrewe and
Greek, and that every member may be replenished with the fulness of the spirit
(which thing is peculiar to Christians) or else let them suffer the Church to
enjoy the communion and participation of gifts which Christ distributeth to
each man as seems good unto him self.

^he reason of ^e Title.
As touching the tittle of the book, we thought it good to call it an
Ecclesiastical exposition for a double respect: first, because it is gathered
out of those wrytinges which were employed and consecrate to the Church it
self by holy men, which bestowed all their labor and study to enlarge the
true faith: and for that cause they may well be termed Ecclesiastical writers:
Secondly, because it appertains of duty to the Church to know the familiar
voice of their spouse who speaks unto her sitting in the heavens, and that by
the help of his servants (to wit, faithful ministers) who for that same
cause are called in the Scriptures the interpretours of Gods will, 2. Cor. 5.
and the messengers which bring fidinges of the reconciliation between God and
man.

But we call it Catholic, (that is, universal) because it is gathered
universally out of all the most appro^ed deuines. And for because (well-beloved
brethren in Christ, you which yet groan under the yoke o^ ^ntechriste
dispersed here and there) you desire with ardent affections to know those
things which may guide you to the perfect unity and certainty of faith: I
most earnestly request you, that as the Churches restored to their integrity
enjoy the sacred sermons, lectures, communication, and public conference of
the self same men which have enriched this work with their labors, so you
also use gladly and cherefully this exposition of the new Testament, that your
faith may have the better success, and Christ's spirit by the reading of the
Scriptures may in such wise mortefie whatsoever concupiscence of the flesh is
remaining in you, that we may all speak, think, and understand one thing
being one whole body. 1. Corint. 1.


Fly therefore all peregrine and strange doctrines, and give attentive ear
to the most sweet voice of that great shepehearde of the sheep Christ Jesus,
who by his Apostels and Evangelists teaches you most plainly the way to
salvation. Despise with a stout courage the forged tales and traditions of
men, by which your consciences are snared, and embrace the liberty achieued
by Christ, and worthily set forth in this new Testament: whereof you have
here an exposition, no less sound than plain, and evident. Not that this
interpretation is so perfect and absolute in every point that nothing may be
added thereto pertaining to doctrine and edification: for who can examine or
interpret any one place of Scripture so happily and dilligently that no man
shall be able to express the same more plainly, or observe in it somewhat more
helping either to teach, exhort, or reconcile other places. Neither was it my
intent to urge the students in holy Scriptures to keep silence, but rather
not only to exhort all the Godly, but also to desire them for Gods sake, that
if they have attained any thing, either by revelation of the spirit, or by
the commentaries of other whom we have not seen, to bring it, and make it
commen, so that it be brief and fit to edefie: which how necessary it is
in serious matters, there is none but will confess. For over and besides the
new books which come forth daily, whereby this work might be enlarged, I
am fully persuaded that the authors them selves, out of whose wrytinges I have
taken this exposition, are so far from ambition and emulation that they
desire nothing more, than that they to whom the gift of prophecy is
granted, should not defraude the Church thereof, for whose sake they have
received that which they have. I sought therefore to profit them only which
with upright conscience seek the simple and peculiar sense of the Scriptures,
leaving unto the Church (whom God endeweth every day with marvelous gifts)
liberty to add according to time and place, what seems to belong to the
common edifyinge of the godly, as is wont to be done in the holy assembles and
metinge: where the Godly communing of divine matters, have liberty to bring
forth or allege in the midst of the company that which they have received
of the father of lights, 1. Cor. 14.
so that if it be revealed to an other sitting by, the first does willingly
keep silence, as the Apostell commands.

Now as concerning the authors out of whose commentaries or annotation upon
the Gospel after Mathewe this exposition is collected, we have declared their
names in the next leaf following. And least the often repetition of their
whole names should trouble the readers, we have signified the^ by their first
letters, although that thing seemed once unto me not greatly necessary, if this
one admonition of my fre^des had not provoked me thereto, who told me that it
would fall out that some would reprove me of a lie, for because this work
being entitled a Catholyke exposition collected out of sondrye interpretours,
should nevertheless appear to be one discourse, neither would they believe any
other, except we did note by letters every particular man's words. But where I
my self did incline to that part, not to discrie the authors names by
letters, I was led hereby because I feared the disposition of some, who being
addicted to men, do for the most part measure, approve, and reject the
interpretations according to the authority and estimation of the man, rather
considering the men, than what the holy Ghost pronounced by them to the common
erudition of the Church.

Moreover, the readers peradventure will marueyle that I note so few words
out of some authors: but let them understand this, that when I find one that
says the same that almost all the rest do, whether it be in few words, or
many, so it be in more plain words, his words I have chosen, yet as it
were weauing to or uniting out of other, that which he had either omitted or
left unspoken: for one man can not speak of all things, for want of memory,
neither is occasion offered, If at any time a diverse or contrary exposition
happen to be found among the authors, I have so described the same, that I
have noted what the reader should follow. Neither shall there be found in
this book a hotche potche of opinions, (if we may so term it) whereby the
Reader might be troubled, not edefied: but sound and true doctrine, and the
same throughout the whole book, guyding us to the father and Jesus Christ his
son.

Therefore (good brethren) accept, and according to goodness and equity allow
his diligence, which together with you wysheth before all things, the
increase of Christ's kingdom, and the destruction of Antechriste. Do you also
your endeavor with earnest and ardent zeal to, profess Christ's Gospel,
neither (as some falsely termed Christians do) be you ashamed of it, by
constant confession whereof the glorious sentence of Christ is only to be
hoped for, Math. 10.
who shall approve the same before his heavenly father, and elect Angels.

And verily no man is able worthily to commend the excellency and fruit of the
eternal wisdom of God which is opened in the Gospel. For the Gospel is,

Math. 4.
The light which the people that vvalked in darkness did see, and which
sprang up to them which sat in the region of the shadovve of death.

Mar. 1.
It is the kingdom of God which approached to us, which were the bondslaues
of sin, and heirs of eternal death.

Luke. 2.
It is that happy and joyful tidinges which exempteth us from all fear and
brings occasion of incredible joy, because it told of his coming which
came to seek and to save that which was lost.

John. 3.
For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son to the end
that all which believe in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.

Act. 20.
It is that most rich treasury which conteyneth whatsoever Moses and the
Prophets have written, wherein is opened unto us all the counsel of God.

Romans 1. 1. Corint. 1.
It is the power of God to salvation to as many as b^^^ to the Jew first and
to the Gentile.

It is the preaching of the cross, which unto those ^erishe is foolishenes,
but unto us that are saved, the power of God.

2. Cor. 3.
It is that Myrror of the divine glory, in which we all beholding the glory
of the Lord with uncovered face, are changed into the same Image from glory
to glory as by the spirit of the Lord.

Gal. 1.
The doctrine also of the Gospel is so certain, and in every point so
absolute, that although an Angel from heaven should preach any other thing
but the same he ought to be counted accurssed.

Ephe. 3.
It is the unsearchable mysteries of Christ, which in other ages was not
known to the sons of men, as it is now revealed to his holy Apostels and
Prophets by the spirit.

Phil. 2.
It is the word of life with which all the godly must hold out in the
midst of a naughty and crooked nation.

Colos. 1.
It is also the word of truth which is not only come among us, but also
does fructefie and increase through the whole world in spite of the
resistance of Satan and his ministers.

These. 2.
It is that holy and true saying which is worthy to be received of all men,
not as the word of men, but (as it is in deed) for the word of God, which
also works effectually and mightily in those that believe.

These. 2.
It is the spirit of the mouth of the Lord, which shall slay that wicked
son of perdition Antechrist, who shall seduce them that perish.

1. Tim. 1.
It is that faithful saying, and worthy by all means to be received, that
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.

2. Tim. 1.
This is the same Gospel, whereby Christ the son of God coming into this
world, has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality unto
light.

Titus. 3.
For it teaches how we being iustefied by the grace of God are heirs
according to the hope of eternal life.

Phile.
It is moreover that immortal and incorruptible sede, whereby he which was
before wicked and unprofitable, is made a nevve creature in the Lord.

Heb. 4.
It is the lively word of God mighty in operation, and sharper than any two
edged svverde, and enters through eue^ unto the dividing a sonder of the
soul and of the spirit, and of the joints and mary, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intentes of the heart.

Iam. 1.
It is that pure word which being received with mekenes and grafted in us,
is able to save our soul.

1. Petr. 1.
It is that holy word of the Lord against which, almost all the world is
bente, and yet it endures for ever.

2. Pet. 3.
It is also that Scripture which is given by inspiration from heaven which
they that are unlearned, and unstable, peruerte to their own destruction.

1. John. 2.
It is that inviolable word, which whosoever keeps, in him is the word
of God perfect in deed.

2. John.
It is the doctrine which we must only embrace, so that if there come any to
preach unto us, and bring not this, he ought not to be received of us, no nor
yet saluted.

3. John. Inde.
It is the word of salvation and verity, whose faithful preachers ought
courteously to be received.

Contrarivvyse, the contemners and scorners of the same shall be grievously
punished by Gods just judgment.

Apoca. 14.
And to conclude, it is the eternal Gospel which must be published unto
them that inhabit^ on the earth to every nation and kynred, and tongue, and
people.

Those men therefore are unhappy which set light by this unviolable Gospel of
Christ, but far more unhappy are they which have and persecute the
ministers and favorers thereof, and most unhappy of all are such as deny and
reiecte frowardly that which otherwise they know to be true: of which sort
many are found among the Papists, for whom it had been better not to have
known the way of righteousness than when they have known it to return from
that which was set forth by Gods commandment. But it falls out with them
according to the true proverb: The dog is returned to his own vomet, and
the Sow that was washed to wallowe in the myer. I beseech you most dearly
beloved brethren in Christ, ^^e from such as are worse than the Dog or
Serpente, and read over this book which is offered unto you with great
diligence: you shall find in it (I trust) wherewithal to confirm your
minds in Christ our Savior aboundauntly, among so many and so great troubles
of this curssed world. To him be glory, honor, and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.

Farewell in the Lord, At Viuiacum in the Calendes of January. 1559.
The names of those, out of whose works, this exposition is gathered.
1 Martin Bucer. B. 12 Augustine. AVG. 20 Josephus. 2 Calvin. C. 13 Hierome.
HIER. 21 Aulus Gelius. 3 Erasmus. E. 14 Origene. OR. 22 Plini. 4 Musculus. M.
15 Cyrill. CYR. 23 Budaeus. 5 Philip Melanethon. P. 16 Chrysostom. CHR. 24
Georgius Agricola. 6 Erasmus Sarcerius. E. 17 Basil. BA. 25 Cicero. 7 Brentius,
R. 18 Eusebius. EVS. 26 Hegesippus. 8 Bullinger. Bu. 19 Gregory. GR. 9
Zuinglius. Z. 10 Vitus Theodorus. V. 11 Augustine Marlorate. A.

A GODLY AND CATHOLIC EXPOSITION OF THE holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, after
Mathewe.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE MORE PLAIN AND EASY THOSE things are which are described and set forth
unto us in this Eua^gelical history, the more we ought to seek chiefly, for
what purpose the Evangelists not content with the office of preaching,
committed unto their posterity, in writing, the preaching of Jesus Christ,
which by mouth in their time, here and there, they had published. For it is
certain that they did it not without a special meaning and intent. Surely
the holy Ghost, with the which they were inspired, did forsee that there
should come many after the death of the Apostels, by the instinct and motion
of Satan, which should bring unto men, ^o the defacing, and d^siling of the
doctrine and faith of Christ) false opinions, and vain dreams, under the name
of Christ A, and would place and set false and feigned things, instead of
that which is the very truth, and so would either extinguishe and clean
put out the true light of the Gospel, or at least so obscure and darken the
same with their thick and mistie clouds, that scarce truth might be
discerned from falsehode and lies. For the crafty vvylines of false Apostels is
well enough known, who being deceitful, and subtle workers, taking upon
them the name of the Apostels of Christ, do easily begyle the simple, 1.
Corint. 11
and such as take no head of them: as the Apostell Paul in his epistell to
the Corinthians declares.

M. Therefore, to the end a certain^ doctrine, as concerning Christ, should
persiste and continue in the Church or congregation, the holy Ghost brought
to pass, that first of all, the nativity of Christ, his life, doctrine,
death, burial, resurrection, and assention into heaven, beside these, the
sending forth of the embassage of the Gospel into the whole world, the
going forwards, and good success of the doctrine of the Gospel and Christian
faith, the declaration and confirmation of the same by faithful vvitnesses,
that is to say, holy Evangelists: should in manner of an history be^ committed
to vvriting by them: which Evangelists, heard, and savve all things them
selves before their face: which also, having authority and power of God,
were the first which were sent and appointed to the preaching of the
Gospel throughout the whole world. To this use, end, and purpose, the
four Evangelists have vvrytten the history of Christ: among whom, C, only
Luke makes a preface to his Gospel, which he vvryteth briefly, shevvyng
the cause which moved him to write: as evidently you may see if you read
the same.

B. As touching the interpretation of this word Gospel: it being taken from
the Greek word, signifies good or glad tidinges. The which word the
three score and ten interpretours used so often as they found the Hebrevve
word, (...) Bisser, which signifies to tell, and (...) Besora, tidinges,
being the deriuatiue of the same, and also (...) Meuasser, telling. Chap. 4.
Esaias. 64.
The Apostels and Evangelists used this word, very much after them. The
Euangeliste Luke, citing the place of the Prophet Esaye, used this word, To
preach the Gospel to the poor he has sent me. Therefore the Gospel shall be
unto us a public or open setting forth and preaching of the grace and
redemption, purchased and gotten by Christ, as concerning the which
redemption there are infinite testimonies of holy Scripture: C, Or else the
Gospel is a history, containing the glad tidinges of the coming of Christ in
the flesh, being sent of the Father, according to his promises in the law,
Prophets, and Psalms. In the which history, the life specially of Christ,
his doctrine, death, resurrection, and assention is declared: beside these, the
fruit of his coming is therein declared, namely that by him we are delivered
from the Deuell, sin, and death, and that we are sanctified and assured of
everlasting life.

B. As therefore the Gospel in the Scripture is properly a declaration of the
long looked for salvation, and at the length revealed and offered by Christ:
even so our Euangeliste Mathevve (as the rest, Mark, Luke, and John) has
very cunningly and artificially written in his Gospel, the history of the
Lord by the which he declares both his words and deeds in order. A. But
who this Mathevve was (whose work in the nevve Testament has the first
rome) M, and from what state of life he was called of Christ, and advanced
by him to the dignity of an Apostle, Mat. ^.
he of himself (as we shall hear hereafter) declares. In the mean time we
must think and assure our selves that the holy Ghost was and is the true
author of this history, and that Matthew was only the instrument or secretary
to the same, who leaving his pouling kind of life, is become not only a
companion, and disciple, but also an Apostell, and Euangeliste of Christ: from
whom all things in the world that are good do flow, as from the lively
and celestial well of grace.

A GODLY AND CATHOLIC EXPOSITION OF THE HOLY Gospel of Jesus Christ, after
Matthew.
The first Chapter.
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of
Abraham. The book of the generation. C. IN VAIN do certain interpretours
travel about this titel, or inscription, to make excuse, because the Evangelist
Matthew does name the whole history, of the half of one chapter. For this titel
is not exte^ded to the whole book, but the name of the book is put for a
Cataloge or rehersall: as if it had been said, here follows ye order of the
generation of Christ. Gene. 5.
B. Even as we may read in Genesis, This is the book of the generation of
me^. In the which place the Hebrew word is (...) sepher, which comes of the
verb (...) saphar, that is, he has nombred, rehearsed, or declared. For there
follows the Cataloge or rehearsal of men from Adam until Noah, with a
description of who^, and what time, every one had his ofspringe and original.
Or else the book of the generation, signifies that, in the which, somewhat is
rehearsed or nombred. M. whereupon we read that the book of the Just, Exodus 32
Joshua. 10.
the book of God, in the which the Just are written, is so called.

B. This name therefore pertains properly to the Cataloge, and to the history.
A. And although the Evangelist goes about to show that Jesus the son of Mary
is the true Messiah promised long before in the law and Prophets, and looked
for of the fathers: B. Yet notwithstanding he would begin the Gospel of Christ
with the baseness of his generation, sekinge to bring in all the sorrows,
traueiles, and pains of his life, even till the power, glory, and majesty of
his resurrection, and kingdom, (in the which he sittinge at the right hand of
God, governs all things): that as Christ suffered many things and so
entered into the glory of his kingdom, and as he did first abase him self,
and became man, a servant also, Philip. 2.
and humbled him self to the death of the cross: even so he might preach
Christ unto us to be a mortal man and crucified, before that he was mortal, and
rayned gloriously in his kingdom: and so by the folishenes of preachinge, 1.
Cor. 1.
to bring salvation to the faithful.

A The Evangelist John more plainly even at the first, preaches the majesty
of Christ, John. 1^
B. teaching him to be the eternal word of the father, and that divine power
and virtue, by the which all things were made, live, move, consist, feel, and
understand. But our Evangelist Mathewe thought it sufficient to show briefly,
(as it were) in one word, the divinity of Christ, wrytinge thus, The book of
the generation of Christ, And where as he calls Jesus (which was thought to
be a carpenter, and the son of a carpenter) Christ, (being that king which
was long looked for and promised to the fathers) he has already showed a
sufficient cause and reason of so doing, to those that know the force of this
name.

The son of David, the son of Abraham. C. He calls Christ the son of
David, and Abraham, in respect of the promises: because God had promised that
the seed should come of Abraham, in the which all the nations of the earth
should be blessed. Gene. 21. and.22.
But to David there was a more plain promise made, namely, that his kingdom
should abide firm even unto the worlds end, and that a king out of his
loins, should syf upon the throne so long as the son and the moon endured.
Psalm. 89.
Wherefore it was a common speech among the Jews to call Christ the son of
David: M. The cause therefore why Mathewe does place David, before Abraham, was
the same and renown which David had in that Age among the people, when so ever
they talked of Christ to com: which fame was first brought by the words of the
prophets, with whom it was counted a solemn matter to prophesy of Christ under
the name of David. Even so in many places the people cried unto christ, Thou
son of David, Math. 21.
and Hosanna to thee son of David. And the Phariseis being demanded as
concerning Christ, whose son he was, Matthew. 22.
answered the son of David. S. Paul also says, which was borne of the sede
of David after the flesh. Roman. i.
A. But because the genealogy or pedegrewe of Christ is described and set
forth by the two Evangelists, (as by Mathewe and Luke) and that not without
great difference, (as it might seem) this chiefly ought to be considered,
whether both of them do bring the petegrew of Christ from Joseph: or whether
Matthew does it alone, and Luke from Mary. They which think that Luke brings
the petegrew of Christ from Mary, have a special pretense of difference in
diverse names. and trewely at the first sight, a man can not perceive that
Mathewe and Luke do declare all one petegrewe, there is so much difference
between them. For in the genealogy, from David to Salathiell, and from
Zorobabell to Joseph, Matthew names not one of those names which Luke names.
Furthermore they say that is very absurd to bestow so much labor in a
thing not necessary, as to have the stock of Joseph (who notwithstanding was
not the father of Joseph) twice recited. And because Mathewe has recited the
progeny and ofspringe of Joseph, they excuse the matter, and say that it was
done for many men's sakes which thought him as yet to be the father of Christ.
But truly, it had been great folly by such sufferance to maynteine a
perniciouse error: also the text it self is manifestly repugnant, and
contrary to it. For so sone as the Evangelist Matthew comes to the end of the
genealogy or petegrew, he teaches that Christ came not of the seed of
Joseph, but that he was conceived in the womb of the virgyn, by the secret
working of the holy ghost.

Wherefore if their reason should stand and be allowed, then we must needs
condemn Matthew of folishenes, and rashness, that he in vain would recite from
whence Joseph had his original. But their objection is not yet answered,
which affirm that the progeny of Joseph does nothing parteine unto Christ. We
answer therefore that the stock of Mary is comprehended in the person of
Joseph: B. because the law commanded every man to take a wife of his own
tribe. As it is written, Nume 36.
Every man shall marry his wife of his own tribe, and kindred: and every woman
shall take her husband of the same trybe: that the inheritance of the
children of Israel, remove not from trybe, to trybe. C. They gather against
this law, saying that it was almost never used, but neglected. But the
arguments which they bring in are but vain. Judge. 21.
They allege an example out of the book of Judges, because the eleue^ tribes
promised that in no wise they would geeue any of their daughters to wife, to the
trybe of Benjamin. It may be answered, that very unaptly they bring in that
which is extraordinary, and nothing to the purpose, for a common rule. For it
must needs be, that one trybe being cut of, the body of the people must be
mutilate, lame, and imperfecte, except the last extremity by this remedy were
helped. Therefore the common law in this place must not be regarded.

Beside this they do obiecte, that Mary being the mother of Christ, Luke. 1.
was cosyn to Elizabeth, whom Luke at the first wytnessed to be of the
daughters of Aron.

This also may easelye be answered, namely, that it was lawefull for young
damsels of ye tribe of Judah or of any other tribe, to be married from them to
the priestly trybe: because the law did not gainsay it, which was, that no
woman should remove her inheritance from one trybe to an other. 2. Par. 22.
So does the sacred hystory make mention that the wife of Ioiada the hie priest
sprange of a kingely stock.

Therefore no strange or unwonted thing is it, if that the mother of Elizabeth
were joined to a priest.

Wherefore these two generations written by Matthew and Luke, do very well agree
together. Yet notwithstanding there are four differences to be noted.





The third is, because Mathewe only takes in hand the legal stock or
stock perteyning to Christ, and cutteth of and omitteth some men in the order
of the rehearsal of the petegrew, and seking to help the memory of the readers,
he reckeneth up only three times fouertene generations: but Luke does more
exactly prosecute the natural stock of Christ.



As concerning the first difference because it is not hard, but very easy, it
were to no effect, to make more words about the same then were requisite. The
second wants no good reason. For seeing that God had chosen to him self the
seed of Abraham, from the which, the redemer of the world should come, and
seeing the promised saving health was there, after a sort included until the
coming of Christ, Matthew passes not the bounds or lymittes appointed of God.

We must remember what S. Paul says, ^oma. 15.
Christ was made a minister of the circumcision of the truth of God, to
confyrme the promyses made unto the fathers. To the which agrees the saying
of our savior Christ, ^^on. 4.
namely that Salvation sprang of the Jews. So that Matthew places him to be
seen in that stock, to the which he was properly and peculiarly appointed.
Therefore in the petegrew of Matthew, we must consider the covenant of God, by
the which he chose the seed of Abraham, to be a people to him self, that
they might be hedged in (as it were) and separated from other nations.

But Luke had a further consideration and regard, for although God had made
his leage and couenante with Abraham that of his seed the redemer should
spring: notwithstanding we know that from the defection and fall of the first
man, he was necessary to all me^: even as he was then ordained and appointed to
the whole world. This was don by the wonderful wisdom of God, that Luke
should describe and declare unto us that Christ was the son of Adam: and
that Mathewe should include him in the stock and kindred of Abraham. For it
should have nothing profited us, that Christ was given and appointed of the
father to be the redemer and author of salvation, except he had perteined
generally to al men alike. Furthermore the saying of the Apostel should not be
true, that he was to day, Hebre. 15.
and to morrow, and for ever, except his grace and goodness had been powered
out upon al ages from the creation of the world. Let us therefore know for a
suertie, that salvation by Jesus Christ, is made manifest, and given to all
mankind: for so much as not without cause, he is called the son of Noe, and
the son of Adam. Notwithstanding, because he must be sought for in the word
of God, the spirit does not rashely, or without good consideration call us
back by this our Evangelist Mathewe, to the holy stock and kynred of
Abraham, where, the treasure of everlasting life with Christ, was laid up for
a time.

As touching the third difference: there is not doubt but that Mathewe
observes an other manner of order then does Luke: for the one has, Salamon the
son of David, and the other has, Nathan the son of David. whereupon it
evidently appears, that there are diverse lyniall descentes appointed.

The best, and most cunning interpretours do thus unite, and reconcile this
show and appearance of discord, namely, that Matthew, leauinge the natural
line and stock, (which Luke follows) does rehearse the legal genealogy or
petegrewe. And we interpret that to be the legal genealogye, by the which
it was ordained that the right of the kingdom should come to Salathiell.

And where as Eusebius in his first book of his Ecclesiastical history,
calls the genealogy (which is described of Luke) a legal petegrewe, it
comes all to one effect. For he means nothing else, then that the same
kingedome which by lawful right was stablished in the person of Solomon, came
at the length to Salathiell,. But more trewly and parfectlye a great deal, do
they speak, which say that the legal petegrew was set forth of Matthew:
because he naminge Solomon straight after David, does not al together by order
still observe, of who^ Christ came as touching the flesh, but how he descended
and sprange out of Solomon, and other kings, that he might be the lawful
successor, in whose hand the eternity of the kingdom should be stablished,
according to the covenant and promise of God. For their opinion is probable,
and likely, which think that the stock of Solomon ended by the death of
Ochozias.

As touching that, which many allege out of the commentaries of ye Jews, (how
that it was commanded of David, that if at any time the issue of Solomon
should decay or want, that the^ the kingdom should come to the posterity of
Nathan) we leave unspoken: and we take that only which is certain, namely,
that the succession of the kingdom was not confounded, but that the degres
thereof were distinct.

4. King. 11.
Now where as the sacred history does show that after the death of Ochozias,
the kyngedome was taken of his mother Athalia, and all the kings seed
destroyed, it is very evident and plain, that those horrible and wicked
slaughters were procured of a woman ambitious and desirous of rule, least she
being brought to a private estate, and mean condition of life, should see the
kingedome removed and taken away. Therefore if the son of Ochozias, had
been alive, Athalia the grandmother, should quietly have raygned under the
color of protection without envy or danger. But the reason why Ioas, 1.
para. 22.
is said to be the son of Ochozias, is this: because he was the next of kin
or blood, they called him so, to the end he might in deed, be thought to be the
true and natural heir of the kingedome.

For if Athalia had been the grandmother of Ioas in deed, he being an infant,
she would never wyllingly have so much abused his titel: again what man of
indifferent judgment will think it likely, that the natural son of the
king, could be so priuyly hydden by Ioiada the priest, that the grandmother
by diligent care and search should not find him out? But rather, if a man way
all things wisely, he shall find that the next heir of the kingedome was of
an other stock. And that is the meaning of the words of Ioiada the priest
when he said, 2. Para. 23.
the kings son shall reign according to the covenant of the lord with
David: as who should say, it was an execrable thing for a woman, being a
stranger, to take by violence unto her ye which God would have stand in the
house of David.

Wherefore it is no absurdity if Luke bring the stock of Christ from Nathan:
because it might be, that the stock of Solomon, as perteining to the
succession of the kingdom, might decay.

Now, if any do object that Jesus Christ can not be known to be the Messiah
which was promised, but by the posterity of Solomon, who without all doubt
was a figure of Christ: we answer, that al though he spra^g not naturally
from Solomon, yet notwithstanding by the legal order he ought to be counted
and thought his son, because he took his original and beginning of kings.
But so great dyuersitie in names, troubles many very much. For from David to
Joseph, there seems to be no agreement at al between the two Evangelists,
saving only between Zorobabell, and Salathiell. This difference is said to
come, because the Jews for the most part had two names: but this excuse of
some is not well lyked. But truly, for so much as the manner and order of
bringing, and placing genealogies and petegrewes, is not well known to us now
adays, (the which order Matthew kept and followed) it is no marvel if we be
ignorant, and know not, how both of them do agree or differ in every name.
and yet not withstandinge it can not be doubted, but that from the time of the
exile of Babilo^. they rekned certain men by diverse names, and yet the self
and same men. But in Salathiel, and Zorobabel both the names were kept still,
peradventure for the altered state of the people: because then the kingely
throne and majesty was clean extinguyshed and put out. And that small and
thyn shadow of domination and rule, being left as a remnant, there apered a
marvelous change, which change should admonish all the faithful to hope for
a more excellent kingdom, then the vysible kingdom of Solomon, which for a
short time only flourished. This also is now worthy the notinge, namely, that
it is no absurdytie, for Luke in his Cataloge or rehersall, to reckon up more
then Matthew: when as it was usual to put more in number in the natural
generation, the^ in the legal. Moreover it comes to this purpose that Matthew
dividing ye genealogy of Christ into three degrees or parts, and attributynge
to every degree fowertene heads or pryncipalles, gave to him self liberty to
pretermytte certain names, which Luke could not omyt, because he had not tied
him self to that law, or order. Thus far as concerning the genealogy of
Christ.

Now it rests to declare, wherefore Matthew, has comprehended the whole
generation of Christ in three special heads and pyllers (as it were) and has
attrybuted to every head fowertene generations. Suerly he did it, not only to
help the memory of the readers, but also to note the trypell estate and
condition of the people, of the which Christ was promised to Abraham, to
come, even until the fullness of time came, in the which he should be
revealed in the flesh. For although the trybe of Judah, until the time of
David did excel the rest, yet not withstanding it kept not the principality.
In David the kingly authority (contrary to all men's expectation) issued out,
which abode until the time of Iechonias. From that time there remained some
dignity and government in the tribe of Judah, which chered up, and comforted
the minds of the godly, until the coming of the Messiah.

2 Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, Jacob begat Judas and his brethren.
Abraham begat Isaac. M.

Moses does show that Abraham did not only beget Isaac, but also Ismaell.
Gene. 16.


But to the generation of Christ, the carnal propagation was not sufficient,
but the divine election was also required.

Wherefore God said to Abraham, Gene 21. Roman. 9.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called.

A. Which, saint Paul also alleges, when that he makes a distinction
between the carnal sons of Abraham and the spiritual. M And to this Isaac
(although he ware inferior, Gene. 26.
both by birth and condition) did God promise the blessed seed: In thy seed
(says he) shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And trewely this
miraculous and wonderful birth of Isaac, being begotten by a man that was an
hundred years old, and being borne of a woman that was also fowerscore and
ten, and barren, did foreshewe the miraculouse nativity of Christ: Luke. ^.
even as did also the nativity of John the Baptist. Beside this the wonderful
obedience of Isaac, which he showed first to God, Gene. 22. Philip. 2.
then to his father when he should be offered: bare the Image of Christ, which
was obedient to his father, even to the death. Isaac begat Jacob.

M. He begat Esau also: Gene. 25.
which two were borne at one birth. But Christ came not of Esau. Jacob was
chosen to this dignity, although he were inferioure to his brother Esau, both
in age, and also in condition of life. Malac. 1.
For so God says by his prophet: Jacob have I loved, Roman. 9.
but Esau have I hated. And S. Paul also repeteth the same words. To this
Jacob also the promise was made: In thee, and in thye seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. Jacob begat Judas and his brethren.

M. Neither was he the first begotten, but the fowrth, neither of Rachell,
Gene. 29. Gene 49.
(which was so well beloved of her husband) but of Lea he was borne. And yet the
Patriarche Jacob did prophecy that Christ should spryng of him, saying, The
scepter shall not depart from Judah. For so much as the Evangelist makes no
mention of Ismael the first begotten son of Abraham, neither of Esau, which
by order of nature was above his brother Jacob: he did not unadvisedly place
the.xii. Patriarchs in the genealogy, when as God has given the adoption of
his grace to all men alike. It signifies therefore unto us that the
blessedness, promised in Christ, does not only belong to the tribe of Judah, but
to all the children of Jacob also, whom God has gathered into his church,
Roma. 9.
where as Ismaell and Esau, are made aliantes. M. And although Christ came only
of Judah, yet not withstanding all those fathers perteyned to the rest of the
tribes of whom Christ came.

3 Judas begat Phares and Zara^ of Thamar. Phares begat Esrom. Esrom begat Aram.

Judas begat Phares. Many things are to be reprehended in Judas. First because
he went from his brethren: because he agreed to the Chananea^s, and married with
a woman of the same country, because he begyled his daughter in law of the
marriage of his son, being promised to her: because he committed fylthines: so
that of this man was Phares begotten out of wedlock, by whoredom, which
Phares is nombred among the fathers and elders of Christ. This was truly a
foreshewinge of the baseness and lowlines of Christ, Phillip. 2. a
of the which Paul speaks.

The son of god could have kept by his providence, his seed, his stock,
from al filthiness, and note of infamy. but he came into the world to abase
him self, and to take upon him the form of a servant, that he might be a
worm and no man, opprobry, Psalm. 42.
and iestinge stock of men, and the outcast of the people, and that at length
he might take upon him the cursed death of the cross. This reproach he
refused not in his stock, that out of the incestious bed might come one that
should be among his anceters. For although Thamar did not couete to lie with her
father in law being by lust provoked, yet not withstanding she sought by an
unlawful means to revenge her injury: Gene. 38.
for Judas when he would have committed filthiness, A comfortable saying.
by chance happened on his daughter in law. But certainly the inspeakeable
love and goodness of god strove with the sin of them both that this unclean
seed should nevertheless obtain the septer.

M Furthermore it was so convenient and necessary that he which should dye
for sinners, and should take flesh of our sinful flesh. should also take his
generation by sinful fathers, and sinful flesh.

Phares begat Esrom. 1. Parli. 2.
A. For so has the sacred history, The sons of Phares are Esrom and Hamul.

Esrom begat Aram. Look in the book of Ruth. chap. 4. and. 18.

4 Aram begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Naasson, Naasson begat Salmon.

The order of these is plainly set forth in the history of Ruth, the. 4,
Chapter

5 Salmon begat Booz of Rahab, Booz begat Obed of Ruth, Obed begat Iesse.

Salmon begat Booz of Rahab. B This Rahab is rehearsed by name, that in her, we
may se the cause why Christ came, which was to deliver that which was lost, and
wholly subject to death, and not only to deliver it from destruction and
death: but also to beutifie and deck the same with dignity and worship. For
this woman was one of the citizens of Ihericho, whom the lord had made to be
accursed, the children of Israel being commanded wholly to destroy them, and
to burn the City and al things therein with fire, yet notwithstanding, he
did exempt this woman, being scant good (as men thought,) for she was a
tauerner, and perhaps a harlot, for the hebrew word signifies both) not
only from this curse, but also he would have her to be his mother. Joshua ^.
Look in the history of Joshua.

Booz begat Obed of Ruthe. M. This woman was of the country of the Moabites,
who afterward by divine inspiratio^, leauinge her country and kynred, came
with her mother in law, an Hebrews, to the Israelites, and being taken to wife
of Booz, is made the mother of kings, B. that we may thereby see how loving
Christ is to every one, but specially, to the desolate, gentell, and
merciful. Ruth. ^.


6 Iesse begat David the king, David the king begat Solomon, of her which was
the wife of Vri.

Iesse begat David the king. C. Only David is described with this title of
honor, because God has set forth in his person ye type of the Messiah and
captain to come First, the kingdom began of Saul: But because this
happened by the tumult and dishonest desires of the people, the alteration and
change was at last thought lawful in David: specially as pertaining to the
league and covenant of God, in the which he promised that he would be a
governor of his servants for ever. For when the people (the yoke of God
being shaken of) required to have a king, ^. Sam. 8.
he gave them by and by Saul. But God straightwayes ^tablished his kingdom,
which was the pledge of true blessedness in the hands of David. Therefore let us
here understand that the second state of the people is here noted, as it was
ordained of the lord. M. But the father of David was of no high blood, but
unknown, and of small reputation. Whereupon also David in despite and contempt,
was called of Saul the son of Isai. 2. Sam. 20.
Besides, David was the youngest, and least of his brethren, and contemned. And
yet afterward he was not only chosen to the kingdom, but also into this
dignity, that he should, be specially nominated among the aunceters of
Christ: 2. Sam. 7. and 1, Pet. 17. and Psalm. 89. and 132.
yea to whom the promise (as concerning Christ) was renewed. That we may
learn, how that God, does not cast of those that are humble, but leaving the
proud, does extolle those that are abiectes and despised.

David the king begat Solomon of her. and cet. C. Now is added of the
Euangeliste, the humane shame and reproach, which after a sort might pollute
and defile that glory of the heavenly benediction, whereof we spoke eue^ now,
that is to say: because David begat Solomon of Beersabe, whom wickedly by
violence he took from her husband, and to the end he might use her still,
deceitfully he betrayed the giltles man, and caused him to be slain of the
enemy. This filthiness in the beginning of the kingdom, might make the Jews not
to glory in the flesh. Man's merits are condemned.
For God would have it known and sure, that he in appointing that kingdom, did
nothing regard, or way man's merits, furthermore, to the end Matthew might
more specially admonish us, that sinners are not rejected of Christ (because
he thought no scorn to have his aunceters as concerning the flesh) he rather
chose to call her the wife of Vrias, then by her proper name, Beersabe. H. It
is to be noted therefore in the geneallogie of Christ that none of the holy
women are taken, but those whom the scripture does reprehende: that he which
came for sinners, being borne of sinners, might clean put away the sins of
all men.

7 Solomon begat Roboam, Roboam begat Abia, Abia begat Asa.

Solomon begat Roboam. A. In the beginning of this chapter it was showed, why
Luke brings from this place the generation of Christ, not by Solomon, but by
Nathan, the other son of David and his posterity also even until the time
of the captivity of Babylon. 1. Reg. 12, and. 2. Para. 12.
M. The scripture makes mention of Roboa^ that he was evil, whose heart was
not right with God. His mothers name was Naama, an Amonnites. 2. Para. 12.
When this man reigned, Judah was stricken and vanquished, and the gould of the
temple carried away by Pharao king of Egypt: 2. para. 10.
also in this man's time, the ten tribes rebelled. Note therefore here, yt both
the good and bad kings are set forth by the Evangelist.

Roboa^ begat Abia. 1. Reg. 2^.
M. This man also was evil, his heart being turned from God. Notwithstanding
this man being king, God had mercy upon Judah, so that he suffered them not to
be given into the hands of Iheroboam king of Israel. para 1^.
He had fourtene wives of which he begat.xxij. sons and.xvi. daughters.

Abia begat Asa. This man was good, and sought the lord with all his heart,
even as did David his father, saving that in the.xxx. year of his reign, when
that Baasa king of Israel came against him to fight, he fled (not unto the
lord) but to the king of Sirria, and craved his help: for the which being
reprehended of the prophet Ananias, was displeased, 2. para. 14. 2. po. 15. 2.
para. 16.
and commanded the prophet to be set in stocks.

Again in the.xxxix. year of his reign, being sick, he cried not unto the
lord, but rather trusted to the physicians. By this example we are admonished,
with how great diligence we ought to pray unto the lord, that he will give
us sound and true godliness even to the end. For it is written: The
righteousness of the righteous shall not save him, Ezech. 33.
whenever he turns away unfaithfully.

8 Asa begat Iosaphat, Iosaphat begat Ioram, Ioram begat Ozias.

Asa begat Iosaphat. M. This man also followed the footesteps of his father
David, and sought the lord with a pure heart, notwithstanding, in this he
sinned, that even at the first he entered into league with the wicked king
Achab, and assisted him in battle, for the which he was sharply blamed of
Iehu the prophet, with the which being nothing moved, after Achab also he was
at peace with his son Ochosias: for the which also he was again reprehended
of the prophet Eliezer, the son of Dodan of Maresa. As concerning the which
look in the.ij. book of Chronicles, cap. 17.18.19. and. 20. So yt we may se
nothing to be perfect, no not in holy men. A. Wherefore with the greater
carfulness we must wish that the continual favor of God may abide with us,
to amend our corrupt and vicious nature.

Iosaphat begat Ioram. A. This man followed the wickedness of the house of Achab
and made Judah and Jerusalem to swerve from the lord their God. Moreover, he
killed all his brethren the sons of Iosaphat, when that he was stablished in
his kingdom, which wickedness and cruelty the lord suffered not to escape
unpunished. 2. Par. 21.
Look in the 21. chap. of the second book of Chronicles. So that many times we
see of honest and godly ancestors and elders, to spring a wicked posterity.
Ioram begat Osias. C. In this succession, which Matthew describes, there are
three kings omitted as appears by the sacred history. M. For Iora^ did not
beget Hozias but Ochozias: Ochozias begat Ioas: Ioas Amazias, and Amazias begat
Hozias otherwise Azarias.

C. They which affirm that these three were of Mathewe by oblivion omitted,
are not to be hard, neither is their reason to be allowed which say that
they were unworthy to have place in the genology of Christ. For many other
also were unworthy, whom notwithstanding Matthew places indifferently with the
godly. Therefore, it is more true: that when he would make a Catalogue, or
rehearsal of fourtene kings, he was not greatly curious in having of choice:
because he counted it sufficient to set the order of the genealogy before
the readers eyes, even from the beginning to the end of the kingdom. But
whereas in some books, thirtene are only red, it is likely that it came to
pass by the false and negligence of the writer of the book. Epiphanius in his
book against heresy.
Epiphanius in his first book against heresies, shows the cause, namely that
whereas the name of Iechonias is put twyse, the unlearned are so bold as to
put it out of ye second place as a thing superfluous. The which he says,
ought not to have been done, because Ioachim the son of king Ioachim, had the
same name that his son Iechonias had. Look in the.iij. chap. of the.i of the
Chronicles, and the second of the Chronicle.xxxvi. chap.

9 Ozias begat Ioatham, Ioatham begat Achaz, Achaz begat Ezechias,

Ozias begat Ioatham. M. It is written that this Ioatham was good and permanent
in the law of God. A. He made the sons of Ammon (after he had overcome the^
in battle) to be tributary unto him. As concerning the which, read in
the.27. chap. of the second of Chronicles. Ioatham begat Achas. This man was
evil, and walked in the ways of the kings of Israel: be made molten Images
for Baalym, he offered incense in the valley of the son of Himnon, and burnte
his children in fire, after the abominations of the Heathen, whom the lord
cast out before the children of Israel. He offered also and burnt ince^ce in
hilaultars, and on mountains, and under every grene tree: to be brief, the
true God being forsaken, he lived very wickedly. Here therefore we have an
example of false religion: False religion
with the which also we have to note how evil and perniciouse a thing it is
to the people, to have over the^ a superstitious and wicked king.

Achas begat EZechias. A. This was a godly king, whose earnest zeal against
the worshipping of Images, is fully described and set forth in the.xviij. chap.
of the second book of kings.

10 Ezechias begat Manasses, Manasses begat Amon, Amon begat Josias.

EZechias begat Manasses. M. This man was so evil and ungodly, that he
exceaded all his elders, and kings of Israel, yea the very Heathen, in malice
and ungodliness: at length notwithstanding, being in extremity, he was moved
with repentance, and turned to the Lord, of whom he obtained mercy and
grace. Read of him in the.xxxiij. chap. of the second book of Chronicles. We
have therefore in this king a worthy example of repentance, and of the divine
grace. Manasses begat Amon. This man exceded his father in wickedness, but he
followed not his repentance. Amon begat Josias. This man was godly after the
example of Ezechias. In his time the book of the Divine law which was given
by the hand of Moses, was found, being hidden in the temple of the Lord,
which the king received in the fear of the lord, and commanded the lord to
be entreated and prayed unto, that he would turn away his anger from Israel,
The reverent ^steming of gods word.
which had neglected the words of the Divine law. By the which example we see
what is in the end to be looked for where wicked kings reign, ^. Para. 34
and are nothing touched with the word of God. For so long Israel fell from the
fear of the lord, that the book of the law it self was hidden and of a long
time not regarded.

11 Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren, about that time that they were
brought to Babylon.

Bu. This Iechonias differs from him that came next after. ^. King. 24
For this is called Ioachim and Eliachim, as appears. 2. King. 23. and. 24.
and.2. Chron. 36. But he that follows, being the son of the former
Iechonias, and the father of Salathiel, is called Ioachim and Iechonias, as
in.1. Paralip. 3.

It is not red in any place that Josias begat any, whose name was Iechonias,
that had brethren: but it is red that Iechonias was borne to Ioachim, which
was the original of the captivity of Babylon.

But in a certain ancient Greek book we read thus, Josias begat Ioachim,
Ioachim begat Iechonias: and rightly it may so be said as we have showed
before.

About the time that they were brought to Babylon. C. That is, when the Jews
were brought into captivity. For the Evangelist does show that then the
posterity of David, were of kings made servants and banished men into
bondage. But where as this captivity was a certain kind of destruction, it
was brought to pass by the wonderful working and providence of God, that the
Jews should not only increase and gather together in one body, but also that
some remnaunt of rule, principality and kingdom should abide in the house of
David. For they which returned home again, did willingly submit them
selves to the rule of Zorobabel without cohertion and constrainte. The remnant
therefore or fragmentes (as it were) of the kyngly scepter, endured after this
sort, even till the coming of Christ, according to the prophecy of Jacob,
when he said: Gene. 49.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a captain from his thigh until
he come, which must be sent. And even in that miserable and sorrowful
discipation of the people, the sparks of the grace of God ceased not to shine.
A. But where as it is said, about the time that they were brought to Babylon:
It is not to be understood so, that Josias begat his sons in the exile of
Babylon, when as he saw not the same, being by death prevented: but that his
posterity was brought into the same. C. For the Jews were constrained to
wander out of their country that they might lead their lives in an other
place as pilgrims and strangers.

12 And after they were brought to Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel,
Salathiel begat Zorobabel.

C. That is, after the Jews were brought into captivity: or else, after their
demigration, or wandering into Babylon: for even in the very exile, Iechonias
begat Salathiel and his brethren. M. It is said that he begat them after the
exyle, because the Evangelist seems to reken or rehearse his generation and
posterity, which immediately follows the exile. Finally, 1 Paralip. 3.
it is said that Asir, Salathiel, Melchiram, Phedaia, Senneser, Iechmias,
Hosamai, and Nadabia, were the sons of Iechonias.

13 Zorobabel begat Abiud, Abiud begat Eliachim, Eliachim begat Azor.

Gene. 49.
Bu. In this third and last degree, the kings are not rehearsed or nombred,
but the captains and chief, and (as Jacob the Patriarche does name them) the
lawegeuers, and headmen in the common wealth of Israel. But they which follow
Salathiel, in Luke are thought to be of two names (according to the opinion of
Philo) even unto Simeon: so that Neri (which Luke makes mention of (is
Iechonias. of Melchi, Ioachim, and the rest, we have spoken at large in the
first verse before.

14 Azor begat Sadoc, Sadoc begat Achim, Achim begat Eliud.

15 Eliud begat Eleazar, Eleazar begat Mathan, Mathan begat Jacob.

M. As concerning these, there is no mention in scripture, yet it is lykely
that the posterity of David was diligently comcomprehended and kept in
certain volumes of the which nothing pertains unto us.

16 Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was borne Jesus which is
called Christ.

Jacob begat Joseph. B. Luke places Heli for the father of Joseph, as also he
differs from Matthew in the whole genealogy both in name and nombre, even as
it is said already. The husband of Mary. M. For the conjunction in wedlock or
marriage, Joseph is called the husband of Mary, not for carnal copulation,
neither did he know her according to wedlock, as we shall hear in that which
follows. B. And because the genealogies are joined to the Hebrews, only by
the enumeration of men, Matthew could not show the stock of Mary, except he
had showed Joseph him self, her husband, to be of the tribe of Judah: for she
could not mary, but to a man of her own tribe, as we have declared above in
the first verse.

Of whom was borne Jesus. M. Speakinge in the foeminine gender: for Jesus was
not borne of Joseph but of Mary the virgin. Which is called Christ. C. The
Evangelist in the syrname does declare the office, that the readers may know
him, not to be a private man, but divinely anointed by the power of God, to
fulfill the office of a redemer. As touching that which pertains to this
word Christ, this is to be noted, that after the kingdom was abolished and
taken away, it began to be referred soly to him, from whom a full and perfect
renewing and restoring of the lost health was hoped for to come. For so long as
any majesty flourished in the house of David, The signification of the word
of Christi.
the kings were wont to be called Christi, which signifies anointed. But
truly, least the foul destruction which followed, should bring the minds of
the godly into despair, and discourage them: God would have this name made
proper to the only redemer, Dan. 9.
as it appears out of the.ix. chapter of Daniel. The Eua^gelical history
does show in diverse places, that it was then the common kyndof speaking, when
the son of God was manifested in the flesh, as in Matthew.16 John.1.4. and.10
chapters for it is plain and manifest that Jesus is anointed to be our king,
prophet, and hie priest, even as the kings, prophets, and priests, in times
paste were wont to be anointed. Psalm. 45.
As concerning which anointing read the.45. Psalm, and the first to the
Hebrews. By the name of ye which anointing is understood the fulness of the
grace of the holy ghost. For to this Christ, is the spirit given, not
according to mesure as to the rest of the saints, John. 3.
but most abounda^tly: so that it behooves al saints to receive of the fulness
of the same.

17 Therefore all the generations from Abraham to David, are.14. generations,
and from David to the captivity of Babylon, are.14. generatio^s, and from the
captivity of Babylon unto Christ, are.14. generations.

^^e. 6.
Therefore all the generations. A. That is, they which were begotten, or which
lived from Abraham to David are.xiiij. generations, so is it said in the first
book of Moses: Noe being a just man, was perfect in his generation. He has
divided the generations of the people of Israel into three orders and
conditions, and has ascribed the sure and certain number of the generations,
to every one of them, because he saw, that the state of the people must be
changed, fourtene generations being thrice complete and ended. They were, from
Abraham to David, under the rule of Judges, from David until the captivity of
Babylon, under kings, and from the captivity of Babylon they were under hie
priests.

The xiiij. last generations therefore, from the captivity of Babylon, unto
Christ being ended: the manner and disposition of the times did greatly require,
that the state and government of the hie priests should be taken away, and that
the alteration of the same should be made by the coming of Christ, so that this
people at that time should be, neither under Judges, neither under kings, nor
under hie priests, but rather that the hard hearted and unbelieving, should be
subject to princes of strange nations, as we see this day: and that the
faithful should be taken up into the kingdom of the true Judge, king, and hie
priest.

And from David to the captivity. B. In this second degree there are read
only xiij. except the name of Iechonias should be put twyse, that in him, the
head of the third generation might be appointed: even as it is before noted of
us in the sixth verse of this chapter.

18 The birth of Jesus Christ, was on this wise. When his mother Mary was
married to Joseph (before they came to dwell together) she was found with child
by the holy ghost.

The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise. C. Matthew as yet does not
expound or declare, where, or how, Christ was borne, but how his heavenly
generatian does belong to Joseph. ^th. 13. ^o. 6.
M. The Evangelist therefore means to declare that Christ Jesus was not the
son of Joseph (as commonly the Jews thought) but that he was conceived of
the holy ghost, and borne of his mother Mary, notwithstanding she a virgin.
But because this was altogether new, and never hard of before: it seems good
unto him not to give it forth simply, but to adioyne certain testimonies, by
the which he might prove these three things, namely that Jesus was not borne
of the seed of Joseph, that he was conceived of the holy ghost, and thirdely,
that he was not only conceived of a virgin, but also borne of a virgin. When
she was betrothed. B. Betrothed, not yet governed or scarce touched of her
spouse. Luke does more plainly set forth the same, saying: Luke. 1.
The angel Gabriell was sent of God into a city of Galilae named Nazareth,
to a virgin betrothed to a man. Therefore a virgyn was the mother of our lord.

Before they came to dvvell together. C. The word which the Euangeliste does
here use, does denote the honest lying togetogether in the way of generation
or else simplely it is taken for to dwell together, that the man and wife may
make one house and family. So, the sense is this, that the virgin was not given
into the hands of Joseph by her parents, as yet, but lived still in their
custody and keeping. A. But certain expound this according to the other
signification of the word, as conconcerning the intermedling of the husband
with the wife, following their opinion which thought Mary to be the wife of
Joseph long before, from whom he abstained for the vow of virginity, of the
which thing, no doubt they dream.

She was found with child. E. This the Evangelist says, not that the
hidden and secret workynge of God was openly known: but that he mingelth with
the knowledge of men, the virtue and power of the spirit, which as yet lay
hid.

By the holy ghost. B. Joseph was flesh, and therefore he could beget
nothing but flesh, that is lies and vanity, for that which is borne of the
flesh is flesh. But by Christ there comes grace and truth. Therefore he
could not be begotten of a man. It was necessary also that by the secret power
of God, (that is by the holy ghost) the time and course of the seed of man,
should be supplied and have his full continuance in the virgin, being the elect
vessel of God, and in the same time or term, a body to be formed to the lord,
in a Most chaste virgin, whereby he being pure and void of all sin, might be
a holy and acceptable sacrifice to his father, and also might purge and
sanctify us. The angel being sent of God, did foreshewe the same to the
virgin saying: The holy ghost shall come upon thee, Luke. 1.
and the power of the highest shall ouershadowe thee.

19 Then Joseph her husband (because he was a righteous man, and would not put
her to shame) he was minded privily to depart from her.

Then Joseph her husband. C. These two parts must be read aduersatiuely,
that Joseph was righteous, and yet that he was careful for the fame of his
wife. Therefore the righteousness which is here praised, was for the contempt
of the evil fact, because he suspected his wife of adultery, yea and judged
her to be an adulteress. The honest zeal of Joseph.
Such a wickedness with his clemency and gentleness, he would not seem to
favor, for truly he is a bawd to his own wife, whatsoever he be that
winketh at her dishonesty: neither is there any (being of honesty and godly
disposition) but they abhor and detest such wickedness. Therefore Joseph by
the zeal of righteousness did condemn that which he thought to be a falte in
his wife, notwithstanding his mind bending to humanity did stay him that he
showed not the rigor or extremity of the law. Deutro 22.
M. The law commanded that she should be punished, which in adultery was
found with child. Yet the humanity that was in Joseph would not suffer him
to show such extremity. C. This was a more mean and reasonable way, if he
departing privily went to another place. Whereby we may gather that he was not
of so tender or effeminate mind, that under show of mercy and compassion, he
should maintain the falte in hiding of it. He did only remitte somewhat of the
extremity of the law, least he should make his wife an open shame. And we
ought not (truly) to think, but that this was done by the divine counsel of
God, who no doubt stayed his mind by the secret motion of his holy spirit.
By this we know how impotent and weak Ielosy is, and how violently it
withdraws a man. Wherefore although Joseph did fully determine in his mind to
depart away from his wife, yet he was let with the consideration of so many
dangers that would ensue upon the same. And the selfsame is to be judged of
the silence of Mary, who no doubt also, was let with shame that she durst not
bewraie her self to be with child by the holy ghost: Notwithstanding she was
let more by the providence of God then by her own counsel and mind. For if
she had spoken of it (the matter being so strange, and hard to be believed)
namely that she was with child by the holy ghost, then would Joseph have
though he had been mocked. Therefore the lord did suffer his servant Joseph
to be led by ignorance into a perverse judgment, that he by his own voice
might bring him into the way.

But we must understand that this was done rather for us then privately for
Joseph's sake or cause. For God in no wise would suffer any to have a sinister
or wrong judgment and suspicion in his word. M. Let us learn here, Justice,
modesty, mer^ and anger, must be had punishing v^
by the example of Joseph, so to be angry with wickedness, that we swarne not
altogether from humanity, yea and let out humanity be such that justice
thereby be not hindered. C. Also this is the reason why this misery was not
made known then immediately to many: because it was necessary that the
excellent and incomparable treasure should be hid, that it might only be
reveled to the sons of God. Again it should seem no absurdity if we say
that the lord did it (as he often does) to prove the faith and obedience of
those that be his. For the same cause also it came to pass that the lord
suffered Mary to marie, that the celestial and heavenly conception of the
virgin should be hid under the name of marriage, until the full time that
revelation should be made: in the mean time it was hid from the unbelievers,
The cause why Mary married.
as their ingratitude and malice deserved. And would not put her to shame. M.
A man is put to shame when that he is openly punished according to his desert.

20 But while he thus thought, behoulde the aungel of the lord appeared unto
him in sleep saying: Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee
Mary thy wife. For that which is conceived in her comes of the holy ghost.

While he thus thought. C. Here we may perceive that ye lord is always ready
to help those yt are his, and that in time eue^ at the very instant. Bu. In
Joseph is verested that which Paul writes, 1. Cor. 20.
saying: God is faithful which shall not suffer you to be tempted above your
strength: but shall in the mids of the temptation make away that ye may be able
to bear it. For with a wonderful comfort here, does God assiste Joseph being
afflicted. Whereby we may gather yt although he fears or seems as though he
regarded not our cares and griefs, yet notwithstanding he has respect unto
us: but he thus hides him self, and refraineth, that he may have a full trial
of our patience, and in the time which shall be of him appointed to help us.
And all though his help be long ere it be showed oftentimes, yet is it
profitable for us, so to have it differred. Appeared unto him in sleep A. That
thaungel appeared unto him in sleep, it shows unto us that this is one of the
two ordinary means, that God used in time paste to show his mind to man, of
the which is made mention in Numeri, Nume. 12
where the lord says. I will be known to the prophets which are among you by a
vision, and will speak to them in a sleep. My servant Moses is not so unto
who^ I will speak mouth to mouth. Bu. Supernatural slepes or dreams do come
of God from above by good angels, Dreams su^^rnaturall ^^d natural.
by the which God reueleth his will to whom it pleases him. C. And we must
understand that those kind of dreams, do much differ from those that are
natural, because they are of more certeintie, and sealed and confirmed from
above, so that the verity of the same cannot be ambigious or doubtful. ^he
cause of ^^turall ^^ames.
The dreams which commonly happen unto me^, are wont to come of continual
cogitacions and thoughts of the mind, or of ye course of nature, or of ye
diste^perance of ye body, or of such like causes. Bu to the divine dreams
comes ye testimony of the spirit which witnesses for a suertie yt it is God
which speaks. Gene 28.
Bu. As of ye ladder of Jacob which we read yt he saw in a vision or dream.
Moreover we learn out of this place, how great ye providence of God is
toward those yt are his, Gods providence showed in dreams.
with the which by his fatherly watching and care, he does instruct and teach
those that are a sleep, and nothing careful for things necessary, what they
must do, and what they must avoid: and he will sooner teach the^ with a miracle,
the^ they should so dau^gerously err Joseph thou son of David. C. This
exhortation of the angel, does declare yt Joseph was troubled with carefulnes
of mind least he should be polluted or defiled with any infection, in suffering
the adultery of his wife. Therefore that opinion yt he had conceived of ye fact,
thangel takes away, that he might abide and dwell with his wife with a quiet
conscience. This Epithete of the son of David, he uses according to the
present cause, that he might lift up his mind to that hie mystery, because he
should be of that family, and a certain remnaunt with a few, of whom salvation
was promised to ye world. Joseph therefore hearing the name of David (of yt
which stock he married) he might remember that excellent covenant of the
restoring of his kingdom: that he might understand yt no new thing was spoken
unto him. Therefore it is eue^ as if the angel bringing in the foretellinges
of the prophets, should have prepared the mind of Joseph to receive the grace
presently proffered.

21 She shall bring forth a son and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall
save his people from their sins.

This thing was forshewed by thangel saying: thou shall conceive and bring
forth a son. She shall bring forth a son. And thou shall call his name Jesus.
C. The cause why he should be so called is presently added, for he shall save
his people from their sins. This name Jesus is taken from this word (...)
Hiphil, which properly signifies to save, but according to yt Hebrew it is
otherwise pronounced as Iehosua: but the Evangelists, for so much as they
write in Greek, have used the common phrase of speech whereby their folly is
reproved, which rather do wrest this name Jesus of (...) then derive it. For
they count it a great absurdity yt any should have this name, save only the
sone of God. And tragically and cruelly they cry out, that Christ would never
suffer his name so to be profaned and made common, as though truly we had
forgotten, (...) that is, that the name of Jesus, was no less common to those
men the^ Iehosua. But where as the Rabbines, The malice of the Rabbines
do write in every place, Jesus. It is plain that they do it maliciously,
least they should call Christ by any title of honor: but rather they imagined
him to be some base borne Jew. Therefore their writing deserves as much
authority as ye barking of a dog. Moreover they obiecte, Philip. 2
that this name Jesus (before the which every knee ought to bow) deserves no
reverence nor tre^bling fear, except only and alone it pertains to ye son of
God. There is no virtue included in the bare word Jesus.
But certainly Paul ascribes not unto him any magical name, in the sillables
whereof, any majesty is included or hid, no rather he means thus, that al
power is given to Christ of his father, yea al empire and dominion, and
therefore that the whole world ought to humble it self under him. Therefore al
such fond and fained imaginatio^s laid apart, let us understand that the name
of Jesus was given to Christ, yt in it the faithful might learn to seek for
that, which in times past was shadowed under the law: which was, that salvation
should come through him. Esaias. 49
Bu The self same word uses the prophet Esaias speaking of Christ saying. I
have made thee the light of the Gentiles, Act 4. b.
that ye may be my health or salvation, to thend of ye world. For he shall
save his people from their sins. A. Here the son of God is plainly
commended to be the author of salvation, even as there is no salvation in any
other but in him. C. First of al therefore we must consider, that al they in
the^ selves are lost, to who^ Christ is sent to save: for he is called by
name, the savior of the church. If yt they are overwhelmed with death and
destruction (whom God has taken and joined to him self) until Christ restore
life unto them again: what shall we say of those strangers which are not of ye
fellowship, unto who^ at no time any hope of light or life has shined?
Wherefore we must needs confess that mankind universally was judged and given
to utter death destruction and damnation, until salvation was included in
Christ. Salvation by Christ only.
But here also we must note and consider the cause of this death and
destruction, for the celestial judge, will not pronounce us to be accursed
rashely or without cause. The aungel therefore does witness that we perished, and
were oppressed and kept down in miserable da^natio^, because by our sins we
were alienated and drawn from life. Whereby is showed unto us the wickedness and
corruption of our nature. For if there were any man so fully bent in any points
to live uprightly and justly, yet he shall stand in need of Christ the
deliverer. But truly there are none, but they have need of his grace. Therefore
it follows that we are the servants of sin, and altogether destitute of
true righeousnes, Roma. 3
eue^ as the apostle Paul writes. C. Here also we may gather what way and
means Christ has to save us, Two parts of deliverance.
because he delivers us from our sins. There are two parts of this
deliverance. The first is by the pacifiyng Christ is not our savior without
we believe.
until we assure our selves to have free remission of our sins, and to be
certified that we are righteous and acceptable in ye sight of God, because we
are absolved from the desert and gilte of death. And finally, we having no
confidence in our own works and merits, must crave of him the spirit of
perfect righteousness. M. Therefore diligently we must endeavor, that this
effectual power of Christ to salvation, may ratify and confirm in us his
truth and verity. We must also note here, The coming of Christ hat^ abolished
the awe.
how the aungel with this only sentence does cast down all the service of the
law, and the whole opinion of the Scribes and Phariseis, when that he
pronounces that at length he shall come which shall deliver his people from
their sins. His people. C. No doubt the angel called the Jews the people
of Christ, to whom he was ordained joined a ruler and a king, but because
shortly after, the Gentiles were to be united to the stock of Abraham, this
promise of salvation is extended to all one with an other, which grow into
one body of the church, by faith: A. as more plainly appears by the words
of the prophet saying: Osee. 3. Roman. 9
I will call her my people which was not my people, and her beloved which was
not beloved, and her to have obtained mercy which had not obtained mercy.

22 All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord
by the prophet saying. P. That is to to say: that our savior should be borne
man of the holy virgin by the power of the holy ghost: and should be called
according to his office, Jesus. C. For Matthew comprehends whatsoever is
divine and heavenly in the conception of Christ, as easily may be gathered by
the universal note which he gives.

23 Behold a maid shall be with child and shall bring forth a son, and they
shall call his name Emanuel, which if a man interpret, is as much to say, as
God with us. Esaias. 7


Behold a maid shall be. This place is plain and commonly known. But the Jews
according to their wo^ted malice, do deprave and corrupt the same, yet here
they do bewray and show forth, not only their blind and folishe, but also
their wicked malice against Christ and his truth. With no less impudency
their Rabbines have gone about to expound this place of the prophet, of
Ezechias, which was then fiftene years of age.

But what unreasonable falshode is this, to lay up the young man again in his
mothers womb, that he might be sixtene years of age, and all to obscure the
light and to deny a manifest truth. But they are the worthy enemies of Christ,
whom (being stricken with ye spirit of madness) God will make foolish. Other
sum feign and imagine to them selves an unknown son of Achaz, whom the
prophet did foretelle should be borne.

But here it may be demanded by what right he should be called Emanuel, and
how the land was subject to his authority when he died as a private man
without honor. For the same prophet, by and by says that the same child,
whatsoever he be, shall be lord and ruler of the earth. And no less fondly do
they babble which apply this prophesy to the prophets son. And truly in
this point our Christian writers have to grossly erred, in applying the
prophecy (in ye eight chapter following) to Christ. Esaias. 8.
There the prophet says, that he was commanded to go to the prophetisse his
wife by a vision, and by the commandment of God, to call the child that was
borne unto him a spedy robber, and a hasty spoyler. For there is only noted the
troublesomnes of war, with the great destruction and desolation that was at
hand. Whereby it may easily be gathered that there were diverse causes. Let us
seek therefore for the proper sense and meaning of this place. When king Achaz
was afraid, Jerusalem being besieged, yea he being almost discouraged with
fear, the prophet is sent unto him, which promises that God shall be the
keeper and defender of the city. But when this simple and undoubted promise did
nothing eleuate his troubled mind, the prophet was bydden to proffer sum
sign or token, whether in heaven above, or in earth beneath. When this wicked
hipocrite cloking his infidelity, denied to have any sign or token, the
prophet did more sharply reprove him, and at length said. Notwithstanding,
the lord shall give you a sign. For behold a maid shall conceive and bring
forth a son. We expound this to be spoken of Christ in this manner: All you
which are of the posterity of David, do endeavor so much as in you lies to
abbolishe the grace promised unto you: notwithstanding your distrust shall
never bring to pass, but that the truth of God shall always be higher, and
have the upper hand. God does promise that the city shall be safe and defended
from the enemies: if his word be not sufficient he is ready to give you
according to your own arbitrament a toke^ to confirm the same. You exclude ye
grace proffered and drive the same from you, yet shall God abide firm and just
in his counaunt and promise: for the promised redemer shall come, in whom God
will show him self perfectly unto his people. The Jews do obiecte that Esaias
should have done both folishly and absurdly, if that, he had given a sign to
the people in those days, which sign was exhibited and manifestly showed
unto them eight hundred years after or thereabout. And here very arrogantly
they triunphe: because that this objection, either by the want of skill and
learning, or else by the carelesnes and negligence of the Christians, was passed
over with silence. But truly the solution and answer to this objection
appertaining, does not seem hard, if that we consider and way, that the promise
of adoption was given to the Jews, whereupon all the rest of the benefits of
God did depend, and wholly consiste. It was therefore a general promise, by the
which God did take and chose the sons of Abraham to be a peculiar people unto
him self, in the which all other special promises were founded and
stablished.

Again, the Messiah was the foundation of this covenant and promise. Now let
us note that the cause of the delivering of the city was, Jerusalem the
sanctuary of God.
for that it was the sanctuary of God, and that from thence the redemer should
come. This respect being taken away, Jerusalem had been destroyed and laid
waste, an hundred times. Now, let the godly readers way, and diligently
consider, that when as the kinglike house had rejected the sign proffered of
God unto them, whether the prophet conveniently passed to the Messiah or no.
As if he should have said: Although this people are unworthy of ye saving
health, which I promise from the lord: Notwithstanding God being mindeful of
his covenant, shall deliver this city from her enemies. Therefore that he
might show forth no particular sign for the testifiyng of his grace, this
might be sufficient and enough, that the Messiah should come of the stock of
David. Further we must note here, that the prophet does call the unfaithful to
the general promise, because they would admit no particular sign. It is
therefore now manifest that the prophet (when no miracle might be received)
very aptly and in good time passed to show of Christ: that the unbelieving
might conceive in their minds that there was no other cause of their
deliverance then the covenant made with their fathers. Now also rests to
confute their cauil in the Hebrew word (...). Almah. They do shamefully
co^tende against Matthew, who proves that Christ was borne of a virgin, where
as the Hebrewe word simplely signifies a young wenche or damsel. Also they
scorn and mock us which (being deceived, the word being wrested amiss) do
believe that he was borne of the holy ghost, whom the prophet says to be
only the son of a maid. And first they take to much occasion in this to
rail, when they urge ye name to be understood of a yo^ge damsel known unto a
man, which name of damsel, the scripture in diverse places, gives to virgins.
B. For by this name Rebecca was called when she was craved to be given to wife
unto Isaac. Also Mary the sister of Moses when she was bed of Pharaos daughter
to fetch the Nurice, Gene. 24. c Exodus 2. b
she was called (...). Almah, which in lattin is either Adolescentula or
puella, a damsel or wenche. Moreover the Etymology or force of the word is
here to be noted, which signifies a hiding, by the which may also be noted
the shamefastnes of virginity. They bring on place out of the.xxxi. Proverb.
31.
Chapter of the Proverbs, which notwithstanding does nothing at al help them.
There, Solomon speaks of a damsel which a young man found. But it follows
not at all that she is corrupted or defiled, which is beloved of a young man.
But now let us grant that which they require of the name, yet
notwithstanding the matter it self does overcome, and constrain the^ to
confess, that the prophet does speak of a miraculouse and an unwonted birth.
He cries that he brings a sign from the lord, not common, but such a one
as excels all other signs and tokens. If he only should have said that a
woman shall bring forth a son, how ridiculous would that great preface have
been. We see that by peruersenes and untowardness, the Jews do not only make
them selves but also the divine mysteries of God, to be a scorn or ieste.

And they shall call. M. So the old latinistes do read it, and so does
Chrysostom very well witness that it must be read in his fifth homely But
Matthewe said, they shall call, putting it to the number of the multitude. For
he respected the person of the people which said, God with us: That is to
say, they greatly rejoiced to them selves of such a birth. Somewhat the
Evangelist has altered the words of the prophecy: for there it is read
vocabis, thou shall call, in the foeminine gender, or else vocabit, she shall
call, that it may be referred to the virgin which brought forth. His name
Emanuel. This is an Hebrew word compounded of (...) with v^^nd (...) God. C.
For the scripture does often times so speak, that God is with us, when as he
asisteth us and helps us with his grace, and stretches out his arm over us
to be our defense.

But here is expressed the mean by the which God does communicate with me^.
For without Christ we are alienate from God: but by Christ we are not only
received into his grace and favor, but also we are made one with him. Our
iniquities have so withdrawn us from God and made such a division between him
and us: Esaias. 59.
And also our sins have caused him so far to hyde his face from us, because
he would not hear us, that none but he which was adjoined unto him, even
Jesus Christ, might appease his wrath. This thing was lamentable and past all
hope of recovery, if the great and excellent majesty and power of God had not
come down to us, when it was not in us to ascend unto him.

The nere affi^tie between God and us, ^y his son Christ.
Wherefore the son of God is made God with us, and that upon this condition,
that even as he adjoined his deuinitie unto us, even so, that he might couple
our humanity to his deuinitie: otherwise we should have had neither sufficient
neerenes, neither sufficient affinity or kindred, to have made us hope and
believe that God is with us: so much in all poinctes did our humility disagree
from the majesty of God. But whereas Paul does teach that the Jews were nere
unto God under the law, ^phe. 2.
and that there was mortal dissension between them and the Gentyles, he
means nothing else but that God did give the^ to the people, (which he chose
to him self) signs of his presence in types and shadows. For the promise
which he made unto them was great. As this: Deuteronomy. 7.
Thou shall be blessed above all other nations. Also he shows his word unto
Jacob, Psalm. 147.
his statutes and ordinances unto Israel, he has not delte so with any
nation, neither have the Heathen knowledge of his laws. But when as the
familiar copulation of the people with God, did depend of the mediator: that
which was not in deed fully accomplished, was shadowed in signs and tokens.
His seat or mantio^ place, is placed between the Cherubins: because it was the
Arc, the figure of his glory, and the visible pledge: but the presence of God
was showed no more to the people in shadows, but perfect and sound in
Christ. By the which reason Paul says that in him dwells all the fulness of
the godhed bodily. Collos. 2.
Christ a lawful mediator.
And truly otherwise he should not be the lawful mediator, except the
inseparable connection and knitting together of both ye natures in Christ should
adioyne men unto God.

Christ therefore being the word of his father, became flesh, John. 1.
and dwelt among us men: Hebr. 2.
and that because children are partakers of his flesh and blood, and because
he him self also took part with them. Trewly a wonderful consolation, that
God is joined to us in Christ, by whom he has reconsiled us to him self, all
things both in heaven and in earth, being appeased by his precious blood,
Collos. 1.
as witnesses S. Paul. Which apostell also (when he had propounded him a
mediator unto us) called him a man by name, as plainly appears by his
words. 1. Tim. 2.
There is one God and one mediator between God and man, even the man Christ
Jesus. Lest peradventure some man should say: but where is that mediator to be
sought, or which way should we come unto him? Therefore his words are in
effect thus. He is nere unto you, he in manner touches you, because he is your
flesh: Going about to show the same which in an other place more plainly he
declares saying, Hebr. 4.
we have not an high priest which cannot have co^passio^ on our infirmities:
But was in all points tempted like as we are, 2. Pet. 1.
but yet without sin. A. He therefore is the only mean, by whom we come unto
God. Yea by the which mediator as (S. Peter says) we are made partakers of the
divine nature. C. Neither is there any cause why the Jews should make
exclamation and say, that often times the name of God is transferred to those
monumentes in the which he witnessed him self to be present to the faithful.
For it cannot be denied, but that this name Emanuel, has a certain hidden
Antithesis and force in it self, which makes equal the manifest presence
of God in Christ, with the whole kind and manner of presence, as it was
manifested to the ancient people before his coming. And truly he has done
the office of a mediator even from the beginning of the world: but because
this did depend wholly of the last revelation, he now coming openly forth
as a priest in the sight of all men, which should put away the sins of man,
by the oblation of his own body, and should reconcile them to his father by
the price of his own blood, finally when he having finished all the parts of
man's salvation, he having (I say) as it were put on a new person, worthily is
now called Emanuel.

So that the divine majesty of Christ in this name is to be counted of us in
the first place, and to be highly esteemed of us, that it may have the reverence
of us which is only dew to the eternal God: but in the mean time the fruit
is not to be neglected, which God afterward would have gathered and received
of us. For so often as we behold and see God and man in one person of
Christ, for certain, we may believe that we shall have and possess the living
God, if by faith we be joined and linked to Christ.

24 And Joseph so sone as he awoke out of sleep did as the angel of the lord
commanded him: and he took his wife unto him.

C. The promptnes and redines which is here described and set forth, makes no
les to the witnesing of the fyrme faith of Joseph then it does to the praise
of his obedience. For except all doubt and care, had been taken away, The
obedience and faith of Joseph.
and his mind very well pacified, he had never so willingly taken his wife
again, with whose company a little before, he thought him self to be polluted.
Therefore some note of godliness was printed in his sleep, which would not
suffer his mind any more to be troubled, or to be carried hither and thither.
After this, the effect and force of faith followed, that so soon as he knew
the will of God he prepared him self without delay to obey the same. B. Even
so when the lord shall begin to speak to our hearts those things which
seem impossible to the mind of man, it is our parts not only to believe all
those things that are absurd and doubtful, but also to follow, Without the
lord by his holy spirit in struct the heart all external preaching is in
vain.
and embrace them all. Therefore how obscure and doubtful so ever the words
of the cross of Christ do seem to our mind to be, yea how vntrewely soever
the same be preached: if the Lord do teach within, nothing at all shall be
hard unto us to be believed, or done: but if he teach not, the hearers may
seem to have faith and works, but they can not have it in deed nor do those
works, no although they heard Paul or Christ him self persuading them.

Therefore in that Joseph did not doubt in him self, but that the angel of
God appeared unto him, and that those things which he hard were true,
(although they were marvelous and strange) and diligently without delay did
that which the angel of the Lord had enjoined him to do, she being taken
to wife, (whom he fearing a little before to keep) determined to put away
privily: it was the work of the holy ghost guiding his mind according to the
words of the angel.

25 And he knew her not until she had brought forth her first begotten
son, and called his name Jesus.

And he knevve her not until. C. About this place Heluidius makes a great a
do in the church, affirming that she continued a virgin no longer then till
the birth of Christ, but that afterward she bare more children to her
husband. And he proves it thus.

^^ed by the ^slatour (...) of Hiero^.
The first objection of Heluidius.
HE knew her not until she brought forth her first begotten son. Ergo,
after she had brought him forth, he knew her.

Aunsvvere.
This word (did know) in the sacred Scripture is understood two manner of
ways, sometime it is taken for the carnal copulation between man and wife,
and sometime pro scientia. that is, for knowledge, or acqueintaunce. Heluidius,
and those of his sect, do understand this word (know) for the copulation
between man and wife. where as it is certaine^ that it ought to be referred to
acquaintance, and perfect understanding of any thing. For although Joseph was
handefasted, or bethrothed unto Mary: yet he was not acqueinted at the first,
that she was conceived with the holy ghost, ^ath. 1.
and until the almighty had by visions or dreams revealed his will unto him.
As we hard before in this first cha. where the Angel said. Joseph, thou
son of David, fear not to take unto the Mary thy wife, for that which is
conceived in her, comes of the holy ghost. And in the second likewise.
Arise, and take the child and his mother, and fliee into Egypt, and abide
there until I bring the word. So that the knowledge that Joseph had, was the
sure and undoubted faith of those things that were revealed unto him from
above. And that this word (know) is taken pro scientia, in the scripture often
times, it apereth by this place.

The child Jesus abode in Jerusalem, and his parents knew not of it.

This word (until) also does sometimes signify the certain and appointed
time, and sometime it signifies the time infinite without end, or ceassynge,
As in these places that follow. I am, I am, and until you wax old, I am.
Now in this place because he says until they be old, he will be their God,
will he therefore when they be old, cease or leave of to be their God? And
our savior Christ to his Apostels. Behold, I am with you, even until the
end of the world.

Will the lord therefore, after the consummation of the world forsake his
disciples? Again the psalmist says.

He shall rain until he have put all his ennemies under his feet. Shall he
therefore, when his ennemies are subdued rain no longer? Again, As the eyes of
the maid do wait upon the hands of her mistres, even so do our eyes wait
upon thee, until thou have mercy upon us. When the lord therefore has
compassion and mercy upon us, shall we wait no longer?

In the like sense, this word (until) is to be taken in this place. For the
Evangelist says, he knew her not until she brought forth her son, that
we may much more perceive and gather, that he knew her not after.

The second objection of Heluidius.
Our savior Christ was called her first begotten son, and none can be called
first begotten, but he that has brethren, even as he is called the only
begotten son, which is the only son of his father.

Aunsvvere.
But that is not true, for every only begotten son, is the first begotten,
although he have no brethren, and therefore in the book of Numbers, the
almighty God does define, who, or what is the first begotten, saying. Nume.
18.
All that breaks the matrixe in all flesh, whether it be of men, or of
beasts. shall be thine.

Nevertheless the first borne of man thou shall redeem. Here the word of the
lord does define what first borne is, that is, every one that opens the
matrixe first: namely whether it be only begotten or first begotten. The lord
says not, tarry until the second be borne: but he says, those that are to be
redeemed, shalt thou redeem, from the age of a month, for the value of a
mo^the, namely for five sicles. For if it should have been so, that he that
first opens the matrixe, should not be called first borne, until he have
brethren, then might some man have said, I owe nothing unto the priest, till
that he be brought forth, by whom, he that is already borne, be made first
begotten.

Also in Exodus it is said. And at mydnight the Lord smote all the first
borne in the land of Egypt, Exodus 12.
both of man and beast. Now if it be true, that none are first begotten but
they that have brethern, then the only begotten, although they were first
borne, peryshed not.

The third objection of Heluidius.
Math. 13
ANd he taught them in their synagogges, in so much that they were astonished, and
said: whence comes this wisdom, and powers unto him? is not this the
carpenters son* is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and
Ioses, and Simon, and Judas? and are not all his systers with us?

Acts. 1.
Also in the Acts of the Apostels it is said thus. These all continued in prayer
and supplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his
brethren.

And Paul in the Acts says, And I went up according to the revelation, and
savve none but Peter, and James the brother of our Lord.

These places he brings to prove that she was not a virgin, because that
these are called the brethren of Christ.

Aunsvvere.
But in the scriptures a man is said to be our brother, four manner of ways,
that is to say, by nature, by country, by kindred, and by affection.

By nature, brethren are as Esau and Jacob, the twelve Patriarchs, Andrew,
and Peter, James and John.

By country, brethren are said to be as the Jews, which among them selves
were called brethren, as in Deuterono.

If thou bye thy brother which is an Hebrewe, he shall serve the six years.
And S. Paul. I have wysshed my self to be accursed from Christ, for my
brethren and kynsemen according to the flesh, which are the Israelites.

By kindred, they are said to be brethern, which come of one house, that is,
when of one stock a great multitude do spring. As in Genesis, Abraham said to
Lot.

Let there be no contention between thee and me, and between thy shepeherdes
and my shepeherdes, because we are al brethren. And again Laban said to
Jacob, because thou art my brother, thou shalt not serve me freely, for
nothing.

Those that are brethren by affection, are divided into two sorts, into
spirytuall, and common. They are spiritual brethren, which are Christians.
As in the Psalm. Behold how joyful a thing it is, brethern to dwell together
in unity.

Commonly, we are al called brethren, because we come al of one Father.

By this division it is apparent that they were said to be the brethren of
Christ, by kynrede, not by nature, not by country, nor affection. Therefore as
Joseph was called the father of Christ, even so were they said to be his
brethren, and that both in one respect. for Joseph was thought to be the
father of Jesus: and so were James and Ioses, and others thought to be his
brethern. But none will contend about this, but such as ar to curiouse.

The second Chapter.
WHEN Jesus was borne at Bethleem, in Judah, a City of Iewry, in the time of
Herod the king behold there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem.
When Jesus was borne. B In the first chapter, the Evangelist has descrybed
the original and stock of Christ: In this second chap. he does rehearse what
happened unto him in his infancy, in all things preachinge him to be the
Savior and true Christ: For the which cause in this place he does
express by name the place of his birth, and the kingdom of Herod. At
Bethleem. M. By what occasion the virgin came into Bethleem, where as the
angel was sent to her in Nazareth, Mathewe shows not: but Luke very plainly
declares it in the beginning of the second chapter. Luke. 2. a
C For the spirit of God, which prepared and appointed him self scribes or
secretaries, does seem so orderly to moderate, their style and manner of
writynge, The notable agreement of the Evangelists.
that all of them should write on, and the self same history, with most
excellent agreement, and yet notwithstanding diverse ways, whereby the truth
of God should be the more undoubted and manifest: where as it is certain, that
they spoke not of their own brain, but every man did write severally, that
which the spirit declared and told, (one having no regard to the other) and
that simply and freely. Judah. M. There are two Bethleems, one in the tribe of
Judah, and the other in the tribe of Zabulon, ^a. 19. ^ges, 12.
of the which is mention made in the books of Joshua and Judges.

In the time of Herod the king. M The greek text has, in the days of
Herod, according to the manner of the Hebrews, This is that Herod the
greatter, (...). li. anti. ^ic. 14. (...) 18.
the son of Hircane, of the beginning of whose kingdom Josephus writes. In
this man's time, he being now old, was Christ borne.

Behold, there came wise men. C. Here a history worthy remembrance is
declared, that God styrred up wise men out of Chaldea, which came into
Iewry, only to worship Christ, where he lay in a maunger, without pomp, yea
rather contemned. Suerly this was the wonderful wisdom of God, that he would
suffer his son in so base humility, to come into the world, and yet
notwithstanding, he decked, and beutified him, as well with praise, and
glorious tytels, as with other excellent things, least that any thing should
be wantinge to our faith, to the proving of his divine majesty.
Notwithstanding in this show of repugnancie and disagreinge, the apt, and
proper harmony is to be considered, and noted. The Star from heaven does
declare him to be a king, whose state or throne is the maunger or crybbe of
beasts, because he was denied to have rome or place among men. In the East
his majesty did brightly shine, where as in Iewry, not only there appeared
none at all, but also it was polluted with much ignomie and reproach. ^he end
of ^apering of (...) star.
But to what purpose was this? Because our heavenly father would appoynte, both
the star, and also the wise men, to be our guydes, which should direct
and bring us a right to his son. But in the mean time he took from him al
earthly renoune and glory, to the end we might understand, that his kingdom
was a spirytuall and heavenly kingedome. Wherefore this history is not only
profitable, for this cause, that God brought the wise men to his son, as it
were the first fruits of the Gentiles, but also because he would celebrate
the kingedome of his son, as well by the witnessing of them, as of the star,
to the profitynge of our faith, least that the wicked and evil despite of
his country, should have made him contemptible, and despised unto us. B. These
wise men, that the Evangelist makes here mention of, were commonly so called
of the Chaldeis, Percians and Greeks, and of the Latins, Astrologi, that is,
such as used the speculation of celestial or heavenly motions. These were
specially among the Percians in great price, honor, and veneration, so that
no public matters were moved without their council: neither was any thing
thought to be done lawfully, without their consent, had approved and allowed
the same. From the East. C. It may easily be gathered, that these men came out
of Persia. But how many they were in number, because the Euangeliste does not
express it, better it is to omit it, then to affirm that for a certainty,
which is doubtful. A folishe opinion, and childishe error, caused the
papists to feign and immagin them, to be three for certain, and no mo:
because that Mathewe (as hereafter follows in the leuenth verse) says, that
they offered Goolde, Myrre, and Frankensence. As though he should assign to
every one his proper gift, distinctly, and not rather to express these three
things to be offered of them, generally and commonly. There are some which
affirm that there were fowertene of them, which fond immagination
notwithstanding has no more lykelyhode then the other, except peradventure
it come of the tradition of the fathers, which thing neuerthelsse has no
certainty. But our fond and ridiculous papists, can not be sufficiently
derided, which invent and make unto them selves kings: because they read in
an other place, Psalm. 72. The fond immagination of papists.
yt it is foreshewed, that kings of Tharsis, of the Isles, and of Saba, should
come and offer gifts unto the lord. Forsooth these are witty and artificial
craftesmen, who, to the end they might give a new form and shape unto
men, they have taken it from the conversion and turninge of the world.

For of the South and the West part also, they have made the East. Thus we may
see how they are blinded, and no doubt, by the just judgment of God, that
their gross ignorance, and dull folyshenes, might move worthy occasion of
laughter to all men: with whom it was no relygion, but counted a tryfle, to
counterfeit the truth of God, and to turn the same into a lie. To Jerusalem.
M. They came to Jerusalem, because it was the chief city: and also that it
might be a shame, and reproach to the Jews, that strangers should come from
so far, to worship and they to neglecte the same.

2. Saying, where is he that is borne king of the Jews, for we have seen his
starr in the East, and are come to worship him.

Saying, where is he that is borne. C. They do signify by this manner of
speech, that this king was lately borne; and as yet an infant, that they
might distinguish and make him to differ from a king of sufficient age, and
holding government of the people. For straightwaye they add, that they were
stryrred thereunto, not by the same of his valiant acts, or by his present and
manifest greatness, but rather by the sign and token of his heavenly kingdom.
King of the Jews. M They call him king of the Jews, being ignorante as
yet, that he should be the king and lord of all the whole earth. They did
believe that he should be some wise, mighty, and a more excellent man then the
rest.

For we have seen his Star in the East. C. First, here it may be
demanded, whether this star was one of the number of those stars, which
God created, in the beginning, Gene. 1.
for the adorning and furniture of the elemente. Besides, whether the reason of
Astrology, brought the wise men hither, that thereby they might conceive in
their mind the birth of Christ. Answer.
Although we may not rage or braule contentiously about these things, yet
notwithstanding by the words of Matthew, it may be gathered, that it was not a
natural, but a strange and extraordinary star. Neither was it according to
the order of nature, that certain times it vanishes out of sight, and
sodeinely again it would shine: Then, because it went directly toward
Bethleem, what the star (...)
and at length it abode fixed over the house where Christ was (of the which
things, nothing does parteyne and agree to natural stars (it is more
probable that it was rather a Comet, the^ a star, and more lykely to be seen
in the air, then in the firmament. And yet no absurdity that Mathewe
(speaking according to the manner of the common people) does call it a star
improperlye. Hereby the answer of the second question is almost gathered.
For, in so much as it is certain that Astrology is contained in the lymittes
of nature, they could not (only by the leading thereof) come so far as Christ.
Therefore they must needs be helped by the secret revelation of the spirit.
Notwithstanding it cannot be denied, but that they had some inkelyng and
knowledge by art: yet, it was necessary that the same (by a new and
extraordinary revelation) should be helped. But for somuche as the sight of the
star did so much prevail with the wise men, that by the same they came from
far, to Christ: Woe unto our sluggishnes, The dilig^ of these he^ is to be
pr^ferred bet^ the slouth^ neglectyn^ Christian^
which so slowely and coldely seek after Christ, being made known unto us.
M. We must note in this place, the manner and reason of the divine dispensation,
how she does submit her self to the capacity of mortal men, in reuealynge
of the truth. It might have pleased God to teach these wise men the birth
of Christ, by sending to them an Angel, Luke. 2.
as he did to ye shepherdes but he thought it better to appoint and show unto
them a star, by the sight whereof, they might be instructed of the same matter.

But werefore did he rather lead them by a star then by any other thing?

Because they were men given to the obseruinge, and markinge of stars,
Answer
he used that sign, as a thing wherewith they were most accustomed and
familiar that by the same, he might bring them to the knowledge of the
nativity of Christ. By this example we are admonished and taught, that in
instructing and winning men unto Christ, we use those things that are familiar
unto them: and so by things known, to bring them to understand things more
hard and unknown.

And we are come to worship him. ^cause the star ^ed.
C. To this end and purpose, the star was showed to the wise men, to bring
the^ into Iewry, that they should be witnesses, and proclaymers of the new
king. (...) wise me^ (...) not to ^ship christ (...) spiritu^ ^orshyp.
But as parteyninge to them selves, they came not to worship Christ with
that godly worship, which apperteyneth to the son of God, but according to the
manner of the Persians, they came to salute him, as the most excellent king.
Neither did they thinck more of him, tha^ that he was endewed with a singular
power and dygnitie, whereby he might make all people to have him in worthy
admiration and reverence. It may be also, that they came unto him before the
time, to obtain his favor, whereby he might be favorable and ientle unto
them, if by chance it came to pass, that he might get the dominion of the
East part, unto him.

3. When Herod the king had hard these things, he was troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him.

When Herod had heard these things. B. It was no marueyle, if the king were
pricked and troubled in conscience, when that he heard that a king was born to
the Jews The forewarninges of the Prophets were not unknown to Herod, by
the which a king was promised to the Jews, which should restore those that
were afflicted and overwhelmed, into a blessed and happy state. For he was
brought up of a child in that country, and had learned those things familiarly

Admit that this rumor was publyshed a broad by little and little, that the
people dwelling there aboutes, might know it: Notwithstanding he is troubled,
as with some new and unwonted thing: And that, because he, abrogating Faith
from God and his promises, thought that a redemer was looked for in vain: ^e
wilful ^dnes of ^rode.
specially when as he had persuaded him self with foolish trust and
confidence, (as lofty and proud men are wo^t to do) that his kingdom was
stablyshed for ever, to him and his posterity. But whereas at the first, he
being druncke (as it were) and ouercom with his felicity and happy state, did
carelessly despise the prophets, is now made sodeinely afraid with the
remembrance of them. Neither would he have been so greatly moved with the
simple talk of the wise men, except the divine oracles had come into his
mind, The slepinge onbeleuers are now and then wakned.
which before seemed ridiculous unto him, and of no force. Even so, the lord
after he has suffered the unfaithful, for a time to sleep, does at a soden
wake them, and stir them up from the same. M. Also in this place we must
note, how that this king Christ, came to give heavenly kingdoms to the
faithful, and not to take away from those that rain in this world, their
earthly kingdoms: very rashely, therefore was Herod troubled, about this
rumor of him that should be borne king of the Jews. For he was troubled with
the sinister and wrong opinion that he had of Christ.

After the very same manner is the truth of God despised in this world,
worldelinges at the coming of Christ, fear the loss of promotion
of those that are mighty, and bear rule, because they are afraid that their
kingedomes shall be taken from them, when as his doctrine does not take away the
rule of this world, but does confyrme them by the word of God, and does
direct them to the glory of God. Peradventure also, the seditiouse brain of
the Jews, gave great occasion to Herod, to be troubled. But thereby his
impiety and ungodliness is not excused, which he showed toward Christ,
being borne. For how seditiouse so ever this people had been, notwithstanding
all things being attempted, he was feign to go under the yoke, and to submit
him self: in the which thing sufficiently the will of the lord is declared,
because he would in no wise move and help forward the seditiouse pretense of
the Jews. Whereby he might easily have taken occasion to put away this
fear, if he had had any reason or understanding of the judgments and works
of God. The oppressors of the truth in those days, are inexcusable.
In like manner the princes and maiestrates in our times, can not be excused,
which go about to opresse the doctrine of the truethe, as if it were a
seditiouse doctrine. For although not a few seditiouse spirits, have gonne
about to trouble the state of the common wealth, yet nevertheless it is
evidently enough declared, that the providence of God does not favor their
indeuoures: which has made al their doings hitherto void, and of none effect,
that they might have no just occasion of resistinge the doctrine of the truth.

And all Jerusalem with him. C. This may be expounded two manner of ways:
either that the citezens were troublously (as it were) with a tumulte styrred
by the suddeyne novelty of the matter, (although willingly they received the
glad tydinges of the king that was borne unto them): or else because they
being accustomed to evil kings, and for their long patience the sore being
ouerlayed, they feared a change, least that afterward there should come a
greater destruction and calamytie. For they were so worn and weried with
continual wars, and almost consumed, that miserable and cruel servitude
joined to them, with peace, was not only tolerable, but also of them, desired
and wished for. Whereby it is euidente, how evil they profited under the
correction of God. For they were made so dull with abashement, The blindness of
the Jews
and vnsensiblenes, that even now the promised redemption and health, after a
sort stancke, and was odiouse unto the^. And it is not to be doubted, but that
Matthew goes about to note their ingratitude: because they being discouraged
with the tediousenesse of evil men, did cast from them all hope and desire of
the grace which was promised unto them. Very few that believed were at that
time at Jerusalem, so that almost all of them did rather covet a worldly peace
and quietness, which dureth but a time, then the everlasting tranquillity
and kingdom of Christ, they were so troubled so sone as they heard that a
new king was borne unto them. And so of that, whereof they should have most
rejoiced, they most lamented and sorowed.

4. And when he had gathered all the chief pristes and scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be borne

C. We have heard the trouble of Herod, now let us here his craft and
hypocrisy. Although there was great silence and small talk of Christ in the
kings court, yet notwithstanding a rumor of the king was spread abroad, by
the wise men, which made the prophesies to be remembered, where as before they
were quite forgotten. Wherefore Herod did by and by conjecture that the king,
whereof the wise men made inquiry, was the Messiah, which long before was
promised. And hereby again it appears that Herod was afraid in good
earnest, since that so carefully he inquireth: and no marvel: For so much as
all tyrants are afraid, Tyrant^ more afr^ then oth^
and their own cruelty and tyranny brings more fear unto them, then it
does to any other.

Herod could not chose but be more afraid then any other, which knew that
he reigned against the will of God. All the chief priests. E. These chief
pristes, wear the chief prelates among the priests, both for their holy
life, and wisdom, and also for their skyll in other matters, which were of
great power, before that Herod bare rule, whereby they were as yet in great
authorytie among the common people. And scribes. Bu. S. Luke calls these
scrybes, Luke. 7 and.11^
lawyers. These gave aunsweres out of the books, the prophet saying. In the
pristes lyppes should be sure knowledge, that men may seek the law at his
mouth. Malac^


5 And they said unto him, at Bethlem in Iewry, for thus it is written by the
Prophet.

And they said unto him at Bethleem in Ievvry. M. Here is to be considered the
wonderful impiety of the tyrante. The two things which he sought, as well
of the chief priests, as of the wise men, did wholly consist upon the
detection and revelation of God: that which was demanded of the hye priests,
was of that which is written in the prophets: that which was demanded of the
wise men, was as concerning the heavenly sign. So that the majesty and power
of God was on both sides, and yet the foolysshe mad man thought he could
deceive god, and could make all the divine oracles, and tokens, ^he wicked
^ade the scrip^^^rs to vsurp ^e same.
as concerning Christ of none effect. Even so the wicked men in these
days are wont to learn the prophesies, and to usurp the same, so far as
they do seem to make by any means for their ungodliness or hypocrysie. but
in how much they might be withdrawn from the same, in so much with
shameless obstinacy they do reiecte it.

For so it is written by the Prophet. C. That the chief priests and
scrybes, do so syncerely and truly answer out of the Scriptures, (which
notwithstanding afterward, went about furyousely to peruerte the same,
least they should give any estymation to Christ) was done for this end,
because as yet Christ was not troublesome unto them with his Gospel. Even so
all the ungodly in general beginnings, do wyllyngely subscribe and submytte
theimselues unto God, but when as the truth of God does more nearly begin
to urge and touch them, then they show out their poisoned cankered
dysobedyence. Of the which thing, at this day we have a manifest and plain
exaumple in our Papists. For they will confess without contention or
controversy, (...) Papists ^e to con^ Christ, ^n deed (...) deny him
that Christ is the only begotten son of God, which has taken upon him
our flesh, and they will acknowledge also one person in two natures, of God
and man, but when we come to the virtue and office of Christ, then begins
the contention.

In fine, so long as the wicked perceive that they do nothing preiudicyall or
hurtefull to them selves, they will geeue some reverence to God and his
word: But when Christ shall fight hand to hand, wickid ^ot abide ^hention.
with Ambytion, with Couetousenesse, Pride, Hypocrysie, and Deceyte. then they
forgette all modesty, and become more mad then dogs. Let us be well
assured therefore, that wicked affections are the princypall cause of
blyndenesse to the enemies of the trewethe, which turn light into
darckenesse.

6. And thou Bethleem in the land of Judah, art not the least among the
princes of Judah. For out of thee there shall come a captain which shall feed
my people Israel.

And thou Bethleem in the land of Judah. M. This place is written in the
prophecy of Mycheas. Miche. 5
From the which text the high priests and Scrybes, being asked of the
place where Christ should be borne, answered Herod.

C. And no doubt, they syted trewely, the words of the text in their
tongue, according to the prophecy: but Matthew thought it suffycient to note
the place.

And because he wrytt in Greek, he followed the reading admytted, and
receiuyd. For out of this place, and such like, it may easily be gathered,
that he wrote not the Gospel in the Hebrewe tongue. But this is always to be
noted, that so often as the Apostelles do syte and allege any place of
scripture, althouge they rehearse it not word for word, (yea sometimes they
much dyffer in words) yet for all that they apply it very agreeable, and
aptly for the purpose.

Wherefore let the readers always marcke and take heed, for what purpose
the Euangelystes bring in places of the Scripture, that they stand not
scrupulousely, upon every word, but to be satisfied and contented with this
one thing, that the Scripture is at no time wrested of them into a contrary
sense, but is properly used according to the true sense and meaning thereof.

But for so much as they were appointed to nouryshe up infantes and nouyces in
the Faith, with the drink of milk, which could not take flesh as yet, no
religion does hinder, but that the children of God, may exactely and
dyligently search what the scripture co^teyneth: and so the taste which the
Apostelles do give, may bring them to the clear and perfect well. Miche. 5.
Now let us return to the prophecy of Mycheas. it is red thus, according to
the words of the prophecy. And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art not littel among the
thousa^des of Judah. Out of thee shall come unto me, which shall be the
governor of Israel. For Ephrata. Mathewe has put Judah: but in the same
sense. For Mycheas would have Bethleem, whereof he speaks, discerned as it
were, by this note, from the other, which was in the tribe of Zabulon, of the
which we spoke before in the first verse.

C. In the rest of the text, there is much more difficulty and hardenes. For
the Prophet says that Bethleem was little among the thousands of Judah.

Mathewe on the other side extolleth the dignity thereof, and says, that it
is one of the chief: And this is the cause that diverse interpretoures do
read this place interrogatiuely. But others much better expound it: which
thought that Mathewe would cellebrate the grace of God in this mutation and
change: because that a simple, little, base town, should be made the place
of birth, for so excellent a king: Bu. As if he should have said. And thou
Bethleem, although thou seem a base and contemned town, if thou be
compared to many other towns, in the tribe of Judah: yet notwithstanding, thou
art not the least among the chief Cities of Judah, if that in deed we have
respect unto the mystery. For out of thee shall be borne a captain, which
shall govern my people Israel. M. In the which we may note, how God does
choose those things that are humble, and of no reputation in the world, to
great and hye matters. 1. Samu. 16.
Even so he chose David, being the least of his brethren, to the dignity of
a king. Furthermore we see of how great price and estimation those things
are, which when they be abiectes and castawayes in the syghte of the world,
are made by the gift of God most excellent. What had that poor city
Bethleem, and the very least among the rest of the cities of Judah, whereby it
should be so much exalted of the Prophet. It had the birth of Christ,
and that of all byrthes the most base and humble: and yet through this name
it was so great in the syghte of God and the Prophet. But although this
city did excel with such honor, yet not withstanding it nothing at all
profyted them that dwelte therein, so that they fell into greatter mischief,
because that the redemer of mankind was so unworthily received.

Which shall feed my people. Bu. Instead of a governor, Matthew has put in
a pastore or feder, although in deed he has expressed both, that is to
say, Christ to be the captain of the people, and yet the office of feeding
to perteyne to him. E. The angel said before. for he shall save his people
from their sins. M. Both the places do commend unto us, wholly the grace of
God toward his people in Christ, whom he has sent to be a captain and
savior. The one does promise delyueraunce from sins, having respect unto
the priestehode of Christ, And the other, gouernemente and rule, having
respect unto the kyngedome of Christ. Both of them are necessary for us, and
both of them are offered unto us in Christ.

B. Saying that therefore we have a prince and governor given unto us of our
father, being of such power that all things are in his hand, let us safely
commytte our selves unto him: and it is meet and conueniente that we here one,
in whom al health and everlasting life is put, who also shall judge al men,
and shall destroy all those quyte, that would not have him to raygne over
them. Luke. 19.


7. Then Herod, when he had priuyly called the wise men, he inquired of them
diligently, what time the Star appeared, Then Herod when he had privily
called the wise men.

M. All things are full of deceyt and craft. C. The tyraunte durst not
confess his fear and care, least he should encourage the people to be
boulde against him, of whom he knew that he was envied. He does therefore
openly dissemble this thing to partayne unto him, but he makes privy
inquiry, that he might help and remedy the present danger. ^ote herethe
^icked pre^^ace of hypo^^sie.
And although an evil conscience makes him afraid, yet for all that, no
doubt God stroke his mind, with a strange fear, that he being void of
counsel, and distraught of mind, should for a time be astonished, for if he had been well aduysed, nothing had been more easy, then to have sent one of the
noble men of his court, as an offycer, the which so sone as he had perceived
the whole matter, might spedely have returned again.

For Herod in policy was wonderful: beside that, he had an excellent
hawtye mind, and therefore it is the more marvel, ^^sedom and ^licie can
(...) withstand ^^od.
now in the extreme peril and danger, the remedy being in his own hands,
that he lies astonished and quyte discouraged. Wherefore let us well
understand, and be persuaded, that not without miracle, the son of God
escaped the mouth of the lion. And no less in these peryllouse times does
the lord amase and astonishe his enemies, who, although they have a thousand
means and ways, yea, and that before their eyes, to destroy his church: yet
he does frustrate the same and make them quite forgotten.

A. Herod hydeth his craft and sutteltie, as much as may be, in the which,
at length he is taken.

He inquyred of them diligently. M. Matthew hereafter adds that Herod sent
forth his men of war, and slew all the children that were in Bethleem, and
in the coasts there aboutes, so many as were two years old and under, ^erse.
16.
according to the time which he had dyligently learned of the wise men.
Therefore this cruel and subtle man, for this end, enquired so diligently
of the wise men, what time the star appeared, that if they brake promise and
returned not again, that then he should have a sure token of the newborn
king, according to the which he might execute his tyranny upon all the
infantes there aboutes, and so by that means, to destroy Christ, whom he
sought. So great cruelty did this tyrant conceive in his mind against
Christ.

8. And he bad them go to Bethleem, and said. Go your way thither and search
diligently for the child, and when ye have found him, bring me word
again, that I may come and worship also.

And he bad them go to Bethleem and said. A. The wonderful wisdom and
providence of God does here appear.

M. Behold, the wicked king is a mean to show the place where the king
Christ was, although against his will. Even so, the wicked often times by
their wicked deeds are constrained to help the godly, Go your way and
search. This he speaks, that Christ being taken, he might spare the
multitude of infantes, and not slaie them.

That I may come and vvorshyppe. The worship of hypocrites.
This is devilish hipocrisy. His mind is: that I may come and kill him, where
as he says, that I may come and worship him.

You do well says he, in sekinge after this king, to worship him, for he
shall be great, I know it, and therefore I my self covet to be acqueynted with
him and to worship him. So that he thinks one thing in his heart, and
speaks an other thing with his mouth.

He knew that Christ could be extynguished, by no better advantage, then by
such dissimulation.

C. But God, (as we shall here) by an other means made this craft and
deceypte, to appear. In the mean time, we may behoulde and see the miserable
lotte and chance of the reprobate.

B. This tyraunte does here that the wise men were styrred by the syghte of
the Star, to come from the East part, to worship the king of the Jews:
he hereth also the Scripture to give testimonye of Christ, yet for all this,
he was no whyt moved, but seeks with tooth and nail to deface and spoil this
new king. Not considering, that if he were the lord Christ, (which in deed
the new sign declared) that then he would easily escape his hands: but if
not, that then he need not to fear him at all. C. Therefore as he, fearing
him self, by the tumulte of the people, is as it were out of his wit: even
so again, such fury and madness does stir him, that he is not afraid to
provoke the wrath of God against him self. For he well understood, that if any
king should be borne, that he was ordained by the power of God, to erect and
set up the decayed throne of David. He does not therefore go against men, but
outragyouselye he staieth not (void of all fear) to fight with God. This
therefore is to be noted, that he was suddeinly strycken with the spirit of
madness, so that he sought to invade God: yet he behaved him self
chyldishely, for his counsel was brought to naught, that even like unto a
blind man, he might grope in the dark. B. Even so throughoute the whole
scripture we may see, that the more plain and euidente the power of God, by
words and signs, does at any time appear unto the wicked, the more are they
increased in madness.

Very manifest exaumples we have of Pharao, of Saul, and of the Jews, which
were the persecuters of Christ. Let us not then marueyle, if we see the self
and same, at this day to happen to the reprobates: The reprobates are captives
to Satan.
For they are captives to Satan the devil: who, the nerer he is touched with
the power of God, the worse he is set on fire, and the more cruelly he vexes
and disquyeteth those that are his, that they may make that thing poison for
them selves, which by nature, is the medicine, and food of everlasting life.

This tyrante therefore is a pattern and image of them, which will seem to
honor, and worship God aright, when as in deed, they would, if they could,
have him quite destroyed. A. But that great judge of the world, in due time
shall disclose, and openly show their hypocrisy.

9, When they had heard the king, they departed, and loc, the star which they
saw in the East, went before them, till it came and stood over the place
where the child was.

When they had heard the king. C. A great shame was it to the Jews, that
not one of them would go with these wise men, to behold their promised king.
The chief priests and scribes told them the way before, and plainly
declared the place, where he was borne, and yet not one of them would once move
his foot thitherwardes. Peradventure they greatly feared the cruelty of
Herod: but this was a wicked ingratitude, to have no regard at all of the
proffered saving health, and to less esteem the grace of God, then the
displeasure of the tyrant. But all the people as we showed before, were to much
void of reason, which rather desired to be oppressed with the yoke and bondage
of tyranny, then by the alteration and change of their king, to feel some
discomoditie. And except God had confyrmed the minds of the wise men, by his
holy spirit, this might have been a stomblinge block and let in their
journey: nevertheless their earnest desire to the same, is never a whitte
dyminyshed, but without any to bear them company, they proceed forward.
Neither wants there any matter to the^ to confyrme their faith, when they
heard the king to be renoun^ed, and honored with deuyne oracles, which was
showed to them by the star. They were ignorant of the malice of Herod, in
so much that they credyted him in all things, that he spoke unto them. And it
is very lykely, that they would have returned to the wicked tirante, and so
unwisely to have bestowed their peine and travail, to the destroyinge of
Christ. And therefore (as we shall here) they were admonished from above, not
to return to Herod.

And behold the star. M. The Greek word does signify: so to go before, as
a guide or leader of the way. So God was wo^t to direct the way of those that
are his servants: So he led his people by the cloudy pillar in the day, and
by the fyrie pillar in the night.

Went before them till it came and stood over the place. Exodus 13.
C. That the same did guide the wise men (they being entered into their way) to
the very place, it may easily be gathered, that at the first, it vanished
away, for no other cause, but that at Jerusalem, they might search and enquire
for the new king: and that to take excuse away from the Jews, whoo after they
were taught, as concerning the redemer which was sent unto the^, yet
notwithstanding, wittingly and willingly they despise him. M Now there are two
signs as touching the place where Christ was borne, which do very well agree,
that is to wit, the oracle of the prophet, ^eauenly re^elations do ^waies agree
^ith the scrip^res.
and the star the moderatrix and guyder of them in their way. Even so it is
always necessary that heavenly reuelatio^s agree with the scriptures. The
citezens of Jerusalem, had the letter of the scripture, the which they had
always in memory: yet they wanted the heavenly Star. Even so a great many
at this day, well remembrynge the letter of the scripture, seek not Christ
with all their heart, and therefore worthily they are depryued of the guiding
of the heavenly grace. Therefore God is to be entreated and prayed, that he
will suffer heavenly revelations to join unto the scryptures, and the oracle
of the scripture, to heavenly reuelatio^s. In these means Christ is found,
which is never found by the wisdom of man's reason

10. And when they saw the star, they were exceeding glad.

M. Not only this was brought to pass by the apperynge of the star, that
they might be led to the place where Christ was borne, and all fear being
driven away, should be made glad: but also that they should have heavenly
munition and furniture, against this obstacle and let, of humility and
poorenes which they should find in Christ, and in his parents. Whereby it
came to pass, their faith being confyrmed the child being found, ^od
never ^leth those ^t are his.
and with his humylitie nothing at all stayed, they worshypped. Even so, God
is accustomed to send the true light of his truth and grace, to those that
are his in the midst of temptation, and that to this end and purpose that
they should rejoice for the dangers paste, and that they are prepared and
fortified against those that are to come.

11. And when they were entered into the house, they found the child with
Mary his mother, and they fell down flat, and worshipped him, and opened
their treasures, and offered unto him gifts, Gould, Fra^kensence, and Myrrh.

And when they were entered into the house. C. This monstrous syghte might
have been a new let or obstacle unto the wise men, when as no one show or
spark of kyngelynes appeared in Christ, so that he was more base and
contemptiouse then any common man's child: but because they were persuaded by
the instincte of the holy ghost, The operation of Gods spyrite surmou^teth
man's reason.
that he was appointed a king: This only persuasion being fixed in their
mind, makes them to worship Christ. They consider that as yet, his
dignity (by the wisdom of God) is not revealed.

And because they are fully persuaded, that he shall be of an other price and
estimation then he now appears to be, they stayed not, to geeue unto him that
honor, to a king apperteyning.

And they fell dovve flat and worshipped. By the prostrating of their bodies
they acknowledge him to be a king, and worship him accordingely. The manner of
the Persians in worshippinge.
This is the manner of the Persians to worship a king, with falling down and
prostratynge them selves. Even so Satan desired to be worshipped of Jesus,
saying, Math. 4.
al these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

The bishop of Rome does not only desire to be worshypped, that is, The
Romish bishop, even as satan did desires to be worshipped.
to have men fall down before him, but also he will have his feet kiste, and
that not of the meaner sort, but of such as are of great dignity: He
shows great favor to others, if he suffer them but to kiss the place,
where his foot has but trodden. So much the successor of Peter, and the
viccar of Christ, has excelled both Peter and Christ, in honor and
dignity. But I would to God that he would so follow Christ, and Peter, in
doctrine and life, as he does so folishely crave of all men by the name of
them, to be worshipped.

They offered unto him gifts. C The wise men by their gifts do declare from
whence they came. For it is no doubt, but that they brought these gifts as a
present of the best things that they had in their country. But note here,
that every one brought not his several and proper gift, as one to bring Gold,
an other frankense^ce and the third Myrrh, but they brought these three
several things, as parteyninge to every man alike. They chose these three
things as principal among others. Goulde, Frankensence, and Myrrh. The
profit whereof did much enryche the East part. After this manner we may read,
that Jacob did send of preciouse fruits of the land into Egypt. Likewise
the queen of Saba brought gifts unto Solomon the king. Gene. 43 1. King. 10
It was usual among the Persians, to have some gift in their hand, so often
as they saluted their king: For by such oblation and offeringe of gifts, they
declare the good affection and good will that they bear to their king. But
where as the wise men worshippinge the king, according to the manner of the
Persians (whose kingdom they thought to be earthely, and of this world)
offered the fruits of the earth: it is our part to offer spiritual things,
and to worship him spiritually, seeing that we are fully persuaded, that his
kingdom is heavenly. Two things to be studied of every christian.
Therefore the first kind of worshipping is, the study of doctrine, and
Faith: and the second is invocation. For so he is trewly worshypped, not when
we give, but when we ask. After this, there follows not only bodily
afflictions, but also the craftye assaults of the devil, by the which faith is
exercysed and tried, To conclude, this is the laufull and true worshyppinge,
which he requires, Roma. 12.
to give our bodies a holy and acceptable sacrifice unto him.

12 And after they were warned of God in sleep, that they should not go
again to Herod, they returned into their own countreye an other way.

And after they were warned. B The wise men could not perceive the deceyte
of Herod. The simplicity of Godliness.
So simple always is godliness, that it measures other men by it self. The
oracles therefore of God is at hand, which takes away all danger from them,
and makes them to return home again in safety. M. God would not have these
good, The deeds of the godly are often times perverted by ^he wicked.
sincere, and innocente men return to the wicked tyrant, lest that they, for
lack of knowledge should have been made against their wills, ministers of his
malice. And meter it was that they obeyed the commandment of God, then the
crafty and deceytfull petition of Herod. B. These things were done, and
written for our instruction, to teach us that our simplicity will never
deceive us: and that God does continually care for us. A singular comfort.
So that he will sooner send his aungel, (if occasion should serve) then he will
suffer us to peryshe in any danger, Psalm. 9^
according to the saying of the Prophet. Who so dwells under the defense
of the most high, shall abide under the shaddowe of the almyghtie. Yea almost
all the Psalms and the whole Scripture, being written for our consolation, do
often inculcate the same matter: that God, in all things does defend those
that fear him, although he do not declare the same, by manifest revelations.

13 When they were departed, behold the angel of the lord appeared to
Joseph in sleep saying: arise and take the child and his mother and fly into
Egipte: and be thou there till I bring the word. For it will come to pass
that Herod shall seek the child to destroy it.

When they were departed. C. How many days it was from the departure of the
wise men, until the time that Joseph was commanded to fly into Egipte, it is
not known, neither makes it any matter, saying: that it is probable, that the
lord spared Mary until she was recovered of her childbyrth, that she might be
able to take that journey. This was the wonderful counsel of God, which
would save his son by sleynge from one place to an other. M. But this is an
other temptation and trybulation of Joseph, in this cause of Christ.

C. There is no doubt, but his mind was assaulted with very daungerouse
temptations, when as there appeared no hope, but in running away: beside this
it was very unlikely that he which should be the savior of al me^, could be
saved by no other means, then by the work and industry of mortal man. But
God used this moderation, in preserving his son, that he might give some
signs of his heavenly power: neither did God make this so manifest, but that
it lay hid under the show of infirmity. For the full time of the glorifiyng
of Christ openly, was not yet come. ^estion.
And fly into Aegipte. M. Why into Aegipt? Could he not fly into Jury, and be
privily kept in some place there? I answer, ^nswere.
in Egypt Herod had no power or liberty to search where the child was
hid, because it was in an other man's dominion: but in Judah he had.
Furthermore, this was done by the just judgment of God, to declare that it
should come to pass that the kingdom of God should be taken from the Jews and
carried to the Gentiles. And beside this, Egypt being nere unto Palestine was
more proffitable to fly unto. Moreover, it was necessary, that ye scripture
which the Euangeliste resists here, ^erse. 23.
should be fulfilled. It is very well therefore. If Jury drive away Christ.
Egypt will receive him. Even so, if our kinsmen, if our friends, yea, if our
country drive us and expulse us away, yet let us not despair, for we shall
have place and friendship among strangers. If Europe do banishe us, ^amu. 27.
^ene. 41 King. 17 King. 10
Asia will receive us. David being expulsed Judah, was received and entertained
in Palestine. Joseph being sold of his brethren in Aegipte, was greatly
exalted. Elias being driven from the company of men, was nourished of Ravens.
And after that he was kept by ye widow of Sarephta. By this therefore we are
tought that God does not always preserve those that are his by one kind of
mean, but sometimes mightily he declares his power, and some times again very
obscurely he shows forth ye same. Now this wonderful mean of saving, and
preserving, under the cross of the son of God, teaches us that they do very
wickedly and ill, which will prescribe unto God any mean or way of
deliverance. Let us suffer therefore our health to be wrought of him by
unlikely means. Neither let us refuse to humble our selves, whereby the better
he may show forth his glory. But specially we must take heed that we fly not
from the cross, with the which he has exercised his son from his infancy.
The folishnes of Christ's cross excels all wisdom of the world.
For this flight is a part of the folishenes of the cross, and yet the same
excels all the wisdom in the world. That the Savior of Jury may come forth
and show him self in dew time, he is constrained to fly out of the same:
and Aegipt nourishes him, out of the which nothing came at the first, but
that which was cruel and hurtefull. Who therefore is not amassed at the work
of God so far beyond man's expectation.

And be thou there until I bring. M. This consolation and comfort the angel
brings unto him, least he should think that he should abide still in Aegipte
in exile and banishement, which no doubt would have been very grievous unto
him. Furthermore, by these words the angel does declare and show, that God
hereafter will take charge and care of the childs life. And to say the
truth, Joseph had great need of this confirmation and strengthening, that he
mightfully be persuaded that God was not only the guide of his journey: but
also that he would be his continual keeper and defender in his banishement. And
by this means God would pacify and aswage, many cares, with the which the
heart of the godly man might exceadingly have been tormented and troubled, to
the end he might quietly abide in Aegipte. For there was no moment in which
he escaped at any time without trouble and torment, for now again he sees
that he was deprived not only of the enheritaunce promised of God to all
saints, but also of the temple, of sacrifices, and of the open profession of
the faith, and should dwell among the most wicked enemies of God, and in the
pit and gulf of superstition. Joseph in the person of Christ carried the
redemption of mankind.
And truly he carried with him in the person of the infant, what good thing
soever at any time the fathers looked for, or the lord had promised unto them:
but because as yet he had not sufficiently proffited in the faith and
knowledge of Christ, he ought of necessity to be stayed with this
commandment: Be thou there until I bring thee word, least it should be
grievous unto him, being banished from his country to languishe among the
Aegiptians. We are taught by this example, that when we are in the midst of
affliction and mysery, we look patiently for the hand of the lord, which
will deliver us from the same: God never forsakes those that obey his will.
Then that we doubt not, but that the same providence of our heavenly father
will be with us in tribulations which brought us to the same. He which says,
go, and fly, does never forsake those that are in flying or going, according
to his commandment. For it will come to pass. C. In that the aungel does
foreshew a secret thing and unknown to man, it is a plain token of the power
of God: and in that he bids Joseph by flight and exile, to save the life of
the child: it is a token also of humanity, and pertaining to the infirmity
of the flesh, unto the which Christ as yet was subject. M. Nothing therefore
is hydden from the Lord.

The wicked tyrant deceived the wise men, but he could not by fayning that he
him self would come and worship, deceive the living god, who knows the
council of princes. Psalm. 33.
In what misery were the godly, if that wicked hipocrites might deceive the
lord. But for certain let us be assured that there is no knowledge, no
wisdom, Proverb. 21
no counsel against the lord. M. Wherefore the angel says not: It will
come to pass that Herod shall destroy the child: but that he will seek to
destroy the child. In this example is depainted unto us, that all the fond and
vain enterpryses of the wicked against this Christ, The wicked cannot destroy
in deed how much so ever they seek to destroy.
whom (whylest they would destroy in deed) do nothing else but seek to destroy:
and in vain, for so much as he can be destroyed of none, which at length shall
deliver all the wicked to everlasting punishment and destruction.

We must think the like of the just and all godly men, whom the ungodly seek
to destroy in vain, because they are never forsaken of God, as the prophet
says, The ungodly sees the righteous and seeks occasion to slaye him, Psalm.
37
but the lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is
judged. 1. Pet. 5.
Let us therefore cast our care upon him, because it is he that cares for us.

14 So when he awoke, he took the child and his mother, by night, and departed
into Aegipt.

And when he avvoke. C. That Joseph without delay obayeth the commandment of
the angel, we may gather again the certainty of the dream. For such
willingness in obeying, does plainly declare, that he nothing doubted, but that
God was the author and cause of taking his slighte. Notwithstanding, this might
seem to be attributed to distrust, that he takes his journey so privily in
secret. For his departure in the night was not without great fear but the
excuse is easy. He saw that a base and abiecte kind of way in saving, was
appointed from above unto him, he thought it good therefore privily with fear,
(as commonly men do in the extremity) to take his flight. It is mete therefore
that we temperate and measure our fear with predictio^s and forewarnings of
God, with the which if it agree, it is not contrary to faith.

15 And was there, unto the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken of the lord by the prophet, saying. Out of Aegipt have I called my
son.

And was there unto the death. A. How long the child abode in Egypt it is
not well known. M. There are some that write that Joseph, and Mary abode in
Aegipte with the child Jesus seven years. But in what place they abode in
Aegipte, and how they were there accepted: also whether there were any
miracles concerning them, and such like, because the Evangelists make no
mention of the same, we ought not more curiously then they to stand about it.
That it might be fulfilled. B. Or brought to pass. For the scripture is
fulfilled, or brought to pass, when that is done which it before declared or
rehearsed, or by any kind of means spoke. In this place we must understand
the scripture, or that which is spoken of the lord, to be fulfilled, when that
is done or brought to pass, which of the same is rehearsed: although it be not
the thing it self, of the which it is properly spoken or written, but has
some co^gruence and likelihode with the thing that is past and finished.
^isco^struing of the place of ^^e prophets
C. But because Mathewe does say that the prophesy is fulfilled, many have
thought that the prophet meant nothing else but that which is expressed, and
thereby they co^ster it thus: that the Jews did foolyshly in seking to
oppress and resist the son of God, because the father called him out of
Aegipt. And after this manner, amiss they do wrest the words of the prophet,
whose meaning is to prove the Jews gilty of ingratitude, who from their
infancy and original, have had God the father loving and benificiall unto them,
and yet with new sins, they seek to provoke him to anger more and more.
Wherefore let us determine without controversy that this place ought not to be
referred to Christ. And yet nevertheless the place is not strained into an
vnpropre sense and meaning, but aptly applied according to the present
occasion. The true vn^ersta^ding of ^e place of ^e prophets
Thus are the words of the prophet to be understood. For so much as the
child, as yet was in Israel. I brought him out of the miserable servitude and
bondage, in the which he was overwhelmed and drowned. At the first he was like
unto a dead man, and Aegipt was unto him as it were a sepulcher, but I brought
him as it were out of ye womb, into the light of life. Not without cause the
lord speaks this, because the deliverance was as it were a certain
nativity of the people, by the which they became new borne. For then openly
the tables of adoption were made, when as the law being promulgated and
published, they were made a peculiar people unto God, a priestly kingdom, and
a holy nation, when as they were separated from all people: yea, finally when
as the lord dwelling in the midst of them erected and buylt a tabernacle to
him self. Wherefore the words of the prophet are in effect as if he should
have said, that the people were escaped out of Aegipte, as out of the deep
gulf of death and destruction. Now the redemption by Christ being brought
unto them, what is it else, but a rising from death, and the beginning of a new
life? For almost the light of salvation was extinguished, when as God in the
person of Christ, again begat unto him a true church: then came the church
out of Aegipte, as it was brought before from thence, a whole body. For this
analogy or proportion makes that it should not seem absurd, that Christ
passed some part of his childhode in Aegipte: but rather the grace and power
of God was the more manifest, and his wisdom did the more appear, that light
should arise out of the pit and dungeon of Darkness. For otherwise the carnal
sense and meaning might make much a do here, that the redemer should come out
of Aegipte.

Mathewe therefore does show that it is no unwonted or new thing, that God
would call his son to him from thence, and that rather this thing did
concern the confirmation of our faith, that as in times past, even so now the
church of God should spring in Aegipte, from the one end to the other. By
this means it is otherwise, because in times past all the people were shut up
in the brikehouse or prison of Aegipt: but in the second redemption only
Christ the head of the church was there privily kept, but he it was, in
whom was included the life and salvation of all men. Bu. Moreover the
scripture is fulfilled, when as one thing oftentimes is finished and done. As
this: Esaias. 6. Mark. 4. Acts. 28 Roma. 11.
With the ears ye shall hear and not understand. Of the which in the
thirtene chapter of Matthew, is made mention also. And the same saying was
fulfilled in the Jews in the time of the prophet Esaye.

16 Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, he was
eexceading wrath, and sent forth men of war, and flewe all the children that
were in Bethlehe^, and in all the costs (as many as were two year old an
under) according to the time which he had diligently learned of the wise me^.

Then Herod when he savve. B. Here we may se that the wise men were neither
kings nor princes, for if they had they could not have escaped away without the
knowledge of Herod, neither would he have sent them away to Betlehem without
some to wait upon them for nobilities sake. C. But as touching the text.
Mathewe speaks of the mind and opinion of Herod, who thought him self to
be deceived of the wise me^, because they would not be ministers of his wicked
cruelty. He in deed was rather taken in his own craft and fraud, which
deceitfully feigned that he meant to come and worship the new king. M. Therefore
in that the wise men returned not, according to their promise, it was not done
for any craft and contempt, but because they were admonished to the contrary
by the commandment of God.

He was exceading wrath. Although the wise men seem to give this cause of
great and vehement anger, yet they are not in fault of this fearce and mad
cruelty.

Two kinds of anger.
For there are two kinds of anger, the one deserved, the other undeserved. The
Herod. The undeserved anger is when as they are angery which are let by some
means or other from their wicked intent and purpose. He that gives occasion
to these, is not in fault. With this kind of anger was Herod angry,
wherefore the fault was in him self and not in the wise men.

And he sent forth men of war and slevve C. Josephus makes no mention of
this history. Macro. li. 2. Saturnaliorum.
Only Macrobius showing the iestes and deeds of Augustus, says. When he hard
that all the children that were two year old and under, should (by the
commandment of Herod) be slain, and that among the multitude his own son
was slain also, he said, I had rather be Herodes hog then his son. But in
deed sufficient enough is the authority of Matthew unto us. For so notable a
deed should not have been pretermitted of Josephus, and yet notwithstanding it
is no marvel that he makes no mention of the infantes, when as he does
lightly pass over and obscurely touch the detestable example of cruelty, that
almost even at the same time he showed in destroying all the Judges, that no
remnaunt of the stock of David might remain. There is no doubt, but one
fear, constrained him to commit both kinds of murder: and yet for all that,
there is great doubt, as concerning the time. For when as the Evangelist says
that the children that were two year old and under, were slain according to
the time, that he had diligently learned of the wise men, we may thereby gather
that Christ was come to that age, or very nere thereaboutes. How greatly with
fear Herod was amassed, When the rumor was spread abroad of the new king that
was borne, we hard before. At the which time (fear letting him) he durst not
fend any privy betrayor or spy, which diligently might have searched out all
things. And yet we neade not marueyle that he was withhelde and let, so long
time from such wicked and detestable slaughter: specially when as the fame of
the return of the wise men as yet was new and brim in all places. And
certainly it may well be coniectured and thought, that this wicked deed which
did reuolue and prick in his mind, did linger and watch, for his occasion:
and it may be that he first flewe the Judges, whereby (the people being
deprived of their Judges) he might constrayne them to end any matter without
damage or check. Whereby we may easily gather, that fondly they argue, which
would make Christ two years old when he was worshipped of the wise men:
because at the second time when the star appeared. Herod slew the children
that were two year old and under. For foolishely they take this for
advantage, that the star appeared not before the birth of Christ. It is
much more lykely that they were admonished in dew time that they might take
their journey with the nativity of Christ, to the end they might find and see
the child new borne, and in the cradell or else in his mothers lap. But this
specially is a childishe opinion, to think that these wise men came out of an
unknown country, or as it were out of a new world, whereby they should be
constrained to spend two years in coming. Furthermore there arises no
discommoditie by the order of this history which we have propounded, namely
that ye wise men came before the time of her childbirth was fully co^plete and
ended, and sought for the king that was borne, and not which was two year
old: that Joseph also (they being returned into their country) fled by
night, but in passing away, performed that which was godly at Jerusalem, ^it.
12.
according to that which is written in the law of the lord. And that he being
fled into Aegipte, Herod carefully sought to destroy the child, and last of
all, that at the length brake out the hidden mischief of cruelty, which more
then a year and a half he had kept secret. For this aduerbe (Then) does not
always in the scripture signify the continual time: but often times it is
used, where as there is a continual distaunce of things.

17 Then was fufilled that which was spoken by the prophet Jeremy, where

18 he said: In Rhama was there a voice hard, lamentation, weping, and great
morning. Rachel weping for her children and would not be comforted, because
they were not.

Then was fulfilled that. Bu. He brings forth the place of the prophet, not
so much to declare and show that all these things were so disposed and done
by the power of God, as to heap together the cruel and detestable
childeslaughter of Herod. For now in this testimony also, he declares the
mourning and lame^tation of mothers, and specially to this end, that we might
have a most absolute example of greuouse affliction. And examples are the more
lively and of greater force, if they be made manifest and plain by similitudes.

A voice in Rhama. This place is taken out of the prophecy of Jeremy. ^my. 31
C. It is sure that the prophet described and set forth the great destruction
of the tribe of Benjamin, which happened in his time. Bu. Rhama is not a
proper name but an Hebrewe appellatiue, which signifies hye, or great,
although in the tribe of Benjamin there is a city of that name, not far from
Gabaon, Joshua. 18. Iud. 4. and 19
as we may read in the book of Joshua and Judges.

Rachel mourning for her children. Where as here, weping and mourning is
attributeed to Rachel being dead, it is done by a figure called Prosopopaeia,
which is when we bring in those that are dead as if they were alive, which
figure is of great force to move affections. Neither (truly) does the prophet
Jeremy bring in the colors of Rhetoric only to adorn and beutifie his order
of speech: but because otherwise the hardness and dulnes of those which are
alive, could not be corrected and amended, then if the dead (after a sort)
should be called out of their graves, to bewail and lament the vengeance of
God, which before time was much derided, and not regarded. When as there the
prophecy of the prophet was fulfilled. Mathewe understands not that it was
in that place forshewed what Herod should do: but by the coming of Christ,
that that same mourning and sorrowyng which long before the Beniamites
suffered, was now renewed: and so he would preuente that stombling block and
offense, which else might trouble the mind of the godly: which was this, that
no saving health was to be hoped for of him, for whose sake so soon as he was
borne the tender innocents should be tormented. Yea, this was a wrong and
unhappy foresight and knowledge, that the Nativity of Christ should kindell a
greater flame of cruelty, then commonly is wo^t to burn in mortal wars. M.
Twyse therefore the prophecy of Jeremy is fulfilled: once, when the children
of Israel were carried into captivity, namely the tribe of Judah and Benjamin.
Then was there in deed mourning among them. After that again it was fulfilled,
when as the Bethlemites and those dwelling there aboutes, wept bitterly for
their children which Herod had slain. C. For as the instauration and new
building was promised by the prophet, whereas the people were destroyed even
to the very infantes: even so Matthew does admonish us, that, that great
slaughter committed, should nothing at all hinder the coming of the promised
redemer. It is not unknown unto us, how full of comfortable places, that
chapter of Jeremy is replenished. For after that funeral complainte,
immediately it follows, Leave of from weping and crying, withholde thine eyes
from tears, for thy labor shall be rewarded: and they shall come again out of
the land of their enemies. Because they were not. Bu. Presupposed or this
understood among the living, but were taken from: Among them by Herod, or else
according to the meaning of the prophet: Because they were not, that is, the
Israelites being slain, led into Aegipte and there kept in bondage, were, as
if they had never been, but seemed to be quite destroyed. Finally, where as the
prophet writes that the voice of Rachel weping, was heard on hie, and
afterward also shows the great consolation of the lord that followed: The
voice of Gods children pearceth the heavens.
we are taught that the voice of such as mourn is hard even to the heavens,
and yet not in vain, but quickly they receive comfort, and great consolation.

19 But when Herod was dead, behold the angel of the lord appeared in
sleep to Joseph in Aegipt saying.

But when Herod was dead. Bu. Herod rained above.xxxvij. years, the
kingdom being appointed to him of the Romans four and thirty years after
that Antigonus was slain, Lib. anti. 17 cap. 10.
as Josephus writes, he being a wonderful cruel and evil tyrant. But what
for his cruelty? at the last he died, and our Christ reigns eternally: and
this might have been said of Herod, Psalm. 37
I have seen the ungodly flourishing and in great power, like unto the baie
tree. I went by, and lo he was gone, I sought him but his place could no
wheare be found. But of what kind of disease died this tyrante? Josephus
writes of such a one, that no doubt the wonderful plague of God was
declared upon him. For how many years so ever the wicked are forborne, God
spares the wicked for a time, but at length he plageth the^ for all
at length notwithstanding God powers his vengeance vpn them: the which
when it fell upon Herod, what proffite, what pleasure was his old tyranny and
filthy pleasure unto him?

Behold the aungel of the lord. B. That the angel is present again with
Joseph, and shows him that Herod is dead, and called him back again from
exile and banishement, it commends unto us the singular love of our heavenly
father, who makes our tribulation momentany and light, 2. Cor. 4.
and has prepared against the same an exceading and eternal wayghte of glory
unto us. Before he promised Joseph to bring him word in time of his return,
here therefore is showed the true performance of the promise of God. Let us
here note that God will send his angels, rather then he will lead his
servants in troublesome Aegipte.

Moreover, that the angels have free access and passage, to and from Aegipte.
Neither is there any place so wicked, whereby the divine providence of God will
let to visit and comfort those that are his therein. C. To conclude, the
lord does at no time, nor in no place forsake those that are his, but duly
does aid and assiste them. In Aegipte. Here is showed the perseueraunce of
the faith of Joseph, who once stirred not his foot out of Aegipte, until he
was called again by the commandment of God into his country.

20. Saying, arise and take the child and his mother, and go into the land of
Israel, for they are dead which sought the childs life.

Saying arise and take. M. The Evangelist here does very well order the words
of the angel, which said not: Arise and take thy child: but simplely, Take
the child and his mother: that those things following may agree with that
which goes before in the first chapter.

And go into the land of Israel. Joseph was thus commanded, because it
behooved the child to be brought up in the land of Israel and not in Aegipte,
least he might seem to be an Aegiptian and not an Israelite. Furthermore, there
was a consideration to be had of Joseph and Mary, to whom no doubt it was
grievous (the fear of Herod being taken away) to abide any longer without
cause in Eegipte, and to be depryued of their own land, and country. Which
sought the childs life. M. This is an Hebrewe phrase, instead of, They went
about to kyl the child. This same was told of the aungel before, but in other
words, when he said: For it will come to pass that Herod will seek the
chyldes life to destroy it.

21 And he arose and took the child and his mother, and went into the land of
Israel.

A. As Joseph obeyed the first commandment without delay, when he was
commanded to flee into Aegipt: even so now at the second time he obeys,
committing him self to the regiment of the heavenly king.

22 But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Jury, in the rowme of his
father Herod, he was afraid to go thither, notwithstanding after he was
warned of God in a sleep, he turned aside into the parts of Galile.

But when he heard that Archelaus. C. It is likely that Joseph returned from
Aegipte immediately after the death of Herod, before that Augustus Caesar had
appointed and decreed Archelaus to be his deputy and ruler in Jury, because in
his fathers testament or will, he was appointed the successor of his kingdom,
although he took not unto him the glorious name and titell of a king, for that
stood always at the appointment and will of Caesar: nevertheless he bare rule
of al things: after this he went to Rome, and was fully confirmed and
established: all was granted unto him, saving the name of king, and that was
only denied till such time, as he deserved the same by his valiant deeds.

But Philip bare rule of Galile, being a man of a gentle nature, and almost
none like unto him. ^entle and ^rcifull ^^nce makes (...) subject to (...)
without ^^nger.
Therefore Joseph by the forewarning of the angel, gate him into his
dominion, because under a gentill and merciful prince there is no danger. As
concerning this Archelaus the son of Herod, we may read more in Josephus.

He was afraid to go thither. C. We must always have in mind the
determinate counsel and purpose of God, Christ was exercised with ^he cross,
eue^ from his childhoode.
which kept his son even from the beginning under the rudimentes and
instructions of the cross, because afterward, that same should be the only
way and mean to deliver his Church. The end of Christ's cross.
For therefore he took upon him our infirmities: therefore he was in peril and
danger: and therefore he was subject, to fear, that his Church being
delivered by his power from peril from danger, and from fear, might fear no
more, but have continually everlasting peace and quietness.

Wherefore, his danger was our safegarde, and his fear was our sure trust and
confidence: not that he then feared that any danger should happen to him
self, by reason of his age, but because for the fear of Joseph and Mary, they
were carried to and fro, he may truly be said to have taken our fear upon him,
that he might bring unto us a peaceable and quiet trust.

23 And went and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophets: he shall be called a Nazarite.

And went and dwelled. M. Luke the Evangelist says, Luke. 4
that Jesus was noursed and brought up in this city of Nazareth.

This place must be joined with that in the second of Luke, where it is written
thus: And when they had performed all things according to the law of the
lord, (for he speaks of the law of purifiyng) they returned into Galile, to
their own city of Nazareth. Least any man should think that they gat them
to their own city immediately after their purifiyng, ye history of the wise
men, does stay and let, beside also ye exile into Aegipt the which being
ended, they returned into their own city Nazareth, as our Euangeliste Matthew
declares. That it might be fulfilled. Theuangelist might have showed another
reason why they went into this city, namely ye which Luke seems to allege,
Luke. 2
when he says: They returned to their own city Nazareth. But according to
his manner and order, he would not pretermit the occasion of the prophesy
fulfilled, to the end we might learn, that all things that were done as
concerning Christ, were signified before by the foretellinges of the prophets.

By the prophets. Why does Mathewe use here the plural number, when as he
alleges but ye testimony of one prophet? why he so does we shall see by and
by.

He shall be called a Nazarite. C. Matthew does not bring this word Nazarite of
Nazareth, as though it were the true and proper etimologie and force thereof:
but it is only an allusion which has some other meaning. For the Hebrewe
word (...) does signify holy and consecrated unto God: of (...) Nazar,
which signifies to separate. The Hebrews (truly) call (...) Nezer, a flower,
but there is no doubt but that Mathewe had respect unto the former sense and
meaning.

For we do not read that the Nazarites are called flourishing or garnished, but
they were those which were consecrated to the lord, according to the
prescripte law, Nume. 6.
as we may read in the book of Numbers. Wherefore the sense and meaning is
this, namely, although Joseph by fear was constrained to go into a corner, of
Galile, yet for all that, the lord had a farther respect and purpose, to have
the city of Nazareth ordained a dwellinge place for Christ, to the end the
name of a Nazarite might pertain unto him.

The place also in the thirtene of Judges is here noted, for there mention is
made of Samson: but because Samson was not called a redemer of the people,
saving only in the respect that he was a figure of Christ: Sampson was only a
figure of Christ
and the health which he brought by his hand unto the people, was a certain
obscure and mistical proheme and foreshewing, of the full and perfect saving
health, which at the length was reveled and exhibited by the son of God to
the whole world: whatsoever goodness the scripture does show of Sampson, it
ought to be referred unto Christ. Wherefore Christ is the chief example,
Sampson the inferior tipe and shadow. But where as Matthew puts prophets
in the plural number, it may easily be answered: because the book of Judges
was compyled and made of many prophets. Although that which is here spoken of
prophets, is much more ample and large. For Joseph which was a temporal
savior and preserver of the Church, and many ways bare the figure of Christ,
yea the very Image and pattern of him, was called of his brethren the
Nazarite, that is to say, the flourishing among his brethren: Gene. 4^ Deuteronomy.
33.
as we may read in Genesis and Deutronomy. God therefore would have the
excellent dignity (the show whereof he declared in Joseph) to appear in
Sampson, and gave him also the name of Nazarite, that the faithful having
these first rudimentes, and enteraunces might be the more fixed and grounded
upon the redemer to come, which should be separated from all men, that he might
be the first begotten among many brethren. B. Furthermore, we are here taught,
that whatsoever happened unto Christ, shall also happen to all the elect and
chosen of God* for there is nothing so small or little that happens unto them
by chance and not by the providence of God. But whatsoever happens, he does
wonderfully in all things comfort and stablishe them.

Moreover we see all things so ordered in Christ, that the godly cannot
chose, but acknowledge him to be their savior: but contrariwyse all things
are so obscure to the reprobate, that nothing can be unto them more hard: his
divinity and godhead, The hum^ of Christ ^eth from ^eprobate^ divinity.
is so covered with his cross and humility. Again, his portion and lot was
not the least, in that he was coumpted a Galilean and a Nazarite, that is, to
be borne in the poorest region or country of the Jews, John. 1.
and in a base town also. Whereupon, Nathanaell said: Can there come any
goodness out of Nazareth? But we may see that hereby the reprobate Jews were
offended, so that in no wise they could abide to acknowledge him to be
Christ. Wherefore to Nichodemus (persuading the Phariseis that no man ought to
be condemned, before his cause were known) it was answered, art thou also of
Galile? John. 17.


Search the scriptures, and look, for out of Galile arises no prophet.

But the godly, although they thought him (...) Nazarite, nevertheless when they
ba^^e in preach, and publish words of eternal life, and when they saw that
he sought not his own praise or glory, but ye glory of his father, they by and
by with all their heart believed: and so were easily persuaded that Christ was
borne at Bethlehem, according to the promises.

The third Chapter.
Verse. 1
IN those days came John the Baptiste, preaching in the wyldernes of Jury and
saying
In those days. M. Before in the first chapter, the Evangelist showed the
generation of Christ in the second chapter he showed the revelation of his
nativity made by the wise men, with the craft and cruelty of Herod, the
flight of Joseph with the child and his mother, and finally their return
again. Now of necessity it follows that he show his childhod until the
time of his preaching. But leaving those things, he does accelerate and come
to those times, in the which the original and beginning of ye dispensing of
our salvation began, and the reueling of the son of God. Therefore he does
begin with the preaching of John the Baptist, by whom Christ was first made
known to the Jews, as by aforeronner and crier, ordained from above to this
purpose, that he should bear witness of the light. C. But it ca^ not be
gathered by Math, and Mark what time of his age John began openly to show him
self: ^ap. 3.
therefore Luke does sufficiently show that he was thirty years of age or there
about. For he says: In the.xv. year of the reign of Tiberius ye Emperor,
Pontius Pilate being liftenaunt of Jury. etc. The ancient writers of the
church almost with one consent, do affirm that John was borne.xv. years
before the death of Augustus. Tiberius his successor had obtained the empire of
Rome.xv. years before yt John began to preach. Therefore as we said before, that
time of.30. years was expired, whereof also it follows that he did not long
execute the office of a teacher, but shortly gave place to Christ him self,
because it is certain, that Christ was baptized when he was.xxx. year old.
And then he took in hand to accomplish his office. Christ was the bright son
of righteousness.
For when Christ the bright son of righteousness, immediately followed John his
Lucifer or morning star, it is no marvel if John vanished away, whereby
the only shining and brightness of Christ might the more appear. B. For this
was the most apt and fit time to preach the kingdom of heaven, when that
the earthly kingdom was not in prosperous estate, but had evil success. What
time is most apt to receive the word of God.
For we are never more apt to conceive in our minds and to understand
heavenly things, then when as earthly things are out of square, and contrary
unto us.

John the Baptist. Why John he Baptiste was called.
Bu. Therefore John was so called, because that God had appointed by his
ministry, the sacrament of Baptism, and because he was the first that ever
baptized In the vvyldernes of Jury. Luke. 3
Luke does seem to add more saying: And he came into all the coasts round
about Iordane. But in this place of Math. and in the first of Mark, there is
no mention made of the wilderness, but only in ^iske. The Eua^gelistes are thus
united John began first to do his duty in teaching among those that bordered
nere unto him, where he dwelte: afterward more publicly he preached the
Gospel, yt it might be known in many places. Whereby it came to pass that in
short time his fame was spread to Jerusalem. Howbeit, that place might be
called the deserte of Iordane. For indede it was not a wilderness, but a hard,
stony and hylly place, which for the small company of men is not inhabited. Bu.
After the same manner also the virgin Mary is said to go into the mountains of
Jury, Luke. 1
and to enter into the house of Zachary.

So Ioab is said to be buried in his own house in the wilderness. Moreover
Idumea or Edom, is called a wyldernes: 3 King. 2. 4. King. 3.
where as it is well known that it was in those days much inhabited.

Also certain writers have said that Heluetia was barren and without people
dwelling therein, and that the whole land was called the desert of ye
Heluetia^s, otherwise Swisers. Iosue. 15.
Furthermore thinherita^ce of the tribe of Judah, is said to have six cities
and their villages in the wyldernes. Wherefore we may not think that John gat
him quite out of the company of men, The custom of Heremites
as the Heremites seem to do in these dais, who dwell and lead their lives in
solitary woods: but for so much as his fathers house was in the mountains of
Jury, peradventure he went a little into the desert, that is, through ye woods
toward Jordan

2 And saying: Repent the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

And saying, repent. In this, our Evangelist differs here from the other two,
Mark and Luke, that he in ye person of John, shows the some of his
doctrine, but they with their own words. Although Mark has more then Luke by
one word: for he says, he came baptizing and preaching the baptim of
repentance. But in the very thing it self, they agree very well in one,
because all men do join repentance with remissio of sins, as we shall see by
and by. The sermon of John consists of two parts.
The words of John co^siste of two parts. For first he teaches what we must
do: the^ he shows the reasone why it ought to be done. He bids repent,
because the kingdom of heaven is at hand. E. The Greek word, for the which we
read (repent) is said, of understanding the thing which follows, when as one
having offended, does mark and way his offense. Wherefore the Greek word
Metanoi^a, or repentance, is not only referred to the mind of man, Repentance
but to the work and amendment of life, and to the whole co^uersio^ of man:
which Peter plainly declares, Act. 3
when he says: Repent you and convert, that your sins may be done away. For
that which follows is a declaration of that which went before.

For the kingdom of heaven is at hand. A. We have showed ye remission of
sins, is joined with repentance, in the preaching of John, yt which this
reason following does approve C. For the kingdom of heaven among men, is
nothing else but a restoring to the blessed and happy life, and so it is the
true and everlasting felicity. Therefore when John said, the kingdom of heaven
drew near, he meant that those men that were alienate from the righteousness of
God, were banished from the kingdom of heaven, and that they were again to be
gathered unto God, that they might live under his hand. But free adoption and
forgeuenes of sins, brings this thing to pass by the which he does
reco^cile those that are unworthy to him self. That the kingdom of heaven is.
To be sh^^ the kingdom of heaven is nothing else but a ne^nes of life, by the
which God does restore unto us a hope of everlasting blessedness. Ephe. 1
Coloss. 3
For he does challenge us to him self, being taken from the bondage and
servitude of sin and death, that we being pilgrims upon earth may possess at
length (by faith) a celestial and heavenly life. And although we be like unto
dead men, yet we know and are assured that our life is in safety, so long as
it is hid in Christ. From hence (as from the fountain) the exhortation to
repentance is brought. Neither does John say repent, and so by this means the
kingdom of God shall approach straight way, but first he does propounde and set
before them the grace of God, The foundation of repentance.
and then be does exhort men to repent. Whereby it does appear, that the
foundation of repentance is the mercy of God, by the which he does restore
those that are lost. Neither does Mark and Luke say, Repentance is not ye cau^
of remission of sins.
that he preached remission of sins in any other sense. For repentance is
not placed first (as some very ignora^tly fain) as though that were the cause
of the remission of sins, or that it should prevent God, that he might be
favorable unto us: but men are commanded to repent, that they may taste of
the grace proffered unto them, and the reconciliation also. But as by order, the
free love of God does go before, by ye which he does receive and embrace unto
him miserable men, not imputing their sins unto them: even so we must note,
that we have remission of sins in Christ, not ye God does by his suffra^ce
allow the^, but rather yt he may cure and deliver us from sin. Who they
(...) that taste o^ Gods gra^
Neither truly can any man taste of the grace of God, without he hate and
abhor sin and vice. But it is convenient to way and consider so much as
pertains to ye sense and meaning of this present place, The Go^ consists
(...) two parte^
yt the whole Gospel does consist of two parts, of remission of sins and
repentance. But for so much as Math. did note and signify the first part, by
the kingdom of heaven, we may thereby gather, yt there is deadly war and
contention between God and man, that we are quite banished out of the kingdom
of heaven, until he receive us again into his grace and favor. B. Therefore
very short are the words of John, yet they conteyne the sum of the whole
preaching of the Gospel. Wherefore, both Christ and his apostles have begone
their Gospel in these words. Math. 4.
And although John propounding the grace of God, does exhort men to
repentance, yet for all that we must way and note, that this grace is no
less the gift of God, than is the heritage of everlasting life. For as he
does freely forgive us our sins, and does by his mercy and goodness, deliver us
from the gulffe and pit of everlasting death: so he does make and fashion us
like unto him self, that we may live to righteousness, even as he does adopte
us to be his sons, even so he does regenerate us with his holy spirit, that
our life may testify and witness how that, not in vain we call him father.
And no less does Christ, quicken us to righteousness, if that we crucify our
old man, and utterly abolishe the whole body of sin lurking in our flesh,
then he does put away our sins by his blood, and appeaseth the wrath of his
father, by the sacrifice of his death. Notwithstanding this is the sum of the
Gospel, that our sins being wiped away, God does embrace us in his son
Christ, that we denying our selves and our own nature, may lead a godly and
holy life, and so in earth have our minds altogether fixed in heaven.

3 For this is he of whom the prophet Esaias spoke, saying: The voice of a
crier in the wyldernes, prepare ye the way of the lord, and make his paths
straighte.

For this is he of whom the prophet M. The ancient latin wrytings have
(Which is called by Esaie,) and so has the Greek text also. But by Mark
and Luke, they seem to be the words of the Eua^gelistes. M. Some
notwithstanding refer it to John him self, giving a reason of that which he
spoke, of the kingdom of God, which was at hand: but yet to speak this of
him self in the person of a foreronner, and a proclaimer. As if he should
have said: ^ohn the fore^nner of ^hriste.
Behold I am a proclaimer, and foreronner before the face of the lord, showing
unto you the coming of the kingdom of God. But, that he might bring credit
to him self, he brings in the prophecy of Esaias, admonishing them that the
same was fulfilled by his ministry, which was spoken before in times paste by
the prophet, of the redemption made under Cyrus and Darius, and also to
concern and apertaine to these times. C. For although this place of Esaias ought
not to be restrained only to John: yet nevertheless he is one of them of whom
the same was spoken. For after that the prophet had declared the besieging of
the city, and the extreme destruction of the people, he promises the
reedifiyng of the same again: the words are these. Esaias, 40. a
Comfort my people O ye prophets, comfort my people says your God,
comfort Jerusalem at the heart. etc. For after that the temple was destroyed,
and the sacrifices abolished, the people being led into captivity, things
were desperate and out of all order. And because that ears were deaf and
shut at the continual voice of the prophets, the lord for a time was as it
were dombe. Now in this sad and doleful silence, in this heavy chere, the
prophet, least the godly minds should faynte or in any wise quayle, plainly
opens unto them this comfort, that there shall arise new proclaymers and
setters forth of the grace of God, which should chere up the people to hope
for the saving health. Such were Zachary, Haggeus, Malachi, Esdras, and such
like. But because the perpetual restoring is not there promised at a moment,
yea rather Esaias had much respect to the redemption, which was hoped for by
the coming of Christ: therefore John is worthily thought to be the chief
among the ministers of comfort. Then it follows in the text of the prophet.

The voice of a crier. C. This voice is compared to that temporal silence, of
the which we spoke even now. The Jews were to be deprived of that doctrine
(for a time) which wickedly they despised. M. John Theua^gelist, when he
brought certain testimonies of this crier concerning Christ, he said: John bare
witness of him self, and cried saying: John. 1.
This is he of whom I spoke. etc. showing that he declared all things with a
diligent cry to every one. For he being indewed with the spiritie and virtue
of Elias, stoutly rebuked ungodliness, (as Elias did the Thesbites) and with
diligent endeavor he sought to restore again the true religion. A true witness
bearer of Christ.
And certainly he is a true witness of Christ, not which without a courage,
faintly, inconstantly, and obscurely, but which openly, plainly, and truly with
force, does so witness of Christ that none may excuse him that he hard not the
voice of this cry. Wherefore the lord by the same prophet, says: Esaias. 58.
Cry out and cease not, exalte thy voice like a tro^pet. For in deed the world
has great neade, to have this cry of repentance and true godliness in
Christ, which continually refuses to hear, like unto the deaf adder which
stopped her ears, and will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never
so wisely.

In the deserte. C. The name of deserte is put metaphorically, for the vaste,
wild, and deformed reign of the people, as it was in the time of their exile
and banishment. For it was such horrible destruction, that well it might be
compared to a deserte. So the prophet does amplify the grace of God: as if he
should have said, although the people are cast out from their country afar,
yea, and vanyshed the company of men, yet for all that, the voice of God shall
sound in the deserte, which shall bring joyful consolation to those that are
out of heart and quite discouraged. At what time John began to preach,
Jerusalem (in this sense and meaning) was a deserte: because all things were
brought every where, into vaste, and horrible confusion: but it behooved gross
and dull men, to be more moved and affected with the sight of the visible
deserte, whereby they might with the greater desire, receive to them selves
being in death, the promise of salvation. Now we see how truly this
prophecy did appertain unto John, and how fetely it is applied unto him.

Prepare the way of the Lord. There is no doubt, but the prophet spoke to
Syrus and the Persians, of whose works the lord had intelligence: and the
sense and meaning is, that the lord would bring to pass by his wonderful
power, that his people should have way through the unoccupied wood, over the
hilly and sharp rocks, and through the barren and dry wyldernes because at
his hand he shall have ministers of his grace, which shall take away all
lettes and stombling blocks from among them. But this was a shadowed
declaration of the redemption.

But when the spiritual and heavenly verity came into the light and was
manifest, John was sent to remove and take away all impedimentes which
might let and hinder the same. Sin stopped the way to gods gra^
And daily the same voice sounds in our ears, that we might prepare the way
of the lord, that is: all vices being taken away which do stop and shut
up the way of the lord, we may give free access and passage to his grace.

M. Furthermore, we amending our life by the study of repentance, may remove
and put aparte all such things, as may offend the divine majesty of God. C.
It pertains to the same effect which follows in the words of the
prophet, Let all crooked things be made straighte. For by these words he
does signify, that in this world there is nothing but rough, stony, hilly,
and crooked ways: but yet he shows that the lord will make a way through so
many and hard strayghtes, that by his wonderful power he may pearse through
the same, to the accomplishing and fulfilling of our salvation. B. But in the
Hebrew text this saying, In the deserte. is joined with that which follows,
as thus: A voice crying in the wyldernes, prepare the way of the lord, that
it may agree with the clause followyng: And make the paths of our lord
straighte in the wyldernes: M. Therefore John the proclaymer of Christ to the
Jews, by his cry, stirred them up, to prepare them selves against the coming
of the king promised before time, to lift up their minds also, to amend
their lives, casting of all such things as might be lothsom and odious in the
eyes of his divine majesty, that they might be partakers of his grace with
joy.

4 This John had his raiment of Camels hear. And a girdell of skin about his
loins, his meat was locustes and wild honey.

The austere ^fe of John ^e Baptist.
This John had his raiment. C. The Evangelist reckneth not this among the chief
and excellent virtues, that he was addicte and given to a rude, and austere
kind of life, eschewinge and not regarding the ciuyll and accustomed manner of
life: but because the same Evangelist showed that he was a man that came out of
the mountains, or deserte: he shows also his apparel and manner of food,
which was agreeable to his habitation and abiding. And also he reherseth this,
not only that we might understand that his rusticall kind of diet, did
suffyse and content him, in so much that he never hungered after delycate
deyntie dysshes: but was in his uncomely and contemptible attire, in great price
and estimation among sumptuouse, and neat persons. But to the end
superstition might appointe parfecte righteousenes in eternal shows, the
common and ignorant sort of people thought such continency, to be a great
part of holiness. To this error agreed the foolyshe and superstityouse vice,
^arefoted fri^ the devils ^keis.
of Monkery, of Hermites, of barefooted friars, which were the devils
lackies, and such kind of hypocrisy, to seem to be in the face of the world
those, which in deed they were not. But there is no doubt that the
Euangelyste, describes him here, to be a mountain manne separated from all
vrbanitie, and civil fashion and order: and not only content with such
food, as he could easily get, but only eating such meat, as was in the
place, where he had his abode, as wild honey, of the which there was great
abundance, and locustes, of the which it was a most plentiful region: or
else because it was profitable, for a contemptible, and unseemly man to come
among the multitude of people, that only in him, the majesty of God might
shine, which notwithstanding did rauishe their senses, with the admiration of
the man. B. This therefore he did that he might be the more commended of the
people, and that he might add the wait of severity to his preachinge of the
truethe. And a girdell of skin about. M. The same is read of Elias the
Thesbite. It is apparaunte, 4. King. 1.
that in old time they used to wear very preciouse Gyrdelles, and adorned
with great cost, very sumptuously. Against the which the Prophet inuaieth,
saying. In steed of your sweet smell, you shall have stink, and in stead of
your gyrdelles, you shall wear loose bands. His meat also was locustes. etc.
He used such meat as they do, that live in the wilderness. As ye holy
fathers have eschewed luxury and excess: even so they could not abide the
arrogancy, and vain ostentation of holiness, of such a one as would be
singular. 1. Sam. 14.
We do read in the book of Samuel, that in the woodde there was great plenty
of honey. We do read also that the locustes which he did eat, were nombred
among the beasts that were clean. Furthermore Pliny does write that this
meat was in great price, Leuit. 11.
and very acceptable to the Parthians. Plin li. 11. chap. 29.
The same Pliny also does write, that in some place there are found Locustes
that are three foot long. Temperance.
Therefore in this place the sobriety and temperaunce of meat and drink is
commended unto us. For to al men lyuinge, it is honest profitable, plesante,
tractable, and a friend to Nature. On the other side, Luxury.
luxury or riot is fylthy, hurtful, unsavory, intractable, and an ennemy to
Nature.

5, Then went out to him all Jerusalem, and all Iewry, and the whole region
that lies round about Jordan.

Then went out to him. C. The Euangeliste does here show that there was a
great multitude of people gathered together to here John: whereby we gather,
how great his fame was. M. For many came unto him by heaps as it were,
because from the second temple until now, they had no prophets: Mat. 11.
for Christ says. What went ye out in the wilderness to see? a Prophet?
Moreover because he does not symplelye preach repentance, and the
observation of the law, Luke. 7.
according to the law of the hye priests, and commands to prepare the
way of the Lord, and said, that the kingdom of God was at hand. And also
because he lived a strait and austere life. But as it is wont and commonly
seen, that in new things men are very fervent and gredy: even so in John's
time, the people being fervent, came apase to him, but at the length this
fervent heat being cold, few there were (which by John being called to
true repentance) that came unto Christ. For neither the austere and strayte
life of John, nor the gentleness of Christ, could prevail any thing at al
with this people, as appears by the words of our savior. John came neither
eating nor drynkinge, Math. 11,
and they said, behold, he has a devil, the son of man he came eating and
drinking, and they said, behold a glutton etc. So that neither the prophets
that were before Christ, nor yet Christ him self, could please and win
this people.

6 And they were baptized of him in Iordane, confessyng their sins.

And they were baptized of him in Jordan. M. The other Evangelists say, that
John preached the baptism of repentance in the remission of sins: that is,
he called every one to repentance, and he signed them also that professed
repentance with the sign of baptism, with the promise of remission of
sins, if they believed in him, in whom he preached, and adioined them selves
in good faith to the kingedome of heaven, Chap. 19.
as we may read in the acts of the Apostels.

The true sine of repen^ance is confession of our sins.
Confessinge their sins. C. The true testimony and sign of repentance, was
the confession of their sins. For even as the lord in his sacraments does
bind him self (as it were) unto us, by his own hand writynge, so likewise it
is mete that we, in all points, become bound unto him. Baptism witnesses
unto us, that our sins are forgeuen, and bids and commands us to
repent. Therefore that men may duelye offer them selves to repentance,
confessing of their syns is required: otherwise what were that, but a vain
jest which he did? But let us here note, that the words which are spoken,
are of such as were at the years of discretion, whom we know ought not to be
admitted rashly, without consideration into the church, what so ever they be,
neither are to be united or knitt to the body of Christ by baptism, unless
dew examination be first had. Whereby every man may see, how fond the
Papists are which wrest this place to prove their auriculer confession.
Auriculer confession.
For neither were there any sacryficers present, unto whom they might
secretelye tell their sins: neither is there made mention of all sins:
Neither did John give his disciples any ordinary right or custom of
confessinge.

But let us grant to the Papists, that which they require, that confession
is only proper to those that are of age, yet after baptism, it has no place.
Trewely contrary to the example of John, they prescribe a law of confessing
from Baptism. The like place of public confession we have in the acts, where
it is thus written. And many that were faithful came confessing and declaring
their deeds. Acts. 19.


7. But when he saw many of the Phariseis, and Saduseys, come to his baptism,
he said unto them. O generation of vipers, who has taught you to fle from
the vengeance to come

But when he savve many. C. In this place Matthew does show that John does
not only preach repentance generally, but also does apply the same to
persons.

And certainly it will be a cold kind of teachinge, A consider^tion to be h^
in preachy^
except the preachers wisely way, the time, the person, and the place where,
and to whom they preach. For nothing is more out of order, then continually
to keep one kind of order in teching. For this cause John is thought more
severely to handell, the Phariseis, and Saduceies, who (because of their
hypocrisy and disdain, with the which they did swel) saw that more sharply
he must prick and touch them, then the common sort of people. M As concerning
the Saduceys, Phariseys, and Esseys, read Josephus, Pharisey^
in his second book de bello Iudaico. These were special sects among the
people. The Phariseys did profess the more sure knowledge of the rytes. and
customs of the law, they were had in great veneration and reverence of the
people, and they got unto them selves the greateste part of domination and
rule, neither did they only oppress the people with the burden of the
prescripte law, but also with their own traditions, in the which thing, the
Saduce is were greatly against them, as we may read in Josephus. (...) de
Anti. ^ap. 17.
C. But they are deceived which thinck them to be so named of the division, as
though, they being separated from the order of the common sort of people,
might take a degree proper unto them selves. They were called also Pherussim,
that is to say, interpreters: because not being content with the simple
letter, they professed that they had the keye to understand secret mysteries.

Whereof there arose a wonderful myxture, and confusion of errors, when as
they (taking to them selves the dignity of mastership) did with their wicked
lust and sense, and also with wonderful pride, thrust in steed of the truth,
their own inventions. Bu. Luke, both of the Scribes and Phariseis writes
thus: ^t. 23.
when Paul perceived that the one part were Phariseis, and the other
Saduceis, he cried out in the council. Men and brethren, I am a Pharisey,
the son of a Pharisey. Of the hope and resurrection of the dead, I am judged.
And when he had so said, there arose a debate between the Phariseis and
Saduceys, and the multitude was divided. For the Saduceis say, that there is no
resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Phariseys grant both. B.
Therefore the Phariseyes did acknowledge destenye: notwithstanding with the
liberty of the mind, believing the immortality of the soul. ^duceies.
The Saduceys would grant nothing to come by desteny, but attrybuted all
things to the will of man: neither would they allow the immortality of the
soul: these also were more rude of manners, and further from humanity, then
the phariseis. ^eyes.
Bu. The Esseyes were the third sect, so called, as labouringe and workinge:
they attributed all things to desteny, B. they professed a marvelous
continent life, much like unto our old monks. Bu. Besides, they did not
allow wedlock, and part did admit it, but with great warines. Of these,
both Josephus in his second book of the war of the Jews in the.vii. chapi.
And Plini in his. 5. book, and 17. chapter, writes at large. But now let us
return to the words of John. O generation of vipers. C. That we may well
understand the meaning of the holy man, The terror of hipocrites.
we must note that there is nothing that does more amase and abashe
hipocrites, which deceive other by the outward shows of holiness, then to
have their hipocrisy detected, and to be thretened with the vengeance of God.
For that god may thunder generally against the whole world, by false
immagination they make unto them selves a sanctuarye: because they persuade
the^ selves that they have nothing to do with the judgment of God. If any man
do think that Iohon kept a preposterous order in receiving them at the
first gretinge so sharply: we answer, that they were not unknown to him, but
that he had good inteligence of them before, and yet not by experience, or his
own knowledge, but rather by the secret revelation of the spirit of God.
Wherefore they were not to be spared one whit, lest they came home again more
puffed with pride then they went. It was necessary therefore that their high
stomachs should be abated. Again if any shall obiecte, that they ought not to
have be^ dismayed with so hard a reproach, since that coming to baptism,
they would afterward show them selves to be altered, and to become new men: we
may easily answer, that such as do lie unto God, and being wont to dally
with them selves do use falshod and dissimulatio^ instead of truth, are the
more sharply to be urged to true repentance. For the obstinacy of hypocrites
is wonderful, therefore until by force and violence, they are fleyne, they
will hold their skin fast. Now where as John does openly before all men,
reprove and rebuke them, it perseyneth to example: Chap. 3.
in the which sense Luke does say, that it was spoken to the multitude. For
although John spoke unto a few, yet he had respect unto the multitude that
he might make them afraid. As Paul to Timothe, bad us look ever for that
fruit in open reprehentions, 1. Timo. 2.
saying: Those which offend openly, reprove openly, that others may be
afraid. Therefore in the parson of the Phariseys and Saduceys, he does
comprehend the whole multitude, least they should show a feigned clooke of
repentance, instead of true affection.

Moreover it belonged greatly to the people to know what the Saduceyes and
Phariseys were, of whom miserably the true worshippinge of God was corrupted,
the church destroyed, and all true religion quite subverted, finallye with
their corruptyon, they extinguyshed the true and clear light of God, and with
their vices infected all things. Therefore it is certain, that John went
publicly and openly to the Phariseis, that he might admonish the whole
church of God, least that any more, through vain shows, they should blind the
eyes of the simple, and through wicked tyrrany keep the people in oppression.
In this therefore, The constancy of John.
we may behold the constant boldness of John, who, for all that they excelled
others, did not one whit spare their dignity: but sharply, (as they deserved)
reprehended them. Even to it becomes all godly teachers to be bold and
constant, and not to fear any power or authority of men, but without al fear
to contend, against all that exalts it self against Christ. 2. Cor. 10.
But and if they that came fainedly to baptism, to bear the name of the
Gospel, were so sharply and cruelly rebuked, and dealt withal, how shall we
deal, with the professed and sworn ennemies of Christ, which do not only
refuse all taste and savor of wholesome doctrine: but also with sword and fire,
do violently rage, to seek the utter destroyinge of the name of Christ?
Certainly if thou compare the polluted Pope, and his bloddy caynishe clergy,
with the Saduces and Phariseyes, and do deal with them both alyke, they must
needs be bound al in one faggot. Wherefore they quarrel not with us but with
the spirit of God, whose ears are so tickle, that they will suffer nothing
to be spoken against the Pope. In the mean time, let the godly preachers, and
teachers, take heed unto the^ selves, when they are moved with godly zeal
against the tyrants of the church, that they mingell not the lusts and
affections of the flesh. Rash zeal^ prohibited.
And because vehemence or zeal can not be allowed of God, but that which is
moderated by the wisdom of the spirit, let them not only refrain their
affections, but also give and commit the selves wholly to the regiment and
moderation of the holy ghost, lest that any thing unadvisedly spoken, should
excede.

Generation of vipers. He calls them rather the generation of vipers, then
vipers, because he would cast in their tethe their venemouse and poisoned
malice.

Neither did he mean only to condemn those that were present before him but
also the whole body and corporation of them. as if he should have said, that
both their sects, and divisions, did nothing but engender serpents. For they
contended with great discention among the^ selves: but the contempt of God,
the wicked desire of rulyage, the hatred of wholesome doctrine, and the syncke
of all mischief and wickedness, was common to them all, they never contended
about that: The nature of a viper.
M. Finally the vipers of all kind of beasts are most pestiferouse, for if
they do but scant touch a man, they bring violent death. As appears by the
men that dwelt in the Isle of Mylctum. who when they saw the viper hang on
Paul's finger after his shipwreck, they said. surely this man is a murderer,
Act. 28.
whom although he have escaped the danger of the sea) vengeance will not
suffer to live. But when they saw him, (the viper being cast into the fire,
to have no harm, (for they thought he should have been burnt, or else
suddenly fall down beade) they altered their minds, and said he was a God.
So great danger does the poison of a viper bring. Then, when John knew that
the Phariseys and Saduceys, with the hie priests, scribes and lawyers, were
all of like malice, and that they were as wicked as their fathers which slew
the prophets, so that they would fill their Fathers measure: he does cast in
their teethe, not only their own, but also their fathers malice, when he
says. O generation of vipers. Math. 12.
With this title also they were commended of Christ.

Who has taught you to. C. Because he suspected their repentance, doubtinge
with admiration, he enquireth of them, whether it be possible that they should
repent from their heart, and by this means he makes them to examine their
own consciences, and to enter into judgment with them selves, concerning
their own wickedness.

M As if he should have said. Who gave you that mind, being so perverse, so
wicked, to fly and avoid so great vengeance and destruction, which shortly
would come to pass, and presently hangs over this ungodly generation. Anger
in this place, judgment, and vengeance are all alyke, as they be also in many
other places. As in the epistle to the Romans, where it is said, the law
causes wrath. ^ma. 4.
To fly the vengeance of God, in this place is taken in good part, because
it is a mean to seek to please God, that he will not be a^gry with us. For the
godly sort of men, to the end they may escape the wrath and judgment of God,
they will seek al means possible before hand, to prevent and avoid it. But
nothing at al it does profit a sinner, to fly from God, for he does more and
more provoke him to wrath.

M. By the vengeance to come may be understand, the destruction of the hole
nation of the Jews, ^ap. 23. ^4.
which was like to be brought to pass by the Romans, of the which is made
mention hereafter: then the which destruction nothing can be read more cruel:
in the which it has been kept miserable and void, the time of 1400. years. The
lord declaringe this vengeance, more plainly he says.

^e. 21.
Woe unto them that be with child, and give suck in those days, for there
shall be great trouble in the land, and wrath over all this people. And they
shall fall through the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into al
nations.

8. Bring forth therefore the fruits worthy of repentance.

B. As if he should have said. You join your selves to the number and company
of penitentes. Here is no dissembling in the matter. Therefore if you will be
baptized, and be accepted among the number of them, which are trewly regestred
citezens of the kingdom of heaven, your repentance must then be true, and not
fained. It shall be true, The fruits of repentance.
if it bring forth fruits accordingly, that is to say, contempt and hatred
of all things present deniyng your selves, excellent modesty, and the
burninge zeal and love of pity and godliness. These certainly are the fruits
in deed of a repentaunt mind, which willingly seeks to lead a new life.
C. Therefore John confirms that which we spoke before, that the repentance
is nothing, which is witnessed with words and not in deed. For it is a more
preciouse thing then to be made light or a jest of. Therefore John says
plainly, that it was not a sufficient testimony which they did show: but he
said, it would plainly appear in continuance of time, whether they received it
wyllingely or no. Papisticall repentance.
The Papists every year do feign a repentance, with forbeddyng of certain
meats, with auriculer confession, with strewing of ashes, and with certain
buzing words and songs and in the mean time, while theye feigned these
things, how many of them were there, which by the example of the Ninevites,
amended their lives, and showed forth the true fruits of repentance. C. We
must note therefore, that good works are called the true fruits of
repentance. Repentance.
For repentance is an inward thing, which has his seat in the heart and
mind, but brings forth fruits in changing the life. But because this part
of doctrine was foulely corrupted of the Papacy, we must note this difference,
that repentance, is the inward renewinge of the man, which shows it self
in the external and outward life, even as the tree of it self, brings forth
fruit. M. And trewly he which does acknowledge his sins from the bottom of
his heart, and is trewely sorry for those offenses that he has committed, he
truly will remove and cast away al hypocrisy from him, and will take unto him
the true humility of the mind, and will not only allow the physician of
health, but also, will desire to have him above al things: he will not only
abstain from his accustomed faltes, but also will with diligent study and care,
by all means avoid them and the occasion thereof, yea, he will greatly abhor
them, and as before, he gave him self to fylthines of life, even so now he will
ensue and seek to get with synguler diligence, purity, innocence, and true
godliness.

9. And be not of such mind, that ye would say within your selves, we have
Abraham to our father. For I say unto you, that God is able, of these stones,
to raise up children to Abraham.

And be not of such. E. That is, live not so that you may seem to lay al your
trust in Abraham. M. Or be not of this opion, to say that you are the sons
of Abraham, as though that were sufficient to righteousenesse, to be begotten
of saints. C. Until hypocrites are oppressed, Hipocrites are secure.
they sleep securely in their sins: but when they are cyted so ye tribunal
seat of God, carefully they seek for starting holes and lurking places, or
some covering to hide^ them selves. Thus therefore John does speak to the
Phariseies, and Saduceis, Now that you are sharply reproved of me, I would
not have you do, as others are wont, which are like unto you, to seek for
remedy by a false, vain, and colored pretense. For he does extorte from them
the vain trust with the which they were bewitched. The league and couenaunte
that God made with Abraham, was as it were a target or buckeler to cover their
evil conscience: not that they would place all their salvation upon one man,
but because God had adopted all the stock of Abraham: not wayinge at all, that
none were of the seed of Abraham, but such as followed his faith, and that
the league of god was not ratified to profit to salvation, but by faith.
Therefore John adds not this in vain.

Within your selves. For although they boasted not with their tongues, that
they were the sons of Abraham, yet inwardly they greatly gloryed of this
title: as hipocrites are not ashamed at all, to jest, and more grossly to
dally with God, than with men. We have Abraham. M. John knew that they were
the sons of Abraham, as also Christ witnesses, John. 8.
saying, I know that you are the sons of Abraham. he knew that the covenant
was not only made with Abraham, Gene. 17.
but with his seed also: I will make a covenant between thee and me, between
my seed and thy seed after thee. etc. This he had never taken from them, if
they would have followed the steps of their father Abraham. But because after a
preposterous sort, they flattered them selves, through the promises made by
God to Abraham: and because they persuaded them selves that it was possible
that they should be cut of, because the promise was made for ever to Abraham
and his posterity: their hearts were so hardened, that at no time they were
moved at the threteninges of God: to power vengeance on them: therefore after
the apt and profitable exhortation, to bring forth fruits of repentance, he
thought to take away this preposterous security, and carelessness.

For I say unto you C. The Jews did flatter them selves almost after the same
manner, that the Papists do at this day advance them selves. It is necessary
that some church be in the world, because god will be known in the world, and
will have his name called upon. And his church can be no where but among us,
with whom the lord has made his couenaunte. The hye priests and bysshoppes
swelled above others with arrogancy, and others which were of great power and
authority with them.

For the common sort of people were counted profane and accursed of them.
Chap. 7.
as we may read in John. But theye thought them selves to be holy primates
and heads, even as at this day our horned bishops, our abbotes, The pry^^
Papists.
our monks our channons, our friars, and every mass priest, being elevated
and puffed up with the proud title of (Clergy) did much despise the laytie.
John does refell, and confute, this error, that they do to much restrain the
promise of god, shewinge, that although God do want them, yet he will have his
church. The effect therefore of his words, is this. God made an
everlasting couenaunte with Abraham, and his seed, Yet one thing deceives
you, that when you are more the^ bastardes, you thinck your selves to be the
sons of Abraham. Therefore God will raise up a new seed to Abraham, which
now apereth not. For John speaks here in the dative case, (he will raise up
to Abraham sons:) that they may understand that the promise of god shall not
be void, but stand in effect still Neither was Abraham deceived, although
his sede died in them. So that from the beginning of the world god was true and
just in his promises to his servants. Neither does he at any time leave of
to give his grace to those yt be his children, although he reiecte hipocrytes.
Neither does John speak here of the calling of the Gentiles, as some
suppose, but he means the very stones, without any further sense. For
because that proud men thought it impossible, yt his church should be carried
to an other place, he shows that the lord has means and ways in his hand
to deliver his church, which they thought not upon, even, as if he should
create new sons to him self of stones: As if he should have said. I declare
unto you that God is of such power that although he utterly destroy you (as
you have deserved) yet he can raise up children to his beloved Abraham, even of
these stones. Te like argument our savior Christ used, saying. I say unto you
that if these hold their peace, the stones shall cry. Abraham had respect unto
this power of God, when he was commanded to offer up his son.

10 Even now is the axe laid unto the rote of the tree: every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

Even now is the axe laid to the root. C. After that John had taken away
the cloak of vain trust from the hypocrites, he denounces unto them, that
the judgment of God is at hand. Before he showed them, that being expelled
they were not the people of God: now he adds, yt God is bent to banishe and
rote out, al chose that are unworthy, from his church, even as barren,
unfruitful and rotten trees, ar wo^t to be cut up. The efecte is this that God
is purposed to purge his church. For the grace of God never comes forth to
the health of the godly, The health of the godly and the destruction of the
wicked come together for two causes.
but also his judgment comes forth to the destruction of the world, and that
for two causes: because then god will separate his people from the reprobate,
and the ingratitude of the world provoke new anger. Wherefore no marvel,
if the preaching of the gospel, and the coming of Christ have removed the axe
to the cutti^g up of the wicked trees, and do daily hasten against them, the
vengeance of God.

Is hevven down and cast into the fire. B. Here he says, that as trees
(which in vain comber the ground, and are vnfrutful) are cast into the fire:
even so shall you be cast out of the la^d, and be consumed with fire; which
hitherto have been vnfrutful, and unthankful to Go^. To this efecte was the
parable of the fig tree alleged, of our savior Christ in Luke, Luke. 13.
saying Except ye repent, ye shall al likewise perish: he told also this
similitude. A certain man had a fig tree, planted in his vyneyard, and he
came and sought fruit thero^ and found none Then said he to the dresser of his
vyneyarde. Behold, this three year have I com and sought fruit of this fig
tree, and find none, cut it down, why combereth it the ground? and he
answered, and said unto him: Lord, let it alone this year also, till I dig
round about it, and dounge it, to see whether it will bear fruits: and if it
bear not then, after that shall you cut it down. And in an other place Christ
faith thus. John. 15
If any abide not in me, he is cast out of the doors, as a branches
withers, and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and they burn.

11. I baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that shall com after me,
is mightier then I, whose shoot I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you
with the holy ghost, and with fire.

I baptize you with water. C. The three Evangelists do rehearse the self same
words of John the Baptiste; In this one thing Luke is more plentyfull because
first he does show for what occasion this sermon was made, that is to say,
because it was a doubt, that the people would take away the honor of Christ,
by a false and wrong opinion. M. For he says. As the people were in a doubt,
and al me^ mused in their hearts at John, whether he were very Christ, John
answered and said unto the^ all. Luke, 3.
I baptize you with water. etc. C. Therefore that he might in time take away the
occasion of the error, he does plainly say, that he is not Christ, and so he
does disseuer him self from him, that he may bring him that right which
aparteined unto him. And truly he did this willingely, that he might bring
disciples unto Christ, (as the proverb is) from hand to hand: but he
preuenteth it the sooner, least in holdinge his peace any longer, he should
confirm the error of the people. C. His words therefore tend to this efect.
I call al men to re, pentance: and having professed the same, I sign them with
the seal of Baptism, whereby they may be assured that their sins are
forgeuen the^, if they believe in him, which shall come after me, that is to say,
in Christ, which only forgeueth sins, and gives the holy ghost, printing
a true faith in our hearts, of remission of sins, and mortifying also the
affections of our flesh.

He which comes after me. This is spoken in the present tence. The greek
participle is doubtful, so that thou may understand it, that Christ was
Junior or younger then John, or else that he should succeed John in the
office of preaching. Chap. 1.
So the Evangelist John resiteth the same words, saying. After me there came a
man, which went before me, for he was before me.

Is stronger then I. C. By these words he does show, that Christ was of a
greter power and dignity, in respect of whom, he also was subject: as if he
should say, The work of Christ to come, that is, the redemption of mankind,
and the kingdom which he received of God the father, do require greater force
and power, then I or any man else ca^ show. I am his minister, he is the lord
which has received all power of his father.

Therefore in that John does acknowledge his own imbecillitie, it is done to
attrybute ye glory of virtue and power to Christ, No Angel has power to save.
to save and to destroy: to save the elect, and to destroy the reprobate: also
he does admonish us, yt there is no saint or angel, Christ only excepted, that
has power to save and destroy. Whose shoose I am not worthy E. He said
before that Christ was stronger then he: to a^plifie the same, he says, that
he is unworthy to carry his shoose: He uses the common form and phrase of
speech, by the which he does so extol ye glory of Christ, that above him he
co^pareth nothing. To the which end this is also spoken, He must increase,
John. 3.
but I must decrease. He shall baptize you with the holy. Here John makes
Christ the author of spyrituall baptism, but yet nevertheless a minister of
the external thing. Occupati^
Here he does seem to prevent before, secretly, a question, that might be
objected against him, to what end and purpose, the baptism, yt he took unto
him, served. Neither was it any small triffell, to bring a new and unwonted
thing into the church of God: and that specially to set forth a new kind of
begi^ning, that should be more perfect, and better then the law of God. Baptism^
Therefore he answers that he has don nothing rashly, and though he be a
minister of the outward sign, that yet he does nothing at al diminish the
virtue and power of God. Wherefore we may easily gather yt it was no part of
his meaning to distinguishe and make a difference, between his baptism, and
that, which Christ gave his disciples in commandment to use, the use whereof
also he would have continually establyshed in the church. Neither does he
compare the visible sign to the invisible: but co^paring the persons of the
servant and lord together, he does teach what is proper, and apperteining to
the servant, what also (as due and right) is to be rendered to the lord. And
also herby is gathered a general doctrine, yt is to say, what are the parts of
men in baptism, and also what is properly to ye son of god. For only to men is
committed ye administration of ye outward and visible thing, but yt truth it
self does only remain with Christ. The scripture sometime does improperly
assign to men that, which John does affirm only to belong to Christ, and
which he denies to apperteine unto men: but tha^ he does not way and consider,
what man has specially by him self, but simplely does teach, what is the force
and profit of signs, and how God does work with his holy spirit by them.
(...) difference ^twene ^hriste and his ^nisters.
Here is given a distinction, between Christ and his ministers, least that the
world give yt unto them, which only of duty and right, pertains unto him:
as nothing is more ready and inclined then the world, to beautify and adorn
the creatures with the spoils of God.

We know what, and how great outragiouse contentions have been in these days,
as concerning the use and efficacy of the signs, all the which may be taken
away with this one word, that the whole institution of the lord, does
comprehend the author him self, and the virtue of the spirit, with the
figure and minister: but when as the mynister is compared with the lord, that
he may have al, we must bring the other to nothing.

With the holy ghost. It may be demanded, why John did not say as well, that
it was Christ, which did wash our souls with his blood. Forsothe, because, ye
washing is done by the virtue and power of the spirit also, he thought it
sufficient, only in the name of the spirit to express the whole effect of
baptism. The meaning truly is plain, that we must give unto Christ, what
grace soever baptism does figurate or signify, because that he does sprincle
the consciences of men with his blood: he also does mortify the old man, and
he does give unto it his spirit of regeneration. And with fire. Bu. Fire is a
sign of purging, and love. C. But the name of fire is applied to the spirit,
because he does purge away our filthiness, even, ^n. 3.
as gold is purified in the fire. He is called fire metaphorically, as he is
called water. Therefore, he shall baptyse you with the holy ghost, and with fire,
that is he shall ad unto it, his holy spirit, which has the property and
nature of fire: he shall regenerate, renouate, and make clean your hearts, and
shall consecrate you into ye adoption of the sons of God. ^ke 24. ^t. 1. and.
11.
To be baptized with the holy ghost, to be indewed with the power of the
hiest, to receive the holy ghost, and to have the power or virtue of the
spirit, coming upon any man, signifies all one thing.

12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will pourge his flower: and gather his
wheat into his barn: but will burn the chafe with unquenchable fire.

Whose fan is in his hand. B. Hitherto John has preached the lord Jesus to
be the savior, because he affyrmed that he was the giver of the spirit, of
justification.

C. That the Jews might offer them selves to be renewed of him: now he
resoneth of judgment, and shows ye Christ is the general judge of all men,
that he might make the conte^ners afraid. For, because many hipocrites always
proudly reject the grace of Christ proffered unto them, it is necessary also
that the vengeance, which ha^geth over their heads, be declared unto the^. For
this cause John does here describe Christ to be a severe judge, against the
hard hearted and unbelieving. We must note here also, this order of teaching,
that hipocrites may know, that they shall not escape unpunished, because they
reject Christ: and being awaked from their sluggishnes, shall begin to fear the
revenger, whom (being the author of health) they despised. But no doubt the
purpose of John was, to teach what Christ would bring to pass by his
gospel. Therefore the preaching of the gospel is a fan: The Gospel is a fan.
because before the lord does shake and sift us, all the world is wrapped
with confusion, every man flattereth with him self, and the good and evil are
mingled together: and it is enough for us to swel and increase with the chaff.
But when Christ comes among the^ with his gospel, when he pearceth their
consciences and cites the^ before his tribunal seat, The reprobate are
compared to chaff
the chaf is winnoed or fanned from the wheat, which before co^bred a great
rome. For although al men ar fa^ned by the gospel, from the chaff. yet
notwithstanding here John does compare ye reprobate to chafte, and the elect
children of God to wheat. Wherefore the flouerth is not taken for ye world as
some deem, but for the church. For we must consider to whom John speaks. For
the Jews were only puffed up with a name or title, so that John does tell them,
that they are proud in vain, since that but for a time they occupy the room
of the church of God, from the which even by and by, they shall be rejected
and banyshed, even as chafe is separated and divided from the flouerth. By
this means be does touch ye state of the church at that time corrupted,
because it was full of chafe, darnel, cockle, and reffuse, but strayte way
with the fresh wind of the Gospel, to be purged, Answer.
It may easily be answered, that the elect are fourmed and made into wheat,
that being exempted from the chafe, they may be gathered into the barn,

Christ began, and perfourmeth this purgynge daily, notwithstanding the
effect of the same shall not be until the last day: therefore John calls
us thither. The fruit of Hope.
But let us remember, that even at this day the faithful enter by hope into
the barn of God, that in the end in deed they may have a place there, and
the reprobate do feel (according to their deserte) the heat and burning of
that fire, which shall be in the last day. Therefore, before the Gospel was
preached in Iewery, the reprobate were not only joined with the elect, but
also they were so covered with the brightness of the ceremonial law, that
they were counted for true Israelites. But when the preaching of the Gospel
came, which is the sound and perfect fan, there was such a separation made,
that easelye the one might be deserved from the other, yea, the very secrets
of their hearts were opened, John. 8.
Christ him self saying. He that is of God hears Gods word, therefore
you do not here, because you are not of God. And again. You believe not,
because you are none of my sheep: John. 10.
even as I said unto you, my sheep here my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me. The like separation also is in these our days. With
unquenchable fire. In these few words, is thretened the ponishment of
everlasting damnation which never shall have end, appointed for this purpose,
that more sharply they should be moved to repentance. This ponishement does not
only apperteyne to chafe, to be separated from the wheat, but also to be
cast into the fire, and burnte, even as unfruitful branches, are not only
cut of, but gathered and cast into the fire. The like ponisheme^t does Christ
threaten to counterfeit and false Christians, telling them before, what a
terrible sentence he will pronounce against the^, saying. Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, Math. 25.
prepared for the devil and his angels. About this fire there has been great
disputation. But we may gather out of scripture, that it is a metaphorical
kind of speech. For if we may determyne and judge it to be a material, and
real fire, (as they term it) the^ we must add unto it also wodde, brimstone,
and breathe to kendel it, as Esaias in his.30. chap. makes mention. Neither is
there any further meaning in the fire, then there is in the worm. For if al
men do agree and consent, that there is in the name of worm a metaphorical
sense, and meaning, they must then confess that the like is in the fire.
Wherefore all speculation and lokinges omitted, with the which vain men do
weary them selves, without profit, let us be satisfied with this, that those
manners and forms of speakinge (for the rudeness of our capacity) do note
unto us, horrible torment, yea and so terrible, and painful, that neither the
mind of man can comprehend it, nor yet the toungue with words express the
same.

13 Then came Jesus from Galile, to Iordane, to John, that he might be baptized
of him.

Then came Jesus from Galile. B. The preachinge of John the Baptiste being
ended, the Evangelist begins to preach our lord Jesus, the savior of the
world, personally of his own words and deeds. And first of al he shows how
he was baptized not only with water, but also with the spirit: and was not so
much celebrated, and put into the flock of Gods people, which was the kingdom
of heaven as he was declared, by the voice of his father from above, to be a
teacher, and king, Chap. 1.
of his people and kingdom. M. Mark says, in those days. when as John had
preached a while, and a great multitude of the people came to be baptized: A
conuen^ time when word of (...) should be ^ched.
then was it a fyt and convenient time for Christ to be revealed, the hearts of
mortal men, by the preching of repentance, being pricked, and desiring, and
thirsting after the grace of Christ.

That he might be baptized of him. C. To what end the son of god would be
baptized, we may somewhat gather of his answer folowinge.

14. But John forbad him, saying: I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me.

But Iahn forbad him. M. John denied his office and ministerye to Christ,
first in consideration of his majesty, then in consideration of his own
imbecillitie and weakness, the which he partly declared, when he said, whose
shoose I am not worthy to bear. He knew that Christ had no need to be
baptized with this baptism of repentance, yea, rather that he had need to be
baptized of him: he thought it was unworthy and unmeet that the servant
should baptize the lord and master of all, which had no necessity
thereunto.

By these reasons being moved he refused to baptize him. I have need to be. C.
It is certain, that Christ was not only known of John to be an excellent
prophet, (as many very fondly imagine) but also to be the son of God:
otherwise, submittinge and surrendering his holy vocation to a mortal man, he
should have been iniuriouse to God. But the reader may learn, whereby he was
known unto John in the first cha. of John. This was a reasonable cause to
refuse, and deny, seeing that Christ had no need of baptism: but in this John
was deceived, that he wayed not, how that Christ did not desire baptism for
his own sake but for other men's. Therefore Christ beddeth him to consider,
what does belong unto him that has taken upon him the parson of a servant:
because that willinge subjection does derogate nothing of his glory and
renown. For although, John knew not his own office, and dewely for a time,
yet notwithstanding his error does not let, but that he did his duty, both
lawfully and duly.

15. Jesus answered and said unto him: let it be so now, For thus it
becomes us to fulfill all ryghteousenes. Then he suffered him.

Jesus answered and said unto. E. Our savior Christ, by these words does
not deny the words of John to be true, when he said, I have need to be
baptized of the. but grants the words of John to be true, yet nevertheless
he does infringe and put away the occasyon of controversy which arose of those
words, saying.

Let it be so now, for so it becomes us to fulfill all righteousenesse. C.
By this answer of Christ, we may gather, why he would be baptized, because
it becomes us (says he) to fulfill all righteousenes, To fulfill al
righteousenes in the scripture, is as much to say, as to fulfill the law. And
so we may expound this place, that it behooved Christ, which willingly
submitted him self to the law, to fulfill the same in all points. But better
it may be understand on this manner. as if Christ should have said, Sease and
leave of to speak of my dignity, neither is it my purpose at this time to
reason which of us two, is the better: but rather we must look what our
vocation requires, and what God the father has appointed unto us For Christ
used this general baptism, General and special Ba^time.
that he might in all points obey the will of his father: but he used the
special baptism, that he might consecrate the same in his own body, that it
might be common to us with him. Therefore he says, so it behooves us to
fulfill all righteousenesse, as if he should say, I must in all things be
obediente to my father. Thy baptism is appointed of the father, therefore
although I am greter then thou, yet it so pleased my father, that I should
receive baptism of thee, and should consecrate the same in my body, that
they which receive me, and are in me baptized, should acknowledge me to be
their brother, and fellow heir.

Then he suffered him. The modesty of John.
Here is to be noted the modesty of John, which by and by gives place and
obeys Christ. For he contendeth no farther, but hearing reason, that so it
became him, to fulfill all ryghteousenes, (although before it seemed very
absurd) is now persuaded, and baptizeth Christ. Even so Peter, which said,
John. 13.
Thou shall never wash my feet, when he heard Christ say, except I wasshe
thee, thou haste no part with me: by and by he said, Lord not only my fete,
but my hands and head.

M. Whereby we are taught, Error by ignorance is easily put away.
that those that err by ignorance, when they know the truth, are easily
persuaded.

16. And when Jesus was baptized, he ascended out of the water, and behold the
heavens were opened unto him. and he saw the spirit of God desce^dinge like a
dooue, and lyghtynge upon him.

And when Jesus was baptized. M, Now the Euangeliste does show unto us,
how Christ was celebrated and authorized after his baptism. And behold the.
C. The openinge of the heavens, is sometimes taken for the showing forth of the
glory of the heavens. But in this place it is taken for the visible separation
and division of the heavens, so that John might se somewhat hier then the starry
firmament, where the planettes were. But to search farther what this opening of
the heavens means, or what it was, neither does it parteine to the matter,
neither is it necessary: because it is sufficient to know that this was a sign
and token of the presence of God. Yet, where the Evangelists do say, that
John saw the holy ghost, it is lykely that the heavens were open, specially
for his sake. Although it ought not to be denied, but that Christ in respect
that he was man, was the more assured of his vocation. And to this effect do
the words of Luke seem to serve, Chap. 3.
which says, that when Christ prayed, the heavens were open. M. But by the
openinge of the heavens here specifyed, is signified, that this is he, which
should come from heaven, and should teach heavenly things, that is, he
should show the will of his father to heavenly men. John. 3.
For he that is of the earth, speaks of the earth: but he which came from
heaven is above all. Furthermore it is signified, that this is he, which by
his incarnation and blood, should make agreement between human things and
heavenly things, as S. Paul writes to the Ephesians, Ephe. 1. Collo. 1.
and Collossians. Thirdly it signifies, that he is that same Christ which made
unto us free passage and recourse to the thron of his grace, the gates of
heaven, being by him broken open. To be short, that which was revealed to
Joseph in the vision, of the opening of the heavens, and of the ladder that
from the earth reached thereunto, is declared from above by this inauguration
and celebration of Christ.

And he savve. C. Namely John: because by and by yt follows, that the spirit
descended upon Christ. M. And John him self in an other place says, I did
not know him: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto
me: John. 1.
upon whom thou shall se the spirit descend, and tarry still on him, the same
is he which baptizeth with the holy ghost. And I saw, and bare record, that
the same is he which is the son of God. C. It may now be demanded, how John
could se the spirit, We answer, Answer.
that for as much as the spirit of God is dispersed every where, and fylleth
both heaven and earth, that the descention from heaven, is very improperly
applied unto it. the same we must judge also, as concerning the sight thereof.
For although the holyghost be invisible by it self, yet notwithstanding it is
said, that we se it, when as it shows any sign of his presence. The spirit
God can not be seen.
John saw not the essence of the spirit, the which essence or being, can not
be seen with man's eyes: neither did he se the virtue it self, which cannot be
comprehended with human sense, but only with the intelligence and
understanding of faith: but he saw the shape of a dooue, under the which, it
pleased God to show and manifest his spirit. Metonymi^ ^s a fygure^ ^ed
denomination. as when Bacchus is put for wine. (...) Venus for ^chery.
Therefore this is a metonymical kind of speech, by the which the name of a
spiritual thing, is put for a visible sign. For as some very folishly, and
preposterously, do urge the letter, that they might include the thing in the
sign: even so we must wey and consider that by these means and phrases of
speaking figuratively, is noted, the conjunction of the thing, with the sign.
According to this sense and meaning, the bredde of the sacred, and holy supper
of the lord, is called the body of Christ, not because it is so, but because it
does witness unto us, that it is trewely given us to eat.

Furthermore we must call to mind that which we towched even now, that is, we
must not feign and imagine the coming down of any notable or myralouse
thing, that the holy Ghost should be sought in a sign, as though he were
included in the same, as in a place: but we must satisfy and content our
selves with this, that the lord by his secret power does show forth unto us
by figures, whatsoever he promised.

Descending. M. This coming down of the spirit of God, was made for this
purpose in a visible shape to descend upon Christ, that the authority that
he had from above, might be declared in earth. The like came upon the Apostels,
^es. 2.
when they were sent to preach the Gospel throughout the whole world. And
when the Apostles had laid hands on those that were ready to preach the
Gospel, the virtue and power of the holy ghost was given to them by a
visible sign, (which before they had received through faith, that the church
as yet being rude, should be comforted, and that by the singular and visible
gift of the spirit, they might be appointed to the work of the mystery, and
instructed and confirmed in the same. ^estion.
Like a dove. C. It may be demanded why the holy ghost rather appeared in the
shape of a dove, ^^nswere.
then in fire. The solution of this question does depend upon the analogy or
similitude, of the thing sealed with the figure. We know what the Prophet
attributes to Christ, ^ay. 42.
when he said: A broosed reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall
he not quench, he shall not cry, neither shall his voice be hard. Because of
this gentleness of Christ, by the which mildely and lovingly, he has brought
sinners to the hope of salvation, the holy ghost descended upon him in the
likeness of a dove. And in this sign is offered unto us the manifest pledge of
sweet consolation that we should not be afraid to come unto Christ, which
came not unto us in the fearful and terrible power of the spirit, but in the
pleasant and amiable show of his grace. M. Also by the same is showed what
Christ would work in the hearts of the faithful, namely the very same,
which he him self says: Be ye innocente as doves. Finally by this appearing
of the holy ghost, is showed, what this heavenly king should be, how meke and
loving: then what behavior and disposition they should have, which should be
regenerate, by the baptism of the holy ghost. C. Moreover, some more
curiously, then profitable, do seek and demand, whether this dove were a
perfect and sound body, or only an image and figure of a Dove. Luke ^.
For although the words of Luke do seem to affirm, that it was not the
substance, but the shape of a Dove, yet notwithstanding, we can not appointe
any certainty thereof.

And coming upon him. M. That is to say, upon Christ. C. Here it may be
demanded why the spirit did then desce^de upon him, when as before he was
replenished with the same. Answer. Esaias. 61. Luke. 4.
This question is answered with this place of the prophet, The spirit of the
lord upon me, therefore he anointed me, to preach to the poor he sent me.
For although Christ did excel in the singular grace of the spirit, even
until the miracle: yet nevertheless he kept him self at home like a private
man, until he was brought forth of his heavenly father. Therefore now when
the dew time was come, in the which he should prepare him self to
accomplish the office of a redemer, he is indewed with the new power of the
spirit, and that not for his own cause so much as for others. For this was
done by the providence of God, that the faithful might learn to embrace
reverently his divine power, and that the infirmity of the flesh should not
be contemptible and despised in him. And that was also the cause, why he
differred his baptism till yt he was thirty year old. Baptism was the
beginning of the Gospel.
Baptism was the beginning of the Gospel, therefore he took it when he began
to preach the Gospel. For Christ preparing him self to preach the Gospel,
began his office as well by baptism, as by the instruction of the holy ghost.
The holy ghost therefore descending upon Christ, appeared unto John to teach
that no carnal or earthly thing was to be found in Christ, but as a divine
person to come from heaven, in whom the fulness of the spirit reigned. We know
undoubtedly that he was God, manifested in the flesh: yet notwithstanding his
heavenly virtue is to be considered in the person of a servant, and in his
humane nature.

17 And lo, there came a voice from heaven, saying: This is my beloved son
in whom I am well pleased.

And lo, there came a voice. M. Math. does not say simplelie that a voice was
heard from heaven, but that a voice came from heaven. C. For out of that
division and opening of the heavens (which we touched even now) came this
voice, whereby he might have the greater majesty.

This is my beloved son. M. This testimony of the father being brought from
the heavens to the earth, as concerning his son, has a declaration of his
will toward mankind, with a declaration also of Christ, the only begotten
son of God. C. For the title of (son) does only pertayne unto Christ,
truly and naturally: but yet the son of God was made manifest in our flesh,
that by the same right that God was father unto him, he might make him our
father also. Wherefore God bringing unto us a mediator, in the tytell and
commendation of his son, does show him self to be a father to us all. The
Grek word does signify more then my beloved son, in the superlatiue
degree, my best beloved son. For Christ is so called, because when we were
hateful and odious unto God, it was necessary that his fatherly love should
flow from Christ unto us. M. As if the father should have said: He whom I
have sent unto you, and caused to come in your flesh, is my only beloved
son: In whom you may see how greatly I love mankind, and his salvation,
wherefore see that you cleave unto him by faith. Ephe. 1.
But S. Paul does very well interpret this place saying: By his grace he made
us accepted through the beloved.

In whom I am well pleased. The Greek word does signify a mind so
inclined, that it has a singular and ready good will and affection, separated
from all anger and displeasure.

C. Therefore it declares that the love of God so rests in Christ, that he
does give him self from him unto us, and not only to us, but to the very
angels: not that they have need of reconsiliation, who were never out of Gods
favor, but because they them selves clean not unto God, but by the benefit
of the head. Wherefore he is called the first begotten of all creatures.
Coloss. ^
Coloss. ^
And S. Paul in another place teaches, that he came to set at peace all
things both in heaven and earth. 2. Pet. 1.
M. The Apostle Peter got the certainty of the faith and doctrine of Christ,
by this testimony of the father, Math. 17
which was declared in the mount. Moreover this place teaches us that none
can reuele the son but only the father: according to the saying of Christ.
Math. 11.
None knows the son saving the father, and again. Math. 16.
Flesh and blood has not reveled this unto thee, but my father which is in
heaven. Also he says: John. 6.
No man comes unto me except my father which sent me draw him. Wherefore
we must pray unto God, that he will reuele unto us, and make us know his
well-beloved son Jesus Christ, in whom he is so well pleased, that whatsoever
we ask in his name we shall receive the same, if it be according to his will.

The.iiij. Chapter.
THen was Jesus led into the wilderness of the spirit, Verse. 1
to be tempted of the deuell.
Then was Jesus led into. B. In this fourth chapter, the Euangeliste does
show that our lord was tempted, before he took in hand the office of
preaching: M. Then what disciples in the beginning of his preaching he called
unto him: Last of all, how at the first in Galile, with going about, with
teaching, and with healing those that were diseased, his name was spread
throughout all Syria. M. Therefore immediately after baptism (as Mark says)
he was led or carried, Mark. 1.
as it were from the mids of the people, and from the conversation of his
former life, from those things which he (being subject to his parents)
hitherto exercised, Into the wilderness. The wyldernes was a place not
inhabited, or void of men, for Mark says, that he was among the beasts. C.
For two causes Christ went into the wyldernes, ^^rist went (...) the wyl^nes
for (...) causes.
first, that after the fast of forty days, he might come forth as a new
man, yea rather as a heavenly creature, to the executing of his office.
Secondly being proved and tried, with nothing but temptations, he might (being
thoroughly instructed in all points) prepare him self to so difficulte and
excellent an office. Know we therefore, that Christ (the spirit being his
guide) was led away from the company of men, that he might when he came again
appear, to be the chief doctor and teacher of ye church, and the Ambassador
of God, that he might rather be thought to be sent from heaven then to be taken
out of some city, or from the company of men. Even so God took Moses into
the mount of Synai, when that he purposed to promulgate and set forth his
land by his hand, and being taken out of the peoples sight, was received as
it were into a consecrated and holy place.

Now it behooved Christ to shine no less with the notes of heavenly grace and
virtue, ^od. 24
then Moses, least that the majesty and authority of the Gospel, should be
less then the force of the law. For if the lord did deck the doctrine being
the minister of death, with so excellent dignity, how much more should he
beutifie the doctrine of life? And if the shadowed figure of God had so great
light and brightness, ^ Cor. 3.
how necessary was it then for his face and countenance, which appears in
the Gospel with glittering beams to shine. Of the spirit. Bu. That is to
say of the holy ghost, by the which eue^ now he was declared to be the son
of God. But all this is signified to be done by the providence of God, and not
by fortune or chance, but by the council of the spirit to be governed. Not as
though he wanted hitherto the direction of the spirit: but that now by the
appearing of the spirit, and by his more manifest impulsion, he should do
greater things.

^arke. 1.
Mark says, The spirit drove him into the wyldernes. Luke says he was forced
of the spirit, that we may understand, that now at this time by a special
kind of mean, through the force of the spirit he took in hand higher
things of greater and waightier charge. M. By this example we see, how that
those which the spirit of God does selecte and chose, to the glory of the
divine office, are changed into other men, and by the spirit of God are
driven and constrained to take great matters in hand, The force of the spirit.
as we may for example see in Moses and David.

To be tempted of the deuell. C. Satan took occasion to tempte Christ by his
honger, as we shall here anon. But now generally we must see why God would
te^pte him. Matthew and Mark by their words do seem to affirm that he was led
into the wyldernes of the spirit, by the sure and determinate counsel of God,
Satan the enemy of ma^kinde.
who no doubt would show in the person of his son, as in a clear glass, what
a cruel and importunate adversary Satan is to the health and salvation of
ma^kinde. Whereby it came to pass that more sharply he assaulteth Christ, and
uses al his force and power against him, even in this moment, which the
Eua^gelistes do note: and that because he saw him prepared at his fathers
commandment to work the redemption of man. Therefore, then he resisted our
salvation in the person of Christ, even as he does cruelly bend all his
might, daily against the ministers of the same redemption, the author whereof
is Christ. But we must also note, that the son of God did wyllingly without
cohersion, Christ suffered him self to be tempted willingly.
take these temptations upon him which here are mentioned, and that he
contended with the devil hand to hand, that by his victory he might cause us
to rejoice and triumph. Therefore so often as Satan does assault us, let us
remember that we can by no other means sheylde and defend our selves then by
this bucler: and this was the cause in deed that the son of God suffered him
self to be tempted, that he might help us, so often as Satan armed him self
against us. Hebr. 2
M. For in that he was tempted him self, he can help the^ that are tempted.
Therefore when he led a private life at home, we read not that he was tempted,
but when he took upon him the office of a redemer, he descended into the midst
of the field, to take the quarrel in hand, in the name of his church. But if
Christ was tempted in the common state and person of all the faithful,
Temptations come not unto us by chance
let us then well know that those temptations which we suffer, are not by
chance, or at the will and pleasure of Satan, without the permission of God,
but that the spirit of God is the cause of all our temptations, by the which
our faith is tried.

Whereby a sure hope is to be gathered, that God which is the chief ouerseer
and moderator, will not be vnmyndefull of us, but will help us at all such
needs and straites which are to hard for us. But the words of Luke have
more force, who says that Jesus being full of the holy ghost, returned from
Iordane: By the which he signifies that he was then endewed with more
plentiful grace and power of the spirit, that he might be more strong and
apt to the enterprise which he had in hand, neither in vain did the holy
ghost descend upon him in a visible shape. Answer.
that causes man to be tempted. First I answer, that Christ took our
infirmities upon him, but without vice: furthermore, that nothing of his glory
was any whit the more deminished, in suffering him self to be tempted, then it
should be in taking our infirmities upon him. For this was the cause that he
was made man, that taking upon him our flesh, he should take our affections
also. But all the doubt consists in the first member or part, how Christ
should be enclosed in our infirmity that he might be subject to the temptation
of Satan, and yet nevertheless to be pure and free from all vice and sin.
But truly this is no doubt at all if we call to mind the whole and perfect
nature of Adam, in whom although the Image of God did shine, So many
affections in man so many temptations also.
yet nevertheless, he was subject to temptations. Moreover, look how many
corporal affections there be in men, so many occasions does Satan take to
tempte them. And this is worthily thought to be the infirmity of man's nature
to have his senses moved with those things that are before him: whereby it
comes to pass that Satan does at no time set upon us, but he does wound
us, or at least with some stroke or other hurt us. But the integrity of
nature in this part, does separate us from Christ. Howebeit, such a mean
condition, as was in Adam, is not to be imagined, who had power given him only
not to sin. But truly we know that Christ was so replenished with the
virtue of the spirit, that the ingins and darts of Satan could not once
pearce and enter into him. Bu. Now as touching the text, Mathewe here calls
him the ^uell, whom by and by he calls Satan, that the Greek text which
signifies (deuel) and the Hebrew text that has (Satan) may be all one. In
some places these two are joined together. Apoca. 1^ Job. 1. b Zacha 32 Psalm. 99
The old Serpent which is called the deuell and Satan. where the Hebrewe
text does allege this word (Satan) the.lxx interpretours have altered it
into (deuell). Properly this name deuell does signify a privy accusar and
slaunderer, causing infamy, and betraying men. According to the etimology or
force of the same word, John says: Apoca. 1^
The accusar of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God
day and night. But (Satan) does signify an enemy, an adversary, and a
hateful person. As David said: what matter is between you and me, for this
day ye are become adversaries unto me. 2. King. 1^
The Lattin text has. Cur efficimini mihi hodie in Satan. Math. 16
Even so to Peter he persuading Christ from the cross, it was said: Come
after me Satan, for he was an adversary unto Christ reuoking him from his
fathers commandment.

2 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was at the last
an hongered.

And when he had fasted. C. The fasting of Christ, and his departure into the
wyldernes, were done all to one effect and purpose. Neither did Christ
abstain from meat and drink, to give an example of temperauncy, but because
thereby he might have the greater authority, and being exempted from the
common company of men, might come as an angel from heaven, and not as a man
out of the earth. For what virtue of abstine^cie was that, not to taste meat,
to the desire whereof he was not once moved by h^nger? For it is most sure, and
the Evangelists do declare the same that he suffered hunger no otherwise the^
as if he had not taken upon him our flesh. Wherefore the fast of the holy time
of Lent (as they call it) was mere foolishenes since it was appointed to the
immitation of Christ. ^he supersti^us fast in ^nte.
Neither is there any such reason to persuade us more to follow this example
of Christ at this day, then there was to move the holy prophets and fathers
in times paste under the law, to follow the example of Moses fast. And we
know that none remembered this. Also, allmoste for the same end, King. 19.
God caused only Helias to fast in the mount, because he was a minister of
the restoring of the law. ^e devout ^e of Pa^es.
They feign them selves to be immitators and followers of Christ, which
observe and keep the fast of the holy time of Lent: For they so stuff their
bellies at dynner, that at night they may easily go to bed without a supper.
Are these like unto the son of God? Are these immitators of him? The fast of
our fathers was far greater, yet it was in no point to be compared to
Christ's fast. Moreover, neither Christ nor Moses, did observe this solemn
fast every year, but both of the^ fasted but once in their whole life. But I
would they had been contented with apyshe toys only, and not to have
attempted to fashion them selves to his rule, with their feigned fasting,
which was a wicked and most detestable deriding of Christ: for because they
persuaded them selves, that it was a meritorious work, and a worshipping of God
it was a wicked superstition. But this co^tumely toward God is not to be
suffered, because they obscure and darken his singular miracle. Then they are
injurious to Christ: because they detracte from him excelency and deck them
selves with his spoils. Thirdly they are enemies to the Gospel, from the
which they take no small authority, except this fast of Christ be knowem to
be his seal God did show a wonderful miracle when yt he exempted his son
from the necessity of eating: do they not with mad rashenes immitate God, and
seek to be like unto him, when that they think they are able by their own
power and strength to do the like? Christ was marked to be known, with divine
glory by his fasting: Do they not (he being robbed of his glory) take away his
excellency, when as they join them selves being mortal me^ to be fellows and
companio^s with him. God appointed to the fast of Christ, this end, that he
might seal the Gospel: now they which brought the same to an other use, did
they not take away the dignity of the Gospel? Away therefore with this
Cacozelia, or false, perverse, and apishe immitation, which both does peruerte
the council and purpose of God, and also the order of his works. But let the
Reader note here that we speak not generally of fastinges, the use whereof I
would to God were oftener among us, (So that it were pure and holy as it ought
to be) but our purpose and intent is to show for what end Christ fasted.

He was at last a hongered. M. As if the Eua^geliste should have said he
hongered not before. For Christ fasted (as we have showed already) not as we
fast, The miraculous fast of Christ.
(which somewhile leave our ordinary and accustomed diet or fare, somwhyle
less somwhyle more, we take as occasion and custom shall serve) but far
exceeding the custom and manner of men he fasted, abstaining wonderfully
altogether both from bread and drink, finally from all kind of food to
sustain humane nature: for he lived that time among the beasts where was
nothing to be gotten. It was necessary therefore that the humane body should be
preserved by his divine power, that he should live not only without meat, but
also that he should not be a hongred so long as the appointed time of
temptation endured.

3 And when the tempter came unto him, he said, if thou be the son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

And when the tempter. M. Now Matthew begins to describe the order of the
te^ptatio^s of Satan. And first he called him ye tempter, whom before he
called the deuell, whereby he admonishes the faithful to take heed of him: as
does also the apostle Paul, 1. These 3. 1. Cor. 7.
saying: Least peradventure the tempter tempte you: and in an other place:
Least Satan tempt you.

He is justly called by the name of Satan since the time, in the which he
with a wyly and subtle temptation, caused all mankind in our first pare^tes,
to be subject to death. C. Whereby also we may gather that those temptations
which stir our minds to evil, Euel temptations come from Satan
do only come from him. For where it is said that God does tempte, that is
done to an other end namely to try the faith of his servants, or else to
punish the unbelieving, or at least to make their hypocrisy (which love not
the truth) to be openly known.

P. But craftily the deuel brings men to mischief or calamity, that he may
lead them to desperatio^ and blasphemy. These crafts and wyles of Satan, let
us learn to know, that we may fly to our captain Christ the son of God;
which fights against the deuell, as it is written in Genesis. Genesis. 3
This seade shall tread town the head of the Serpente which agrees with this
saying of John. The son of God came to destroy the works of the deuell. 1.
John. 3.


He said if thou Be thou son of God. M. This is the first temptation of
Satan which is here described, with the which by occasion of honger he
sets upon Christ.

Comaunde that these stones be made bread, C. Here some ancient writers with
slender reasons dallied. For they said that the first temptation was of
Glottony. The second of ambition, and the third of covetousness. But very
ridiculous it is, to refer that to the intemperancy of glottony, when a man
that is very hongry, does desire to have meat, whereby he might sustain
nature. Moreover what delicates or dainties do they said in bread, that he
may be though so be very delicious and dainty, which was contented (as we
say) with dry bread? But the only answer of Christ does sufficiently
declare, that the purpose of Satan was otherwise. For certainly the son of
God was no rude, or inexperte wrastler, which knew not to shonne the trips of
his adversary, which being offered the foil on the right side, would not
defend him self on the left. Therefore if Satan went about to deceive him
with pleasures of Glottony, he had in a readiness the testimonies of scripture,
with the which he might repelle him and put him to flight. But yet he
propounds no sache thing, but takes this sentence that man shall not live by
bread only, but by the secret benediction of God. Deuteronomy. 18.
Whereby we may gather that Satan began directly with the says of Christ,
that the same being extinguyshed, he might constrayne Christ to seek his living
by perverse and unlawful means. And truly then he follows us at an inche
(as we say) when he assayeth to bring this to pass, that we distrusting God,
may help our selves otherwise then Gods word does allow. Therefore, the
effect and sense of the words is this: Satan seeks to mak^ us to dist^^
Gods pro^fes.
Seeing thou see thy self to be forsaken of God, it is time to look to thy
self. Therefore make thy self meat, which God refuses to help thee with.
For although he pretend the divine power of Christ, by the which the stones
might be turned into bread, yet notwithstanding this only he hunteth after,
that Christ departing from the word of God, whatsoever he should have said,
should have been discredited. To the purpose therefore Christ makes answer,
that man shall not live by bread only: as if he should have said thou beddest
me seek some remedy, whereby I may help my self otherwise then God does
allow: And this were distruste, whereof there is no need, so long as God does
promise to nourishe me. Thou Satan, doste bind his grace unto bread: but he
on the contrary part witnesses, that his grace is sufficient to nourishe and
succoure us. Now let us consider what kind of temptation this was: surely
such a one, with the which Satan daily fights against us. For the son of
God would not suffer any unwonted temptation, but would fight in the same
battle that we fight in, ^iste our ^uerer.
to the end that we, being fournished with the same armoure, wherewith he was
armed, need not doubt of the victory, but that already we have the palm in our
hands.

4 But he answered and said: It is written, man shall not live by bread only,
but by every word that proceadeth out of the mouth of God.

And he answered and. C. First, this is here worthy to be noted, ^s word ^r
weapon ^ate down ^han. ^c 6.
that Christ takes the scripture for his buckler, for this is the true kind
of fight, if we covet to have the victory. Neither in vain does Paull call the
word of God the sword of the spirit. M. Christ could by his divine power
have cast Satan into the bottomless pit: but for our sake, he would overcome
his temptations, that his deceites should not only be frustrate, but also we
that should follow, thereby might learn how to fight. A. That we being well
appointed with the armoure of the word of God might bouldely resist our
enemy the deuell. C. Whereby also we may gather that the Papists having made a
league, (...) Papists (...) from us ^s word.
and agremente with Satan (as it were) to cast out the souls of men, to
the end they may cruely of him be destroyed, they suppressing the scripture, do
despoyle the people of God of their armoure, with the which they might only
defend them selves. For they which cast from them this armor, and exercise
not the^ selves daily in the schole of God, are worthy every hour to be in
danger of the deuell: to whom they do betraye them selves. Neither is there
any other reason why Satan should so spoil and ouercomme so many, were it not
that God would be reue^ged on their negligence and contempt of his word. Now
we must consider the testimony of Moses, which Christ cites.

Man shall not live by bread. M. By this word bread he understands all manner
of food what soever we use, to ye sustentation of our body: Look in ye sixth
chap. following. Some very falsely wreste this testimony of Moses, as if it had
been said that the lives of me^ were not nourished with visible bread, but
with the word of God. In some respect this is true, but Moses respected
another thing. For when they had no other bread at hand, Man's life's
consists not in bread.
he shows that Manna was an extraordinary food to the people, that by this
document it might be witnessed for ever, that the life of men is not included
in bread, but to depend at the will and pleasure of God. The word therefore in
this place is not taken for doctrine, but for the decree, which god published
to the defending of the order of nature, and to the nourishing of his
creatures. Neither does he reiecte men which are the workmanship of his
hands, but for this cause he powers life into them, God gives life to man to
sustain life in him.
that once being given, he may daily sustain the same. The word is the
virtue and power of God, by the which we be sustained as well without meat as
with meat: whether he place any other thing in stead of meat, as Manna,
which he gave to our forefathers: or nothing, as he kept and preserved Moses,
Helias, and Christ so many days. C. So says the Apostle, Hebr. 1.
he rules all things with the word of his power. That is, all the world is
preserved, and all the parts thereof abide in their proper state, at his beck
and decree, by whom al things are governed. Therefore although we be fed by
bread, yet we must not attribute our life to the virtue of the same, but to
the secret power of his grace, which God inspireth in the bread to feed us.
Bread is but the ordinary mean of life.
Whereupon also it follows that God, which uses ye ordinary mean of bread
to our sustentatio^, will otherwise (when it pleases him) feed us, that we may
live. B. Therefore the answer of Christ, is in effect thus, Although I
honger, yet God by his power can preserve me still as he has done hitherto
without meat, that I shall not need to make these stones bread.

A. Neither is the power of my father tied unto bread. Man's felicity
consists not in meat and drink.
By this sentence of Moses, therefore their wickedness is condemned wiche
count that their life and felicity to have aboundace and superfluity of all
things pertaining to the body. Here also is reproved the distruste and wicked
carefulnes, which causes us to seek after unlawful things. And to this
point the answer of Christ is properly directed: that we must so trust to
receive our food, and other things necessary to our life, that we pass not
the bounds limited unto us. Unlawful means ought to be avoided
For if Christ thought it not lawful and mete to make bread of stones,
contrary to his fathers commandment, much less it is lefull to get our
living by rapine, violence, murder, bribery, extortion, usury, and such
like. We know it was said to Adam in the beginning. Gene. 3.
Thou shall get thy living in the sweat of thy brows. 2. These. 3.
And Paul: He which labors not let him not eat. And again, if any
provide not for his household, 1. Tim. 5
he has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidele. And these places are
written least that any man should take occasion to live idely, and refuse the
labor of his hands which God has appointed to get our living by.

5 Then the Deuell took him into the holy city, and set him on a pinnacle of
the temple.

Then the deuell took him. M. This is the other temptation of Satan, by the
which what he went about, we may gather by the answer of Christ.

Luke resiteth this in the second place, but the Evangelists meant not so to
order the history, that they would observe and keep always exactly the order
of time: but rather to gather the special things, that they might set forth
as it were in a glass or table, those things which were most proffitable to
be known, as concerning Christ. This therefore shall be sufficient for us to
know, that Christ was tempted three manner of ways. But which was the
first, second, or third, it makes no matter unto us.

A. Here Matthew declares that Christ was taken of the deuell, and set upon
the Pinnacle of the temple. E. But how he was taken and carried, whether by
force, or by his own free will, following the Deuell, C. Or whether he were
carried through the air, or whether it were done by a vysion, it is not for the
godly to search. It may be that there was no small time between the first and
second temptation, and between the second and the third, but that there was
some distaunce: which is most lykely, although by the words of Luke it is
gathered, Luke. 4
that there was no long space between, because he says, that Christ had rest
for a time.

Into the holy city. M. Luke calls it Jerusalem, which in deed was the
most corrupted city, Why Hie^lem was c^led holy.
notwithstanding it was called holy, not of her own righteousness, but for the
grace of God, because he would have the habitation of his name there.

After this sort the Prophets called it holy, partly for the promises, and
partly because of the holy things which the lord wrought there. Read the
ninthe chap. of Daniel. Daniel ^
Even so although we are sinners, yet we are the holy people of the lord,
because of the name of God which we call upon. And this title ought to be a
sufficient warning unto us, that with all our minds we should study true
holiness.

And set him on a Pinnacle. Bu. That is, upon the very shafte or steple, being
the highest place of the temple, upon the which commonly we set wethercockes
for the wind.

6 And says unto him: If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down
hedlong. For it is written, he shall give his angels charge over thee, and with
their hands they shall hold thee up, that thou dash not thy foot against the
stone at any time.

And he said unto him. C. To this end the wiles and deceites of Satan did
tend that Christ forsaking ye ordinary means might tempte God. Before, the
Deuell sought to bring Christ into despair, because he wanted food, and the
appointed means against honger: now he stirs him to vain glory and light
credit, that he rejecting the ordinary means, which was at hand, might put him
self in peril without necessity. We must ^ther disp^ nor pre^
And as it is not mete for us to despair, when as we are oppressed with need
and penury, but still with a sure trust and confidence to depend upon the
providence of God: even so it is not laufull for us to exalte our selves, and
to reach farther then God would suffer us. Now let us note what was the
dryfte of Satan in this point: Surely, to cause Christ to tempte God with
foolyshe and ungodly rashenes, in assaying what he was able to do by the power
of his Godheade. M. As if Satan should have said: For so much as thou doste
so depend upon thy fathers providence, that being a hongred, and in extreme
penury, doubtest not, but that he will sustain thee, it is well: now cast thy
self down hedlong, that thou may the more show thy self to depend upon
his providence: for there shall no peril come unto thee.



Answer.
The answer is this: No man tempts God which does not willingly without
necessity cast him self into danger, but against his will is brought thereto:
furthermore the providence of God has a care, Gods proui^ence.
not of those which love danger, but of them which against their wylles are
in hasarde. The subtlety of Satan.
Therefore Satan when he tempted the sons of God, he seeks not to throw
them down perforce, or by violence into destruction, but rather that they them
selves should wyllingly throw down them selves hedlong into mischief.
Furthermore, it is not in his power by violence to constrain the children of
God. Satan cannot lay hands ^olently on ^e children of ^od.
To tempte it is permitted unto him, but to destroy it is not so. Hereby it
comes to pass, that he drowneth not ye desperate against their wills, he
hangs them not, he cutteth not their throats, but by his temptations be
brings to pass, that they do unto the^ selves such violence.

For it is written. C. This malice of Satan is here to be noted, in that he
abbuseth the testimony of scripture to bring death unto Christ, and to turn
the bread into poison. For daily he seaseth not to use this craft: and the
son of God in his own person would enter into this contention, which is a
common example of all the Godly, that every one of them might learn to take heed to them selves, least by the deceitful and false coloring of Scripture,
they fall into the snares of Satan.

Nor there is no doubt, but that the lord does give so much liberty to our
enemy, least with negligence we should be to slow and dull, but that we might
watch continually to beware of him. The Papists say the scripture is
doubtful.
But let us not be like unto preposterous men, which cast the scripture from
them as a thing ambiguous, because that Satan does falcifie the same, as
though we ought to abstain from meat, lest we should be poisoned. Satan
does profanate the word of God, and does seek all that ever he can, to wreste
the same to our destruction: but for somuche as the same is ordained from above
to us for salvation shall the council and purpose of God be of none effect,
unless the wholesome use thereof do perish, through our sluggishnes? But this
matter has no need of any long disputation: Let us only look what Christ does
prescribe unto us by his example, which we must follow as a sure and certain
rule. Does Christ give place to Satan, most wickedly wresting ye scripture?
Nay, rather he does boldly refell and confute the wicked calumniation of
Satan, which he objected by the scripture. Wherefore so often as Satan does
seem to allege by his fallacis the scripture, and by the self same pretense
wicked men setting upon us, to the end they might oppress our faith, let us
borrowe weapons from no other place to defend our faith then out of the
scripture.

For although this promise, (He shall give his angels charge over thee. etc.)
does pertayne to all the faythefull, yet notwithstanding specially it does
belong unto Christ, who, as he is the head of the whole Church, even so by
his own right he does govern his angels, and does give them charge and
care over us. The word of God is a sufficient weapon to drive away Satan.
Wherefore Satan does not deceive in this that he proves by this testimony
that the angels are appointed ministers ad servants unto Christ, which
should keep him and hold him up with their hands: but the fallacion and deceit
is in this, that he draws the custody of angels to that which is uncertain
and rash, The angels are Gods ministers to keep us.
which custody is promised to ye sons of god, so long as they keep them
within their bounds and walk in his ways.

God does command us to walk in his ways, and then he does promise that
his angels shall keep us. Satan pretending the custody of angels, exhorts
Christ to cast him self down from the pinnacle hedlong, as if he should
have said: If thou cast thy self into the peril of death, contrary to the
will of God, he will by the custody of his angels defend thee and preserve
thy life. To conclude, The ordinary means must be used.
the deuell would have had Christ to try the power of his Godheade, in
throwynge down him self, when as he might descend by the steres from the
pinnacle, the which God would have us use, rather then to cast our selves
down and need not.

7 Jesus said unto him, again it is written, thou shalt not tempte thy lord
thy God.

Jesus said to him. M. Here our savior Christ does very well set and
compare Scripture to Scripture, not to deny the Scripture which Satan
brought, as though it were false, but rather to reject ye which he falsely
applied out of the scripture, saying: Throw thy self down. Although the
Greek word (...), is so placed that it may be referred to both: He said
again, or again it is written.

Furthermore sometime it signifies an itteration, sometime a contrariety.

If it be referred to this word (said) it signifies an itteration, for he
answered before once, but if it be referred to this word (it is written) it
signifies then a contrariety. As if he should have said, on the contrary
part, it is written: that he might set scripture against his scripture, not
that he would deny the same (as it was said even now,) but that he might
resist the temptation of Satan by the testimony of scripture.

Thou shall not tempte. B. This place is in the book of Deutronomie, Deuteronomy. 6.
where as Moses does warn the Israelites not to tempte the lord, as they did
in that place which was called Massa and Meriba, Exodus 17
that is temptation. For there when they thyrsted, they would prove whether
there were a God among them or no, saying: Is there a God among us or not?

C. Most aptly therefore does Christ answer that the help which God
promised there, is no otherwise to be hoped for, then if the faithful modestly
commit them selves to him to be governed. Obedience is a trial of gods
promises.
For we can no otherwise assaye the promyses of God, then if we obey his
commandments. But for so much as God is tempted by many kinds of means:
in this place he is said to be tempted, when we forsake the ordinary means
which are before our eyes. And they, which forsakinge the means that God
does commend will try the power and strength of God, do even as if one
should cut of a man's arms and his hands, Presumpti^
and after bed him set them on again and go work. Or as if a man having his
limbs should lie still in the ditche and yet desire God to help him out.

To be short, whosoever seeks to try the divine power, whereas there is no
necessity, he tempts God, making his promyses to none effect.

M. So the Jews tempted Christ saying: What sign do thou show that we
may see and believe thee? What workest thou? John. 6.
Our fathers did eat Manna. etc. And in an other place, when as sum of them
tempting him, Luke. 11.
required a sign from heaven. But this place which our savior Christ
alleges, was spoken of Moses plurally, as thus, see that ye tempte not the
lord your God, as ye did in the temptation. Yet he took no more then that
which should serve for his purpose, leaving out that which followed. (as ye
tempted in the temptation) because that did appertain to the children of
Israel.

8 Again the deuell took him up into an exceading high mountain, and showed
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof.

Again the deuell took him. M. By the two former temptations, the tempter
nothing prevailed. For Christ neither gave place to the honger, nor to the
subtle wresting of the Scripture amiss.

Therefore now the enemy takes another kind of temptation in hand.

And shevved him all the kingdoms of the world. C. This truly was a vision,
yet we must note that it was not made by the imbicillitie and weakness of the
nature of Christ, that Satan should stay his eyes, but rather by voluntary
dispensation and sufferaunce.

Furthermore, his senses were so pleasauntly touched and styrred with the
kingdoms of the world set before him, that his mind was nothing at all
therewith touched: When as the lusts of the flesh, (as wild and untamed
beasts) are carried headlong to those things that seem pleasant unto us. For
Christ had the like sense and felinge that we have, but not his desyers and
appetite so unruly and out of square. Nothing therefore is said here to be
unworthy of Christ, although he were God nor nothing secret unto him. For it
was necessary that his divinity for a time should be hid, that he might be
subject to temptations.

9 And he says unto him all these will I give thee, if thou wylt fall down
and worship me.

And he said unto him all these. C. The order of this temptation was, that
Christ should seek for the enheritaunce which God had promised to his sons,
from some other then of God him self: then being delighted with the pomp of
the world might submit him self to Satan: with the which temptations we
are daily assalted. And here the theuishe boldenes of Satan, in stealing of
holy things, does show it self, in that he usurps the kingdom of the earth
to him self, which pertains unto God. A. As more plainly by the words of
Luke appears, where he says. I will give thee all this power and the glory
thereof, because they are given unto me, and to whom I will, I give them. C.
And we with the same deceit must have no less contention daily: the which
all the faithful do feel in them selves, and is more plainly perceived in the
whole life of the wicked. For although we repose all our strength, and
defense, all our riches, and proffit in the blessing of God, yet nevertheless,
our senses do provoke and allure us, to seek for the helps of Satan, as
though God alone were not sufficient. For the chief part of the world, taking
away from God the empire, and rule of the earth, do persuade them selves that
Satan is the geuer of all good things. Whereby it comes to pass that they
are addicte and given to evil practyses, to rapyne, and to all kind of
deceites. They truly with their mouth desire God to give them their daily
bread, but no farther then with their mouth, because they make Satan the
chief in distributing the riches of the whole world.

M. Moreover the bishop of Rome does immitate this lie of Satan, The Pope and
Satan in ambiton and lying ar alike
which says that the power and empire, both of heaven and earth, is given unto
him, that also he has by right the dispensation of kingdoms, and that by his
liberality it came to pass that the empire came to the Germans.

If thou vvilt fall down and worship. C. This is the spirit which from
that time requires to have divine honor of mortal me^, in the which, because
of his pride, he was cast down from heaven into the inferior parts. He
prescribes this condition to his subjects, to who^ he promises earthly power
and glory, that they may worship him. And this was the chiefest cause of
worshipping of deuels, that thereby they were promised to have the kingdom and
rule of this world.

10 Then said Jesus unto him, avoid Satan: for it is written, thou shall
worship the lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Then said Jesus unto him. B. As in ye former temptations, Satan signifies
an adversary.
so even in this Satan persuaded to do that which was wicked, and farther he
exalted him self above god. For this cause, Christ only seking his fathers
glory, does more sharply give him the repulse, and called him Satan (that is
an adversary) which even now openly went about to withdraw him from God and to
worship him. C. Luke has: Come behind me Satan. Wherefore some very fo^dly
trouble the^ selves about ye aduerbe when as it was said to Peter: vade retro,
Math. 16.
that is, come back, as though Satan also heard not the same, for Christ
simplely bed him depart.

For it is written. C. Christ defends him self with scripture, not as with
a target or sheelde made of straw or rushes, but with a bucler as it were of
brass and stele, citing the testimony out of the law, that one God only is to
be worshipped.

Deuteronomy. 6.
And now by the application and circumstaunce of this present place, we may
gather of what force, and wherefore the worshipping of God is appointed.

The Papists deny only God to be worshipped.
The Papists, when that they deny only God to be worshypped, they with a false
comment and interpretation, do shyfte and falsefie this place and the like.
They grant that the divine worship, ought to be left unto God alone: but
they attribute and give a certain service to the dead, to their bones, and
Images. But that frivolous and vain destinction being rejected, let us
consider that Christ does challenge only to God (...) or adoration, by the
which we are admonished to have respect rather to the thing it self then to
the word, so often as there is any mention made of the worshipping of God.

The Scripture commands to worship God alone: We must look to what end it
so commands. Idolatry.
If man do take any thing away from his glory, and ascribes the same to the
creatures, it is a robbyng and violation of his divine worship. And this is
manifestly seen to be done, when as we attribute those benefits that we
receive to creatures of the which God in deed will be acknowledged to be the
author. But now, as Religion properly is spiritual, and the confession
thereof pertayneth to the body: even so not only the internal worship is due
solely to God, but also the external show and testimony of the same. M.
Furthermore against temptation, this word (fear) is changed into the word
(worship) where as the sense is all one. For to worship God and to fear God,
are both of such like piety and godlynes, that very well the one may be
taken for the other. Again this word (only) is not in the Hebrewe text, but
the three score and ten, interpretours used the same, and that worthily. For
Moses speaks there, Why God must be only worshipped.
not simplely, that as concerning he is God, he is to be feared and worshipped,
(which peradventure no man will deny) but that he is therefore to be feared and
worshipped, because beside him there is no other God. Whereupon immediately it
follows, Deuteronomy. 6.
ye shall not go after strange Gods of the Gentyles.

11 Then the deuell forsook him, and behold the angels came and ministered
unto him.

Then the deuell forsook. C. Luke expresses more, saying: All the temptation
being ended, as if he should have said. Christ had not rest and quietness,
before that he was exactly proved and assayed with all kind of temptations.

Moreover he adds that Christ was left for a time, that we may know that the
rest of his life was not void of temptations: but the power of Satan was
stayed from above, least importunately he should be troublesome unto Christ,
even as God does commonly deal with those that are his. Temptations are but a
trial for a time.
For if at any time he suffer them to be vexed, after a littell temptation, he
does somewhat aswage and slake, that they may breathe a while and call their
minds and spirits unto them: notwithstanding he does not spare them least
they should be careless and sluggyshe, but does as it were prepare them to a
new battle. Nevertheless, we must always resist him boldly, and that with
faith, as Peter teaches us, 1. Pet. 5.
that being always overcome he may depart from us. The affections truly and
motions of Satan are never wanting: but the lord has him bound that he can
exercise his deceites no farther then he will suffer him: Moreover we have a
promise, God is faithful and will not suffer you to be tempted above your
power, yea even in the midst of temptation he will make away for us, 1. Cor.
13. James. 4
by the which we may escape. In fine, let us resist the deuell and he will
fly from us.

And behold the angels. C. This, is to be referred to Solace and comfort
that Christ might know that his father had a care over him and also that he
wanted no safe munition and defense against Satan. For the wyldernes might be
an increasynge of sorrow, when as he was deprived from the company of men, and
led his life among the wild beasts. Neither must we think that Christ at any
time, was forsaken of the angels: but that there might be time and place given
to the temptation, the grace of God, for a while (though it were present with
him) was hyd from him in respect of the flesh, according to ye sense and
felinge thereof. M. By this place let us learn, that those which constantly
resist the temptations of Satan, shall never want the aid and help of god:
but in the very moment, when danger approaches, they shall be sure to be
delivered.

12 When Jesus heard that John was taken, he departed into Galile.

When Jesus heard. M. After the description of the victory of Christ,
(which he gate of Satan the temptour) the Evangelist consequently goes
forward to declare the beginning of the manifesting of him, and of his
preaching. And first of al, he shows whither he went when he came out of ye
desert, namely into Galile: but after this sort, that he shows a reason why
he abode in Iewery.

^p. 3.
That John was taken. C. Luke only shows the cause why Herod did cast John
into prison. Joseph says, that he was cast into the prison of Machero^,
because that Herod feared the tumulte of the people, and new matters: because
his authority was suspected. But we shall gather the certainety of this
history out of the Evangelists to whose testimony we must stand.

He departed into Galile. M. The Greek word sometime signifies to return,
sometime to depart, and to slyppe privily away, when danger is at hand. Luke
in his text has, And Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galile:
^p. 4.
the which kind of speech, is first of all to be noted. For it makes great
matter, that we imagine no earthly or human thing in Christ: but the heavenly
power in him, and the divine virtue always come to our remembrance, and
occupy our senses. Moreover the narration of John, does not seem to agree with
these, who says, that Christ and John at one time, took in hand their office
of teachinge. We must note, that Mathewe, John. 3.
Marcke, and Luke, did pretermitte with silence the short space of that time,
because as yet the race of John was not ended, that is, the preparation, to
receive the Gospel of Christ. And trewely although Christ had done the
office of a teacher within that time: yet notwithstanding he began not properly
the preachinge of the Gospel until he had succeeded John. Wherefore the three
Evangelists do grant and assign, not absurdly that time, to the mynistery of
John, by the which he prepared disciples unto Christ: as if they should have
said, the morning giving place, the son arises.

13 And left Nazareth, and went and dwelt in Capernaum, which is a City upon
the sea coasts in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalym.

And left Nazareth. M. Why did Christ, leaving his own country, go to
Capernaum? Luke in his.4. chapt. shewethe. The ingratitude of the country
drove away Christ, the Nazarytes did not believe Christ, because he was known
unto them. Furthermore they were offended with him, because he reprove them,
and therefore they went about to cast him down hedlong. He therefore him self,
truly says of them, A prophet is not accepted in his own country. This
dissease has been of long time, as Christ taught, by the examples of Elias,
and Elizeus, and we our selves also, have experience of the same. For those
things which are best, common, ancient, Things familiar unto us, are not
esteemed.
plentiful, and familiar, are dog cheap (as we say) and of no reputation.
This happened not to the prophets, and Christ alone, but to all the gifts of
God. Such is our wickedness, which deserves to be deprived of the gifts of
God, til such time we be more destrous of the. Therefore by this example of
Christ, we are taught, to depart for a time (if we may) when that the furor
of the wicked rages against the ministers of God. A. For as before, our lord
avoided the outrageous cruelty of Herod, so now he escheweth the rage and
madness of the Nazarytes.

And dwelled in Capernaum. M. That is, often times he abode there. Wherefore
being rejected of the Nazarytes, the Capernaites receive him. So that we see,
there wants no place to those, which are banished for the truth of God. This
city gat a wonderful gift, and a great prerogative, above all other
cities: beside this, a singular commodity for the knowledge of God, by the
presence of Christ. But it used not this gift well, Math. 11.
as we shall se anon. Which is a city upon the sea coasts. M. The Hebreus
call the metynge, and gathering together of many waters, the sea, and therefore
the lakes, and marshes by them are called the sea. So the lake of Genefar, is
called the sea, and Caparnaum, a city bordering upon the sea coasts, because
it is nere unto that water, where the ends and borders of Zabulon, and
Nephthalym do meet: or else Nazareth should be nerer to the sea Mediterrane,
then Capernau^: least some should think, that the city was for that cause,
said to border upon the sea.

14. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying.

M. Why did Christ return out of Iewrye, into Galile, and for what cause,
leauinge Nazareth, came he to Capernaum? What is that therefore that Mathewe
says, he left Nazareth, and came to Capernaum, that the saying of the
prophet might be fulfilled? The answer. Answer.
It is no rare or unwonted thing, that those things which are done by divine
power, ar done for certain humain causes. For it was so appointed of God, that
in this region Christ should set forth his light. First, because when John was
taken, he went into Galile: then because of the ingratitude of the Nazarites,
he left his country, and went into Capernau^. But as concerning the
fulfyllinge of the scripture, Chap. 2 verse. 15.
we have spoken before.

15 The land of Zabulon, and Nephthalim, by the way of the sea beiond Jordan,
Galile of the Gentyles.

The land of Zabulon. A. This place is taken out of the.9. of Esaias. C. But
Mathewe seems to abuse the testimonye of the prophet in an other sense: yet
if we way and consider the true meaning of the prophet, the appliynge of the
same to this present place, shall be very apt and easy. For after that Esaias had
spoken of the great calamity, and destruction of the people: to comfort them
again, and to adioyne joy with sorrow, he promises that when they are
brought to extremity, there shall a deliverance com, which shall drive away the
darkness most uncomfortable, and restore unto them again, the parfecte
light of life. The words of the prophets are these. Out of such adversity
he shall not escape. Esaias. 9
Even like as in time past, it has been well seen, that the land of Zabulon,
and the land of Nephthaly (where through the sea way goes over Iordane, into
the land of Galile) was at the first in little trouble: but afterward soore
vexed. The people that walk in darkness have seen great light. At this time the
people of Israel were in double calamity, and, both the ways oppressed.
First, 4. King
whereas they were brought into exyle by Tyglath peleser, being in number.3.
tribes, or there aboutes. 4. King
Then whereas Salmanasar cut of the whole kingedome of Israel. The third
calamity remains in the latter end of the.8. chap. which the prophet
says, should be most cruel of all. Now in the words which we have
rehearsed, there follows a mittigation: namely because God will stretch out
his arm over his people, to defend the^, death shall be now more tolerable,
then the disseases at the first, says he, although all the people shall be
destroyed, yet notwithstanding, the shyninge light of grace shall bring to
pass, that there shall be less darkness in this later destruction, then in the
double ruin and destruction of the ten tribes. Forasmuch as therefore he
does promise the instauration, and reedicting of the whole church, it must
needs follow, that he comprehends the land of Zabulon, and the land of
Nepthalim, and Galile of the Gentiles, in the number of them, whose darkness of
death, is to be changed into the light of life. The beginning of this light,
was as it were the dawninge of the peoples return out of Babylon. At the
length arose Christ, being the son of righteousenesse, with parfecte
brightness, which wholly abolyshed the darckenes of death by his coming.
Therefore Paul shows us, that the same which was spoken by the prophets,
was fulfilled in him, saying. Awake thou that slepest, (...) 5.
and Christ shall give thee light. Now, since we know that the kingdom of
Christ is spiritual, (...) is our
it is necessary that the light of his salvation, which he offers, and what
help so ever we have at his hands, should be according to his nature. Whereby
it follows, that our souls are overwhelmed in the shadow of everlasting
death, until he does illuminat the^ with his grace. But as concerning the
destruction of the Gentiles, the prophet sufficiently shows. But what the
state and condition of mankind was, until the coming of christ, it is
described as it were in a glass. M. For those thick darcknesses do take place,
where so ever that light of ye grace of Christ does not shine. ^na. 13.
This darkness does engender all kind of wickedness, which the apostel
calls the works of darkness: Galile of the Gentiles. C. This lower Galile,
was called Galile of ye Gentiles, not only for the adjoining to Tire and
Sydon, but because yt there the Jews and the Ge^tyles were mingled together,
out of the which specially, ^ing. 9.
David had granted to king Hiram certain cities, to declare, that the light
of the Gospel should be carried also to the Gentiles.

Jesus spoke unto Paul thus, Delyueringe the from this people, and from the
Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their eyes, that they may be
turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, ^ct. 6.
that they may receive forgyuenesse of sins, and inheritance among them,
which are sanctified by faith, that is toward me.

16. The people which sat in darkness, have seen great light: and to them
which sat in the regio^ and shadow of darkness, is the light sprung up.

The people which sat in dark. M. The Apostell Paul most plainly declares
what it is to sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, saying. Remember
that ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, were called uncircumcision,
from that which is called circumcision in the flesh, which circumcision is
made by hands: remember I say, that at that time ye were without Christ, being
aliantes from the common weal of Israel, and strangers from the testame^tes
of the promise, Ephe 2.
having no hope, and being without God in this world. Savve great light. C.
That they which sat in darkness are said to se great light, so sudden and
manifest a change, does amplify and enlarge the greatness of the divine
saving health. John. 8.9. and.12.
M. Christ does call him self the light of the world. The property of the
light is to drive away the darkness, and to lyghten those that are in the
same. So, Christ is the true light of the world, John. 1.
which lights every man coming into the world, that is, he puts away the
darkness of our minds, he opens the secrets of our hearts, and by his holy
spirit, he makes us to have parfecte knowledge of God.

In the region and shadovve of death. S. He calls it the region and shadow
of death, according to the manner of the Hebreues a region, in the which there
are dark clouds, even as in hell. The shadow of death, is the coming of
present death, yea even the very terrors of death, and it signifies a
continual trouble of consciences. Is a light sprung up. A. To se the light,
and to have the light to shine vp-vpon any man is all one.

17. From that time forth Jesus began to preach and say, repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.

From that time forth. C. Mathewe in this place does seem somewhat to differ
from the other two Evangelists, Mark, and Luke. For after he said, that
Christ leauinge his country, went into Capernaum, at length he touches the
beginning of his preachinge: but Luke and Mark say, that he taught openly in
his own country. A. For thus says Mark. After that John was taken came
Jesus into Galile, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and saying: The time
is fulfilled, Chap. ^.
and the kingdom of God is at hands: repent and believe the Gospel. But Luke
says. And Jesus returned by the power of the spirit into Galile: and the fame
of him was spredde througheout the whole region, Chap. 4
and he preached in their synagogges, and was commended of all men.

But the solution of these, is easy and soon gathered. For the aduerbe of
time, which Matthew has, ought to be referred, not only to the next member,
but also to the whole sum of the narration. Therefore Christ, by his coming
into Galile, entered and began his race.

Repent, for the kingdom. C. The sum and order of this doctrine, Chap. 3.
differs nothing from that which John used: of the which we spoke before.
For it consists of two parts, of Repentance, and of the preaching of grace
and health. He exhorts the Jews to conversion and amendment of life,
because the kingdom of God was at hand, that is, because God would take in
hand him self, to govern his people, with full and parfect felicity and
blessedness. Mark, a littell otherwise says. The kingdom of heaven is at
hand, repent and believe the Gospel: notwithstanding, even in the same sense
that Matthew writes. For speaking before of the restoring again of the
kingdom of God to the Jews, he exhorts to repentance and faith. Math. 10.
A. Christ him self commands his apostelles to preach the like. Luke. 9.
Se that ye preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is at hand. and again:
Luke. 10.
he sent them to preach the kingdom of God. Also: say unto them, the
kingdom of God is come upon you. And again: Luke. 24.
Repentance, and remission of sins, must be preached in his name.

Mark. 6.
The which commandment the Apostells obeyed. For when they went forth they
preached, Acts. 2.
repentance. But Peter said unto them. Repent and be baptized, every one of
you, in the remission of sins And again. Acts. 3.
Repent and convert, that your sins may be done away.

Acts. 20.
Notwithstanding, it may be demanded, forasmuch as Repentance depends upon
the Gospel, why Mark did separate the same from the doctrine of the Gospel.
We may answer two manner of ways. For God sometimes does so bed us amend our
lives, that he only says, the same must be changed into a better: afterward
he shows, that conuertion and newnes of life, is the gift of his holy
spirit: that we may know how we are commanded not only to do that which
is our duty, but also that the grace and virtue of obeiyng, is with the same
offered unto us. If after this manner we understand that which John preached
of repentance, the sense and meaning is, The lord commands you to turn
unto him: but because of your selves, you can not do it, he promyseth his
spirit of regeneration. Wherefore you must receive this grace by Faith:
although the faith which the Gospel requires, ought not at all to be
restrained to the gift of renouation or renuinge, but specially it does
belong to remission of sins: For John joins repentance with faith:
because God does reconcile us to him self, to be worshipped and honored of us
as a father, in holiness and rightousnes. Furthermore it is no absurdity to
say, that to believe the Gospel, is as much, as to embrace and receive free
iustificacation and righteousenes. For often times in the scripture, this
special relation between faith and remission of sins is had: as when it
teaches, that we are justified by faith. Both ways we may expound this
place, but the beginning is sure and ratyfied, that free salvation is offered
unto us of God, that being turned unto him, we may live to righteousness.
Therefore he promising to us mercy calls us to the deniynge of our flesh.

18, As Jesus walked by the sea of Galile, he saw two brethren, Simon whose
sir name was Peter, and Andrew his brother, castinge their nets into the sea
(for they were fysshers.)

As Jesus vvalked. M Here the Evangelist in few words touches the calling
of certain of his disciples. Luke. 5.
C. But because this history is placed by Luke after the two miracles which we
shall se anon, it grew to a common opinion, that the miracle which he
declares, was showed within short time after they were called by Christ, to
be his disciples: but the reason which moves them thus to think is of small
force. For it was not the Evangelists intent and shooteanker to make by a
sure and distinct order of times, a yearly cronicle. Whereby it comes to
pass, that the order of days being neglected, they thought it sufficient,
orderly to gather the special acts and deeds of Christ. They had a
consideration of years, that it might be apparante to the readers, how Christ
performed his race, during three years, from the beginning of his preachinge,
until the time of his death: but those miracles that happened at that time,
they set together at their pleasure: as shall apere hereafter by more
examples. But now it is manifest and plain, ^rke. 1 ^ke. 5.
by many arguments, that this same history is showed of Mark and Luke, which
is here declared of Matthew: among which arguments, let this one suffice the
contentiouse reader, that these three with one consent, at length do teach that
Peter, and Andrew, James, and John, were made Apostelles. If they were called
before, it should follow that they were Apostatas, which, forsaking their
master, and despising their calling, return to their former kind of life.
This is only the difference, between Luke and the other two, that he only
recites the miracle which they omitted. But this is no unwonted thing to the
Evangelists, to touch one part of an act, and to pretermyt many of the
circumstances. Wherefore it is no absurdity if we say, that two pretermitted
the miracle which one reherseth. And we must not be unmindful of that which
John says: that among the innumerable miracles of Christ, there was a
special part chosen, which should serve and suffice to the confirmation of our
faith, ^n. 20.
and to the probation of his divine power. No marvel at all therefore, if
Mathewe and Mark do not so at large show the calling of the four Apostels,
as Luke, who takes in hand to show the occasion of their calling, as there
at full we may read. Simon whose syrname. A. To this Peter Christ said, thou
shall be called Cephas. which by interpretation signifiethe Peter. ^n. 1.
Also Mark has, whom he named Peter, ^ke. 5. ^e. 6.
and Luke has in like manner the same words: That we might understand that
this Apostle had a peculiar name given him of Christ, to signify unto us, that
a constant faith and confession is requisite to be in us: or else of a rock,
he obtained his name. Math. 16.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church. And Andrew his
brother. Of this Andrew, read the first of John.

Castinge their nets, for they were fysshers. E. The Greek word does not
signify a fysher, of the fyshe, but of the sea. Here we may see what manner of
men the lord called to the ministry of his word.

C. Dull ideotes they were trewely that he chose, The rudenes of Christ's
disciples when they were called.
which were not only rude of wytt, but also void of learning: whom he so
garnished, and renewed with his holy spirit, that they excelled all the wise
men of the world. So it pleased him to abase and beat down the pride of the
flesh, and to give a wonderful show of spiritual grace in their person, that
we might learn to crave and beg the light of faith from heaven, Wisdom
comes not by our own industry.
knowing that by our own industry and labor, it will begotten. M. Wherefore
Paul says to the Corinthes, Behold your calling brethern, how that not many
wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many of hye degree are called, 1.
Cor. 1.
but God has chosen the folishe things of the world to confound the wise,
because no flesh should rejoice in his sight. Again in the acts. When
they saw the boldenes of Peter, and John, and understood that they were
unlearned and lay men, Acts, 4.
they marueyled, and they knew them, that they had been with Jesus, and
beholding also, the man that was healed, they could not say against it, Behold
here the adversaries of Christ, being learned, wise and mighty, are amassed and
confounded at the doings of simple men, neither ca^ they find any thing to
gainesaye them. But because, (when he chose those that were unlearned and rude)
he did it not to leave such behind him always, The ignorance of the Apostels,
is not an example for blind guides, in these days
we can not at this day take it for an example, to chose and ordeyne such
pastors and mynisters into the church, as must after their election go to
schole, to learn to do their duty. We are not ignorant of the rule
prescribed by the mouth of Paul, 1. Timo. 3. and Tit. 1.
who commands to ordeyne none, but such are apt to teach. Neither trewely
did Christ chose such, as though he did prefer ignorance before learning,
as certain frantic and mad men persuade them selves, rejoicing in their
ignorance, and thinkinge the more ignorant that they are, the liker to be to
the apostells. No, God would in the beginnynge elect and choose contemptible
and simple men, Why Christ chose such as were ignorant
to beat down their pride, which thought that heaven was not open unto
unlearned men, but he adjoined Paul a companion to fisher men, Acts. 22.
which was diligently instructed, and brought up, even from his childhode

19. And he says unto them follow me, and I will make you fisshers of men.

Osee. 11.
And he says unto them. B. Here is the saiinge of the prophet Osee fulfilled.
They shall walk after the lord. And Jeremy, saying. Iere. 3.
Ye shall call me father only, and not shrink from me.

And I will make you fisshers. M. The Apostels are not called to preach out
of hand but that in trauailinge abroad with the lord, they should be herers
and seers, of all those things which he spoke and did. For as yet they were
rude and ignorant of divine things, and therefore first they were to be
instructed and framed to the same purpose. C. But although it perteyne not to
the purpose to make any long disputation or inquisition about the reason of the
metaphor, because it was taken of a thing present, notwithstanding very aptly
it was aplied of our savior Christ to fysshing, when as the matter was, as
concerning the preaching of the Gospel: because that men, being strayers and
wanderers in this world, are gathered together by the Gospel, as in the vaste
and co^fused sea. But the history of the which John makes mention in his
first chapt, dyffereth from this: as may easelye be gathered by the order of
the text.

20. And they, strait ways, leaving their nets followed him.

C. First of all, here apereth the great force of the voice of Christ: not
that the voice only does so effectually perce into the hearts of men, but
because the lord does compel and force those. whom he will draw unto him, by
the inward workinge of his spirit, to obey his voice.

M. Christ speaks unto us by the mynisters of his word, The out^ calling is
(...) thing, w^out the in^uall.
the which can nothing at al profit us, except he touch our hearts. C.
Secondly the redines in obeyinge the voice of Christ, is to be commended in the
Apostelles, who prefer the calling of Christ before all the business in the
world. This example specially belongs to the mynisters, The dilig^ that
ought be in ministers.
who forsakinge all other business, ought to give them selves wholly to study,
and dyligence in profiting the church.

21 And when he was gone forth from thence, he saw other two brethren, James
the son of Zebede, and John his brother, in the ship with Zebede their
father, mending their nets, and he called them.

A. Here Mathewe shows the calling of the sons of Zebede, in the which,
the self same things ar to be observed which were noted in the calling of
Andrewe.

For they had al one trade of living, that is, they were all poor fisher men.

22 And they immediately, left the ship and their father, and followed him.

M. Why did they all this? certaynely to follow Christ, and to be instructed
and taught of him, how to become fysshers of men. Neither did they seek their
own profit. For it was impossible to look to their worldly affairs, and
unfeignedly to follow Christ, who went every wheare preachinge and teachinge.

23 And Jesus went about all Galile, teachinge in their synagogges, and
preachinge the Gospel of the kingdom, and healynge all manner of sickness,
and all manner of dissease, among the people.

And Jesus went about. C. The self same miracles does the Evangelist Matthew
rehearse in the.9. cha. following. But it is no absurdity at all (when as Christ
ceased not at no time to show almost innumerable miracles) twice or thrice to
touch them briefly in general. All Galile. B. Behold how this regyon,
which sometime was base, darck, and oppressed, with the shadow of death, is
now lightened with the brighte son of righteousness, and is also become
gloryouse. Teachinge in their synagogges M. According to the Greek word, it
is called a Synagogge, ^ynagogge ^at it is.
and to the Latin word, a place for the people to assemble together to here
dyuine matters: by the which name also, the places for the assembly of
Ecclesiastical persons, ar called. In these places Christ taught, least he
should seem to do any thing in secret, as one that suspected his own
doctrine to be evil: furthermore least he should be thought to condemn that
custom, of the meting together of the people, The which custom was given to
the people from God, to the exercysing of godlynes, and to the readyng of the
law

For it is written, Moses of old time hat^ in every city, them that
preach him in the Synagogges, when he is red every Sabbath day. C. Here
therefore we must note, ^tes. 15
that Christ rested in no place, that he might sow the seed of the Gospel
every where. ^e office of ^icars of ^yste.
This truly is the office of the vicars of Christ, so to walk a progress,
that they call sinners to life by the doctrine of salvation, if they seek to
prefer Christ, rather in deed then in name and dignity. But what did Christ
preach?

The Gospel of the kingedome. Here is to be noted the epitheton or title of
the Gospel. The which title also Mark adds unto it. ^p. 1.
For herby we learn, that by his preachinge the kingdom of god is erected and
set up in earth, (...) gospel of ^ingdom.
and that God does rain by no other means among men for their salvation.
Whereby it appears how miserable the state and condition of men is, without
the Gospel.

Matthew therefore does separate the parfecte and everlasting blessedness, from
the prosperouse and pleasant things which are in this life. C. The Gospel
of the kyngedome is preached, when we are admonished of our mysery, and when
Christ is offered unto us, who delyuereth us from the kingdom of satan, and
sanctifies us in the obedience of God.

And healinge al manner of syckenesse. C. In that Mathewe says, that he healed
all syckenesses, we must understand, he meant all kind of disseases, what so
ever they were. For it is certain, that all were not delivered from their
disseases: but there was no kind of dysseased person brought unto him which he
healed not.

24, And his fame spread abroad throughout all Syria, and they brought unto him
all sick people that were taken with diverse disseases and grypinges, and that
were possessed with deuilles: and those which were lunatic, and those that
had the palsy, and he healed them.

And his fame spread abroad. M. This was done not only that the name of
Christ should be famous in Iewry, and in Galile alone, but also among the
Gentiles. For although the time of the calling of the Gentiles was not yet
come, notwithstanding the way of Grace was prepared unto them. And trewely the
blyndnes of the Jews must needs be great, which so obstinately rejected the
savior sent unto them, so manifested with the light of his divine grace, The
fame of Christ.
that his fame was spread throughout all Syria. And they brought unto him all.
M. This fame, which was spredde througheout all Syria, as concerning the
deeds of Christ, may be proved, in that the Syrians brought out to him all
the dysseased: The two special things that Christ did.
By this it may appear that our savior Christ did two things in especial,
that is to say, He preached the Gospel of the kyngedome, and he healed all
those that had infyrmities.

By the first benefyte, few were moved, by the second very many. These
brought their sick, seeking to have them cured: We all seek more for the
health of our bodies than of our souls.
but as concerning the doctrine of life, there is no mention that they sought
after that, where as it was the true medycine of life, in the which might be
seen the crooked and perverse nature of men. For he which is sick in body,
will without blusshynge dysclose his grief and dissease unto the physician:
but he which is sick in mind, Dissimulatio^
does endeavor to hyde his vice, and often times does cloak the same, with
the show of virtue. If he be easily provoked to anger, he pretends the name
of zeal: If he disdain sinners, he will seem to love righteousness: if he be
fearful, The cloak of hipocrites.
he fayneth him self to be very ware: If he be nigardely, he would be
counted to have a care over his household. If he be proud, he would deceive the
eyes of men with a clenly cloak. And if he be obstinate: he would be thought
constant. So that in deed, we seek to cloak and hide all the disseases of the
mind, so far is the care of spiritual health from us. The physician of the
earthly and corruptible body, shall not want for no price, if he will minister
medicine: but as for the heavenly physician, few or none regard him.

That were possessed with devils, and were lunatike. C. He reckeneth up the
special kind of disseases, in the which Christ exercysed his power. The
scripture calls not all them generallye possessed with deuilles, which are
vexed of the devil, but those which are sold unto satan, by the secret
vengeance of God, that he may possess their mind and senses. They are called
Lunatike, the force of whose dyssease, does increase or decrease, according to
the inclination of the moon, such are they that have the fallinge sickness,
the frenzy, and such like. Now for so much as we know that these kind of
disseases, are not curable by natural remedies. it follows that by them the
dygnitie of Christ is proved, for so much as he most miraculously cured them.

25 And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galile, and from the
ten cities, and from Jerusalem, and from Iewery, and from the regions that lie
beyond Iordane.

A. By this it should appear that Christ was known more and more unto ye world.
So excellent was the beginning of his preachinge of the Gospel, and so great
was his fame, that this great multitude followed him, from place to place.

The fyfth Chapter.
WHEN he saw the people, he went into a mountain, and when he was set, his
disciples came unto him.
When he savve the people. Chap. 6.
C. This sermon of Christ differs not from that which is in Luke. They
which think otherwise, read the words of Luke preposterously, because
Christ descended into the plain field, and because, he castinge his eyes
upon his disciples, spoke after this manner. For it was the purpose of both
the Evangelists, to gather at once, into one place all the special and
principal parts of the doctrine of Christ, which apperteined to the method
and rule, of framinge a godly and holy life. Therefore although Luke at the
first does make mention of the plain feeld, yet he does not prosecute by and
by the same historye: but shows the^ of the miracles that Christ wrought, and
after the miracles, he passes forward, to show of his doctrine, neither
shewinge the time nor place. Matthew in like manner descrybeth the place, but not
the time, And it is lykely that Christ did not preach until the twelve were
chosen: but I would not yt we should be to curyouse in searchinge out the order
of time, which we saw to be neglected of the spirit of God. For this ought to
suffice the modeste readers, that they have the brefe some of the doctrine of
Christ set before their eyes, being collected and gathered out of many and
sundry of his sermons, of the which, this here mentyoned was the first,
wherein he preachethe to his disciples, of the true blessedness.

And when he was set. M. It was the custom, that those which did teach
should sytte and teach. Even so Christ, when he red the prophesye of Esaias in
the Synagogge of Nazareth, he closed the book, Luke. 4*
gave it to the minister, and satte down and taught. And in an other place
he said to the souldioures in the garden: ye are come forth as unto a
thief, with swoordes and staves, to take me, Math. 2^
I satte daily teaching in the temple among you, and ye took me not, Also
John says all the people came unto him, John. 8.
and he sat down and taught them. The bishops followed this custo^e, because
it brought some majesty unto the^. The by^ chair.
And they thought it mete for none to teach after this sort, but bishops.
Hereupon came the bysshoppes Chair, whereof diverse churches are called
cathedral Churches.

For it makes no matter to grant unto them this majesty of teaching, so
that they instruct the people as they ought to do in the doctrine of Christ.
But now where as none of them do teach neither sittynge nor standing, how
shall they be excused? Christ him self did teach some while standing, some
while syttinge, according to the opportunity of the place. His disciples came.
Bu. The discyples came unto Christ as witnesses of the doctrine of truethe,
that they might therefully preach, and leave the same in writing to their
posterity, which they had received from his most holy mouth.

2. And after that he had opened his mouth, he taught them, saiynge.

And after he had opened. C. This is according to the Hebrew phrase. He opened
his mouth, that is, he began to speak.

He taught them saying. Bu. Christ taught his disciples as well as the
multitude.

But first of all we must see to what end and purpose our savior Christ did
preach unto his disciples, of the true and parfecte blessedness. We know that
not only the common sort of people, but also wise men the^ selves have been in
this error, thinkinge that he is happy and blessed that is exempt and void of
al grief and trouble, (...) felicity ^e world.
and that having his own desire leads a joyful and quiet life. Yea truly,
all for the most part do think that felicity does depend upon the
present state of this life. Christ therefore (that he might accustom, and
make his servants acqueinted with the sufferaunce and bearing of the cross)
seeks to take away and redress this wicked opinion, that they are blessed
which live prosperousely and well in respect of the flesh. For it is
impossible, ^^acie^t per^ can not ^e the (...).
that they should willingly put their necks under the yoke, of sorrows, and
injuries, which think that patience. is disagreinge and contrary to a blessed
life. ^medy to ^age the ^ernes of ^rosse.
Therefore there is one solace and joy, by the which the sharp and bitter
stinge of the cross, and of all euylles, is made sweet and mittigated: that
is, when we persuade our selves, that in the midst of misery, we are blessed
and happy: because the lord does bless our patience, who in short time will
send a more joyful end. We confess truly that this doctrine excedeth the
common sense, and capacity of men: but it was necessary that the disciples of
Christ should be so instructed, that they might ground their felicity in
heaven, and not in this world, nor in the pleasure and affection of the
flesh. For although that the reason of flesh, will never admit that which
Christ here preaches: yet nevertheless he propoundethe no fained thing, as
the Stoikes, played in their paradoxis: but in very deed he shows why they
(whose state and condition is thought miserable) are parfectly happy. This
therefore is the some of the first part of the sermon of Christ. First he
denies those to be miserable which are oppressed with injury, and which are
subject to diverse kinds of calamities. Secondly he shows that they do very
peruersely which measure the blessedness of men by the present state of this
life, because the miseries of ye godly shall in a short time, even as it were
in a moment be altered and changed into joy. Therefore he exhorts them to
patience in hope of the reward.

3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are the poor in. M. This is the beginning of the sermon of Christ,
following, in the which we must not only note and mark what Christ says, but
also with what affection of mind he speaks it. For these sente^ses do not only
seem to teach, but also to commend their felicite, to who^ the kingdom of
heaven is appointed.

Luke makes this sentence, a bare Metaphor: but because the poverty of many
men is judged accursed, and unhappy, Mathewe does more plainly set forth the
mind of Christ. Therefore, where as many men being oppressed with evil,
Blessedness parteyneth to the pacient.
do swel with disdain and madness, Christ pronounces those to be blessed,
which patiently suffer such troubles as are laid upon the^, and with humilite
wholly submit them selves to the will and pleasure of the almighty. M. But
how, and after what manner are the poor and afflycted blessed, of their
penury, then ar those that are blessed poor, which is most absurd. Let us
hear the reason therefore, Answer.
for what cause they are called blessed.

Because theires is the kyngedome. Therefore the poor are not blessed for their
poverty, but because the kingedome of heaven is given unto them. C. So that we
see that Christ does not puff up the minds of his servants with any
light or vain persuasion, but calling them to the hope of eternal life, he
does animate, and strengthen them to patience: because by this means they
should come to the heavenly kingedome of God. Poor in spyrite.
Furthermore we must note, that none is poor in spyrite, but he which being
humble and lowly in his own eyes, trusts only in the mercy of God. For
they which are overwhelmed with desperation, when they frette and fume against
God, are puffed up with a lofty and proud spirit.

4 Blessed are they that morn, for they shall receive comfort.

Blessed are they that moorne. This sentence does not only depend of that
which went before, but also is a confyrmation of the same. For, because that
sorrows does make a man miserable, it is thereby thought, that moornyng and
grief does always come with the same. And nothing is more contrary to
felicity and happiness then moorninge But Christ does not only deny those
to be miserable, The moorning estate is happy.
but also does declare that this moornynge does greatly help to a blessed
life, because that by this means, men are made to taste and feel, the
everlasting joy, and are as it were with a spur provoked to seek for their
comfort and consolation only in God.

So the Apostell Paul said, Let us rejoice in trybulations, Roma. 5.
because they bring patience, patience brings trial, trial works Hope,
Hope makes not ashamed. Bu. But they are moorners, which do trewelye with all
their heart sorrow and bewail their sins committed, Godly sorrow.
their errors, their excedyng study and care of earthely things, and their
small desyer of heavenly things. For that is that Godly sorrow, 2. Cor. 7.
which causethe repentance unto saluatyon.

Christ therefore, here, speakethe not of all such as moorne, but of his
dysciples and faithful, whose condition and state of life is, in this world to
suffer trouble, oppression, and wrong, Chap. 16.
as he him self says in John, the sixtene chapter. Wherefore in Luke it is
said, Chap. 6.
Blessed are ye which weep now, because ye shall laugh. Christian men truly
are not stony hearted, void of all human affection, for they sorrow, they
moorne, they lamente and weep: but not without measure, not without the
invocation of God, and not without the hope of better things. No doubt the
church and congregation of the faythefull did moorne, when that Peter was
cast into prison by Herod. Acts. 12
They did moorne, when that any had committed a great enormitie, or greuouse
offense against God: the which moornynge, 1. Cor. 5.
the Apostel required of the Corinthians, that they should sorrow for the
fornycatoure. He byddethe us also, Roma. 12
to weep with them that weep, and to moorne with them that moorne. Math. 9.
Christ also tells his disciples, that when the brydegrome is taken from
them, they shall fast and moorne. John. 16.
The which he confirms in an other place, saying, Ye shall weep and moorne,
but the world shall rejoice.

Because they shall receive comfort. P. Here consolation is promised to them
that moorne, both in this life, and in the life to come. Esaias. 6.
M. Christ was sent to the great comfort and consolation of them that moorne.
John. 16.
whereupon he said to his disciples. The world shall rejoice, but ye shall be
sorrowefull, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Again, it is written,
Acts. 5.
The apostelles departed from the counsel, reioycynge that they were counted
worthy to suffer rebuke, 2 Cor. 1.
for the name of Jesus. And Paul, Blessed be the God of all comfort, which
comfort us in all tribulations. There is also an everlasting comfort, of
the which Paul speaks, saying. And he gave everlasting comfort. This
comfort Abraham understood, when he spoke unto the rich man, saying. Remember
that thou in thy life time, receiuedst pleasure, and Lazarus likewise received
peine: Luke. 1^.
but now is he comforted, and thou tormented. And in the revelation of saynct
John, it is written, God shall wype away all tears from the eyes of the
saints, ^oc. 21.
and there shall be no more death neither sorrow, neither cryinge, neither shall
there be any more pain, for the old things are gone. And he that satte
upon the seat, said, behold I make all things new.

5 Blessed are the meek, for they shall receive the inheritance of the earth.

Blessed are the meek. F. Our savior Christ by this sentence does comfort
those that are oppressed, which have none to defend them, and revenge their
cause, and he techeth, that the vengeance which belongs to God, is to be
committed unto him, as Joseph and the Israelites in Aegypte, David under Saul,
the godly under Antiochus, the churches under Dioclesian: all these were
without defense C. The meek therefore are such, ^o are meke
as are not easelye provoked by injuries: who by every offense are not waywarde
and froward, but are rather ready to suffer any thing, then they will be
like unto the wicked: fynallye they are such, ^ma. 12.
which do not resite evil, but do overcome evil in doing that which is
good For they shall receive the inheri.

C. This seems to be very absurd, that the meek should have the possession
and inheritance of the earth. ^iection.
They rather seem to have the dominion and rule of the earth, which at no
time will suffer injuries, but being hurt, are by and by, with force ready to
revenge. And trewely, ^e nature of (...) wicked.
experience does teach, that the wicked do more bouldly rage and spoil, when
they are patiently and mekely for borne. And hereof comes this deuelishe
proverb. ^rouerbe.
We must hold with the Woulfe: because that every one that makes him self a
sheep, is by and by devoured of the Woulfe. ^unswere.
But Christ setting his fathers defense and his against the furor and violence
of the wicked, does affirm not in vain, that the meke are lords and heirs
of the earth. The children of this world, thyncke that they can be in no
better sauegard, The impacyence of the wicked.
then if they cruelly resyste the evil brought unto them, and so they defend
their life with force and arms. But trewly, seeing we must appoynte none to be
the preserver and stay of our life, but only Christ, Christ our only stay
in trouble.
there rests nothing else, but that we hyde our selves under the shaddowe
of his wings. Furthermore we must become sheep, if we will be of his flock.

P. Those which are tyrauntes think, that their empire, authority, and rule,
is supported and kept, by the cruelty of vengeance: on the contrary part,
the gospel teaches us, that in a just cause we should be constante, and yet
for all that, that we should not seek the reuengement of our own cause, but
commytte the end unto God, that we may live a quiet life. Cruel perse^^ are a
fear to them selves.
If any do obiecte that this which is here spoken, is contrary to experience:
first let him here way, and consider, how vnquyete, fierce and cruel
persons are, in so much that they are troubled even of them selves.

Trewelye in so troublesome a life, although they be lords of the earth a
hundred times, yet in possessinge all things, they possess nothing. But the
sons of God, although they can at no time possess and keep that which is
their own, yet do they quietly inioye the mansion place of the earth: neither
is this any immagined or feigned possession, by the which they do inhabit the
earth, the which they know to be given them from above. Again, they are
defended against the intemperancie and furiousenesse of the wicked, and being
subject to all the assaults of Fortune, being in danger of the dishonestie
of the wicked being compassed about with all dangers, yet notwithstanding,
they commytte them selves wholly to the tuition of God, that they might taste of
his grace. And this is sufficient unto them, The inherytance of the godly.
until they come to the everlasting inheritance in the last day. Our lord
therefore in this place says, in effect. Let the children of this world
braule, and chide, let them go together by the ears, let them move sedition,
for empires and kingdoms, for rule and lordshyp, for authorytie and power, for
estimation and prefermente: (for in these vain and fond titles, does the
world delight): but you that are my disciples, shall not appoynte and
determine any blessedness to be in those most frail and vain things, but
rather in this, that with a quiet mind ye lead your lives, The joy of
ungodly.
and in that you are chosen before the foundation of the world, to be heirs
of everlasting life. This sentence seems to be taken out of the psalm where
it is thus written. The wicked doers shall be rooted out, but they that
patiently abide the lord, shall inherit the land, Psalm. 37.
The meek spirited shall possess the earth, and shall be refreshed in the
multitude of peace.

6 Blessed are they that hunger and thirste after righteousness, for they
shall be satisfied, Blessed are they that hunger.

C. To hunger and thyrste, here, are taken by a figure called Synecdoche, by
the which, part is used for the whole, and the whole for part, so that to
hunger and thyrste, is to be in need, to want those things which are
necessary, and also to be defrauded of a man's own right.

Where as the Evangelist therefore says to hunger after righteousness, he
puts the part for the whole. S. Some man might here say, if we be meke,
vice will increase and prevail. To the which Jesus answers privily, Answer.
saying I mean not that ye should be meek in allowing wickedness, but I say,
that such are blessed, as have a hunger and thirst after righteousenes. Because
they shall be satis. That is, God will here their sighynge, and will accomplish
their desire, whose office is to fulfill the hungery with good things. Luke. 12.
M. Even so the prophets before Christ which were put to death of the wicked,
hungered and thyrsted after ryghteousnes. Christ him self, and the whole
multitude of martires, both of that and our time also, which were
innocentely oppressed, commended their spirits to the just judge. They shall
be satisfied at that day, in the which all secret things shall be made
manifest, and al things shall be brought to judgment. He shall make their
righteousenes, Psalm. 37.
as clear as the light, and their just dealing, as the noone day.

7 Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed are the merciful. The reward is here promised to the merciful, which
do help and defend the afflicted. What merc^ is.
For mercifulnes is taken here for gentleness and liberality, A. by the which
one man being touched with the misery of an other, takes pity on him that
suffers, and to his power helps him that labors. Even so the faithful,
which are knytt unto Christ, do bewail those that are in myserye, specially
when they them selves are afflycted and troubled many ways, so that by their
own afflictions they are moved to have compassion and mercy upon other men's
mysery. these are pronounced to be blessed of Christ: because that which is
wonderful and seldom hard of, is contrary to the judgment of man. For the
world countethe them happy, which having no care of other men's mysery, live
quietlye and in ease, and seek to vphoulde the same.

But Christ in this place does call those blessed, which are not only
content, to bear their own troubles, but do take upon them other men's
mysery also.

Christ reprouynge the unmercifully Phariseyes murmuring against his
disciples, said. Math. 12
If ye knew what this mente, I will have mercy, and not sacrifyce, ye would
never have condemned innocents. He answered them also that murmured against
him, because he kept company with publicanes, even in like sort, saying.
Math. 9.
Go learn what this means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifyce. Luke. 10
Furthermore the parable of the Samaritane does plainly declare, what it is to
show mercy.

Because they shall have mercy. C. They shall not only have mercy at the
hands of God, but among men also, whose minds God does inclyne to humanity.
And although often times the whole world is vnthanckful and recompenceth evil
to them, The go^ their p^^ shall not^ vnrewa^ at the h^ of God.
that have well deserved, yet this ought to suffyce, that God has in store to
reward those that are merciful, so that they shall be sure to have him loving
and favorable unto them. For the good man that is merciful and lends, shall
never be moved.

8 Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Blessed are the pure. B. This is the office of a true Christian, ^e office of
^ue christian
to defend the pureness and cleanes of his heart, which is simplicity and
integrity, that he think not one thing in his heart, and with words and
external shows declare an other, but that al things be done with a simple
and pure heart to the glory of God, and to the profit of our neighbor, not
sekyng our own proffite. C. All men do grant that pureness of heart is the
mother of al virtues, ^enes of ^e is the ^her of all ^ues.
but notwithstanding there is scant one among a hundred which has not craft
and deceit in stead of excele^t virtue. Hereupon it comes that the common
sort of people think them blessed and happy, which are conning and practiced
in working deceites: and which can deal craftily with such as they have to do
withal. Christ therefore does nothing at al agree to the reason of the flesh,
when he calls those blessed, which are not delighted in deceit and fraud,
but do walk sincerely among me^, and do show no other thing with their
words and countenance then they think and pretend in their heart. M.
Double in heart and pure in heart are contrary. Lord who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle? ^m. 15.
Even he that leads an incorrupt life, and does the thing which is right,
and that speaks the truth from his heart. And again who shall ascend into
the hill of the lord? or who shall rise up in his holy place. Even he that
has clean hands and a pure heart, and that has not lift up his mind unto
vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor. ^m. 24
This cleanenes or sincerity of heart comes not of the nature of man. For
man's heart (as the prophet says) is wicked and inscrutable. ^m. 17.
^e. 8
And the thought of man's heart is wicked even from his youth. Furthermore who
can say, ^ner. 20
my heart is clean or I am free from sin? But this cleanes and purity of
heart is given to man, ^m. 51.
of God from above: wherefore David says. Make a new heart within me O God.

^es. 15.
Also this sincerity is gotten by faith in Christ: by which faith he
purifieth the heart. Therefore, whosoever believes in Christ he is of a pure
heart, and so many as follow the study of innocence with a true faith. For
although our innoce^cie in all points is not perfect, notwithstanding we are
said to be pure and clean, because the lord does impute the most perfect
cleanes of Christ unto us, and for our faith, he does accept and receive us
as clean. M. Moreover, the lord does seem to reprove the hypocrisy of the
Phariseis, whose hearts as they were hollow and crafty, so were they obstinate
and perverse, and had a false and wrong judgment of the doctrine of truth.
Blessed (says he) are the pure in heart: that is which join them selves unto
me with a pure, simple, and desirous mind of knowing the will of God, and do
embrace the doctrine of truth, without hypocrisy and doublenes of heart.
Such were the disciples of Christ, who embraced the doctrine of Christ, so
sone as it was offered unto them. Such was Nathanaell, John. 1.
of whom Christ said, Behold a true Israelite in whom there is no deceit.

For they shall see God. C. Because the simple are derived as fools, for that
they are not circumspecte to their own luker and proffite, Christ calls
them to consider farther: that if they be not circumspecte to defraude and
deceive in earth, they shall have and enjoy the syghte of God in heaven.
Therefore, they which are not delighted with craft and deceit, but walk
godly, purely, and sincerely among men, which also adioyne them selves with a
sincere and fervent mind unto Christ, such I say shall see God: The just
shall see God.
that is, first they shall be endewed with the perfect knowledge of God: they
shall understand his will and mind, what affection he bears toward them:
and last of all, they shall have everlasting life, when they shall behold
him, not in the dark speaking of faith, but face to face, with his holy
angels.

9. Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the sons of God.

Blessed are the peace makers. C. He vndersta^dethe such peacemakers which do
not only study for peace, Peacemakers
and so much as in them lies do eschew and put away brawlinges, chidinges,
and contentions, but also which with diligence pacify contentions, which
arise among others: they are the authors of peace among all me^: they cut of
the occasion of hatred and debate, Psalm. 34.
as commands the prophet David. Eschew evil, and do good, seek after
peace and insewe it. Neither is this spoken of the lord without great
consideration. For, seeing it is a troublesome thing to pa^ifie those which are
at dissension among them selves, moderate and temperate men, which study and
seek by all means to get peace, are constrained to bear this dishonestie:
that they hear the reproaches, the complaints and quarrels of both parts:
which rises hereuppon, that none would willingly have the^ to be their
advocates, which will not take their part and defend them. Let us not
therefore depend upon the favor of men, Christ bids us to have respect
unto his fathers judgment. Who, for so much as he is the God of peace, takes
us to be his sons, so long as we seek for peace, although our study and
endeavor please not men.

For they shall be called. M. That is, they shall be thought, they shall be in
deed, and they shall be acknowledged the sons of God, whether it be of God him
self, or of those which have the spirit of God. The Hebrewe text has this
word call, Gene. 12.
for to suppose or think. In Isaac shall thy seed be called. The which Paul
expounds thus: Neither are they all children straightway that are of the
seed of Abraham. Roma. 9.
But in Isaac shall thy seed be called: that is to say, they which are the
children of the flesh, are not the children of God. But they which are the
children of promise, are counted the seed. Also where as Mathewe has. Math.
19.
My house shall be called the house of prayer. Luke says. It is the house of
prayer. Therefore if there arise any contention and strife among men, the
preachers of the word of peace, The magistrates office.
shall redress the same. And for this purpose the Magistrate is appointed of
God, that we may one with another live a godly and a peaceable life. And so we
shall be blessed and happy. For we shall be called, that is, we shall be ye sons of
God, which is the God of peace, 1. Cor. 1^
and not the God of debate and strife. Also if we be sons, Roman. ^
then are we heirs of his glory and true felicity. Let the Cardinals,
Bishops, and heads of the church in these our days, read and way these
things dilligently. For men may easily understand whose sons they be, when
that they blow not the tro^pe of ye Gospel in the courts of princes, but
rather they sound their tro^pet to wars and battle.

10 Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are they that suffer persecution. M. It is a wonted and a commen thing
for the children of this world to persecute the godly. This wicked nature is
declared, Persecu^
by an infinite number of examples from the beginning of the world. Bu.
Therefore the world in this life does count them most unhappy and miserable,
which are banished their country, spoiled of their goods, and hated and
despised of al men. But on the contrary part, the lord pronounces them
blessed, so that they suffer the same persecution and affliction for the lord
and righteousness sake. Of the which doctrine ye disciples of Christ have
great need: and the more hard, and grievously that flesh will bear the same,
the more intentiuely we ought to meditate upon the same. Neither is there any
other condition to fight under the banner of Christ, then that when the whole
world does rise against us, and pursue us to the death. The matter is thus: The
po^ of Sath^
Satan the prince of the world cease not to arm his soldiers with
furious madness, to the end they may rise against the members of Christ. This
is very monstrous truly and exceadinge nature, that they which embrace
righteousness should be violently vexed contrary to their desert. Therefore
Peter says. 1. Petr. ^
Who is it that will harm you if ye follow that which is good: yea happy are
ye if any trouble happen unto you for righteousness sake. But in such untamed
and fierce wickedness of the world, it happens to much oftentimes, that the
good, The zea^ the righ^
by the zeal of righteousness, do inflame the hatered of the wicked against
them selves: and this is specially common unto Christians to be hated of the
greatest number of men. For flesh can not bear the doctrine of the Gospel: ^t
perse^n is.
none can abide to have their faltes reproved. M. But persecution, is an
obstinate pursewing to destroy, by the which there is no place of rest and
quietness given, but the destruction of innocents is sought with all kind of
violence and deceites.

For righteousness. (...) they be suffer for ^eousnes.
C. They are said to suffer for righteousness, which therefore purchase and
provoke the hatred of evil men, because with all their endeavor they resist
that which is evil, and defend that which is good. In this part therefore
the truth of God worthily has the pre-eminence. Wherefore, by this note
Christ does disceuer his martyrs from the evil and wicked persons. A.
According to that saying of Peter. ^r. 4.
Se that none of you be punished as a murder or as a thief, or as an evil
doer. If any man suffer as a Christian man, let him not be ashamed, but
glorify god on this behalf. Therefore for so much as all they which will live
godly in Christ Jesus, ^mo. 3.
must suffer persecution (as witnesses the apostell Paul) this admonition
does belong to all the godly alike. But and if the lord do at any time bear
with our infirmity and weakness, and will not suffer the wicked to vex us at
their pleasure: notwithstanding it is mete that in peace and rest, we meditate
and think upon this doctrine, that we may be ready so often as need shall
require to come into the field, and not to encounter with our enemy until we be
thereunto sufficiently armed and appointed.

For theirs in the kingdom of. A. This is a most ample and large reward, ^p.
1.
of the which also S. James speaks thus: Happy is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which
the lord has promised to them that love him.

For so much as therefore in the whole race of this life, the state of the
godly is most miserable, Christ does worthily call us unto the hope of a
heavenly life. Bu. And therefore the lord which is liberal shall reward us,
for the loss of our country, for our goods taken from us, for the vain
glory of this world, he will give us a celestial country, everlasting
goods, and perfect glory, far exceading the light in brightness.

11 Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and shall falsely
say all manner of evil saying against you for my sake.

Blessed are ye when men revile you. M. Here, by a figure called Apostrophe,
be declares to whom he has spoken al these things, namely to his disciples,
which believed in him, which were afflicted by diverse means despised and
rejected for the Gospels sake. C. But the Evangelist. Luke. 6.
Luke has. Blessed shall ye be when men hate you, and thrust you out of their
company and rail on you, and abhor your names as an evil thing. By the
which words Christ would comfort his faithful, that they should not be
discouraged, although they perceived them selves to be the most detestable in
the sight of the world. For this was no small temptation to be cast out of the
church as profane and Heathenishe men: For when as he knew, that nothing
was more venomous then hypocrites. Furthermore, when he forsawe with what
violent force the enemies of the Gospel were vehemently inflamed against his
little and contemned flock: he would fortify them that they might not fainte,
although an exceading sort of reproaches were presently ready to be laid
against them.

And hereby it appears how little the excommunication, The Popes
excommunication is not to be feared.
and cursing of the Pope is to be feared, when as he like a tyrant does
separate us from his synagoge, because we will not be divorced from Christ. And
shall falsely say all. A. The children of this world, because they can not
hate them which are indewed with the spirit of Christ, because they so live
that they cannot worthily deserve their hate, and be afflicted: instead of the
truth they inuente false crimes, the which they allege as causes worthy of
hatred and persecution. M. Here they say, The excuse of the wicked.
that they reiecte not the word of God, but that they cannot bear with such
as are alterers of custom, makers of new things, disturbers of peace and
religion, and finally contemners of true worship. So Christ was accused to
Pilate that he seduced the people, Luke. 13.
and that he was a mouer of sedition against the empire. Act. 6.
And the enemies of Steven brought in false witness, which said: we hard him
speak contumelious words against Moses and against God. M. And Christians
were called malefactors, murderers, and seditious persons. Tertullian.
As concerning the which we may read in Tertullian, how the wicked cried
against the Christians if any calamity and trouble chanced. To the beasts,
to the beasts: away with the churcherobbers: it is not mete for such wicked
persons to live: and such kind of cruel and reprochefull words cried they
against them.

For my sake. Bu. That is, if thou suffer persecution for Christ and his
Gospel, not for thy faltes and wicked deserts: Finally if they be false and
imagined accusations, which are laid against thee, thou shall be happy and
blessed. We are not persecuted when we are justly punished.
For if thou be called a mouer of sedition, an heretyke, a robber of God of his
honor, and art such a one in deed, so that they be verified in thee: then
thou have no cause to think thy self happy, but rather accursed.

12 Be glad and rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven: for so they
persecuted the Prophets which were before you.

Be glad and rejoice. C. By these words he declares that the remedy is at
hand, least we should be dismayed with iniust reproaches and slanders: because
so sone as we lift up our minds to heaven, there the inspeakeable joy
offers it self unto us, and takes away all occasion of heuines. A.
Whereupon Peter the apostell says: In the which ye rejoice though now for a
season (if need require) ye are in heuines through manifold temtations, that
the trial of your faith being much more precious then goulde that perishes
(though it be tried with fire) might be found unto laud, glory, and honor,
at the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom ye have not seen, and yet love him, in
whom even now though ye see him not, yet do you believe, and rejoice with joy
unspeakable, 1 Pet^. 1
and glorious, receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your
souls.

For great is your reward. Bu. As if he should have said. If it grieve you
that you suffer infamy, and that you are persecuted in this world, remember I
pray you, how greatly your glory shall increase in the world to come. For
look how great your affliction is in the earth, so much the brighter shall
your glory be in heaven. Here the Papists play with this name of reward,
saying that there is special relation between the reward and the deserte, Our
w^ deserve ^warde.
but they err for the promise of the reward is free. Furthermore if we
consider how mutilate, imperfecte, and vicious all good works are what so
ever they be, that come even from the very best, we shall then well know that
God at no time shall find any work worthy of reward. There is none
therefore so simple, when he hears mention made of the reward that will
think us, when we spend our lives for the Gospel, to deserve any thing at
the hands of God, that is, to do any thing by the which God may become
debtor unto us. We are all at the will and pleasure of God, and he made not
only us, but also all our goods, what so ever, and that of nothing, for it is
he that works in us both the will and also the deed, Philip ^
eue^ of good will. Notwithstanding the scripture calls that a reward which
is given of God, to such as neither do nor can deserve the same at all,
because they labor and work all that they can to attain the same. Exampl^
Even as the father says unto his son, go diligently to thy book, apply thy
mind to learning, and thou shall have a goodly reward of me, a new coat, or
some other thing as good: now this coat is a reward, and it is not: because
he obtained that reward not by his diligence, but it happened to the child by
his fathers gift, nevertheless not without the accomplyshinge of that
diligence and study, which he requires.

Even so there is none that obtayneth this reward, of the which the lord
speaks here, except he suffer for Christ: and for this cause it is called a
reward. Also, ^n can not ^rue so ^he as a ^e at the ^des of god
if it were possible that thou should die a hundred times for the Gospel,
yet for all that, thou could not deserve the worth of a here at the hands
of God, that is, thou can not constrayne and bind him to owe thee any thing
at all, for so often as thou should receive life so often thou should
become detter to him again. And for this cause they are not rewards which
are given to us of God, but they are his free gifts freely given without any
desert in us. As plainly appears by these testimonies of scripture: ^e. 15.
Abraham, I am thy defense, and thy reward shall be exceading great. that is to
say: I will be thy defender, thy gain, thy riches, and thy felicity. And the
Prophet speaking of the consolation of the people under the person of Rachel,
^m. 31.
says: Leave of from weping and crying, withholde thine eyes from tears, for
thy labor shall be rewarded says the lord. And they shall come again out of
the land of their enemies. So that, where he says, thy labor shall be
rewarded, is even as if he had said: The time will come that thou may
know, that thou have not had children in vain, for yet there remains a
reward of this thy labor. ^m. 127
Moreover, in the Psalmiste it is written. Lo, children, and the fruit of thy
womb, are an heritage, and reward that comes of the lord. In this place,
the heritage and the reward, are taken for the free gift of God. For there
the Prophet does record, that not only all things that we desire, but also,
children come unto us, by the gift of God, and through his goodness, not by our
labor and care. By these and such like places of scripture, ^is meant (...)
word ^rde.
it is apparent enough, that in the scriptures, this word reward, is taken
for those benefits that we receive from the lord. In this place therefore the
spirit of God would use this word to show us, that we ought to seek for
nothing so much as for the gifts and rewards of God, the which he bestows
upon those that believe in him. Therefore when as our savior by these presents
said that they should look for a large reward in heaven, which suffered
persecution for his names sake, he mente, that they did an acceptable thing,
and of great price, by bearing the burden of the cross, laid on them for the
glory of his name, and that they them selves also thereby got great profit. To
be brief, Why the reward is promised.
so often as a reward is promised to good works, their deserte is not said
to be the cause of rigteousnes or of salvation: but only the faithful are
encouraged to do well, since that they are sure that their labor shall not be
in vain. Wherefore these two do very well agree that we are freely justified,
because we are acceptable unto God without deserts: and yet for all that, he
does bestow at his will and pleasure, free reward upon us for our deeds.

In heaven. C. Here he requires of us hope, which does not behold things
present, but things to come. To this effect pertains that which is written
of the apostell, saying. For our tribulation which is momentany and light. 2.
Cor. 4.
prepares an exceading and an eternal wayght of glory unto us, while we look
not on the things which are seen but on the things which are not seen. For
the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal.

For so persecuted they the prophets. This was added by the divine consell of
the spirit, least the apostels hoping to get the victory and triumph without
^aboure and fight, should fainte in the midest of persecution. For, because the
restoring of all things was promised in the scripture, under the kingdom of
Christ, it was a venture that they did not deceive them selves with vain
trust, not thinking on their warrefare. And by other places also it does
appear, that they very fondly imagined the kingdom of Christ to be
replenished with earthly riches and pleasure. Wherefore not without cause,
Christ does admonish them, that they must enter into the same battle that
the prophets did, because they are their successors. Neither does he say only
in respect of time that the prophets were before them, but because they are
of the same order, and that therefore they must frame them selves according to
their example. Finally, this sentence brings great co^solatio^ to the
disciples of Christ. Neither can they easily be removed when that they know
them selves to be the fellows of the prophets. M. Moreover we must here note
how great the iniquity is, of this present world, which lets not to
trouble the people of God, yea his special ministers, with lies, reproaches and
persecutions.

Now for so much as this happened to them in the Church of God to the which
they were appointed, what shall become of them that are without the church?

Even so the Prophets, Christ him self and the Apostels, suffered all kind
of reproach and trouble, laid upon them by the Church of Israel. Therefore
what can be more blockishe and foolish then they which think that none at
this day can be afflicted and oppressed with injury by the heads of Churches?
As though the state and condition of the ministers of Christ were better at
this day, then was the state of Christ him self, his Prophets and Apostels
in their time. Let the ministers of Christ therefore have respect unto the
lot and chance of the^, which were before them in the office and ministry of
the word of God, The affliction of the apostels pertains to the ministers
in these days
neither let them hope in their time to have better estimation and favor, if
they teach Christ sincerely then had the Apostels and Prophets, which were
before time.

13 You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt has lost his saltnes,
what shall be seasoned there with: it is then good for nothing, but to be cast
forth of the doors and to be trodden under feet of men.

You are the salt of the earth. E. Now he does both exhort his disciples by
reason to bear and suffer all kind of evil for his kingdom, and also to
follow and immitate whatsoever is joined with excellent virtue. C. Christ here
does refer the property of the doctrine to the persons, to whom he had
committed his ministration. For in calling his Apostels the salt of the earth,
he means that it is their office and duty to salt and season the earth:
The nature of man is unsavory until it be salted with Gods word.
because men have nothing but that which is altogether unsavory, until they
be seasoned with the salt of heavenly doctrine. M. Christ our savior
therefore by these words does signify and teach that all mankind has need
to be seasoned, least that it putrify and perish, for it is altogether
unsavory, and wholly subject to corruption and destruction, if it be not
seasoned with the heavenly salt, and so preserved. The G^^ is compa^ to salt.
The doctrine of the Gospel is this salt, with the which al men ought to be
seasoned, that they may attain to the sauer and taste of the heavenly and
everlasting life. This doctrine for ye sharpenes thereof, is hated and envied of
the corruptible world, The Go^ is hated ^cause it (...) sharp.
for it requires mortification of the flesh, a lively faith, and true
repentance from dead works, and such like, which are not very pleasant to
the flesh. Preach thou the word says saint Paul: be fervent in season
and out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
doctrine. B. Certainly it was necessary that the doctrine of the infallible
truth, The que^ of the Go^
which is the present medicine of the whole world, should byte, search,
smarte, burn, purify, dissolve, and heal: by certain reason notwithstanding
and just mean. A simile.
For as the salt is a certain seasoning of the meat and as the temperate use
of the same brings some pleasant taste and pleasure: even so the immoderate
mixture, and ouergreat quantity, makes the meat very unpleasant. This does
signify, that the pastors and teachers ought to do all things with judgment,
A consid^tion to (...) of the pr^cher.
and advisedly, least that they make the doctrine of truth to be hated of
many, in being to curious in reproving.

But if the salt have lost. C. After our master Christ had taught his
disciples whereunto they were called, he does denounce vnthem grievous and
horrible judgment, except they discharge their office and duty. And he shows
farther, that the doctrine which they preach, is so joined to a godly and and
a honest life, that the corruption which is tolerable in others, is counted
in them detestable and monstrous.

As if he should have said: If other men be unsavory before God, to you is
given salt to make them sauore, and to have a taste or relishe: but if you
your selves have lost your saltnes, whence will you seek for the remedy,
which you should give to others?

M. For as the salt being unsavory, cannot season any thing, ^^le.
neither can the salt it self, having lost the proper nature, by any means
be seasoned again: even so if those do amiss, to whom it belongs to
exhort and instruct others to the study of godlynes, these two
inconveniences and damages shall ensue:

It is then good for nothing else but. Christ very aptly does prosecute his
metaphor, when he says, that other things which do degenerate from their
nature, are notwithstanding by some means proffitable after their corruption:
but the salt also to be very hurteful, as to bring barrens even to the dounge
hill. The effect therefore is this, that the disease is incurable, when the
ministers them selves do err, and are deceived: because they ought to season
all the world with their salt. ^^le.
B. For as the well head being dried up, from whenche all other do spryng and
flow: and as the light being extinguyshed from whence all other candels are
lighted, there can no other water or fire be found, from whence they may
receive their quality again: Even so truly by foolyshe teachers who shall
learn wisdom and knowledge, and by blind guydes, who shall be conducted and
led the right way.

This therefore is a wonderful inconvenience and incurable. E. Finally this
admonition is not only proffitable to the ministers, but also to every
Christian man. For so much, He that wants the salt of Gods word is
corrupted.
as God intends to season the whole earth with the salt of his word, it
follows that whatsoever wants the same salt, is not only unsavory, but
putrified also and corrupted before him, although he seem to be seasoned in the
sight of men. Wherefore there is nothing better then to admit and receive this
kind of seasonynge, by the which only our putrefaction is corrected and
amended: but in the mean time let the saltours take heed, that they suffer not
the world in their foolishenes, yea, much more, let them take heed that they
infecte them not with their evil and corrupt seasoning. And therefore,
Impudency of Papists.
the impudency of the Papists, is not to be borne with all, who are not
ashamed to adorn and deck their masking Prelates with these tytels, that none
might so hardy of his ears, reprehende any thing in them. As though truly it
were the purpose of Christ to give unto his disciples unlawful liberty, and
to appoynte and make them slears of souls, as tyrauntes and not rather to
admonyshe them of their duty, least they should depart from the right line.

Christ does here show, what manner of persons he would have the teachers
of his Church to be. The punishment of unsavory salters.
Let therefore all unsavory ministers, pastors and teachers, yea, and such
specially as vaunte them selves to be the Apostels successors, let such I
say, consider what a severe commination, and threatening our lord and master
pronounces against them, that they of all men are in worse case if they be
unsavory.

As plainlye we may read in the prophecy of Malachy. Malachi 2.
V. Wherefore let the preachers of the word take heed that they discharge
their office and calling throughlye, least that the curse of the Lord
pronounced, by the mouth of the Prophet, fall upon them, saying: Osee. 4.
Seeing thou haste refused understanding, therefore will I refuse the also, so
that thou shall be no more my Priest.

14 You are the light of the world: a city set on a hill, cannot be hid.

You are the light of the world. M. He speaks here in effect, the same
thing which he spoke in the words going before, saving that he adds a more
plain admonition. Bu. Those whom before he called salt, he now calls
light, and where as before he called them the salt of the earth, he now
calls the^ the light of the world: so that now by the world he
understands men living in the world.

Therefore, as there is nothing more clear then the light, so there is nothing
more proffitable then the same. He has very well therefore shadowed and
prefigured the teachers of the church by the light, and by that means also,
the celestial and evangelical doctrine: then the which, as there is nothing
more pure and clean, so there is nothing that does more replenishe us with
heavenly benefits the^ that. For the Prophet says. Psalm. 119,
Thy word is a lantern to my fete, and a light to my paths. C. For although
we be all the sons of light, after we be illuminated by faith, and are
commanded to have ca^dels burning in our hands, least we wa^der in darkness,
yea, and to show others the way of life: The ministers of Gods word are the
light of the world.
Notwithstanding, because the preaching of the Gospel was appointed to the
apostles above other men, and also at this day is appointed to the pastors of
ye church, Christ did specially give this titel unto them, as if he should have
said: that for this cause they were placed in this degree. to shine clearly
unto all men. M. Finally Christ does plainly show, that this world without
the doctrine of the kingdom of God, (whereof his disciples should be the
ministers) should be oppressed, and quite over whelmed with ye dark and
obscure clouds of error and finne. Furthermore we see that the ministers of
Christ, ought to be in stead of the light, lighting the darkness of this
world, because of the doctrine of truth which they show to the whole
world. John. 3.
For this is judgment, that light is come into the world: and men love
darkness more then light. The doctrine of the Gospel is the light, bewraying,
detecting, and reproving, ungodliness, and the ignorance of the true piety of
God: and for this name it is much envied of the world (for he which does
evil, John. 3.
hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be
made manifest.) Then after it has put away the darkness of ignorance, The
eff^^ the Eo^
it offers the knowledge of God, and true godliness to the hearts of mortal
men. But here it may be demanded how and after what sort, the disciples are
the light of the world, when as John would not grant the same to the
foreronner of Christ, saying: He was not the light, John. 1 John. 8.
but he granted that Christ was the light of the world. And Christ speaking
of him self, says: Auns^
I am the light of the world. I answer. Christ is the true light, which
receives not the light from any other, but by his own proper nature has
strength and power to illuminate. His Apostels have not so, but are therefore
called the light, because they bare wytnes of the true light, and they
received the brightness of the divine knowledge of that light which says:
John. 1^
I have chosen and ordained you. And again, without me ye can do nothing.
John. 5.
Even so John was a burning and shyuing light, but not of him self, for he
was lyghted of this light which is Christ.

Bu. The synceritie and integrity both of life and manners, which ought to
be in them, is signified by this light, as appears by the words
followynge. So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
works and glorify your father which is in heaven. Hereuppon Saint Paul
says, Philip. ^ These. 5
do all things without murmuringe and disputynge, that ye may be such as no
man can complain on: and unfeigned sons of God, without rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation: among whom see that ye shine as
lyghtnes in the world.

A city buylte on a hill cannot be hid. Bu. Now he shows by this parable
that the heavenly doctrine and the life of the teacher, must be godly, holy,
The d^ and life (...) teacher.
pure, perfect, and irreprehensible.

B. But our lord leafte the exposition of this collation, to the intelligence
of the hearers: as thus.

As a city builte on a hill, cannot be hid, even so ye can not be hyd,
neither ought ye, but ye shall be made manifest unto the whole world, even as a
city set upon an hill. Wherefore by all means endeavor your selves, that
men may se that in you, which is godly and verteous to immitate and follow.

15 Neither do men light a candell, and put it under a bushel, but on a
candelsticke, that it may give light to all that are in the house.

Neither do men light a candel. C. He does show unto the^ by these words, that
they ought so to live, as if they were set forth for all me^ to be hold. ^aulte
is ^ught more ^mous in a ^tuous man, (...) in a wic^ person.
And certainly ye more a man does excel, the more he does hurt by his evil
example, if he behave him self not well. Christ therefore would have his
disciples to be more ware and circumspect, to lead a godly and sober life,
then are the common sort of people, because al men do behold them as candels,
and that they are in no wise to be borne withal, except godliness and integrity
of life, be agreeable to the doctrine whereof they are ministers. B. In another
place we read that the lord used the like similitude of a candel, when he
expounded the parable of the sede falling in diverse places, after the which he
adds. Is the candell lighted to be put under a bushel or under a table? Is it
not lighted to be put on a ca^delstick, that those which come into the house
may se ye light? For there is nothing so secret, ^ke. 4 ^ke. 8.
that shall not be opened, neither has it been so privy, but that it shall
come abroad. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear: and he said unto
the^, take heed what ye here. Unto him that has, shall more be given: And from
him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he has. C. The which
similitude, seems not to be applied like unto this. For there Christ does
admonish them that they must diligently beware, least any man bearing him
self bold of the darkness, do take occasion and liberty to sin.

16 Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

Let your light so shine. C. After that our Savior Christ had taught his
Apostles that they were set in the state and degree, that as well their vices
as their virtues were seen a far, either to good or evil example: Now he
byddeth them so to frame their life, that all that behold the same may be
styrred up to glorify God.

Let men says he, see your good works and glorify God: because, as Paul
witnesses, 2. Cor. 8.
the faithful do make provision for good and honest things, not only in the
sight of the lord, but also in the sight of men.

M. By this therefore we are admonyshed to apply our selves to good works,
Good works become a Christian for examples sake.
and that so dilligentlye, that those men with who^ we have to do, by our
works may know what piety there is in our hearts And glorify your father
which is in heaven. Bu. Behold the end of good works. As if he should have
said: Good works may not be done for vayn glory.
Not that men may glorify you, or praise you, or extol you above the
heavens, and to worship you as Gods, offering their goods unto you: but that
they may glorify God, that they attribute all praise to God, that they may
only depend upon God, that they honor him, worship him, and serve him with
their whole heart. 1. Petr. 2.
M. So Peter also says: Se that ye have honest conversation among the
Gentyles, that where as they backebyte you, as evil doers, they may see your
good works, and glorify God in the day of visitatio^. C. Finally, if the
glory of good works ought rightely to be given unto God, Against free will.
and if he be the only author of them. it can not be without the derrogation
of Gods glory, that free will should be so highly exalted, as though good
works came of the same. Good works are said to be our works because God
imputes the^ unto us.
Again here we may see how favorably the lord, does deal with us, to call
the^ our good works the praise whereof by right he should have ascribed to
him self.

17 Think not that I came to destroy the law and the Prophets, no I came not
to destroy, but to fulfill them.

Think not that I came. Bu. Hitherto our savior Christ has reasoned as
concerning the true and perfect felicity: now he comes to the manifestynge
and declarynge of the Law of God it self, and to remove and puryfye the same
from the traditions of the Phariseis with the which they corrupted and
defiled, the true use and meaning of the Law. C. And although Christ might
worthily have boasted that he came to fulfill the Law with the perfection of
his life: here notwithstanding, he entrea^teth of doctrine, not of his life.
Moreover, because he cried that the kingdom of God was come, and lifted up the
minds of men with a rare and unwonted hope, and called his disciples to
baptism: it is probable that the minds of men were suspended, and doubtful,
and that they did diligently search to what end this newnes did appertain.
Now Christ does testify that there is such concordaunce and agreement
between his doctrine and the Law, that it does very well agree with the Law
and the Prophets: and that it does not only agree, but also is a fulfilling of
the same. For two causes he should seem to be led to testify the agreement of
the Law with the Gospel. Two causes moved Christ to declare the agreement that
was between the Law and the Gospel.
So sone as there arises any new order or form of teaching, straightway the
common people think, that there is made an alteration of all things. But
such was

Moreover Christ saw that many of the Jews, although they did profess, that
they did believe the Law, were notwithstanding, profane, and unlike to their
forefathers. For the people were in such disorder, all things were so
corrupted and defiled: The Priests with their luskishnes and malice, did so
extinguyshe the pure light of the doctrine, that there was no more any great
reverence of the Law. But if any new manner of doctrine had been brought in,
which had abrogated faith from the Law and the Prophets, then had Religion
been miserably shaken.

This seems to be the first reason

The second reason was, that he might

But the defense of Christ with the which he does purge his doctrine, ought
to animate, and encourage us, If we at this day have the like reproach and
false accusations laid against us.

This crime also was laid against Paul, Acts. ^
saying that he was an Apostata contrary to the law of God. Wherefore it is
no marueyle if the Papists in like sort falsely accuse us, and rail against
us.

The Gospel is subject to sclaunders.
But by the example of Christ, we must reiecte all false accusations and not
regard them: notwithstanding, we must freely profess the truth although it
be subject to false sclaunders. B. But here this word Law. is taken for the
doctrine ordained for the institution of life, by the will of God. Wherefore
immediately the lord does add to the Law, the Prophets also, saying: I am
not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, that so he might more plainly
declare what he meant by the Law, namely the doctrine and institution of life,
which the Prophets showed and declared also. It is certain therefore,
whatsoever things are written in the Law, do appertain to this end, namely
to call the mind of man to the perfect and true righeousnes, ^. Timo. 3.
that the man of God may be perfect, and prepared to all good works. The
which also the lord signifies, when after the exhortation to the light of
good works, and the necessity of fulfillinge the law, he adds that
therefore he came to fulfill the same. And so we understand by the Law and the
Prophets, that is meant (...) the Law (...) this place.
the doctrine of God comprehended in the holy scriptures, by the which men are
instructed To destroy. M. The Law is destroyed or broken, when that it is
made void, and of none effect, by false expositions and traditions of men: or
else, when as men do violate and break the precepts thereof, either by the
imbecillitie and weakness of the flesh, or else by a wicked and contemptuous
mind But here he understands the destroying of the Law after the first
manner, namely by false expositio^s. A. To break the Law, and to destroy the
law are all one, as appears by the saying of Christ in John. John. 7.
If a man on the Saboth day receive circumcision, without breaking of the law
of Moses, disdain ye at me because I have made a man whole on the Saboth day?

No I came not to destroy. C. God truly had promised a new league by ye
coming of Christ, but he had showed also that it should littell differ from
the first: but rather this to be the end, that he would observe and keep the
league which he made with his, even from the beginning. Ierem. 31.
I will write says he my Laws in their hearts, and I will forget their sins.
By these words he does not so depart from his former league, that he would
deny his last to be firm and sure when the new succeeded. And this is the
meaning of the words of Christ when he said, I came not to destroy, but to
fulfill ye Law. For truly he fulfilled it, How Christ fulfilled the Law.
in quickening the dead letter with his spirit, the^ showing the same in deed,
which was declared under figures and signs. Therefore in respect of doctrine,
we must imagine no abrogation of the Law in the coming of Christ. For seeing
that it is an everlasting rule, to live well and godly by, it must be
immutable, even as there is one only permanente righteousness of God, which is
comprehended therein.

As touching ceremonies, although they may be thought improper and not
pertaining to the Law: notwithstanding they were only abrogated in use, but the
signification abides still. Wherefore the coming of Christ did detracte
nothing, no not from ceremonies, but rather the truth of shadows being
declared, it does bring great confirmation unto them, when we beholding the
true effect, do perceive that they are not vain and unprofitable. Let us
learn therefore to keep this holy bond and knot of the Law and the Gospel
inviolable, the which many do break amiss and very fondly. M. Christ
fulfilled the Law and the Prophets, first by his coming in the flesh, when
as he fulfilled those things which are written in the Law and the Prophets,
as concerning his kingdom and the redemption of mankind, promised long
before. Of the which Luke speaks in his.xxiiij. chap. Therefore as saint
Paul says, Roma. 10.
Christ is the fulfilling of the Law to all them that believe: Roman. 3.
Do we then destroy the Law through faith? God forbid, but we rather
mayntaine the Law.

18 For truly I say unto you: till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one title
of the Law shall not escape till all be fulfilled.

For truly I say unto you. Bu. Although that which was spoken of before, was
made manifest enough: yet for all that it is more strongely confirmed again by
the mouth of the lord. For he uses a most vehement oath and confirmation,
saying: For truly I say unto you. Truly, is a word peculier to the Hebrews,
confirming and wytnessing the truth, and for this cause it is so often repeted
of the lord. And the Apostell Paul says. 2. Cor. 1.
All the promyses of God, by Christ, are yea: and are in him ame^, unto the
land of God. Which is, as if he should have said, all the promyses of God
are sure and certain, by Christ.

Till heaven and earth pass. Luke in words somewhat differs, Luke, 16.
but in sense he very well agrees, saying. It is easier for heaven and earth
to perish, then for one jot or titell of the Law to fail.

For the holy ghost would teach by both places, that there was nothing so
fyrme and stable in the whole world as the truth of the law, and that truly
in every point. Some very subtly dally with this word Until. As though
the vanishing of heaven and earth (which shall be at the last day of
judgment) should bring an end to the Law and the Prophets. 1. Cor. 13.
And truly, even as then, tounges shall cease, and prophecies shall be taken
away: even so we think that the Law written with the exposition of the same,
shall cease. But because Christ spoke more symply, such intisementes being
set to allure, this shall be sufficient for us to note, The firm strength of
the Law.
that heaven shall perish, and the whole world shall decay, before the
stabilitie and strength of the Law be once shaken. For so says the Prophet:
Iere. 33.
Thus says the lord. If the couenaunte which I have made with the day and
the night may be broken. Then may my covenant also be broken, which I made
with David my servant. And a littell after, he says again: Gods promises
are immutable.
If I have made no covenant with day and night, and given no statute unto
heaven and earth, then will I also cast away the seed of Jacob and David my
servant.

One jot or titell of the Law shall not pass till all. C. What means this,

For we see how far men are (yea ando such as are borne a new by the
spirit of God) from the perfect observation of the Law. I answer, Answer.
that this fulfilling of the law is not referred to the life of man, but to
the sound and perfect truth of doctrine: as if he should have said, there is
nothing unstable in the Law, there is nothing rashely put in the same, and
therefore it can not come to pass, that one letter shall vanishe or pass
away. Wherefore this place here, is of the certainty and truth of the word
of God, that we might not doubt, no one tittell in the Law, no one jot to be
in the Prophets, in the which the undoubted and infallible word of God is
not declared. For the words of the lord are pure words, even as the
silver, Psalm. 12.
which from the earth is tried, and purified seven times in the fire. Bu.
Tittels, are the smalest things in writing: by the which also Christ does
signify, that the smalest things seen and red in the Law, shall be
fulfilled. V. Neither is the law of God a humane, and mutable constitution,
(as are the precepts of money or apparel, which are daily altered): but as
the wisdom of God and his everlasting righteousness, are immutable, even so his
law of perpetual and everlasting obedience, abides for ever.

19. Whosoever therefore breaks one of these least commandments, and
teaches men so: he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. But
who so ever does, and teaches the same, shall be called great in the kingdom
of heaven.

Whosoever therefore breaks. C. Here Christ speaks particularly of the
commandments of life, or of ten sentences, by the which all men that are
the children of God, ought to frame their lives. And therefore he pronounces
them to be false and perverse teachers, which keep not their scholars under
the obedience of the law: and he counts them unworthy, whatsoever they be,
that be of the church which diminishe the authority of the law in any
poynct: and those to be honest, and meet ministers of God, which do allow and
commend the observation of the law, as well by the example of their life,
(...) of the (...)
as with words. S. To break the law, and to fulfill the law, are contrary.
He breaks the law, which desires another man's wife, although he commit
not adultery: and he is in this opinion that he believes, that the fulfyllynge
of the law, may be forgeuen for our imbecillitie and weakness sake, or else
that God will not so straightly deal with us, for the fulfyllinge of the law.

One of these least commandments. C. He calls them the least
commandments, according to the sense and meaning of men. For although all
are not of like force and weight, but when we compare them together, one is
greater and less then an other: ^east co^^dement ^at.
Notwithstanding, we may not think any thing small, of the which it
pleases the heavenly lord and law maker, to command. For how great
derogation is it to the glory of God, to take any thing disdainefully which
comes out of his mouth? For by this means his majesty should be
controlled. Wherefore where as Christ calls them little commandments, it
is a kind of granting.

And teaches men so. B. He does not reiecte him only, which transgresses
some commandment, and despises the parfection of the same, but also him,
which teaches others so namely that so great perfection is not required: as
the Phariseyes and Saduceyes, which requiringe only the external works, and
contemninge the spirit of the law, counted it nothing, to lust after a
woman, and so they taught also.

Shall be called the least. C, He alludeth this to that which was spoken of a
little before, as concerning the comaundementes, notwithstanding the sense is
manifest and plain, that they shall be rejected as the outcastes of all men,
which make the law to be contemned, in any one poyncte. The kingdom of heaven
is taken here, for the renouation or renuyng of the church, or for the second
state and condition of the church, which arose then of the preachinge of the
Gospall. Luke. 7.


So Christ makes him which is least in the kingedome of heaven, greatter then
John. This manner of speakinge is, because God renuinge the world, by his son
Christ, made his kingdom firm and sure. Therefore Christ admits no
teachers into his church, after it is renewed, but such as are faithful
interpretours of the law, and apply them selves to maintain and set forth
the wholesome doctrine thereof. Bu. Let such read these things more diligently,
which at this day handle the law of the lord, very negligently and slyghtly:
when as by these words of the lord, a man may plainly perceive, that there
is nothing set forth by the heavenly wisdom of God in his divine law,
which requires not only great and earnest study, but also much estimation
and credit. But some men will here demand. Answer.
that if they weye and consider the end and purpose of the law maker, they
shall be satisfied. The external use of ceremonies is done away.
For although God do command ceremonies, that the external use of the^
should be temporal, but their signification eternal: yet he does not lose
and take away the ceremonies, which keeping still their effect, omit that
which is figurative and shadowed. Now when as Christ does banishe all those
from his kingdom, which accustom and teach men to despise the law, their
senceles sense is wonderful, who are not ashamed with their robbinge
indulgences, Indulgences
to remit that, which God most severely does require, and under the coullour
of venial sin, to tread underfoot and not regard, the righteousenes of the
law.

But who so ever does, and teaches the same. etc. M. This that is spoken
here perteyneth to the ministers of the word. C. He teaches them therefore what
perfection is required of the^, namely that they express and declare those
things in their life, which by their doctrine they declare and teach. So
Paul did chastise his body, and brought it into subjection, 1. Cor. 9.
least when he preached to others, he him self should be a cast away. And
writing to Timothe. 1. Epist. 4,
Be (says he) unto them that believe an exsample, in word, in conversation, in
love, in spirit, in faith, in pureness. And to Titus he says. Titus. 2.
In all things show thy self an example of good works, in the doctrine, with
honesty, with gra, uitie, and with the wholesome word, which can not be
rebuked: that he which with stands may be ashamed, having no evil to say
of you. 1. Petr. 5.
The like words has S, Peter in effect.

20 For I say unto you, except your righteousness exceed the ryghteousenes
of the scrybes and Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

For I say unto you, except. C. Now he towcheth the scribes which went about
to blott the doctrine of the Gospel, as though it were a destroying of the
law. Of this matter he reasons not at large, but briefly shewethe, that
there is nothing in their mind less, then the zeal of the law. As if he
should have said, they fained the^ selves to be against me, because they will
not violate or break the law: but by their life it apperethe, how cold they
be in reuerenceinge the law. yea, how careleslye they mock with God, when
they boast them selves to men, with their false and feigned righteousenes. The
like do many interpretours. But behold and se, if that they do not deceive
the people, even as the scribes and Phariseyes did For when as they restrained
the law of God to external offices only, they fasshioned their discyples as
apes, to hypocrisy.

We deny not trewely, but that they led their lives as much amiss, yea, rather
worse then they taught: therefore we join vain ostentation of ryghteousenes
with perverse doctrine. Notwithstanding it is manifest, wherefore Christ does
inuaye against this righteousenes in the words following, where he, purginge
the law from their wicked inue^tions, restores it to his proper puritye. To
be short, he turns that upon the Scribes, which wickedly and unjustly they
obiectted against him. Behoulde (says he) how parfect and cunning
interpretours of the law they be. for they feign and invent unto the^ selves,
righteousenesse, which shuts the gates of heaven against them. And therefore
Christ mente not to add here any perfection to the law, neither would he
teach the Gospel to be more parfect then the law, but only how our
righteousenes ought to excede the righteousenes of the scribes and phariseyes,
which was false and feigned: A. by the which they greatly seduced the people.
C. He joins the phariseys to the scribes, to amplify, because that sect
were counted much more holy then others. And here they are deceived which
think them to be so called, because they being separated from the company
of the common sort of people, challenged to them selves a proper state and
degree, of the which we have spoken before.

Into the kingedome of heaven. Chap. ^
C. Here the kingdom of heaven does signify the immortality, eternal life,
and everlasting felicity to the sons of God promised.

21. Ye have hard that it was said to the^ of old time. Thou shalt not kill:
Who so ever kills shall be in danger of judgment.

Ye have hard that it was said. Bu. For so much as every error as
concerning true righteousenes, sprange of the false construinge and
understanding of the law: the lord (to the end true righteousenes might be
observed) does restore the true and proper sense and meaning of the law, and
does pourge the same from the inventions and additions of the phariseyes,
showing by the law, that spirit and faith, love, and the very affection of
love is required of God, which he plainly shows by examples taken out of the
law. C. Wherefore this sentence and others following, do agree with that which
was last spoken of before. For Christ does show more largely by particulars,
how ccokedly the Phariseyes did deprave the law, that their ryghteousenes
might be nothing else but the reffuse and abiecte of all. But many of our
elders were deceived, which thought, that this was the correction and mendinge
of the law, and that Christ did extol his disciples to a higher degree of
parfection, than could Moses the dull and carnal people, which were scarce
apt to learn the external elements and signs.

So did many men believe, that the beginning of righteousenes was given in the
law, but parfection to be taught only in the Gospel: But Christ meant nothing
less, then to alter, change, or renew any thing of the law, or the
precepts thereof. For there, God did once ratifye the rule and manner of
living, of the which he never repented him. Whereupon Moses promised life unto
them that kept the law, in the which there ought to have been parfection, or
else he did set before them, that which was false. The same rule of living
well, was from the beginning, which is at this day, And God required the same
parfectio^ and integrity of Abraham, ^cope of ^^e.
which at this day he requires of his servants. For the whole scope of the
law is, that we worship and love God, with our whole heart. And what has
the Gospel more? A. Trewly he, which has such love, that he loves God with
all his heart, and his neighbor as him self, wants nothing to the chief
parfection. C. Therefore the law (as touching the precepts of a godly life)
leads men to the parfection of righteousenesse. ^a 8.
Therefore Paul, does not make the law weak in it self, but in our flesh.
And Moses said. I take heaven and earth to witness, that I show you to day,
the way of life and death: the which witnessinge had been vain if the law
had been imparfecte. ^. 10.
Moreover he says, And now Israel, what does the lord thy God require
more of thee, but that thou cleave only unto him.

^ti. 18.
This were a vain promise also, if the law were to none effect, when he says:
he that does these things shall live in them. But it is euidente by many
other places, that Christ went not about to correct any thing in these
commandments. Math. 19.
For they which will enter into life, by good works, are commanded of him,
to keep, and do exactly all the commandments. Neither does Christ, nor his
apostelles, allege the commandementes of a godly and holy life, for any other
intent: and trewly they are very iniuriouse to God, the aucthour of the law,
which imagine only the eyes, hands, and feet to be disposed and ordered there,
to a false and feigned show of good works: and that in the Gospel only, (as
they feign) God is taught to be beloved with the whole heart. Therefore let
that error seace, namely that the defection of the law is corrected by
Christ. Neither must we immagin Christ to be a new lawemaker, which would
add any thing to the everlasting righteousenes of his father, but we must
here him, as a faithful interpretoure, that we may know what the law is, and
to what use it serves. Now it rests to see what Christ condempneth in the
Phar. and what his interpretation differs from their co^ments. It is
certain, The abuse of the law.
that they brought the doctrine of the law to a pollitike order, that it might
suffice to perform the same, with external offices, and duties: So it came
to pass, that every one thought him self free from murder, which killed not
his brother with violente hand: Again he thought him self free, without
spotte or pollusion, yea, to be very chaste before God, which defiled not his
body with adultery. But this profanation of the law was in no wise to be
suffered, when as it is undoubted and for certain, that the spiritual worship
of god, was every where required of Moses: And God which gave the law bythe
mouth of Moses, did speak the same, as well to the hearts, as to the hands,
and eyes. Thou shall not kill. M. Christ here does not allege the
commandementes of the law, as they are placed in the law, but as they were
depraved and corrupted of the wicked Scribes and Phariseyes, and interpreted
and taught amiss, to the rude and ignorant people: to the end he might make
the doctrine and ryghteousenes of the Scribes and Phariseys, plain and
apparent to the people, and so admonish them to beware of it: wherefore he
says not, it is written in the law: but, it was said to them of old time:
least any man should think that it was newly invented in Christ's time.
Moreover where as he says. Ye have hard, that it was said of old time, that
is, as if he should have said: it is not unknown what the scribes and
phariseyes have spoken of the commandment against murder. C. Hitherto the
litterall exposition of the law, has been published by the Scribes among you,
that it is sufficient, if a man refrain his hand from murder, and violence,
how so ever their minds are inflamed with ire, He that hates his brother in
his heart commits murder.
hatred, and envy. But I teach and warn you, to have a farther respect: and
because love is the fulfyllinge of the law I say that ye hurt your neighbor,
so often as any thing is vnfre^dly wrought against him. For trewely the law
required the Heart in the time of Moses, (as we showed before) the which
Christ also here requires in expoundynge the same, We have a sufficient
example of the phariseical interpretation in the Gospel, John. 8.
after S. John. Where they said, it is not lauful for us to put any man to
death. Where as notwithstanding they being with ire, hatred, and envy
replenyshed, delivered Christ to Pilate, to be crucified. For whosoever
kills, shall be in danger of Judgment. This sentence does confirm that, which
was spoken of before.

To be in danger of judgment, is to be subject to the pain and punishemente,
which by judgment is appointed to the offender. Judgment.
Or as some men think: judgment signifies that, by the which it is required,
whether a man wittingly or unwittingly, with his good will, or by chance killed
his neighbor. For the law does plainly distynguishe between wylfull and not
wilful murder. Exodus 21.


22. But I say unto you: that whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly,
shall be in danger of judgment.

And who so ever says unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of a
counsel. But whosoever says, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

But I say unto you. B. Here again our savior Christ with an earnest
affirmation, does show his mind, M. Yea he does strongely fortify his
authority against the opinion of the Phariseis. For this word (I) has an
emphasis and great force with it. As if he should have said, I your master
sent from heaven, say unto you which are my dysciples, that the law
requires more, then that you hold your hands: for it requires a mind void of
al anger, and hatred. C. Christ therefore brings not this answer against
the commandment of Moses, but against the immagynation of the Scribes and
Phariseis. And because they did boast of antiquity: Truth be pref^ before
(...)
Christ calls the people to his authority, to the which all antiquity,
ought to give place. Whereby we may gather, of how much more value the
treweth is, then custom and antiquity.

That every one, which is angrye. Bu. Here he sets before them certain
particulars, by doing of the which they sin no less, then by committing
murder, although by certain degrees, one sin is greater then an other, and
every sin also in it self, does grow and increase. The fi^ to (...)
And trewely the first degree or step to murder is anger, and burning ire,
the impacient, and impotent commotion of the mind (and as the philosophers
say) the desire of ponishinge. Therefore the angry man, wishes evil to his
neybour, and seeks to hurt him if he may. Wherefore S. James says. Iam. 1.
The wrath of man works not that which is righteouse before God. And S.
John, 1. John
Every one that hates his brother is a man floar. M. Ire and hatred, Ire is
^rote of ^ther.
differ so much from murder, as does the root from the fruit, so that
murder, being the fruit of Ire, is let by no other reason the^ this, that
the angry parson is not able, or else fears ponishement. For our mind being
taken with Ire, is so bent, that with whom so ever it is angry, it sekethe his
destruction. Cayne being angry, Gene. ^
sought occasion to sleye his brother, and because there was none to let him,
he brought his purpose to effect. ^ne. 27.
Esawe being kindled with Ire against his brother, threatened to kyl him. ^am.
18.
Even so, Saul being angry with David, sought to kill him, which afterward he
assayed. Yea, this affection does often prevail in the very elect. As we may
read of David, ^^m. 25.
who was angery with Naball the fool, in so much that he was inflamed to
revenge, and took counsel to sley him. Wherefore not in vain the Apostell
excludes the angry person out of the kingdom of heaven, ^a. 5.
in the which what does he else mean, but that the wickedness of our nature
is damnable: Whereupon Christ him self also says. (...). 3.
Except a man be borne from above, he can not se the kingdom of God.
Unadvisedly. E. Or in vain, or without a just cause, for so signifies ye
Greek word (...) which the old Greek books have. ^sost. in ^. ho. 16.
So does Chrysostom seem to read it in his 16. homely upon Matthew where he
distinguiseth deserved anger from that which is undeserved: affirmynge that
the affection can not be taken from us, but nevertheless that it may be ruled
and subdued. ^r ray^uen in ^^ct.
Christ is here angry with the Phariseies, in his fathers cause. Paul was
likewise angrye with the false prophets. Moses likewise, that the children of
Israel committed Idolatry. ^d. 132.


Shall be in danger of judgment. M. That is to say before God, to whom the
will of man's heart is even as the work it self. That is to say, he shall be
in danger of the divine judgment, he shall (I say) be condemned to ponishment
and death, no less, then he which is convict before the judge, and condemned
to die.

But we must here note, that he says not, he shall be damned in judgment,
but he shall be in danger of judgment: that is to say, he is worthy to be
judged of God, except he were saved by his mercy. So that he speaks it for
this cause, that he knowing the danger of our dissease, might be our
physician, to cure and help us.

And who so ever says unto his brother. C. For so much as it is certain,
that this word Racha is set in the myddle place, between anger, and the open
and manifest reproach, there is no doubt, but that it is an interiection of
despising, and enuiinge. The second step unto murder.
Bu. This therefore is the second degree, not to restrain even at the first,
and subdue our burninge Ire, but to bewray the same with some sign of disdain,
and to suffer it to burste forth.

M. Wherefore let us understand, that here are condemned all signs of
rancoure, and a maliciouse mind. By what kind of means so ever they burst
forth. The tokens of anger.
whether it be in murmuring, or in ragynge, or in reprochynge, or in turnynge
away the face disdainefully, or in frowning, or in turning up of ye nose, with
mowes and mockes, and such like. By such kind of signs, the trouble and
perturbation of an angry mind is often times bewraied, even as the pleasuntnes
of a louinge mind by certain and special signs is declared. Shall be in
danger of a counsel. E. The Greek word signifies a sitting of judges which
Chrysostom also shows. In such sessions, (as in the court of Mars at
Athens,) great matters were wont to be handled: and also men were wont to
delyberate, of the order of ponishement. Bu. Christ therefore, by the mention of
a sessions, (applyinge it to the orders and customs of men) does declare,
that they shall have the greatter ponishement, which slack the brydell of
anger. As if he should have said: such a one is worthy to have a counsel and
sessions upon him, if God might be satisfied. But he that says thou fool.
The third degree is, when anger bursteth out to open reproach, The third step
to murder.
M. For he that callethe his brother fool, does show forth an undoubted anger
of the mind. By this word fool he understands all manner of evil
callinges, of cursinges, of banninges, of raylinges, and of evil wyshinges.

Shall Be in danger of hell fire. A. That is everlasting damnation. For
although Christ does adiudge them only to hell fire, which burst forth into
open reproach, notwithstanding he does not exempt anger from the same
ponishment, but alludinge the same to earthly judgments, he does affirm
that God will be the judge of secret anger to ponishe the same. But because he
excedeth more, which be wraieth his disdain, and hatred, with an evil
toungue, he says that he is guilty, before the whole counsel of heaven, to
have the greatter ponysshement. And he appoynteth them to hell fire, which burst
out to rail with words of reproach: signifiinge that hatred, and what soever,
is contrary to love, leads to the destruction of everlasting death. But as
concerning the name of hell fire, This hell fire is called in the latten tongue
Gehenna ^guis.
diverse writers write much. B. Gehennon was in the valley of the tribe of
Benjamin, of the which there is mention made in the book of Joshua, the 28.
chap: but it was possessed of the wicked, in the which they burnte their sons
and daughters, and sacrifyced them to deuylles, even to Moloch, and Rempham.
The same was also called Topheth. 4. King. 23.
Of the which we read this, And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley
of the children of Hinno^, that no man should offer his son or his daughter
in fire to Moloch. Moreover in ye book of the chronicles, it is written thus.
He offered insence in the valleye of the son of Hinnon, 2. Cor. 28.
and burnt his children in fire after the abhominatio^ of the Gentiles, whom
the lord cast out before the children of Israel. Also in the prophecy of
Jeremy. It shall no more be called Topheth, Ier. 7 and. 19
or the valleye of the children of Hinnon, but the valley of slaughter, for in
Topheth they shall be bourned, because they shall else have no rome. The
ancient writers think that Topheth was so called of the custom of the
sacryfices of Moloch: to whom when their infantes were offered, they did play
upon their tympanies, Heathen abominations.
that when they were burned their pittiefull cry might not be heard, for the
Hebrewe word (...) Toph, is said to signify a tympany. Finally (because in
this place ye infants were burnt, or because this Topheth was in the valley
which was called Gehennon, and was a place of wonderful abomination, into the
which the dead carcases, and what so ever was fylthy, were cast out of
Jerusalem, a place in the which the wicked were ponished) it was so called:
the which Esayas describes thus. Topheth, or the fire of pain is ordained
from the beginnynge: yea, even for kings it is prepared, this has the lord
set in the deep, and made it wide: Esaias. 30.
the burning whereof is fire and much wood. the breath of the lord which is a
river of brymstone does kindel it. Math. 8.
This place of ponishement (whereof our savior Christ speaks here) are those
outward darkenesses, into ye which the reprobate are cast. The lord therefore
using then the vulgar toungue, usurped this word Gehennam ignem, that is hell
fire, for the torment of souls which is to com. And he does it, to declare
what an unspeakable force of torment abides for the reprobate: Esaias. 66.
the which kind of torment also the prophet calls unquenchable fire,
saying. Their fire shall not be quenched. The which saying the lord used when
he spoke of hell fire, in the.9. of Mark, expoundinge him self after a sort,
what he meant by hell fire, saying. Mark. 9
It is better for thee to go halte and lame, into the kingdom of God, then
having two feet, to be cast into hell fire, which never shall be quenched,
where the worm dies not, nor the fire goes out.

23. Therefore if thou offerest thy gift at the aultare: and there remembrest
that thy brother has ought against thee.

Therefore if thou offerest. C. This small clause or sentence does confirm and
expound that doctrine which was spoken of before. Bu. Christ taught what was
forbidden by the law of God in this point, Thou shall not kill: and now it
follows what God has commanded by the same. Love is fulfillin^ the law^
C. The effect and sum is, that we do then satisfye and fulfill the
commandment of the law, (by the which we be forbidden to kill) if that we
live in unity and love with our neighbors. And that Christ might the more
move our minds, he pronounces that the very duties of piety and gladness,
are unacceptable to God, and not regarded of him, if that we dissente and
disagree among our selves. For when as he commands those which hurt one
of their brethren, to come first in favor with him. before they offer their
gift, he signifies unto us, that so long as we are through our own falte
alienate from our neighbors, we have no access unto God.

Wherefore, if men by their hatred and ire, do pollute and corrupt al their
worshyping which they give unto God, we may thereby gather how greatly he
estemeth mutual amity, brotherly love, peace and concord amongst us. M.
Christ therefore notes the error and false persuasion of the Jews, which
they conceived of their oblations, in the which, they so put and placed al
their service of god, ye they thought they did him hie pleasure, if they did
often use to offer gifts unto him, whom they thought to have such pleasure in
them as have the princes of this world, to whom gifts are more acceptable the^
the concord and unity of their subjects. But Christ teaches us, that God
does specially require of us to agree among our selves, and that without this
concord, he does not accept those things which are offered unto him, and
which seem to partaine to his honor. But we must understand that the same
which is spoken here of offerings is, by a figure (called Synecdoche) spoken,
of prayer, of alms deeds, and such like also. For the scripture calls alms
deeds, ^lip. 4.
the sacrifices of a good heart, and yet we hear of Paul's mouth, Cor. 13.
that he which bestows all his substance and goods upon the poor, and yet
has not love, is nothing.

Finally God does take, and acknowledge none to be his children, but those
which be have the^ selves as brethern one toward an other.

And there remembrest, that thy brother has ought against thee. C. Although
Christ commands them, which are iniuriouse toward their brethren, to seek
to please and pacify them again, notwithstanding under one color he shows
how preciouse concord is before God.

24. Leave there thine offering before the aultare: and go thy way first, and
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

Leave there thine offering. M. He says not take away thy gift, for he would
not have us to despair of the grace of God which may be recovered, neither
would he yt we should leave of to worship God. As if he should say: that which
thou have begone in offering thy gift (according to the prescript law) is good,
so that you do not neglect that which ought first to be done. C. Notwithstanding
this question might be objected. Answer.
This question may easily be answered thus. That the words of Christ do
perteine, and tend to no other end then to show, how falsely they profess
the^ selves to be worshippers of God, which despice their afflicted brethren.
For under the color (as it was showed eue^ now) he does declare ye external
exercises of divine worship, by the which men often times do feign godliness, a
great deal more then they do in deed testify ye same. And go thy way first.
M. The bishops of Rome teach us an other manner of lesson the^ this: The bishop
of Romes doctrine.
for they say go first to ye priest, and confess thy syns unto him, and then
approach to the ecclesiastical communion. But Christ truly sends him not to
the priest, but to his brother what so ever he be, whom he has offended.

And be reconciled. B. To be reconciled, Reconciliatio^
is (al hatred and discord set apart) to restore all the former love, concord,
friendship, necessity, and familiarite that was wo^t to be. And then come. B.
By these words our savior Christ means nothing else, but that
reconciliation was of more price the^ sacrifice, yt which sacrifice in those
days ( Moses law flourishing) was counted most excellent. This was agreeable to
ye which the prophet Osee has. Osee. 6.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice, and I esteem the knowledge of God more
then burnt offeringe. M. He beddeth them not therefore to offer according to the
manner of the law, and yet for all that, he forbids them not.

For as yet the time was not come, that these rightes and ceremonies should
cease. But he behaueth him self warely, least he should offend the Jews,
the which warynes also, he used in a another place, Math. 23.
saying. These ought ye to have done, and not to leave ye other undone. Also by
this sentence he does signify, that ye falte of injury is remitted before
God, if that brotherly unity be restored by reco^ciliation. The^ says he
offer thy gift, as if he should say, then is the gift thanckeful and acceptable
in the sight of God. V. This sentence of Christ is agreeable, with the saying of
S. John, who writes thus. Derely beloved, if our heart conde^pne us not, then
have we trust to God ward, and what so ever we ask, 1. John. 3.
we receive of him, because we keep his co^mandementes, and do those things
which are pleasant before him

25. Agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art in the way with him,
least that at any time thy aduersarye deliver thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the minister: and then thou be cast into prison.

Agree with thine adversary. C. Although Christ does seem to proceed and go
forward with this matter, and not only to exhort those to reconciliation
which had done injury to their brethren, but also which are unjustly
provoked: yet notwithstanding he rather had respect to an other end, namely,
yt he might cut of the occasion of hatred and discord, and that he might
show the way and mean to increase good will: The cause of Injuries.
For whereupon comes so many injuries, but only that so many men are so gredy
of their private right: that is, they seek their own commodity, by other
men's loss and damage? For all men are so blinded with self love, that they
flatter them selves in evil causes.

Christ therefore, to thend he might touch hatred, contentions, striffes, and
all kind of injuries: he reproves that pertinacy, the welspring of al these
evils, and appoints his to be ready to moderation, and equity, yt they
giving place to extremite, may redeem peace and friendship with such equity. It
were (truly) to be wysshed for, yt no strife or contention might at any time
happen among us. And this is certain, yt men, at no time should come into
strife and contention, if that the meek and gentle behavior were amongst the^
which ought to be. A remedy against conte^tion.
But because it is almost impossible, but that strife do arise. Christ shows
the remedy, by ye which they may be abated, namely if we bridle our affections,
and ar redyer to depart with loss, then to prosecute our right with obstinate
rigor. E. He calls him an aduersarye, with who^ we have strife and actio^ in
the law. But Christ does revoke and withdraw those that are his, from strifes
and contentions, taking his argument of the danger ensuing. Oftentimes he that
has best right, has most wrong in judgment, and he that is worthy of
ponishement, overcomes. Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in
judgment, lest thou feel the extremity of the law. While thou art in the
way. C. That is, while ye matter as yet ha^geth in equal balla^ce. Luke. 1^
Christ often times used this exhortation, as apereth in Luke, where the sermon
made in the mount is not declared, but an epitome of diverse of Christ's sayings
is gathered. Hereby also apereth what is to agree in the way, namely before
the matter be brought unto ye judge.

Lest at any time thy adversary deliver the to the judge Some expound this part
metaphorically yt the heavenly judge will deal with us extremely, in so much
that he will remyt nothing, unless we seek to pacify those contentio^s which
we have with our neybours. But more simplely it may be taken that Christ
admonishes how that this is most profitable for us, The co^tiouse (...) shall
fele^treme iu^ment.
to agree betimes with our adversaries. And yet we must not deny, but that the
similitude is very aptly referred to God, because he shall feel judgment
without mercy, which is troublesome with his brethern, and given to extreme
contention. Therefore ye simple and true meaning is this. If there happen any
contention among you, by and by agree one with an other, for I will not have
you to contend one with an other about your right, but rather give place and
suffer wrong. And the judge deli. The old interpretour has translated ye
greek word thus, and the judge deliver the to thee iayler. But ye minister or
iailer is he which fulfilleth and executes the commandment of the judge.

26 Verily I say unto thee, thou shall not depart thence until thou have paid
the utmost farthinge.

Verily I say unto thee, thou shall not depart thence. As if he should have
said, if thou be cast once into prison, having then no liberty to agree with
thine aduersarye, thou shall not only get affliction of thy body, and
ignominy, but also thou shall not be delivered until thou have paid the very
uttermost farthing, which thy adversary shall require, where as before he had been so far provoked thou myghtest have agreed for less. Even so in renuynge of
frendeship, be thou not to curiouse in examininge who was in the fault most:
only se that thou depart from somewhat of thy right, so that thereby unity and
concord may be kept. C. But here the papists very fondely with a perpetual
allegory of this place, ^e penny pur^ory of the ^pistes is ^e builded.
do build their purgatory. It is most plain and evident, that Christ did
show of the benevolence and good will which ought to be among men. Yet they are
nothing at all ashamed, to pervert his words, and to wrest the same into a
contrary sense, so that they may blind and deceive the ignorant and
unlearned. But because they deserve not any long confutation, we will show in
one word, how shameful their folly is. They feign the adversary in this place
mentioned to be the denyll. And Christ truly, (as is evident by the text)
commands the faithful to be louinge to him, namely to the aduersarye. So
that by this reason the Papists would have us friends and brethren with the
devil. But let them (to find out their pouling penny purgatory) be brethren
and frindes with the devil and they list, for we will not so paynefully be
purged.

Until thou have paid the uttermost farthinge. C. Now if it be lawful to
cavil, here also is their fond error confuted, and refelled. For if they
which are once in purgatory never come out again, until they have paid the
utmost farthyng, it follows that the prayers of them which are alive, for the
dead, are but vain, and of none efecte. Neither does Christ admit other men
with their satisfaction to pay the debt, but requires every man to pay his
own debte. So that if masses, dirges, trentalles, and other satisfactions be
unprofitable, how hot so ever the fire of Purgatory do burn and flame, yet
shall the kytchens of the priests and moonkes be feruente cold, for which
cause they fight so earnestly M. Wherefore this is to be noted, that the Apostle
Paul does diligently teach, that there is no sauinge health for mankind, but
only in the mercy of God, by the blood of Jesus Christ, by the which we are
redeemed, and reconsiled to the father, if we cleave unto Christ with a sure
faith, to the which doctrine, the dream of purgatory fire, is clean contrary.

27 You have hard what was said of old time: Thou shalt not committ adultery.

You have heard what was. C. Christ proceeds in his disputation. B. and
restores the other commandment to his proper sense. Bu. The Phariseis
thought that they fulfilled the law very well, if any committed not adultery,
that is, they were thought holy and just, if they absteyned from other men's
wives, being contented with their own having no care of impure, and filthy
thoughts, and communication. C. Therefore our lord teaches us, that the law
of God is not only in pollitike order, the guide of our life, to reform
external manners, but also that it requires pure and sound affections of the
heart. But we must remember that which was spoken of before, that although
Christ reherseth the words of the law, yet notwithstanding he reproves the
gross and wrong sense, which false interpretours have brought in. Verse. 17.
For already he has declared that he came not to renew the law, but as a
faithful interpretour to fulfill the law once given.

28 But I say unto you, that who so ever looks on a woman to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her in his heart already.

But I say unto you. Bu. By this commandment he teaches that al kind of
filthiness uncleanness, and concupisence of the flesh in the heart, in the senses,
in signs, and in talk, is prohibited and forbidden. Adultery.
C. For he says that they are not only adulterers before God, which defile
other men's wives, but also they which pollute their eyes, with ungodly
desire. This is a figurative kind of speech: because men do not only make
their eyes gilty, but also their wishes and inflammations of their heart.
Therefore Paul appointed chastity in the body and spirit. 1. Cor. 7.
But Christ here had a very gross opinion to confute: because ye Jews thought
that they only ought to refrain from the external, and carnal copulation.
Notwithstanding because the eyes does allure the mind with his intisementes,
and lust does pearce, and burst forth as it were through these windows,
Christ used this form of speech, when he would disalowe and condemn
concupicence of the flesh. Concupise^ce.
And that may easily be coniectured, by this word of lustinge. By the which
we are taught, that they are thought to be adulterars before God, not only
which conceive whoredom in their minds with a fixed and sure consent, but also
such as give place to every prick of the flesh. Wherefore the grosenes, and
open hypocrisy of the Papists is exceeding, The Papists deny concupisence to
be sin
which deny concupisence to be syn, until the heart of man wholly consents
to the same. But it is no marvel that sin is made so slight of the^, which
never think on their vice, but ascribe to merits, the righteousenes of
works.

M. We see therefore that Christ in this place deals not with Puplicanes and
sinners, but with hipocrites, Iusticiaries, and proud phariseis, whose
hipocrisy always resisted the doctrine of Grace. For when as they were impure,
and polluted with sin, yet they would in no wise seem so to be, because they
did always hyde the said uncleanness of their hearts with that external
show of sanctimonye and outward holiness. To the end he might bewraye this he
has restored the vigor and parfecte strength of the law: and therefore he
speaks of him, which does not only covet with the heart, but also
fulfylleth the same concupisence, and brings it to pass in deed. Yea, and
the law it self condempneth this concupisse^ce or lust, Exodus 20.
as apereth in Exodus. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife.

The Jews knew this, but they did not consider that the lust of the heart was
before God, even as the actual deed of adultery. Bu. Notwithstanding let no
man flatter him self upon the words of Christ, or take occasion to do evil,
and say, if lust make me an adulterer, I will bring the same to efecte, or I
will committ the actual deed, that I might not be counted so in vain. The
adulterer in will and mind.
For truly thou shalt not be so called, or counted without just cause, and
thy deserving, which haste done all that the filthy adulterar does, saving,
the very actual deed, which no doubt thou would have done, if thou myghtest
have had liberty, time, and occasion, to the fynishynge of the same.

Therefore thy virtue did not stay thee from adultery, but having no power,
and occasion also being contrary to thy purpose, thou art let, so that thou
also art unjust, and an adulterer. But for certain, thou do more greuousely
offend and doste deserve more cruel ponishme^t if thou only quench not the
burning fire of concupiscence, but also, if thou bridell not thy self from
the impure and fylthy action. But forsomuche as there is no man living, which
at some time has not lusted, the lord approuethe by this law, that all men
are subject to sin, and need the grace of God, and the justification of
Christ, which is only just, impoluted and pure, and does particypate unto
us his righteousenes by faith: by the which name, the Apostels called faith,
and our righteousenes, and the parfection of the law.

29. If thy right eye hinder thee, pluck him out, and cast it from thee. For
bet-it is unto thee, that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole body
should be cast into hell.

If thy right eye offend thee. C. Because that Christ might seem to severely
to urge men in this natural imbecillitie and wekenesse of flesh and blood, he
does prevent al those mutterings that might be made. To be short, he declares
that although it be hard, sharp, and troublesome, which the lord
commands: yet notwithstanding we are not thereby excusable: because the
ryghteousenes of God ought to be of more price unto us, than all other
things, which are dear and preciouse. For some might say, what shall
becomme of us, if the matter be so, when as we be so apt to all evil
cogytations and thoughts, that we can scarce turn our selves about, and
cast our eye on the one side, but strayghtewaye unlooked for, one daungerouse
snare or other appears, set and pytched before our eyes, to take us.

To this he faith, Again, and again, yea continually ye must take heed,
^unswere.
that you have a consideration and respect to your own infirmity, yea, see
that ye avoid all occasion of offense and provocation, neither let any thing
at no time be so dear unto you (if it bring to destruction) for whose sake,
you should suffer your selves to be seduced, and so to incur the danger of
everlasting peril and pain. There is nothing so near unto you, nothing so
conjoined and knit, nothing so nere of blood, yea, there is nothing so
entierly beloved of you, which ought not to be cut of, if so be that occasion
required, yea, although it were one of your members, and that the pryncipall
and most necessary, as the right eye, or the right hand. For there ought no
member be unto us of such estimation, and price, that for the love of the same
we should forsake God, the creator of our whole body. C. Neither yet, does
Christ mean that we should mangle our body, and destroy the same, that we
might obey God: but because al me^ would wish, not to have their senses so
brydled, but that they might have the free use of the same, Christ teaches
hyperbolically, that we must cut of what so ever is contrary to his will. And
he does the same very warely: because men do to licentiousely in this poinct
favor them selves. If the mind were pure, then a man should have his eyes and
hands obedient to him, ^^e eyes and ^^des are ^yded by the ^rte.
In the which it is certain that there is no proper motion. In this therefore
we sin greatly, that we are not so careful in avoiding of daungerouse
snares, as it becomes us. B. For we must shun and fle al occasion: and the
more we find our selves inclined and given to evil, the more we ought to
refrain our mind from the same.

30. And if thy right hand hinder thee cut it of and cast it from thee. For
it is better for thee, that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole
body should be cast into hell.

And if thy right hand hinder thee. A. This verse tendethe to the same effect
that the former did. C. The Greek text has, if it offend thee. To offend or
hinder, is to make a man stomble and fall in the way of the lord. This is a
life acceptable unto God namely to abide in faith and love, whereby a man may
go forward, in the obedience of God.

M. Here is to be noted what great necessity of auoydinge of offense, the
lord propounds unto us. For if that so necessary members and isntrumental
helps of the body, are not to be retained and kept, The wicked inclination
of man's nature.
if they be a hinderaunce unto health: what shall we then say of them, which
so gredely cleave unto vile things yea, of no reputation, but of the vanity of
this world, that they will rather hasarde and put in venture the benefyte of
eternal life, then they will be secluded from them? For it is better. etc. M.
This reason is taken of the profit of preserving the whole. For better it is
that some part perish, then that the health of the whole body should be put
in danger.

A. The same matter in effect is handled, where he entreats of auoydyng of
offenses, which follows in the.18. chap.

31. It is said: who so ever puts away his wife, let him give her a letter
of diuorcement.

It is said. Bu. These words do parteyne to the law, of eschewinge
adulterye, and do teach that truly and vndefiledly we ought to keep the
faith of wedlock. C. For even as the Jews thought that they behaved the^
selves falsely and amiss before God, if they kept not the law after a
politic order, even so again, what so ever the pollitique or moral law did
not prohybite, they fondly immagined that it was at their pleasure:
Diuorcementes.
Moses in respect of the external order, did not forbid the diuorcementes
with the wives (which were wont to be observed) but only to take away the
occasion of lust, he commanded, that a byll of dyuorcemente should be given
to her which was divorced: For it was a certain testimony of manumission, and
free liberty, that ever after, the woman might be free from the bondage and
power of the man: and also the man by the same, did acknoweledge and confess,
that he did not put away his wife, for any ccyme nor fault, but because she
did not please him.

Hereupon there sprang this error, that none which used this diuorcement was
in fault, if so be they satisfied the law.

But amiss they took a rule out of the civil law, of living a godly and holy
life. For moral laws are often times framed according to the manners of men:
but God in his spiritual law had not respect what men could do, but what they
ought to do. So that in the same is contained the parfect and sound
righteousenes, although we have not power to fulfill it. Therefore Christ
admonysheth us, that all things which Moses law does allow, are not lawful
before God. By the cloak, and color of the law says he, he abuses him
self with puttinge away his wife, The holy estate of wedlock.
gives her a byll of deuorcement: but the bond of wedlock is more holy, then
that it may be losed at the will and pleasure of men. For although the man and
the wife with their mutual consent do join and couple them selves together:
yet notwithstanding God does knitt them together with an inseparable knot,
that they might never after depart except it were for fornication.

Let him give her a byll of. A. The reason of this byll of diuorcement was,
that it was lawful for the wife divorced to conioyne her self to an other man,
and never more to have to do with her former husband, but should be unto him
as an aliant and stranger. The man did declare his own fylthynes, when he gave
this byll of dyuorcement. Some write that this byl of diuorcement here
mentioned, was made after this form folowinge, as should appear by a copy
taken out of the law of the Hebrews.

THis byll made the nine and twenty day of June, The manner of the bill of
dyuorcement of the Jews.
in the year from the creation of the world five thousand and thirty,
witnesses that I H. R. the son of W. R. dwelling in the city of London,
have well advised my self, no man constraininge me, and have dismissed, set at
liberty, and left thee A. R. to thy self, which haste been heretofore my
wife. And now having dismyst thee, and set thee free, I give thee leave to
do what thou wylt, and to go and geeue thy self to wife to whom so ever it
shall please thee. In witness whereof I give unto thee this bil of diuorcement,
and dimissory epistle, being an instrument of liberty, according to the law
of Moses, and Israel.

And thus much as concerning the bil of diuorcement, Math. 19
which in Greek is called Apostosion. Of this bill Christ speaks thus.
Moses for the hardenes of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives,
but from ye beginning it was not so.

32 But I say unto you, that who so ever puts away his wife, except it be
for fornication, makes her to break wedlock: and who so ever maryeth her
which is divorced breaks wedlock also.

But I say unto you. M, Many of the civil laws are not good in that they
permite evil things, as we said even now, and that for the malice of the
subjects, that the public and common estate should not be troubled, even as
we se brought to pass in the suffering of vsery, Usury.
by the which constitution and decree, there is set a certain mean of
couetousenes, and help to their necessity and need, which needs must
borrowe other men's money. Again, they forbid not all evil things, neither
do they ponishe those things, which they forbid not, as anger, hatred,
disdain, covetousness, the impiety of the heart, and such like. Neither do they
command all good things, for they appointe nothing of faith, of hope, of
love, of the fear of God, of patience, of brotherly love, and such like. A.
Therefore for so much as this law of Moses was altogether politic Christ as
a heavenly master, teaching true godliness, shows what must be done in this
business: he says yt the wife may not be put away: Except it be for
fornication. For worthily and not without just desert, is that wife cast of,
which has violated and broken that holy knot, and defiled her husbands bed,
because through her fault, the man obteyneth liberty.

Makes her to break vvedlocke. C. Namely if she marry an other. Of this you
may read more at large in ye.19 cha. following.

33. Again, ye hard how it was said unto them of old time, thou shalt not
forswear thy self, but shall perform to the lord those things that thou
swearest.

Again ye have hard. Bu. This third example, is partly in the 20. of Exodus
and in the.19. of Leuit. and partly in the.30 of Numeri, and 23. of Deutro This
same commands of the sanctification and glorifiyng of the name of God, of
the constancy and performance of words, of the just moderation of the tongue,
that we use not the same to lycenciously.

Thou shall not forsvveare thy self. C. This sentence of Christ also here
spoken, ^es.
is not the correction of the Law, but rather a true and proper
interpretation. For God did not only condemn perjury in the Law, but also
the rashenes of swearing, which did derogate the reverence of his name.
Neither does he only take the name of the lord God in vain, which
forsweareth him self, but he also which in trifling and vain things, or in
common talk, rashely and contemptuously takes the name of God. Finally, when
as the Law did condemn every profanation of the name of God, the Jews did
imagine that the fault only consisted in perjury Christ now reprehendeth
this error so gross, and commands that we perform our vows and oaths to
the lord: For he which after an oath begyleth his neighbor, is not only
deceitful to men, but also is injurious to God But perform. B. Some refer
this performaunce to vows, when as any thing religiously is promised to God.
But this sentence of Christ does very well comprehend all couenauntes,
vargaines, and promyses, which are confirmed with taking the name of God. For
God is then made a witness between the parties and a suertie, to whom they give
their faith.

C. Therefore he that forsweareth him self does not only break promise with
men, but also with God, because he took God to witness.

34 But I say unto you, ye shall not swear at all: neither by heaven, because
it is the seat of God.

Ye shall not swear. C. Many are deceived in this word (at all) thinking
that Christ thereby did condemn, ^pinion (...) Ana^stes.
all kind of oaths without exception. As the Anabaptists, who thought that
Christ did admit no man to swear for any kind of cause, in yt he forbad to
swear at al.

But by the text it self ye meaning is best gathered. For inco^tine^t it
follows. Neither by heaven nor by earth. Of oaths.
Who now sees not that these kinds of swearing, or particulers, are added
expositiuely, that they might express the first member by destincte
enumeration. The Jews had a disordered kind of swearing, and when they did
swear by heaven, by the earth, or by the altar, they did count it as
nothing. Christ to the end he might reprove this vice plainly declares that
they must not swear at all, neither by this nor by that, neither by heaven nor
by earth, nor by any thing. Whereby we may gather that this word At all is
not referred to the substance, but to the form of an oath: otherwise, in
vain he should have rehearsed these particulers. Wherefore the Anabaptists
bewraye their gross ignorance, for while they curiously persiste in urging
one word, they ouerpasse, and perceive not the whole tenor of his talk. A.
Christ speaks here of busynes and affairs, and familiar talk, about the
which there is no necessity of an oath required. In necessary causes, it is
not only permitted to swear, but also is commanded of God, as appears in
the sixte of Deutronom. Deuteronomy. 6.10.
And the Prophet Jeremy says, that an oath is to be taken in truth, in
Judgment and righteousness. Christ did often times swear, Paul used an oath,
Hebr. 6.
God also swore by him self. Therefore the effect is this, that the name of
God is by other means taken in vain then by swearing. Therefore men must
abstain from all superfluous kind of swearing, We must not swear but when
just occasion urges.
and where just occasion serves there to swear. Wherefore Christ mente
nothing else but this, that all kind of oaths were unlawful, which by any
abuse did profane the holy name of God, to the reverence whereof they ought to
serve. V. Finally he that swears does two things: first he takes God to
witness, except he keep his oath. And thus he constrains God to take
ve^geaunce, by the mention of his honor, truth and office. Neither by heaven.
C. They are greatly deceived which expound these manner of oaths to be
corrected of Christ, because we ought to swear by God only. For the reasons
which he brings, do tend more to the contrary, He that swears by any
part of the world swears by God
that then we swear by the name of God when we swear either by heaven or by
the earth, because there is no part of the world, in the which some special
note or mark of the glory of God is not imprinted. Answer.
so often as we swear by his creatures. We may answer that corruption is
adjoining to idolatry, when that either the power of judgment, or the
authority of approving testimony is deferred and brought to them. For the end
of an oath is to be considered, because men called God the revenger of falshod,
and the defender of truth, as we have showed already a little before. This
honor cannot be given to another without the violating of his majesty. In
consideration of this, Hebr, 6
the Apostell says. Men verily swear by him that is greater the^ them selves,
and an oath to confirm the thing is to them an end of all strife: So that
this is only proper to God, to swear by him self. Even so in old time men
did use to swear by Moloch, In matters of importau^ce we must swear by God
only.
or by some other Idol, and so they appointed another in Gods stead, to be a
knower of secrets, and judge of minds: by the which they did take away the
right appertayning to God. Even so at this day, they do no less offend
which swear by angels and other dead saints. God therefore in all things is
only to be taken for a witness.

Because it is the seat of God. M. These words appertain also to ^^e
Prophet when he says. Esaias. 66.
Thus says the lord, The heaven is my seat, and the earth is my foot
stool. C. The heaven therefore is called the throne or the seat of God, not,
that he is there included and shut up, but that me^ may learn to lift up
their minds, so often as they think of him, and that we might not imagine any
earthly thing of him.

A. To this effect tends the beginning of the lords prayer, wherein we are
commanded to call him our father which is in heaven. Math. ^ Luke. ^


35 Neither by the earth, because it is his footestoole: Neither by Jerusalem,
because it is the city of the great king

Neither by the earth. M. This sentence also is taken out of the foresaid
place of the Prophet Esaie. Christ speaks here of a kingely majesty, to put
us in mind of a heavenly majesty and dignity. Great is the excellency of a
kings throne, neither do the footestoles of kings want their honor. Let no
man therefore think that this earth in ye which we live is without the glory,
majesty and power of God. C. The earth is called the foot stool of God,
that we might know, God i^ where.
that he is every where, and that he cannot in the space of place he
comprehended.

Neither by Jerusalem. M. Although the earth is the lords and all that
therein is (as the Prophet David says) and therefore ought reverently to be
inhabited by the grace and favor of the divine majesty: Yet notwithstanding,
Psalm. ^^
it is worthily required, that those places, in the which the goodness of God is
more highly extolled, should be more honorable then others. Such was this
city because of the Temple, priesthood, worship and word of God, and
because the lord had chosen the same to be the seat of his empire. Psalm. ^
To the probation whereof these places followyng, do serve. I have appointed him
my king upon my holy hill of Sion. Again: Daniel
Turn thy wrath away I beseech thee, from thy city Jerusalem, and from
thy holy hill. Moreover, Math. ^
the deuell carried him into the holy city. Math. ^
And they came into the holy city. It is called therefore the city of the
great king, because there, more plentifully he showed his power, and the signs
of his presence, not that he was therein included. Now Jerusalem is become
the whole world, as it was spoken of before by the Prophets. God will be
called upon and known every where. M. It is not with out great cause that
Christ in this place calls God the great king: for this city began to give
more reverence to king Herod, and to the Roman power, then it did unto the
God thereof.

36 Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one
hear white or black.

Neither shall thou swear by. C. When men swear by their head, they offer
their life (which is the singular gift of God) as a pledge of a good faith.
Bu. Furthermore, they usurp the power which is peculier unto God. For we have
not such power over our heads that we can make one hear which is least,
either white or black. God is the ruler of our head, therefore we swear by
God when we swear by the same. A. Here we are admonished that there is nothing
so small of reputation in the creatures of God, in the which there appears
not the majesty of God, by whom it was made.

Christ therefore would have us use the creatures of God with his fear, yea,
and to have the members of our body in honor, least we abuse the same.

37 But let your communication be ye, ye, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is
more then this comes of evil.

But let your communication. Now Christ in the second place does prescribe a
remedy, ^he in ^ning is ^ed.
namely that men ought syncerely, and in good faith to bargain commonly one
with an other: because that then the simplicity and true meaning of their
talk shall be no less, then an oath among them which regard not sincerity.
And certainly, it is an excellent order in correcting faults, to note and
mark the springes, ^ause of ^ing.
out of which they flow. For whereof comes such promptnes in swearyng, but
because in so great vanity, in so many deceites, in such inconstancy and
wavering, nothing is credited? Christ therefore requires us to be
circumspecte in our talk, and constante in our words that we need not to
swear any more. For the repetition as well of the affirmation as of the
negation here mentioned, pertayneth to this end, to teach us to stand to our
promyses.

Ye, ye, and nay, nay, E. Christ here teaches us how we should bargain:
namely that we be simple and constant in that thing which once we affirm, or
deny: if we affirm any thing, to do it truly, and if we deny any thing, to
deny the same also truly. The like manner of speaking used Paul also, saying:
2. Cor. 1.
When I was thus wise minded, did I use lightness? Or think I carnally those
things, which I think? that with me should be ye, ye, and nay, nay, God is
faithful: for our preaching to you, was not ye and nay. Men very seldom do
use to affirm or deny truly yt which they think, but are delighted with
lies: and that is the cause that we have such Indentinge, such wrapping and
tangling, such fouldinge and byndinge in obligations. As though there were no
credit in men at al, which no doubt is very small.

For whatsoever is more. C. Because this is the true kind of bargayning, when
men speak no more with their tongue then they think in their heart: Christ
pronounces that whatsoever excedeth this is sin. Neither is their judgment
to be allowed which think him to be in fault of the oath, that will not
believe him which speaks. For Christ teaches that men are in fault that
they will be constrained to swear: because, if there were any faythfulnes
among them, if they were not waueringe, and double tonged, they would have
simplicity and true dealyng. Neither yet does it follow, but that it is
lawful to swear so often as necessity does require: because the use of many
things is pure and good, the original whereof is vicious.

Comes of evil. There are some which expound this to be meant of the deuel.
Math. 13.
As when it is said. Then comes the evil man and takes away that which
was sown in his heart. For the which Mark has. Satan came, and Luke, The
deuel came. etc.

38 Ye have hard how it was said, an eye for an eye, and a toothe for a
toothe. Bu. The fourth example which the lord brings out of the law, is
taken out of the.xxi. Exodus 21. Leuit. 24 Deuteronomy. 19.
of Exodus and the xxiiij of Leuiticus, and the.xix. of Deutro. By that law,
God would have his people beware, least that any of them did rashely hurt one
another. To this place agrees not that which is written in Leuiticus: Leuit
19.
Thou shall not aue^ge thy self, nor be myndefull of wrong. But we must
consider that this was spoken to private persons, and the other law, (as to
take eye for eye, toothe for toothe) was permitted only to the Judges and
Seniores of the people, as a punisheme^te to be executed upon the offender, and
a satisfaction for the same. Now the Jews upon this law thought, that they
being hurt, might seek to requite one injury with an other, and so to be
revenged for every wrong done unto them. But Christ teaches them the contrary,
that although a common defense were committed to the judges, to subdue the
wyckd, and to bridel their force, yet that they ought patiently to suffer those
injuries done unto them.

39 But I say unto you resist not evil: but whosoever gives you a blow on
the right cheke, turn to him thy left also.

But I say unto you. M. By these words Christ seems to be contrary to the
doctrine of the Scribes and Phariseis teaching us to be lowly and gentle minded
to be meke, in suffering evil, yt we might be so far, from reue^ging of our
selves, that we should rather suffer the greatest injury then to requite any,
Sufferance.
whether it were in our power to do it by right or by wrong. C. There are two
sorts of resisting, the one is whereby we repel injury without hurt, the
other is, whereby we revenge or requite. For although Christ does not permit
those which are his to revenge, yet notwithstanding, he does not forbid them
to eschew unjust violence. Also S. Paul may be unto us a good interpretour
of this place, saying. Derely beloved, Roma 12.
avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, and so forth: and
by and by he adds, be not overcome of evil but ouercomme evil with goodness.
Here our savior Christ entreats of reuengement, Reuen^^
and to take away the liberty of the same from his disciples, he forbids
them to requite evil with evil: Then he extends the law of patience
farther, that we do not only bear peaceably injuries done unto us, but also
that we prepare our selves to suffer a new. C. Therefore the whole admonition
of Christ tends to this end that the faithful should learn to forget
injuries, and all kind of evil done unto them, least they being hurt,
should, (bursting forth into hatred and ill will) covet to hurt: but that
they should be ready to suffer, if that the wickedness and outrageous madness of
tyrau^tes increase against them. Whosoever gives thee a blow. M. For
examples sake, he adds these, and that which follows, by the which he
declares, what kind of euels we should bear, and with what patience also we
should suffer them. C. But here Iulianus and such like, have sclaundered the
doctrine of Christ, saying: that he did overthrow al laws and judgments.
For (as Saint Augustine in his fifth epistell declares) the purpose of Christ
was nothing else, Augu^ epesto^
but to frame the minds of the godly to moderation and equity, least they
being once or twyse offended and hurt, should be faynte and give over any
longer to bear. And it is most true which Saint Augustine says, that the
law is not put to external works, if so be that thou understand it
rightely. For Christ does seek to withdraw our hands from reuengement, and
not only our hands but our minds also. But when any man may defend him
self and his from injuries, the words of Christ do not let, but that he may
quietly without harm avoid and eschew the force of his enemy. And he would
not harden his disciples to provoke them to malice, which already were to
much set on fire, and inclined to hurt. It is not therefore the part of a
right and true interpretour, to cavil upon syllables and words, but to way
and mark his meaning and purpose which speaks. And it becomes not the
disciples of Christ to be to curious in words, when they know their
masters intent and mind. It is not (truly) hard and obscure which Christ
here speaks, namely that the end of one contentatio^ is the beginning of
another, and that the faithful must by degrees suffer injuries, in the whole
race of their life. Therefore when they be once hurt he would have that same
to be a docume^t to teach them to suffer, that in bearing they may learn to
be pacient.

M. A blow or ruff on the ear, (as we term it) is commonly given by
contempt to women, children, or to such as be effeminate and weak. This
intolerable contempt is thought to be in the^ which would be counted men. For
because, the flesh (once puffed up as it were) can abide nothing less then
injury, joined with ignomy and reproach. But a Christian man even as a lamb,
^odly ^acience
will suffer with all submission and mekenes of mind, this ignominy and
reproach. This blow did Micheas the Prophet patiently suffer. ^g 22. ^ 18. ^
23
This blow did Christ our savior mekely take in good part. This blow also
did Paul put up without grudging thinking him self happy, to bear it for
Christ's sake. If therefore we suffer ignominy and reproach for the word of
God with Micheas, if we suffer our innocence to be stricken with Christ, And
if we be beaten with Paul for the truths sake, we must behave our selves
modestly, in the softenes of the spirit, that by our patience and mekenes the
tyrauntes may know that they do offend. Of the sufferaunce of Christ, Peter
writes thus. (...). 2.
When he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed the vengeance to him that judges righteously.

40 And if any man sewe thee at the law to take away thy coat, give him thy
cloak also.

And if any man. C. Christ here touches the other kind of harm, namely when
the wicked seek to vex and trouble us with strife and contention. In this case
he commands us so to prepare our minds, to patience, that we be not only
ready to lease our coat (being taken away) but our cloak also. He is an
unwise man which stands brabling with words, for we must give our
adversary that which they require, before that we go to law, for such
facillitie does kyndell the minds of the wicked to theft and rapine, even
like unto a fan. What is it therefore to give away thy cloak to him which
goes about by the pretense of the Law to take away thy coat? Will thou
know? It is this. If any man being opressed with wicked and unjust judgment,
does lose that which is his own, and yet is content (if need should be) to
depart from the rest: the same deserves no less praise of patience, then he
which suffers him self to be twice spoiled, before that he comes to the
Judge. Loss of goods and al things else must be borne for Christ's sake.
The sum therefore of Christ's words is this, that Christians, whenever
any goes about to take away part of their goods, should be ready, not only
to lose a part, but all that ever they have: if it be for Christ's sake. And
here we may gather that men are not altogether forbidden the Law, or trial in
judgments, if so be that right thereby may be maintained. For although men
do not proffer their goods as a pray to a thief or a robber, yet they
digress or swerve not at all from the doctrine of Christ, which exhorts us
patiently to suffer even nakedness. He is truly a synguler man, and rare to be
found, which goes to the law with his brother, peaceably with a quiet and
charitable mind. But because it may be that some man defends a true cause
for a public and common wealth, it is not mete that we condemn without
exception, until we know upon what affection it be done.

Give him thy cloak also. E. The Greek word signifies the garmente which
we wear outmoste: Which the Romans call a gown, and the Greeks a cloak.
Although the Greek word it self is sometime used for any kind of garmente.
But the diversity in speech in Mathewe and Luke, alters not the true sense
and meaning. A cloak commonly is of more price then a coat.

Therefore when Matthewe says that we must give our cloak, to him that
takes away our coat, he means that when we have received a littell
damage, we should be wylling and ready to suffer greater loss. The saying of
Luke agrees with the old proverb. The coat is nerer then the cloak. For
they which rob, first take away the cloak, and then the coat.

41 And whosoever will compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

Injury must be borne.
M. Again, for examples sake, Christ shows another kind of injury, under
the which all those things are comprehended, which by tyranny are laid upon
subjects. By this place also Christ does teach us, that we must so show and
declare our patience, that for peace and quietness sake, we are ready to suffer
more the^ is required of us.

42 Give him that asks, and from him that would borrowe turn not thou away.

C. Although the words of Christ do seem so to sound, as though he did
command us to give without respect to every one, yet notwithstanding, by the
words of Luke we may gather an other sense and meaning, which (more plainly
then Matthewe) expounds the sentence: For he places the words of Christ
thus. Luke. 6.
If ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? For
sinners also lend to sinners, to receive such like again. But do good and
lend, lokynge for nothing again: Liberality.
For it is certain that Christ went about, rather to make his disciples
liberal then prodigale. And truly it is foolish prodigality to spend that
rashely which the lord gives. And furthermore we may see here what an
excellent rule of beneficence and liberality the holy ghost gives. First
therefore let us here note, that Christ chiefly exhorted his disciples to be
liberal and beneficial. B. But Christ means not here, that we should give
to every one that asks of us we care not how, Prodigality.
for so we might be deceived by scoffing and fained beggars, and by other
idell persons which are unprofitable members of the common wealth. Therefore
Paul says. 2. Cor. 8.
It is not my mind that other be set at case, and ye brought into comberaunce:
but that thereby egalnes now at this time, and that your abundance may
succor their lack, and that their aboundau^ce may supply your lack, that
there may be equality agreinge to that which is written, he that had much had
not the more abundance, and he that had littell had nevertheless.

A. But this exhortation of Christ does agree very well with the saying of S.
Paul, where he says: Let us not be weary of well doing. Gala.
And while we have time let us do good unto al men, but specially to them of
the household of faith. C. Furthermore least any man should gather occasion
to cavil, by the words of Mathewe, let us consider what Luke says. Christ
does deny that we fulfill the will of God if in lendinge we look for reward:
So he does distinguish charity from carnal frendshyp. Wor^^ love for
For profane men, and such as are of this world, love one an other, why?
surely because of riches, because of gain and reward. But Christ requires
of those that are his friendly love, and perfect amity, as to seek to help
the poor, the nedy, Perfe^ ^ritie.
the stranger, the fatherless, and the wydowe, and all such as are
oppressed, of whom no reward or good turn, is to be hoped for again. For
to what end tends the exhortation of Christ else, when he says. When thou
make a dynner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither
thy kinsmen, nor thy neighbors, least they also bydde thee again, and a
recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the
feeble, the lame and the blind, and thou shall be happy, for they cannot
recompense thee. C. Now we se what it is to give to them that ask, namely to
be liberal to all men which have need of our help, and which cannot requite
again. The (...) prope^ a Ch^^^^
M. This therefore is required of Christians that they be good, gentle, humble,
pacient, loving, merciful, and lovers of unity and peace, so that it pertayne
to heavenly things. Whosoever is not of this mind, he is a despyser of this
sentence of Christ, and no true Christian.

43 Ye have hard how it is said: thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy.

Ye have heard. Bu. This Law depends upon that which went before, plainly
teaching that we must hurt no man, but rather do good to all men, yea, even to
our enemies. M. Thus it is written in the book of Leuiticus. ^t 19.
I am the lord. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but shalt in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, (...) of our ^bour.
that thou bear not sin for his sake. Thou shall not avenge thy self nor be
myndefull of wrong against the children of my people, but thou shall love thy
neighbor even as thy self. Now the Scribes and Phariseis, were so blinded
that they understood those to be their neighbors which were loving and
beneficial unto them, when as notwithstanding it is most certain that God by
the name of neighbor comprehends all mankind. For, because every man is
addicted to him self, so often as their private commodite and profit does
separate one from another, mutual amity and friendship is forsaken. God
therefore to stay and keep us in the bond of brotherly love, does affirm
that all men are our neighbors and brethren, because nature knitteth us unto
them. For so often as one man looks upon an other, because they be al of one
bone and one flesh, he beholds him self as it were in a glass. The which
thing, (...). 10.
the lord him self does more plainly touch, when he tells of the man
which fell into ye hands of thieves. And hate thine enemy. Bu. Let no man so
understand this, as though the law of God given by Moses, commands to hate
any man: C. But this was a Phariseycall addition, by the which they thought
that they only ought to love their fre^des according to the Law, and to hate
their enemies: and so they taught. M. By the which assertion they brought to
pass that the force of the Law being weakened, hatred might increase between,
man and man.

44 But I say unto you, love your enemies. Bless them that curse you. Do good
to the^ which hurt you, pray for the^ that hate you and persecute you

But I say unto you. Bu. Christ being the renewer and co^summation of the
law, that he might restore the commandment of the law (as concerning the
love of our neighbor) to his integrity and full perfection, ^d must ^yded.
he teaches by the word neighbor, that not only our friends but also our
enemies, ought of us to be loved. C. But this one thing does contain all the
former doctrine: for whosoever can find in his heart to love his enemies and
them that hate him, shall easily temper and refrain him self from all
reuengement, yea, he shall be paciente to bear al evil, and ready to help
the poor and afflicted. To be short, Christ shows here the mean and the
way to fulfill this commandment, love thy neighbor as thy self. For there
is none that can fulfill this commandment, but he which not regarding self
love, but rather denying him self, does love those which hate and despise
him. Of this perfect love, we have an example and lively pattern in the only
begotten son of God Jesus Christ, Luke. 23.
which prayed to his father for the^ which crucified him, saying: Father
forgive them for they know not what they do. And in Steven likewise who prayed
for them which stoned him, saying. O lord lay not this sin to their tharge.
Bless them that curse you. C. By the which words we may learn how far
vengaunce ought to be from the faithful the which vengeance, Vengeance ought
not to be in the faithful.
they are not only forbidden to ask of God, but also they are commanded so to
remyt the same, that they rather prepare their minds to crave at ye hands of
God, that vengeance come not upon their enemies although they have deserved
ye same. And let the^ commit their cause unto God, until it shall please him to
take vengeance on the reprobate. Do good to them that hate you. Bu. The like
words writes Paul after this sort. Roma 12.
If thine enemy honger feed him, if he thirst give him drink, and in so doing
thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. C. This (truly) is a very hard
thing and contrary to the flesh, to do good against euel: but yet we may not
excuse our selves, by our faltes and infirmity, but rather simply we must
seek what the law of charity does require, that we being strengthened by ye
power of the holy ghost, may in strining overcome all affections that are
contrary, and against us. Christ here does set forth unto us certain degrees
to observe, namely to love with our heart, to bless with our mouth, and to do
good with our deeds.

These things he requires of us, but to what end? namely.

45 That ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven: for he
makes his Sun to arise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on
the just, and on the unjust.

That ye may be. C. When as Christ does plainly pronounce, that none can be the
sons of God, but they which love their enemies, who dare say that we need
not of necessity observe this doctrine? For his words are thus in effect.
Whosoever will be a Christian, let him love his enemies. The popish monks
have preached liberty.
And yet for all this such horrible liberty have our Monks given to the
people, that they durst boldly say, that this was the counsel of Christ
not his commandment. Our enemies do not deserve our love.
M. Christ says not, your enemies are worthy which ye love. For they prove
you for your proffite, and they are the instruments of God proving your faith
and patience. For here the flesh might draw back and persuade us, that they
are evil which try us, and that they do it of hatred, and that therefore they
are worthy to be hated again. What says Christ therefore. That ye may be
(says he) the sons of your father. C. By the which words, he does set God
before us, as ensample to follow, as though that which he does, became us
also. For he strikes and punishes the unthankful, and often times does
root the wicked and ungodly out of the world, in the which point he does not
set him before us to follow and immitate, because the judgment of the world
does not belong unto us, which is only proper to him: but he would have us
followers of his fatherly goodness and liberality. Love was more higely esteemed
of the heathen Philosophers, tha^ of us Christians.
The which thing not only the profane Philosophers saw, but also certain
wicked and ungodly men, which were despisers of godliness, could confess and
say: We are in nothing more like unto God, then in weldoynge. In fine,
Christ does here show a note and token of our adoption, Love is a token of
adoption.
if we be good and beneficial to unworthy and evil persons. M. Not that he
means, that we by doing these things are the sons of God: C. But because
the same spirit (which is a witness, a seal, and earneste, of our adoption)
does correct the evil affections of the flesh, which resist charity.
Christ of the effect proves that no other are the sons of God but they,
which declare the same seal and token by gentleness, mekenes, patience, and
liberality. M. As if he should have said, by doing these things, ye shall show
and declare your selves to be the sons of the highest: As Luke says. Luke. ^
This therefore is the accustomed manner of speaking in the scripture, There
(...) promi^ the scr^ pertay^ the fre^cies of (...) not to ^sertes.
to put in the place and stead of a reward the free mercies of God when he
seaketh to animate and encourage us to do well. And the reason is this: because
he has respect to what end we were called, namely that the Image of God
being repaired in us, we should lead a holy and a godly life.

Which is in heaven. This is not added in vain. For thereby he shows that
this earthly nativity, by the which we are in the flesh, must be denied, and
the eyes of our minds must be erected and lifted up to heavenly things, in
the which we have such part and fellowship, that we should never forget to
be of an heavenly nature.

For he makes his Sun to arise. M. Some read it thus: Which suffers his
Su^ne to arise, but a great deal better they read it which say. He makes
his Sun to arise. For it is more imperfect to say, he suffers his Sun
because it fulfilleth not the divine providence and goodness which Christ
sets before us here. But Christ here reherseth two testimonies of the
benefits of God, which are not only well known unto us, but also commen to
all men. Temp^ benefit^
As the sun, which shines upon all the world as the rain, which falls
upon the face of the whole earth, as life also, which he gives as well to
beasts as to men, as well to the good as to the wicked. Let therefore the
example of your father (says he) move you, which is merciful to all men. He
is no judge now, but in the fulness of time he will judge the whole world Now
his benefits and gifts are exte^ded both to ye godly and ungodly, God is
^rall to (...)
and this he does to allure all men to goodness, and to the consideration of
his merciful liberality To the godly all things happen for the best, but the
wicked in prosperity are hardened, and think them selves in their wickedness
to be acceptable unto God.

46 For if ye love those which love you, what reward have ye? Do not the
publicanes even so also.

For if ye love. Bu. Now by a comparison. Christ shows plainly, that men do
not according to their dignity and profession, if they love them only of whom
they are beloved, and do good only to the^ of whom they receive benefit
again.

What reward have ye? M. The Jews hoped for a great reward in keeping the
law. But the Phariseis did so expound this, that they thought no love to be
commanded, but the love of their friends. Of this fond imagination and
doctrine, what absurdity follows, Christ by this place plainly declares. If
so be (says he that you will only love your friends, that is to say, those
which love you: what reward can ye hope for? For he which loves his friend
or lover, does bestow love for love, good turn for good turn. According to
the proverb. ^mon ^be.
Manus manum fricat, one good tourn requires another. Which in deed deserves
neither thank, praise, nor reward before God.

Do not the publicans even so. C. In the same sense, (...) 6.
Luke puts sinners, that is wicked and ungodly persons, not that the office
it self is damnable (For the Publicanes were receivers of custom or tribute,
(...) Publi^ were.
for as princes of their authority and right appointe tribute to be paid, so
is it lawful for others, whom they shall appointe to require it) But because
this kind of men was wont to be covetous, yea, gredy and cruel. Further, they
were condemned, because they were counted of the Jews unjust ministers of
tyranny. Bu. To be short, they were evil spoken of among the people, neither
were they counted or regarded among honest citizens, but rather were called
common troublers, the worms and mothes of the people, and robbers, and
poulers. Whereupon, John the Baptiste when they came to his baptime said:
(...). 3.
Require no more then that which is appointed unto you. For if any man gather
by the words of Christ that Publicanes are the worste sort of men, they are
deceived: because he speaks after the manner of the people. As if he should
have said, Publicans, thieves, and robbers, have almost no humanity, yet they
have a certain kind of love in sekinge their profit. M. What shall we now
say of Christians, Christians worse then Publicans.
which love not their fre^des, neither do requite one good turn with another,
men void of humanity, and unthankful? They are far worse then Publicans
and sinners, which were despised of the Jews.

47 And if ye make much of your brethren only, what singular thing do ye? Do
not also the Publicanes likewise.

If ye make much. E. The Greek word signifies if ye embrace your brethren with
a kiss: which fashion was wont to be between friends when they met together,
not only among the Jews, but also among the Greeks and Romans. M. Which
manner of saluting, the Anabaptists have ridiculously usurped, The
Anabaptists use to kiss in token of love.
contrary to the manner of the fathers, as a singular note of Christianisme.

Of your brethe^. E. All our Greek books have of your friends. What
singular thing do ye. A. Or wherein do ye excel others? What do ye that other
me^ do not. As if he should have said a great matter in deed, ye will salute no
man, until such time as ye be saluted of them. The Publicanes do this. E. Instead of Publicanes, some Greek books have Ethenix or Heathen. The which
Chrysostom also observes. Chrisosto^.
A. And the common edition.

48 Ye shall therefore be perfect, even as your father which is in heaven, is
perfect.

Bu. Now at the last, by a short and brief sentence, he does conclude the
whole disputation of the true and perfect meaning of the Law, The fulfilling
of the law.
and of the true righteousness of Christians, and says, yt the sense and proper
meaning of the Law, and the will of God tends only to this end, that we all
endeavor our selves to come to perfection, that is, that every one of us, with
all our power and strength, should go about to express, the image of our
heavenly father in us, that as he is perfect, and has expressed the example
of perfection in the Law, which is his will: so likewise every one of us
should frame our will to his will, and image, that as God is perfect, so
should we be perfect also. Which in deed is counted the true and perfect
righteousness. C. But he means not here that we should be equal unto God in
perfection, but that we should have a certain similitude and likeness unto him
Therefore although we be far unlike unto God, yet we are called perfect, even
as he is perfect, so long as we run at that mark which is set before us.
Also in Luke it is said. Luke. 6.
Be ye merciful even as your father which is in heaven, is merciful. M.
Therefore he would have us perfect in love and mercy, even as our father in
heaven is perfect.

The.vj Chapter.
TAKE heed that ye give not your alms in the sight of men, to the intent that
ye would be seen of them: or else ye have no reward with your Father which is
in heaven.
Take heed that ye give not your alms. B. In the chapter going before, Christ
distinguishes the true sense and meaning of the Law, from the false
expositions of the Phariseis: In this chapter, he begins to declare their
hypocritical deeds, which were counted the special works of religion, as
alms deeds, prayers, and fastinges. Then to the end he might make them more
apt and ready to good works, as to the deeds of charity, by many perswasio^s
he exhorts to commit all the care of life to God, which is now our
father. C. Neither (truly) does Christ in this place without cause exhort
his servants to the study and earnest affection, to good works, that is,
that they should endeavor them selves simplely to do that which is right
before God, and not to boste them selves unto men. First and specially this
admonition is necessary, because ambition is always to be feared in virtues,
neither is there any work so commendable, which is not often times polluted
and defiled, Ambition.
by this vice ambition.

That ye give not your alms before men. Bu. In a certain ancient Greek
book, for this word (alms) is written righteousness, as the old interpretour
reads. Almes^
Alms deeds properly is mercifulnes: notwithstanding use and custom has
brought to pass that alms is called a gift that of compassion and mercy is
given to him that needs. C. But in that diversity, there lies no wait or
force, whether ye read righteousness or alms, because it is manifest enough,
that by them both, the vice of ambition is reproved, which in doing well
looks to have praise of men: Math. ^
A. As did the Scribes and Phariseis, of whom Christ speaks thus. All that
they do, is to be seen of men. Vain in given ^mes m^ auoyde^
C. He forbids not here to do well in the sight of men, but that we should
not do it to this end, to be commended of the^. Bu. For otherwise it is lawful
for us to give our alms publicly, so that our mind have respect unto God,
and brotherly love, not to men, and the praise of men.

Or else ye have no reward. C. By these words he teaches us that our alms
pleases not God, if it be defiled with the study of vain glory.

2 Therefore when thou geuest thine alms, let no tro^pets be blowe^ before
thee, as the hypocrites do, in the Synagoges and in the streates, for to be
praised of men: Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

Therefore when thou geuest thine alms, C. Here he touches by name the vice
which is received by use and custom, in the which the desire of praise, is
not only apparaunt and manifest, but also with the hands almost palpable. For
in common and public places, whereunto many people were wont to resort, Hyp^
geu^
they did distribute their doles or alms to the poor, in the which their
ostentation was manifest: because they sought frequented places, to have many
witnesses of their deeds: and not contented with this they caused tro^pettes to
be sounded. They fained truly that they called the poor together by the noise
of the trompet, so that they never wanted a cloak to shadow their hypocrisy,
when as it is for certain that they did it to have fame, renoume and praise of
men.

But all those that seek to serve men and to please them, do deny God to be
the author and stay of life. So that worthily they are deprived of the
reward.

As the hypocrites do. E. An hypocrite is as much to say as a fayner or
dissembler, ^e descrip^ of an hy^ite.
or a player, which represents the person of an other man, which seems to
be such an one as in deed he is not.

Whereupon, whosoever does feign, gloss or dissemble, may well be called an
hypocrite. ^ocrites of ^es kinds
But there are diverse kinds of Hypocrites. For there are some which although
their own conscience bewray them, yet notwithstanding they sell them selves to
the world for good men: and their vices of the which they are conuicte in
conscience, they seek to hyde.

Other some there are, which do so securely flatter the^ selves that they dare
boldly challenge to them selves before God, perfect righteousness. And another
sort there are which do good, not for the study of that which is right,
neither for the glory of God, but only to get unto them selves same, renown,
and the opinion of sanctimony, to be counted just, perfect, and holy. These
last sort of hypocrites be they whom Christ here touches, who (when they
do their good works to no good end) put on them another person, or show that
they may appear unto the world holy, and true worshippers of God. in their
Synagoges. M. Here these Synagoges are thought of certain, (...) a Sy^geis.
to be convenient places of resort, erected in the streates or market place.
To others it seems to be an ecclesiastical place of resort, whereunto the
people came to bear the word of God. By these notes and show tokens of
Hypocrisy, that which he now adds may be understood when he says. To be
praised of men. Neither can there be showed any other reason, why they gave
their alms openly with the sound of a trompet, rather then in secret,
privily. Bu. And in our time also, the covetousness of priests, and the
arrogance of the people has devised a way and mean, by the which liberality
may be openly celebrated in the church. ^^che hy^sle.
For if any man had violently handled the innocent and done him injury, if any
man had defrauded his brother in bargaining all his life time, yea, if any man
had oppressed the poor, and at length given to the church, goods, tenementes,
or lands, whereby the same might be enriched: such a founder, such an
excellent and liberal benefactor should have been as liberally dealte withal
again. For least so great beneficence should quite be overwhelmed with the
waves of oblivion, a day at the years end was celebrated for ever, in ye
which out of the holy chair, both the name, the family, and liberality of the
geuer, should with all commendations be recited, even as though he had been a
saint on earth. Furthermore for his praise, his funeral verses were song,
yea, and all the belles in the stepell were ronge. Beside this his arms are
set on the church walls, and all his famous deeds with solemnity are blown
into the ears of all men. These solemnities has the covetousness of soul
priests allowed, and this worldly pomp and vanity, has the foolyshe pride
of the people embraced. But harken to, what does the Lord here pronounce
against these things, and such as delighte in them?

Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Bu. As who should say, they
look in vain for a reward, which are after that sort lyberall. For in
their well doing they had not respect unto God and his glory, but to them
selves and the praise of men, which was their shoot anchor. He says not here
they have a reward, but they have their reward. As if he should have said:
It is enough for them, to bear a countenaunc of holiness and piety, and thereby
to get unto them selves a vain rumor, or fame, which vanishes away, and
being therewith content look for nothing else at the hands of God.

3 But thou when thou geuest thine alms, let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand does.

But thou when thou geuest. M. After he had admonished and taught us what we
ought to eschew and avoid, he tells us what we must do: and prescribes a
way clean contrary, to that which the hypocrites do, namely, that as the
hypocrites deal their alms in the sight of men only for vain glory, to have
name and fame: so we when we do good to our neighbors being content with the
will of our father, must mot regard public rumors, but must be desirours
to have all things done secretly. C. For by this saying Let not thy left hand
know what thy rygt hand does. he means that we ought to be contented with
the only testimony of God, and so to stay our selves upon his will, that we
ought not to be carried away with any vanity. M. He says not, let not thy
neighbor know how much thou geueste in thy alms, but let not thy left
hand know what thy right does. As who should say. See that thou seek not
to get the minds and commendations of the people when thou geuest thine alms,
even as thou would hyde it from thy left hand, which is a worker and an
aid of goodness, if it had any intelligence to know what, to whom, how
much, and how often thou did give.

Bu. Let therefore thy alms be far from arrogancy and pride, and worship
God with a pure and uncorrupted conscience.

4 That thy alms may be in secret: and thy father which sees in secret
shall reward the openly.

That thy alms may be in secret. M. As if he should have said. As the
hypocrites give their alms openly, so let thine be given in secreate, and seek
for nothing less the^ the sight of men to praise the same.

C. Notwithstanding this place does seem to be contrary to other sentences of
scripture, wherein we are commanded to edify our brethren by our good
ensample. Answer.
But if we mark and consider the purpose of Christ, we shall easily be
satisfied. He commands his disciples to do good works, True and perfect
alms.
with so pure a mind, that they be void of all ambition, not regardinge who
beholds their deeds, but rather to have respect to the need and necessity
of the receiver. And only to content them self with the praise of God. This
simplicity truly does nothing at all hinder the study and care of edifiynge by
good example. And if we remember that which he spoke a little before, he did
not precisely forbid to do good before men, but rather did condemn
oftentation and boasting. Alms (...) be given foremen, (...) that it be ^
without ^tation.
Bu. The alms therefore is given in secret when the mind is without the
desire of praise and ambition: and when we seek not for vain glory but the
praise of God, although we give to the poor in the sight of men.

And thy father which sees in secret. Here priuelye he touches the
foolishenes of men in that, they think their labor lost, and their work as
nothing, except it be beheld of many witnesses and lokers ^n. Therefore he
says, that God has no need of light to know those things that are well
done: because al things that are hid in darkness, are manifest and plain
unto him. There is no cause then why we should think that to be lost which
is not done in the presence of men: because God has his abiding in darkness as
well as in the light. As the Prophet David witnesses saying. Whether shall I
go then from thy presence, if I clyme up into heaven thou art there, if I go
down into hell thou art there also: and so forth. Also to confute this fond
opinion of men, 1. Sam. 1^ 1. King. ^ Ierem. 7 Psalm. 7
let them consider what the scripture says. Man looks on the outward
apperance, but God beholds the heart. And again. Only God knows the heart
of the sons of men. Also, I am the lord which searches the heart. M. By the
which places of scripture we are taught that all our doings, thoughts, and
imaginations are open before the majesty of God: neither is there any thing
done of us that can be hidden from his eyes.

Shall reward thee openly. Bu. This little sentence, he sets against that,
where he said they have their reward. M. where as he says here, it shall be
given openly, he means at the resurrection of the just, Luke. 14
as Luke says. And in another place, make you friends of the unrighteous
Mammon, that when ye shall have need, Luke. 16.
they may receive you into the everlasting tabernacles. Christ here
admonishes us that in seeking the reward of our works, we should patiently
abide the day of resurrection.

Thy father (says he) shall reward thee openly. But when? Surely when the
dawning of the last day appears, which now is under a cloud, and in secret
darckenesse.

5. And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they
love to pray standinge in the Synagogs, and in the corners of the streets,
because they would be seen of men.

Verelye I say unto you, they have their reward.

And when thou prayest. (...).
B. Prayer, is an other thing, with the which all those that are religyouse
and godly occupy them selves. This prayer did the Phariseies very much feign,
as appears by the reproach, hereafter following, which Christ casts in their
tethe Therefore he pourgeth the use thereof from those vices, which at that time
bare a great swinge with the^, specially, which bare a singular face of
holiness in prayi^g. Of the which, ^abuse of (...).
there were two kinds in especial: the one was hypocrisy, the other was
lyplabour, or vain babbling, which in the Greek toungue is called,
Battologia, of a certain Poet called Battus, which used always to resite one
thing. C. This hypocrisy is a very gross and shameful profanation of the name
of God, because hypocrytes would pray openly to get praise of men, or at
least that they might feign, as though they prayed. ^crisie is ^ouse.
But for as much as hypocrysie, is always ambiciouse, it is no marvel, if it
be so blind.

Because they would be seen. M. This is the vanity and desire of praise,
called in the Greek tongue Philodoxia, by the which we seek not to be honest,
but to seem and to be counted honest.

So the Scrybes and the Phariseyes, did not so truly and fervently pray, as
they seemed, and would gladly be judged, neither were they so careful to be of
a devout mind toward God, as they would be thought. How great this vanity
is, it may easily appear in other matters: as for example, if we had rather
seem to be healthy, the^ healthy in deed, or rich, the^ rich in deed. What
man is there so far beside him self, that had not rather be rich. then only
to seem so to be?

Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Bu. As he spoke of the alms
hipocrites, so now he speaks of the babbling hypocrites, pronouncing with an
oath, that they have their reward: A. because they seek not the glory of God,
Popish prayer contuted.
but to have praise of men. Bu. Here also is the babbling prayers (purchased for
souls health) confuted, which the sacrifisinge prestes for money, full
slightely slubber, with a slender devotion,

6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut
the door, pray thou to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

But thou when thou praiest. M, After he has diswaded us from the hypocrisy
of the Scribes and Phariseys, he does consequently show unto us, how we ought
to pray. The true use of prayer.
Christ therefore commands his disciples, if they will atteyne to the
perfection, and right order of prayer, to enter into their chamber.

For although some (because this being spoken particularly, seems absurd)
expound it allegorically to be the chamber of the heart: yet notwithstanding it
prevails not. We are commanded in many places of the Scripture, to pray unto
God in the open assemblye, Public prayer, and the end thereof.
and in the company of men, and before the whole congregation, and that for the
declaringe of our faith, either for to give thanks, or else to stir others
by our example, to do the like: Neither does Christ withdraw us from this
study, but does only admonish us, always to have God before our eyes, when
we prepare our selves to pray. These words therefore are not to be urged:
Enter into thy chamber, as though thereby he forbad us the company of men,
and denied us to pray aright, except, we were solitary alone in secret. For
he speaks here comparatively, signifiyng that it is better to seek a private
place, then a place frequented, where we may be seen of men praying. For God
would have all those that serve him, to avoid oftentation and vain glory: the
which, if thou banishe out of thy mind, and think it sufficient to please
God only, then ryghtly have thou prayed in thy secret chamber, although in
deed thou have prayed among a great multitude. They do greatly amiss
therefore which say, that the lord here condemns all publyque places,
appointed for prayer, and public prayers also. The old and ancient manner
was to pray in the body of the church, as well do approve the examples of David,
of Solomon, and others Moreover, 1. Cor. 14. 1. Tim. 2
the institution of Paul given to the Corinthians, was such. And in an other
place he says, I will have men to pray in every place, lyftynge up pure
hands. Private prayer and the end thereof.
And it is profitable trewly to the faithful, to withdraw the^ selves, both
from the company, and sight of men into a deserte place, whereby they may more
frutefullye pour out their whole mind, and offer their sighs, and tears,
procedinge of a fervent spirit. Also secret prayer, for an other cause, is
very profitable, as to remove al letts and impedimentes, and to set the mind
at liberty, which else is often times other wise occupied. Christ therefore
him self, when he went to pray, sent away his disciples, and went to the mount
alone, and sometime into the desert. But that is not here handled, for only the
falte of vain glory is reproved. But the sum and effect is this, that
whether we pray alone, or before others, that we be of a pure and vncorrupt
mind.

And thy father which is in secret. S. That is in heaven, where the eyes of
man can not behold him. but he seethe those things that are done in secret,
yea, even in the hearts of men. Shall reward thee openly. C. When Christ
says, that a reward shall be given to our prayers, he sufficiently declarethe,
that what reward so ever the scripture promises, is paid unto us, not as a
debte, but freely without deserte.

7. And when ye pray, babble not much, as the heathen do, for they thyncke,
that they shall be hard for their much bablinges sake.

And when ye pray babble not. C. Here he reproves a another falte in prayer,
Liplabour in praying must be eschewed.
namely much babbling, or liplabour. He uses two words for this matter, but
all one sense. For the Greek word Batologia is a superfluouse repetition: but
Polylogia, is vain pratinge or babbling, with more words then need. M. The
Evangelist here uses this word, much babbling, to show that the same is as
absurd, in prayer before God, as it is in an oration, or sermon, before men.
Cold p^chers vs^ labor.
S. Also those which are distrustful and afraid, and of a cold stomach, and
care not what they speak, in their sermons, use this much bablinge, and
multiplication of words. C. And they likewise which think to pray unto God,
Luke. 1^
and to persuade him with many words. Neither is doctrine contrary to the
continual prayer, 1. These.
commanded in the scripture. For when as prayer is conceived with a seriouse
and earnest affection, the tongue then runs not before the wit (as we say)
but we utter that with the tongue, which the heart first thinks. Furthermore
we may assure our selves, that the grace of God is not gotten with the vain
copy and superfluity of words: but rather the godly and fervent heart,
sends his earnest affections, even like darts, which pearce the heavens.
Popys^ labor.
So that we se how their supersticion is here condemned, which think that God
regards them, through their long circumstances, with the which error, the
papacy is so replenished, that they think prayer to consiste in much
babbling, with often rehersall of Auise, Creedes, and pater nosters in laten,
which they understand not for the most part, and that upon beads: whereby
their mind is so sore occupied in kepinge just tale, that often times, they tell
them selves a sleep. For he which has powered out most words, and most
often has run over his prayers, and said Kirleson, Popish^er is so^uery,
(...) stede^ it pro^ pedle^
christleson, kirleson, how vnsauourly so ever the same came forth, he (I
say) thought him self happy, above others, and to have more exactly made his
prayers: as though with such buzzing, muttering, and mumblyng, the lord were
pleased.

As the Ethnikes do. M. The Ethniks were evil spoken of among the Jews,
because they were Atheistes, and knew not God, being also expert of al
godlynes. This contempt of the Ethniks, abode among the Jews: but the whole
study of godliness, whereby they would seem to be contemners of the Ethnikes as
wicked men, ceased long since. Notwithstanding Christ uses this exaumple of
the Ethnikes, to the intent that he might move their minds. So likewise the
Apostell, by the example of the Gentiles, calls the christians, to the true
conversation of life, and dehorteth them from the filthiness thereof. ^e 1.
Remember says he, that ye were sometimes Gentiles in the flesh. etc. And
again, That ye walk not now as the Gentyles walk in vanity of their mind.

For they think they shall be heard for their E. By this place we see what we
may think of those, which use to babble much, and to occupy their tongue
with superfluouse words. They brag and bost that they pray much, ^abourers
^ompared unto the ^kes.
when as Christ compares them here unto Ethnikes. But let us consider how
Christ prayed, and his apostels prayed, and let us follow the^ so far as they
are the followers of Christ. And in any wise to beware of ostentation and
vaineglory.

8 Be ye not like the^ therefore, for your father knows whereof ye have need
before ye ask of him.

Be ye not like them therefore. A. That is, thyncke not that ye can attain to
any thing at Gods hands, by the vain superfluity and chewing of words.

For your father knovveth whereof. C. This one remedy is sufficient and
enoughe, to take away the superstition here condemned. For whereupon should
this folishnes come, that men should think them selves to profit much, when
as they weary God with their much babbling, except, because they think him to
be like a mortal man, which has need still to be admonished and taught? But
who so ever is persuaded, that God has not only a care over us, but also
knows our necessities, and does seek to prevent our requests, and our
cares, before he be admonished: (...) is not ^d with ^des.
he (al liplabour set aside) shall have sufficient to do to offer his prayers,
so far as it is expedient for the tryinge of his faith: but to come unto God
rhetoricallye with eloquence, as though he would enclyne to words, I
certify thee, it is absurd and folishe. M. The Ethnikes, because they know
not God, therefore worship they not the true God, but the false Gods, yea, the
deaf and the dombe gods, which know nothing also, whom they think, must
be instructed wisely with words, that they may know what is asked, and that
they must be moved with much bablinge, 1. King. 18.
and calling on, as plainly shows the example of the priests of Baal. But
there belongs a another manner of prayer to Chrystians. For they have their
father in heaven, which knows all things, and that before they ask of him,
that they need not much to instruct him. C. But if God know all things,
before we ask, prayer should seem to be in vain, and to none effect. For if
he of his own good will be ready to help us, what need we any prayers unto him.
Answer.
The end whereunto prayer is appointed, answers this objection. For the
faithful do not pray unto God, to put him in mind of things unknown: but
rather to adresse the^ selves, Prayer is the exercise of our faith.
and to make them prompt to seek him: they exercise their faith in pondering
his promises, and to ease them selves, in casting their cares upon him. Also we
pray to testify, that al good things proceed and come from him. And that
which he was determined freely unasked to give unto us, he promises
notwithstanding to give unto us for our requests, and prayers: Wherefore we
must acknoweledge both, that he of his own free will preuenteth our prayers,
and yet that we by our prayers obtain that which we ask.

9. After this manner therefore pray ye. Our father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name.

After this manner therefore pray. C. It is uncertain whether Christ committed
this form of prayer once or twyse to his dysciples: To some this second, does
seem more probable, because Luke says, that his disciples asked him how they
should pray: but Mathewe seems to affirm, that Christ taught it unasked.
Chap. 12,
This may be, that Mathewe gathering the special points of doctrine, omitted
the occasion which Luke declares, about the which thing we will not much
contend.

The first table of prayer. in the which we ask those things that pertain to
the setting forth of Gods glory.
Instead therefore, of Pray ye after this manner. Luke has, when ye pray say.
etc. Howebe it Christ commands not his discyples with express words to
pray, but only shows to what end all prayers ought to be referred. M. For
although the petitions of this prayer ar very few, in them notwithstanding is
prescrybed unto us, what we ought specially to pray for. The Lords prayer
consysteth of six petitions.
C. This prayer consists of six potitions, whereof the three first, have
respect to the glory of God. The other three are appointed to those things
which belong to our health. For as the law of God is divided into two
tables, The law of God is divided into two tables.
whereof the first contains the offices and duty of godlynes, the other of
charity: so Christ in prayinge commands us partly to seek the glory of
God, and partly our own profit. A time convenient for prayer.
Know we therefore that then we are apt and mete, to pray aright, if we he
not only careful for our own profit, but also if we first seek the glory of
god. For it is a preposterous order to care first for that which is for our
self, and to neglect the kingdom of God, which ought specially to be preferred.

Our father which art in heaven. M. Many things are spoken and written of
diverse concerning this prayer: The profou^d treasure contained in the lords
prayer.
and not without cause. For in the same there is inscrutable treasure. And no
doubt many will come after us, which in this prayer, by the grace of God
shall find many things, that as yet were never known, such is the profound
knowledge therein contained. Two things to be considered of them which pray.
C. But there are two things to be considered specially, of them which prepare
them selves to pray, both that they may have free access unto God, and also
that they may put their whole trust Epithete, God is our father.
or title, Christ gives us great occasion to believe: but because this is but
the one part of the goodness of God, he does in the member followinge declare
unto us his divine power.

Which art in heaven. C. For when the Scripture says that God is in heaven,
it signifies that all things are subject to his power, and that the world
and al things therein contained, were made by his power, and held in his hand:
that his virtue and strength is in every place, and that all things are
governed by his providence. The prophet David says. Psalm. ^
He that dwells in the heavens, shall laughe them to scorn. And again he
says. Psalm. ^
As for our God, he is in heaven: he has done, what so ever pleased him. M,
Heaven therefore, as Christ says, is above, which is the seat or throne of
God: 1. King ^.2 Cro. ^
not that he is therein comprehended, as though he were inclusible: but because
thereby he might show the majesty of his divinity to be the greater, and that
whatsoever he showed unto man in this earth by revelations, visions, and
oracles, he might be seen to do it from heaven. C. Furthermore this saying
of Christ (seperatinge God from the order and manner of creatures) does teach
us, not to think him any earthly, or base substance, when we read of him in
the scriptures, because he is hyer then all the world. Now let us way and
consider the purpose and meaning of Christ: Praye^^ be g^^^ upon (...)
namely how that in the very beginning of prayer, he goes about to stablishe
the faith of his servants in the goodness and power of God: because if their
prayers, be not grounded upon faith, Chap. ^
they shall not profit as S. James says. C. Now, when as it is a poincte of
foolishenes, and mad arrogancy, to call God our father, except we be his
sons, graffed in the body of Christ: we may gather, that there is no other
way to come unto God, then by the mean of a medyatour. B. For upon what trust
so bold, Christ i^ made (...) sons*
can we call God our father, except it be in Christ, in whom we are adopted to
be the sons of grace? V. Let us therefore consider to whom we speak, and why
we call him our father we call him so to this end, because he is the true God,
maker of all creatures, which has revealed him self unto us in his son
Christ, for whose sake he favors us, he hears us, and receives us into
his grace and savor.

Hallowed be thy name. C. Here that appears more plain, ^ur pray^ must
^eeke the of God.
which we spoke before how that in the three first petitions, the respect and
regard of our self being set aparte, we must seek the glory of God: not,
because we ought not at all to have respect to our selves, but because first,
and above all things, the majesty of God ought to be preferred. According to
this place of Scripture. First seek the kingdom of God, ^h. 6.
and the righteousenes thereof, and all other things whereof ye have need
shall be ministered unto you. But between these three petitio^s, there is great
affinity and agreement: For the sanctyfication or hallowing of the name of god,
is always joined with his kingdom: and the principal and special part of
the same kingdom consists in this, that his will be done. But if every man
way and consider, how great our coldness is, and our negligence also, in asking
the greatest things of all, we must needs confess, that there is nothing
superfluouse in these three petitio^s: but that they were necessary to be so
distinguished. Bu. And because by faith and a sure trust in Christ, we are the
sons of God, therefore in the first petition, we pray that his name be
sanctified, hallowed, or blessed. For the special duty of children is to
honor their parents. ^llow^ gods
To sanctify or hallow the name of God, is nothing else, then to give the
honor unto God, which is dew unto him that men do never speak nor think
of him, without great veneratio^. And the name of God is here put as it is
named among men.

But where as his name should be correspondent to his works, we understand
that honor, which his virtues deserve: as his power, his wisdom, his
righteousness, his mercy, his truth, and such like. For in this, by right,
God is great, and wonderful, because he is just, because he is wise, because he
is merciful, because he is mighty, because he is true, and so forth: this
majesty therefore (resplendishing and shyninge in such virtues) we desire to
be sanctified: not in God him self, to whom nothing can com or depart: but
that it may be sanctyfied in men, that is, that it may truly be sanctified,
hallowed, and magnified. To this hallowinge is contrary, the profanation of his
name: as when his majesty is diminished, and not so honorablye and reverently
received of men, as it ought to be. Whereupon, Esaias. 52.
thus says the Prophet. My people are brought into heaviness, by their rulers,
and my name is ever still blasphemed, says the Lord. Ezech. 36.
And again, I will sanctify my name again, Which among the Gentiles is
evil spoken of: Ezech. 39.
for ye your selves have dishonored it among them. Also, I will make ye name
of my holiness to be known among my people of Israel, and I will not let my
holy name be evil spoken of any more. Roman. 2.
And S. Paul he says. Thou that make thy boaste of the law, through the
breaking thereof, dishonorest God. For the name of God is evil spoken of among
the Gentiles through you. The sum therefore of this petition is, that the
glory of God should shine among men.

Now we may here se, how wicked they are which judge amiss of the works of
God: if he chastise or correct any of them, they cry out, they complain, they
murmr, yea, and some break into open blasphemies: and if he fulfill not our
desires, we think straight, that he does not sufficiently extend his
lyberalitie toward us. Many prate and talk, either peruersely, or wantonly,
of his inspeakable providence, and secret judgments. Often times his holy
name is taken in vain. Finally the greatest part of the world do profane his
holiness so much as in them lies. Wherefore it is no marvel, if in the first
point, we be commanded, to desire that his name, in the world may have dew and
condingne reverence. We must note also, that in this petition geuinge of
thanckes is contained. For when we desire at all times to sanctifye the name of
God, we geeue praise unto him for all his goodness, and acknowledge the
benefits that we have received.

10. Thy kingedome come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

Thy kingedome come. C. Although the Greek word be simple, the sense
notwithstanding, abides whole, if we read the verb in the imparatiue mood,
as the ancient interpretour has translated it. But first of all, we must have
the difinition of the kingedome of God, to know what it is. Gods kingedome.
For it is said to reign among men, when (the flesh being subdued and the
lusts thereof) they commit them selves willingly to his government.

Man's natural affections resist god
For in this corruption of Nature, al our affections, are wholly the soldiers of
Satan, which resist the righteousenes of God, and so hinder and trouble his
kingdom. Wherefore by this prayer we wish that al impediments being taken
away, he would bring all mortal men to his kingdom, and lead them to the
meditation, of a celestial and heavenly life.

This trewly is brought to pass, by the preaching of the word partly, and
partly by the secret power and operation of the holy ghost. He will govern
all men by his word: but because the bare word (unless the operation of the
spirit be thereunto adjoined) pearceth not to the heart, it is necessary that
both be joined together, that the kingdom of God may be stablished. Let us
pray unfeignedly therefore, that God will show forth his power, as well by his
word, as by his spirit, that all the world may willyngly submit it self
unto him. All imperfection and confusion is contrary to the kingdom of God:
neither is there any thing ordained in the whole world, which he rules not
with his hand and counsel. The destruction of the old man, is the beginning
of gods kingedome.
Hereby we may gather that the decay and destruction of the old man, and the
renouncing of our selves, that we may be translated into an other life, is the
beginning of the kingedome of God. But God reigns after an other manner, when
he scatters his ennemies, and brings their captain Satan under his
subjection, 1. Cor. 15.
until he have made them al his fotestoole. Wherefore the sum of his prayer
is, that god would illuminate the world with the bright light of his word: and
that he would make the hearts of men by the breath of his holy spirit,
obedyent to his righteousenesse. And what soever is dispersed in the earth, by
his power to gather the same to gether again. But now, because the kingedome
of God is increased by continuance of time, even to the end of the world, it
behooves us daily to wish for the coming thereof. And so after the hallowinge
of the name of God, most properly we desire to have his kingdom come. First,
that God might reign in our hearts, and in the whole church: and that the
word of god, faith, righteousenesse, and all goodness may be rooted in the
whole world: then that this mortality being put of, it would please God to
receive us into immortality, and everlasting blessedness, the kingedome of
Satan being utterly destroyed. For the kingedome of God does not parfectly
take place till all his ennemies are quite abolished and defaced.

Thy will be done in earth, as it. God^
C. Although there be but one simple will of God, in respect of him: yet
notwithstanding in God^ is scr^ unto (...) script^ mane^ ways.
For God is said to do what soever pleased him, when as the secret decrees of
his divine providence have brought the same to pass: although men obstinately
work the contrary.

But here we are commanded after an other manner to pray, that his will be done
namely that all creatures obey him quyetly, and without rebellion. which by a
comparison, may more plainly appear. For as he has his aungelles at hand to
do his commandment, Psalm. ^
so we desire to have al men's minds framed into that consent and agreement
of Gods righteousenesse, that willingly they may relent and bend, whereunto
soever he will have them. This trewly is a good wish, when we submit all
things to his will, and subscribe to his pleasure. But this prayer conteyneth
somewhat more, namelye, that God taking away all contumacy of men, all
stubbernnes and obstinacy which cease not to rebel against him, would make
the^ more tractable and gentle unto him, that they wysshe not or desire any
thing, that is contrary to his will and pleasure. And not that only, but also
that he would frame in us new minds, and new hearts, that we might wyshe
nothing hurtefull to our selves, but that rather his holy spirit may guide
our prayers so, that they may agree to the will of God. Bu. For so God will
reign in us, but if we do not renounce our own will, he will forsake us, and not
reign in us. The will of God (truly) is this, John. 6.
that we believe in Christ Jesus, who^ he has sent. The will of god is our
sanctification, that we might be holy in mind, ^. These. 4.
in spirit, and in body, and that we walk in his co^mandementes, and give al
glory to him as well in adversity as prosperity, pacie^tly abiding and
suffering the hand of the lord. This truly is the fulfilling of his will.

11 Our daily bread geeue us this day.

Our daily bread. M. Hitherto he has C. This therefore is as it were the
second table, ^he second ^ble of pray^, in the which we ask ^se things ^t
parteine our souls.
of the form and order of praying, which Christ has given unto us. For so
(to the end we might edefie) we did distinguishe at the first. As out of the
tables of the law, the first does teach of the worshippinge of God, the
other prescrybeth the works of Charity, and the duties thereof: so in this
prayer, first he appoints us to seek the glory of God, the^ in the other
part, he shows what is convenient for us to ask. Howbeit we must also note,
that those prayers, which we conceive to our use and profit, ought to be
referred to ye last end. For it is not mete that we should be so greedy and
desirous of our own profit, that we should prefer the same before the glory
of God. Therefore, so often as we pray, it is not meet that we forget that:
Notwithstanding there is this difference between these two kinds of prayer
which we have rehearsed, that wha^ we pray as concerning the kingdom of god, and
the hallowing of his name, we must eleuate our mind and senses, wholly up to
heaven, that the regard of our self being set aparte, our prayer may assende
unto God only: after that, we may descend to our selves, and we may join
the care of our health and profit, to the first petitions, which only
parteine to God. And although remission of sins ought to be preferred, before
our fode, so far as the soul excels the body, Christ notwithstanding made
his beginning of bread, and the stays and helps of an earthly life, that by
such a rudiment and entrance, he might lead us farther* we do not ask
therefore our daily bread, before we be reconciled unto God, as though we
esteemed our earthly body more then ye health of our soul: but our minds must
asse^de to heaven from the earth, as it were, by steps, and degrees. For when
as God does humble him self to norysshe our bodies, no doubt there is then
a greatter will in him to norysshe our spiritual life. The greatness therefore
of his mercy in this point, does erecte our trust a great deal hyer. M. But
where as we call it our bread, we may not so understand it, as though it were
ours by right, and due unto us as debte, but that it is necessary for us, and
appointed unto us, by that providence of our life, by the which he feeds all
things, of his goodness. And gives it unto us freely, because we should
not want. The fields, are to be tylled and plowed, we must sweat also, in
gatherynge in the fruytes of the earth, and every man must labor,
according to his calling: and yet this lets not, Man's labor without gods
blessinge is nothing.
but that we are fed by the free lyberalitie and gift of God, without the
which, man does but draw water in a syue, yea, his labor is in vain.

But we are taught, that what so ever seems to be gotten of us, by our own
labor and industry, is acceptable to him. Some will have this bread to be
supersubsta^cial, or superesse^tial, as though Christ spoke not of corporal
food, but their reason is vain, and repugnaunte to godlynes. For who knows
not that it is the order of the Scripture in many places, by the taste of
earthly things to bring us to the knowledge of heavenly things. So that
where as Christ here speaks of corporal food, we may thereby gather, that
else his talk were mutilate, and not parfecte. for in many places we are
commanded to cast all our cares upon God: and he, most lyberally promises on
the other part, that we shall want no manner of thing. Therefore in the exact
rule of prayinge, it is necessary that somewhat be commanded, as concerning
the innumerable necessyties of this present life.

This day. By this it should apere that he would have us care but from day
to day. And in deed there is no doubt, but that he would by these words
restrain and moderate the desire and care of earthly food, with the which we
are many times without al measure, brought to distrust. M. In this name of
bread the Hebricians comprehend all kind of food. As we may read in the
words of Elizeus, 4. King. 6.
Set bread and water before the^, that they may eat and drink, and go to
their master: And he prepared a great refection for the^, that is to say,
great abundance of meat.

C. But here in this place it is taken more amplely. For we desire not only
food to be given unto us, by the hand of God, but also what soever is
necessary for our life. So yt now the se^ce and meaning of this prayer is
plain. First we are commanded to pray that god will defend and sustein this
life, which he has given us in this world: and because it wants many aids
and helps, yt he would minister unto us what so ever he knows to be necessary.

Give us. M. When we say, give us, we confess chiefly, yt all the
sustentation of our lif comes of god, and that it is he alone which fedeth al
things: the^ we acknowledge it to be ye fre gift of god, in so much, that
except he give the same, al ye labor and industry of man is but vain.

This day. C. This aduerbe (as we said before) was added to bridell and
restrain the exceeding care of men: because his beneficence every moment
depends over us. So that we ought to be content that he will feed us from one
day to a another. Notwithstanding here a question may be demanded, Answer.
For we are taught by these words, that except the lord do daily feed us, the
store of vittails is nothing. Al our meats and drinks without gods blessinge
are nothing.
Admit yt corn, wine and other necessaries do abound, yet except they be
protected with the benediction and blessyng of God, sodeinely they consume
away, or at least the use of them is taken from us, or else the natural force
and strength of noryshing is taken from them, that in the midst of our store
and plenty, we are in miserable penury. wherefore it is no marvel if Christ
commanded the poor and the rich alike, to seek for their daily bread and
norishement, at the hands of God. C. But no man can pray heartily, but he
which has learned with S. Paul to be content in every estate, to below, and to
excede, Philip. 4.
to be hungrye, and to have plenty: and not to deceive him self with the false
trust of his abundance and plenty.

12 And forgive us our dettes, as we forgive our detters.

And forgive us. C. Here we must call to mind yt which we spoke even now, that
Christ in directing the prayers of his servants had not regard to the order
thereof. For when as Our dettes. M. Luke in the xi. Chapter has, forgive us
our sins, Our fy^ make v^^ters vr^^
or trespasses. C. Therefore our sins are called dettes, because they bring
us before the trybunall seat of God, and make us detters unto him: yea, they do
wholly separate us from God, that there is no hope to atteine peace and grace,
but only by pardon. Roma ^
And so is fulfilled that which Paul writes. All have sinned, and are
destytute of the glory of God, that all mowthes may be stopped, and that all
the world may be subdued unto God. For although the righteousenes of God does
partly shine in ye saints: notwithstanding so long as they are in the
flesh, they lie ouerlade^ with sin. So, that there is no man found in the
whole world so pure, which has not need of ye mercy of God: of the which, if
we desire to be partakers, it is necessary that we feel our own misery. But
they which feign to the^ selves such perfection in this world, yt they think
them selves free from al sin and vice, do not so much neglect their sins, as
they do Christ, from whose church they banish them selves. For when he
commanded al his disciples daily to ask remission of their sins, he excludes
al out of their number and company, which think this remedy to be
superfluous unto the^. Let us put away therefore, by this prayer, the wrath
and indignation of our heavenly father, and the just ponishme^tes which we
have deserved, and let us seek to please him, by reconciliation. For what can
be more grievous then the displeasure of ye father? For so much as therefore our
hole health, consists in this, to keep the favor of our heavenly father,
good and just cause we have to put away his displeasure.

^ission of ^s put^way sa^^tions.
Now, this remission which we here desire is contrary to satisfactio^s by the
which the world seeks redemption. For that credytour is not said to remit,
which being paid asks the det no more: but he which willingly and freely
departing from his right, discharges ye debttor. Neither does that common
distinction of falte and ponishement here take place. for there is no doubt,
but that dets do signify the desert of ponishment or pain. ^ission of ^es in
^te put^ way the ^s part.
We must note also here, that if we be forgiven freely, al dispensations,
coming from the Pope are in vain. For to obtain remission of our sins,
Christ se^deth us to his father alone, and that rightly: for who can forgive
the offense, committed against an other, and not against him self? Nay can any
man forgive sins, beside God? (...). 5.
Wherefore Christ sent him which had hurt his brother, to go and reconcile him
self to his brother. Therefore when we syn against God, our health and salvation
only consisting in him, it is manifest, that we can be forgeuen of none, but of
him, and therefore at his hands we must ask forgeuenes, according to the form
of this prayer. Hereupon David said. I said I will confess my syns unto thee
lord, and so thou forgauest me the wickedness of my sin. Psalm. 32
For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found Neither is this repugnant to that authority which
was given to the Apostels to remit sins. John 20.
For they did not forgive sins by their own power, but as ministers of
Christ, and prechers of grace, they did pronounce to the penitent and
faithful, that their sins were forgeuen. According to the saying of the lord,
by the Prophet Esaias. I, Esaias. 43.
even I am he, that put away your sins, and that for my own sake.

As we forgive our detters. C. This condition was therefore added, that no man
should presume to ask pardon for his sins, except he were free from malice
and hatred. Notwithstanding, the pardon which we ask, depends not upon that
which we show to other: but by this means, Christ exhorts us to forgive
all offenses, and does make our trust and confidence also, of absolution and
pardon, more fyrme and strong. Furthermore it was not the purpose of Christ to
note the cause, but only to teach us of what mind we ought to be, one toward
an other, when we desire to be reconciled unto God. And trewely, if the spirit
of God do reign in our hearts, all malice, evil will, and reuengement will
cease. But for so much as the spirit, is a witness unto us of our adoption,
we se that there is here a note given unto us, who are the sons of God, and
who are not. B. Our remission therefore is a motion of the spirit, because God
rules our affections. Now since the case stands thus, how can they be
excused, which will not forgive their neybours offenses? How can such presume
to ask pardon of their sins, at the hands of God? Is it a triffle, to lie
unto the lyuinge God, and to play the Hypocrytes? Yea, when we say forgive us,
as we forgive others, what do we else, but call for vengeance at the hands
of God, upon our selves, if we forgive not our offenders?

And for this cause there are many now a days, which rather then they will
remit and forgive, they will never say the lords prayer. But such escape not
the judgment of God. For it shall abide for ever, which ye lord says. If ye
forgive not me^ their trespases, your father which is in heaven shall not
forgive you your trespases. Math. 18.
To this end also parteineth ye parable which he shows following. Wherefore
we may not let to forgive our ofenders, if so be that we will have god to
forgive, and forget our sins.

13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is
the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever, amen.

And lead us not into tempta. C. Here many amiss do divide this into two
petitions, when as by ye matter it is evident to be but one and not two, as
they imagine. For the Augustine.
which S. Austine, very wiselye examined. Thus therefore ought this prayer to
be resolved.

Least we be led into temptation, deliver us from evil. But the so^m of this
prayer is this, yt we knowing our own infirmities, desire god to be our aid
and help, that we may stand valiantly against all the assaltes of satan. M.
We are taught therefore in this petion, that we are as yet set in a doubtful,
and dangerous conflict, in the which we must fight against the devil, the world
and the flesh. For the godly have an other manner of fight in this world, then
have the children of darkness. For they have a careless conscience, Satan is
an ennemy to the godly
sekinge at no time to resyste Satan, which works in them: but the godly,
because they geeue them selves, wholly unto God, they have Satan the prince
of this world, their ennemie, most vigilant and crafty against them. and
because they have their conversation in heaven, they are as yet subject to the
hate, and mischife of the world: and because they obey the spirit, the flesh
is disobedient unto them, and draws the^ to wicked things, so that not
without cause we are taught here to pray. And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. C But this word temptation, is in the scriptures often
times taken generally, for every kind of trial and probation: In the which
sense Abraham is said to be temted of God, when his faith was tried: Gene. 22
So we are often times tried, as well in adversity, as prosperity, because by
this occasion, the affections of men are manifest, which before were not known.
The temp^tion of the ^uill, is as (...) were a p^ of bellow^ to kindell^ wicked
a^tions.
But here is noted the internal temptation, which may well be called the devils
bellows, to kindel our co^cupisce^ce, for it were an absurd thing, to ask of
God, and to pray him, that we may be free from al documentes, and instructions
of our faith. Therefore all wicked motions, which cause us to sin, are
comprehended under the name of temptation. Although it cannot be but that we
must feel such pricks and motions in our mind, because al our life time, we
have a continual battle with the flesh, notwithstanding we desire of god, that
he will not suffer us to be subject, or lead us to temptation. And to the end
Christ might the better express, to how great fall and ruin we are subject
(except god of his mercy stay us with his hand) he used this manner of speech.
And lead us not into temptation. For it is certain, that every man is tempted
of his own concupiscence as S. James says: Chap. 1.
but because God does not only give satan liberty, to kindell in us the
fire of concupisce^ce, but also uses him as a minister of his Ire, so often as
he purposes to destroy men, he him self also by his own means, leads to
temptation. 1. Sam. ^
In the which sense the evil spirit of God is said to come upon Saul. and
to the same effect do many places of scripture tend: yet notwithstanding we
may not call God the aucthour of evil: because although he give over men into a
reprobate sense, yet he uses not upon the^ tyranny, but his just and secret
judgment. But deliver us from evil. C. By this name of evil, whether we
understand, the devil or sin, it makes no matter. Satan truly is that
enemy which seeks continually, whom he may devour, and the armoure wherewith
he is prepared to destroy us, is sin. The end therefore of our prayer is, that
we be not overcome with temptations: but that we may stand, by ye power of the
lord, against all the force of Satan: and that we being protected and
governed under the shadow of his wings, may tryumphe over sin, death, hell
gates, and all the kingdom of the devil: which is, to be delivered from evil.

For thine is the kingdom. C. It is marvel that this clause, so well agreing
with the rest, was pretermitted of the Latins.

Neither was this therefore added only that he might kyndel our hearts to
desire the glory of God, and to show us what the scope and end of our
prayers ought to be: but also to teach us yt the prayers, which are here
declared unto us, ar grounded upon none other then God only, lest we would
trust to our own merytes. For although now we be most miserable, ^ingdome
^er and glo^ ^longeth ^ed.
although we be of al creatures, most unworthy, and although we be void of al
commendation: yet for all that we shall never want occasion to pray, our faith
cannot decrease, because all kingedome, dominion, power, and glory perteyneth
unto him, and can never be taken from him. M. First therefore we attribute
this unto God, that his is the kingdom. By this word kingdom, is
understood, al right and power of reigning, of rulinge, of gouerninge,
protectynge, and defendinge. The power. This is added, that we should not
think the kingdom of God, to be weak and void of force and might, and that
we should not think it to be for want of power that he does not revenge him
self of them, which acknowledge not his kingdom. What power therefore so
ever there be, in any place, it parteyneth not unto the creature, but unto God.
And the glory. That is magnificence, and the honor of al things. The which, if
any man understand of the dew praise and glory of God. it shall be al one to
say, thou only art to be honored, praised and glorified.

For ever and ever. M. This is added, yt we might acknowledge the kingdom of
god our father, to be perpetual, his power infinite, and his glory
everlasting. The which things the prophet comprehe^deth after this sort,
saying. All thy works praise thee O lord, and thy saints give thanks unto
thee. ^m. 145.
They show the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power, that thy power,
thy glory, and mightines of thy kingdom might be known unto men. Thy kingdom
is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion indureth throughout al ages. Amen.
C. By this word the feruente desire to obtain those things which we ask of
God, is expressed: and our hope is confirmed, yt those things which we ask,
are granted unto us, because of the promyses of God, which can not be broken.
M. This, is an Hebrew word, having a signification, of a certainty and truth.
And this word is used two manner of ways. First to express the affection and
desire of him that prays And here is required the consent of the mind, yt
which consent truly they have not which pray without the mind, or mark not
ye which is spoken of others. As concerning the which read the. 14. of S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 14
in his 1. epis. to the Corin. The other is yt we declare, yt we do not only
wish yt the thing may com to pass which is spoken, but also yt we know
certainly that it will come to pass. In this sense a sure and undoubted Faith
is required. Thus Christ him self often times said* Amen, Ame^, dico vobis,
Verily, verelye, I say unto you. This word amen being said, our conscience is
pacified, and so we end our prayer.

14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father shall also.

Bu. By a certain repetition or relation here, he retourneth to ye which he
spoke even now, saying. And forgive us our debtes, as we forgive our debtors.

C. And does teach us yt god will not be entreated of us, except we likewise do
forgive the^, which by any means do hurt us. And surely except we be harder
then stele, or stony flint, this exhortation ought to mollify us, and to make
us tractable, to remit our offenders. Except God should forgive the manifold
sins that we daily commit, we know that we should perish many ways: and
truly god does forgive us upon no other condition, then that we likewise
forgive our brethren in whatsoever they offended us. They therefore which will
not forgive, do willingly provoke God unto wrath, and heap dampnation unto
them selves.

15 But if ye forgive not me^ their trespases: your father, which is in
heaven. will not forgive you your trespases.

B. God does require nothing so much of us as brotherly love, that the image
of his goodness might shine among us: now there is nothing that lets
this so much as offenses, by the which the minds of men ar alienate, and
withdrawn from goodness. He did specially repeat this therefore, to the end
we might forgive our neighbors. For he knew how hardely we would forgive,
if we wayed the greatness, and heynousnes of the offense committed. A. or if we
did not call to mind those offenses lykwyse, which daily we committ against
God. Therefore he does here threatten as it were, denyinge him to have pardon,
which will not forgive his neighbors offense. As concerning the which thing,
the lord shows an excellent parable in the.18. chap. following, Math. 18.
which may be a lively example to such as will not forgive.

16. Moreover, when that ye fast, be not sad, as the hypocrites are. For
they difigure their faces, that they might be seen of men, how they fast.
Verily I say unto you, they have there reward.

More over when ye fast. C. Again, Christ retourneth to his former doctrine.
Bu. and goes forward with the same order, Of fasting.
in shewinge of fasting, that he did in declaring of Alms, and prayer. M. For
he does not so reprehende the fasting of the Scribes and Phariseies, as
though it were evil to fast, but he condemned the detestable wickedness of
hypocrisy in them.

A definition of fasting.
Be not sad as the hypocrites. Bu. Fasting was a certain discipline, and
measurable castigation, or chastisement of the body, always used of the
ancient fathers, and saints of God, usurped to this end, that the substance
of heavenly things might the more be inflamed, and that the fleshly desires of
the body might the more be quenched. But the Phariseies abused this fasting, to
gain and to get the opinion of sa^ctimony and holiness, whereby they might have
the more estimation of the ignorant people. The fasting of hypocrites.
If they fasted therefore at any time they framed al their doings to
ostentation and vaineglory, and would have all men know that they fasted. M.
Wherefore they were sad, and being abroad, they would mourn and weep, and
anoynte their face, and hang down their heads, that other men might se their
devotion. this vanity Christ noted in them saying.

They disfygure their faces. B. The Greek word signifies, they obscure
their faces, and as it were to make them that they cannot be deserved, as they
which use deceytes, hyde their faces.

Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Bu. As if he should say, they
get the praise of men, they have therefore that which they seek for, by their
fastinges. God rewards not such arrogant fastinges.

A. For he respects not the work so much as he does the mind of man. And
truly the fastings of the Papists, Popish^
monks, and nonnes, differs littel from that which th Scribes and Phariseies
used.

17 But thou when thou fastest, anoynte thy head, and wash thy face.

C. In that Christ commands to annoynte the head, and to wash the face, we
must note yt it is an hyperbolical locution. For he does not withdraw us from
one kind of hypocrisy, to lead us to an other. Therefore he does not bed us
here to feign a curiouse deintenesse: neither does he exhort us to the
temperancye of living, yt he would suffer us to be delicate in anoi^ting and
appareling our selves, but simpely he exhorts us to keep a mean in the which
there is no new thing.

M. But Christ speaks here according to the manner and custom of the country
and people of the Jews, where, they which gave them selves to mirthe, and
banqueting, anointed their heads with some preciouse ointment, from the which
ointment, they that were sorrowful absteyned: as we may read of David, 2. Sam^
who anointed and washed him self, when he arose from mourning. 2 Samuel ^
Moreover of the woman of Thecoa, who, to the end she might seem to mourn
and bewail the dead, was commanded of Ioab, to feign her self a mourner,
Ruth. ^
and not to anoynte her self with oil. Also, Noemi said to Ruthe, wash thy
self and anoint thee. And Christ said to Simon, the pharisey. Luke. ^
My head thou have not anointed with oil Also in the house of Simon the
leaper, Math^
the woman powered a preciouse oyntme^t upon the head of Christ. E. So that here
he does not teach his disciples what they ought to do, (as it was said even
now) but teaches them to beware of vainglory, that the faythefull may be
deserned from hypocrites.

18 That it appear not unto men, how that thou fastest, but unto thy father
which sees in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward
thee openly.

A. As if he should say, Take heed that ye alter nothing that is accustomed in
the manner of life, whereby ye should covet to be seen of men: only let him be a
sufficient wytnes of your fast, which of evil and unbelieving men, made you
good and faithful.

C. Where as here there is a reward promised of God to fasting, it is an
improper kind of speech, as it was said a littell before of prayer. ^t
diffe^ ^twene (...) and fa^
Between prayer and fasting, there is great difference. For prayers are the
chiefest works of godlynes. But fasting by it self is but a mean work, and
not of the number of them which God does require and allow, as are alms
deeds and such like. ^de of (...).
Notwithstanding, after a sort it pleases him, in that it is referred to an
other end: namely that it may bring us to abstinencie and to brydell the lust
of the flesh, and also that it may be a testimony of our repentance, so often
as we are urged thereunto by the judgment of God. Therefore the meaning of the
words of Christ is this, that God in the day of judgment will make openly
known, that those works pleased him which were often times despised of men.

19 Lay not up for your selves treasures in earth, where the ruste and mothe
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.

Lay not up for your selves. V. Here our Savior makes an excellent
declaration against covetousness, a manifest Phariseycal vice. ^ousnes ^nfected
^^n.
C. yea, this pestiferous and pernicious disease of covetousness, reigns every
where in the world. No nation, no people, no state and degree, is free from
the same. V. But they make a pretty excuse and cloak, ^ousnes (...) cloak.
saying that it becomes husbands or houskepers, to have respect to the
calamity to come, and to provide for their house, for their wife, and for
their children. And thus the world blyndly goes on, having no respect to the
mischief that comes thereof.

C. But the lord reproves men of foolishenes, that they having heaped
together abundance of riches, which they make their felicity, will so
carelessly commit it to worms and mothes, and lay it forth as a pray for
thieves. For what can be more foolish, then to lay up goods, where either they
must perish or be stolen away of men? But covetous men think not upon this,
for they shut up their riches in chestes surely barde, and strongly banded,
with sufficient locks. Riches are subject to ruste.
Yet not withstanding they can not bind so sure, but their riches are in
danger of ruste, of mothe, of corruption, of thieves, of water, of fire, and a
hundred dangers mo They are blind therefore, and out of their wits, which
moyle and toil, labor and travail so immoderatly for riches, and know not
what shall become of them: specially when God will lend unto us a place in
heaven to lay up our treasure, yea, and that which is more liberal, he
offers us treasure to possess which shall never by no corruption perish.
E. Let not man marueyle, that Christ so carefully seeks, Covetousness is a
distrust in God.
to withdraw his disciples from covetousness. V. For covetousness is nothing
else, the^ a distrust in God. M. Whereupon not without just cause, 1. Timo. 6.
Paul calls the same the root of all evil. Bu. And truly if we consider
well what is the cause of strife but covetousness? what is the cause of wars?
covetousness. What is the cause of injuries? Covetousness. What is the cause of
sedition? Covetousness. Covetousness is the root of all evil.
What is the cause of perjury? Covetousness. What is the cause that men betray
their own Country? is not covetousness? Yes undoubtedly. To be short,
Covetousness takes away liberality. Covetousness hyndreth the true worshipinge
of God, and Covetousness makes all that we do to be frustrate before God. O
crabbed root that spreadest thy branches so far, that all the world takes
a taste of thy fruit. Thou haste made truth to be unsavory in the mouths of
men. And as for justice and righteous dealing, thou haste so shadowed them with
thy arms, that the dew of heaven can scarce fall upon them. Yea and the time
of thy florishinge is of such continuance, that except the heavenly husband
man cut the down, thou will shortly ouergrowe all goodness in the earth.

Where ruste and mothe do corrupt. M. Christ reproves them by the utility
and profit of earthly things. As if he should have said, what madness is
this, that you put your trust in those things, which are transitory and
subject to corruption. By this word (ruste) is understood all corruption,
that may happen to earthlye things, read the fifth chapter of Saint James.
M. Here also he touches secretly the troublesome care of keeping, and the
grievous fear of loosing riches, being once gotten.

20 But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither ruste, nor
mothe does corrupt, and where thieves break not through nor steal.

C. They are said to lay up their treasure in heaven, which auoydinge the
snares of this world, do bestow their cares and study, to the meditation of a
heavenly life. Luke. 12.
Luke expresses not the Antithesis, but shows the diverse occasion wherefore
Christ commanded his disciples to prepare them littell sackes which wax not
old. For he said unto them: Sell all that ye have and give alms. Now
because it is a difficulte and hard matter for men to sell all that they have,
to ease this grief, he sets before them a wonderful hope of recompense:
namely that they shall lay up treasures in heaven, which help and succor
the necessity of their brethren in earth: according to the saying of Solomon.
Prouer. 19
He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the lord, and look what he
lays out, it shall be paid him again. M. The lord therefore does here as it
were, set heaven against the earth, whereby he may withdraw his (as the
sons of heaven) from the earth, to their proper country that heavenly
Jerusalem, where they should reign for ever. Paul writing to Timothy, 1. Ti^
does as it were expound these words of Christ, saying: Charge the^ that
are rich in this world, that they be not hie minded, and that they trust not
in the uncertain riches, but in the living God, and so forth, till you come
almost to the end of the chapter. Again, If ye be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God.
Col. 3^
Set your affection on things that are above, and not on things that are on
the earth.

21 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

For where your treasure is. C. By this prouerbiall sentence, Christ proves
men to be most miserable, which have their treasure laid up in the earth,
because their felicity is but earthly and vain.

For covetous men do affirm that they are not let by no means of their money,
to lift up their hearts to heaven: but Christ propounds an axioma, that
wheresoever they feign their chief felicity to be, there is their whole heart
and affiaunce. As if he should say, yea, call upon God your father in heaven,
of who^ ye are called to heavenly goods: upon him therefore set your whole
mind and affection. But if you lay up your treasure in earth, then all your
mind and care will be there. Wor^ fors^^
C. They renounce heaven therefore which have their felicity in this world.
We know how much, how diligently the Philosophers disputed about felicity,
yea, it was the greatest point whereabout they labored and co^tended, and not
without cause: for so much as the whole consideration of the framing of our
life depends upon the same, and whereunto are referred al senses. For if
honor and dignity, be thought felicity and chief happenes, then it must
needs come to pass that ambition do reign in the minds of men: If money,
then it follows that covetousness inuadeth the whole land: If the pleasure of
the body (as the Epicures thought) then it can not be avoided, but that men
shall be given to brutishe inclination and behauioure. For we are all naturally
given to seek that which is good: and so it comes to pass that we are
diversely carried and led away by false imaginations. But and if we were well
and seriously persuaded, that our felicity and happiness were in heaven, it
were an easy thing (the world and all earthly things, being despised) (whose
intisementes and snares, do deceive the greater part of men) to ascend into
heaven. In consideration of this, (...). 3.
Paul goes about to lift up the minds of the faythefull into heaven, and to
exhort them to the study of an heavenly life, settinge Christ before their
eyes, in whom the true and perfect felicity ought to be sought. As if he
should count it a madness in me^ to fire their mind in the earth whose
treasure is in heaven.

There will your heart be also. B. The heart is here put for the affections of
the heart.

The heart therefore to be in a place is nothing else but a care, a cogitation, a
joy, a trust a hope, a love, a fear, or the whole mind, to be in some
place. Bu. The which is to be thought, not only of the study of money, but
also of all other passions. To the Glotton, his belly is his God. So that where
the treasure is, there is the heart also. To the riotous person, bankettinge,
to the lascivious man, pastime and game. To the lecherous person his filthy
lust, is his treasure and delighte. Every man serving his own lust, whereby
he is ouercomme.

22 The light of the body is the eye, if thy eye therefore be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light.

C. We must here remember that which we told of before, how that there are set
here before us imperfecte sentences, one of them not depe^ding on the other
jointly, as if it were a sermon, orderly prosecuted to the end with one
theme: But here are sundry sentences containing diverse matters specially for
our edifiyng. But the sum of this sentence is, that men by negligence do
err, because they are not occupied as they ought to be, to a good end.
Whereby it comes to pass that they wander, they err and flyde away from
that which is good and perfect, and for nothing else but because they had
rather with a corrupt judgment follow their own lust and pleasure, then
the righteousness of God, whereby they do not only obscure the light of
reason, which ought to govern their life, but also quyte extinguishe the
same. Christ here uses a similitude, calling the eye, the whole light of the
body: as if he should say, when men walk, neither the hands, the feet, nor
the belly, are the special helps to guide the way but the eye only is the
chief guide to the rest of the members. Therefore if the hands and the feet
are led rashely amiss out of the way, the fault is in the eye alone,
which did not his office arighte. Our affections must be guyded by the eye of
Gods spirit.
Now we must apply this similitude to the mind, every affection is as it
were a member of the mind: but because they are blind, they have need of
direction or leading. The which thing the almighty God forseinge, has endued
the mind with reason, which should order and rule the affections, and have the
office and property of the candell, that is to say: to illuminate and show
the way. But what is the use of this candell now a days? Surely men do
peruerte and corrupt all that their mind gives them, and that wyllingly, so
that not one spark of light remains. Christ here calls that a simple eye
which is not blered, but is void of all corruption, so that it has a most
perfect syghte. Also that is a light body, whose actions and deeds are framed
a right, and that is obscure and dark, which by a confused motion is carried
in to many errors. We see therefore (as I said even now) that the negligence
of men is here reproved, which will not open the eyes of their minds, to
moderate and govern their affections. The Papists upon this place give free
will.
But where as the Papists gather here, that men have such wisdom and
reason, that they have thereby free will, that is absurd and foolyshe. For
Christ shows not in this place what power belongs unto us, what will also
we have, but does declare how we ought to walk and to frame our life: He
shows also that the whole raze of man's life is obscure and dark, because no
man seeks to do that which is right, but every man with gredines seeks for
that which is evil. We confess truly that man has reason by nature, by the
which he discerns between vice and virtue, yet notwithstanding, it is so
defiled and spotted with sin, that at every step or pase, it faints.

And yet it follows not, but that men do willingly run into darkness, as if
they should being blind, fly to light: because wittingly, and wyllingly they
are carried headlonge to their own concupicence. Such is the force of sin.

23 But and if thine eye be wicked, al thy body shall be full of darkness,
wherefore if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness.

But an if thine eye be evil. E. Or perverse. The Greek word does signify,
mutable and malicious, that this might be contrary to that which is simple.

Wherefore if the light that is in. C. He calls that small remnaunte of
reason, light, which was left unto men, after the fall of Adam: and the
gross and brutishe affections, darkness. The sense and meaning therefore is
this, that it is no wonder if men like brute beasts wallowe so filthelye, in
the puddell of sin, for so much as there is no reason which should rule and
govern the blind and dark lusts of the flesh. He says, the darkness may
be turned into light, not only when men suffer the judgment of their minds
to be over whelmed, with the wicked lusts of the flesh, but geuinge their
will also to wicked thoughts, they degenerate, and become beasts. For we see
how wickedly men bend the^ selves to craftines, Esaias. 29.
which as the Prophet says: keep their thoughts in secret, to hyde their
counsel from the lord, and do their works in darkness: Finally they apply
their wits a hundredth ways to their own destruction. Wherefore not without
cause Christ pronounces, that it can not be avoided, but that horrible and
palpable darkness shall be in that life, where men are blind. These agree very
well with that in the.xi. chapter of Luke.

24 No man can serve two masters, for either, he shall hate the one and love
the other, or else lean to the one and despise the other, ye can not serve God
and Mammon.

No man can serve two. B. This also is a prouerbial sentence fitly added to
that which went before. C. For before he said, that the heart of man was
bound and tied to his treasure. Now he shows that their hearts are alienate
from God, Coue^ person sake t^^ ^nice o^
which give them selves, and are wholly addicte unto their riches. For the
greatest part do flatter them selves by a false pretense, persuading them
selves that they may be divided between God and their lusts. But Christ here
plainly affirms that no man can serve God and the flesh. Christ therefore
takes this Proverb allowed of every man, and not to be denied, that no man
can serve two masters. B. To serve, here is understood, to give thy mind
wholely to him whom thou seruest: Whereupon Paul says, Rom^
Know ye not to whom soever ye commit your selves as servants to obey,
his servants ye are, to whom ye obey: Whether it be of sin unto death, or
of obedience unto righteousness. Ye can not serve God. A. Now he expounds the
foresaid sentence. No man can serve two masters. C. It is not impossible for
rich men to serve God: But who so ever bring them selves in bondage to their
riches, it can not be, but that they separate them selves from god, because
that Covetousness does make us manciples of the Deuel.

And Mammon. B. The Chalde word, does signify riches or treasure. C. But
that which is here specially spoken of riches, may generally be applied to
every kind of vice. Now, for so much as God does so greatly every where,
commend sincerity, and abhor a double heart, we may see how greatly they
are deceived, which think that he will be contented with half a heart. All
men truly will confess with their mouth, God^ serue^ our h^
that God cannot be worshipped but with a whole and earnest affection. But in
deed they deny it, when they go about to reconcile and agree two contrary
things in all respect. I will not cease (says the ambitious man) to serve
God, although I apply a good part of my mind to get honor. So does the
covetous person, the voluptuous man, and the cruel tyrant, boaste them
selves: As if truly it were possible partly to serve God, and partly to be
stark enemies unto him. It cannot be denied, that the faithful them selves,
are not so wholely given to the obedience of God, but that oftentimes they are
drawn away by the sinful lusts of the flesh. Notwithstanding, because they
syghe and sorrow under the yoke of this miserable servitude and boundage, and
are displeased with the^ selves, and do serve the same no otherwise then
against their wylles, and striuinge with the same therefore I say that they
serve not two masters: because their study and endeavor, is as much accepted
before God, as if they had performed and fulfilled the perfect obedience.
Here also their hypocrisy is refelled, which flatter them selves in their
vices, as if light and darkness could agree. We know what Elizeus said. ^8,
If the Lord be God follow him, if Baale be God follow him. How long will
ye halte on both sides? For God does require of us the integrity of the mind,
that we might wholely depend upon him.

25 Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life what ye shall eat
or drink, nor yet for your body, what raiment ye shall put on. Is not the
life more worth then meat, and the body more of value then raiment.

^ate ^bid
Therefore I say unto you, be not careful. M. Now consequently he comes to
the root it self of evil, namely to the carefulnes of food and other
necessaries, or if thou wylt, to the distruste or incredulity, whereof all
wicked carefulnes aryseth, which at the length brings a man to that point,
that being not content with necessary things to his present use, he begins
sorrowefully to care for the time to come, and therefore to provide for many
years, and thus springs the servitude of Mammon, which withdraws us from
the service of God. C. Notwithstanding, ^ces^qui^
where as Christ forbids us to be careful, he means not so precisely
that he would have us void of all care, for we know that men are therefore
borne, to sustain some care: nay, this is the least part of the myseries,
which the lord has enjoined to us in penance, to humble us withal.

But he condemns immoderate care for Psalm. 127.
that it is but lost labor that the unfaithful rise up early, and so late
take rest, and eat the bread of carefulnes: for so he gives his beloved
sleep. Therefore the sons of God, although they be not without labor and
care, yet notwithstanding, they are not properly said to be careful for their
life, because they staying the^ selves on the providence of God, are at quiet.
M. The lord therefore says not: I say not unto you, labor not for your
living and sustentation, but be not careful. He forbids sorrowefull and
immoderate carefulnes, not laweful labor. Let every man labor says saint
Paul, Ephe. 4.
with his hands that he may have wherwithall to help him that needs. C.
Hereby we may easily gather what care of life every man ought to have: namely
that every one of us labor, so far as our vocation requires, and the
lord commands: furthermore, that every ma^s necessity may cause them to
call upon God. Such care, is a mean between slothful security and
immoderate vexation and trouble, which the unbelievers bring upon them selves.
So that if we way diligently the words of Christ, we shall see that he
forbids not al care, but that only which rises upon distrust. Saying: be
not careful what ye shall eat or drink. For that is proper to them which are
afraid of poverty and need, as if they should want meat every moment. Is
not the life more vvorth then meat. Bu. Now, by strong and infallible
arguments, he takes away that distrustful care, and brings forth diverse
questions, by the which his talk may be more ample. C. And the first
argument that he brings is of the more, to the less: He forbadde us of to
much care how our life should be sustained: Now he adds the reason that the
lord which gave the life it self, will not suffer us to want those aids and
helps, which pertayne to the staying and holdinge of our life. And truly we
do no small injury unto God, so often as we believe not that he will give unto us
sufficient food and apparel, as though without regard he had set us upon the
earth. For whosoeeuer is fully persuaded that he is not ignorant what the
condition of our life is (of the which he is the author) he will not doubt,
but that in due time he will help his necessity. Therefore so often as fear
and care of food troubles any man, let him straight remember that God has
care for that life which he gave unto him. Here also we must note that
although we have abundance of meat, Man's life consists not in meat and
drink.
drink, apparel, and all other things necessary, yet that our life
consists not in them. According to the saying of our Savior in an other
place. Beware says he of covetousness, Luke. 12.
because no man's life consists in the abundance of those things which he
possesses. And then he adds. For the life is more worth then meat, and the
body more of value then raymente. As if he should say. If God of his own free
will has given to you a body, and life, which have not deserved the same,
doubt ye not then, but that he will also give unto you meat and apparel,
which things are of less value a great deal.

26 Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor carry into the barnes: and your heavenly father fedeth them. Are ye not
much better then they.

Behold the fowls of the air. M. That he might more plainly set before our
eyes the providence of our heavenly father, Gods providence.
he brings the brute beasts to be an example, which by the power of God are
fed and nourished without any care, that we might learn in them the riches of
his goodness, and the amplenes of his divine providence, in the which we ought
to quiet our selves. C. For infidelity is the mother of all cares which
exceade measure. Therefore the only mean to amend covetousness, is to embrace
the promyses of God, by the which he does openly witness that he has a
special care of us. After this sort the apostell going about to withdraw the
faithful from covetousness, confirms this doctrine, because it is written. He^
I will not leave thee, neither forsake thee. And in diverse places, the lord
does promise that he will never forsake us. G^ de^ lea^
The effect therefore is this: He exhorts us to trust in God, which does not
despise or neglect any of his creatures, be they never so co^temtible or base.
Christ, to make this evident and plain, brings not in the feding of Israel
forty years in the deserte. He brings not in Helias, nor Elizeus, in whom
the lord declared him self to be a feder of bodies, and a prouider of
apparel. (As Moses said. D^
Your clothes are not worn,) but he sets before them brute beasts. And
yet neither Lions, Elephantes, nor Bears, or such like great beasts, which
also are fed by the hand of God, but silly small fowls of the air, whom
the father fedeth, they being void of all care.

Behold the fowls of the air. M. He names the fowls of the air, to put a
difference between them and such as are brought up in houses, which are not
fed by their own care, nor by the industry of men, but by the providence of
God. Luke names Ravens particulerly, alludinge it peradventure, to that place
of the Psalm. Ps^^
Which gives food to all flesh, and fedeth the young Ravens that call upon
him. For they sovve not, neither do they reap. By these words we have not
liberty to be idell. But Christ means, that although we be not able to help
our selves, yet we shall find help of our heavenly father, so that his
providence should be sufficient unto us.

And your heavenly father fedeth them. He says not here. And their heavenly
father fedeth them, but your heavenly father. As if he should say: What
imbecillitie and weakness of faith is this, that when ye have an heavenly
father, which fedeth such an innumerable multitude of souls, you are yet
careful for your food and raiment, as though he would forsake you, which
fedeth little birds? C. This truly is worthy the noting, that he says the
almighty fedeth birds. Whereupon we may persuade our selves that he will not
forsake us, whom he has made after his own similitude and likeness, and has
made us his sons also.

As Christ almost affirms by these words.

Are ye not much better then they. A. An argument of the less. As if he had
said. He that has such care of small things, how can he neglect the
greater things. Yea he which has care for those things that are made for
your sake, how will he forsake you, to whom these things are created.

27 Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubite to his stature.

^^umption ^xcessiue always ^yned to^r.
C. Here Christ condemns the other vice, which is always tied with the
immoderate care of meat, drink, and other necessaries: namely, that man
usurps that which is above his power, to him self. ^^o.
I know (says the Prophet) that it is not in man's power, to order his own
ways, or to rule his own steps and goinges. Yet truly there is scarce one
among a hundredth, which dares not be so bold as to warrant something to him
self, by his own industry and strength. Hereby it comes to pass that men
warrant unto them selves the good increase and success of things, God being
set aside. Christ to abate this mad rashenes and presumption, says that
whatsoever pertains to the sustentation of our life, depends only upon the
blessing of God.

^^e. 12.
According to this it is said in Luke. If ye be not able to do that which is
least, why take ye thought for the remnaunte which is greater. By the which
words it is plain, that distruste is not only reproved, but also pride, that
men will take more unto them selves, then becomes them. The which Christ
also reproves in an other place, saying. Thou canste not make one hear of
thy head white or black. ^^h. 5.


28 And why care ye for raiment? Consider the lillies of the field how they
grow. They labor not neither do they spyn.

And vvy care ye for raiment? Bu. From food he comes now to apparel, of the
which also he reasons particulerly. And as he did before, so does he now
bring an example of natural things, the which he does plainly and manifestly
declare saying. Consider the lelies of the field. Bu. He speaks not here of
the lelies that grow in gardens, which are planted with great care and
diligence, but of those which grow in the field, whose color all ye
painters in the world are not able to immitate. So that he does here make a
distinction between the lelies of the field and the garden. As he said before
the souls of the air, to make a difference between them and such as are
brought up in houses.

They labor not, neither do they spin. M. That is to say, they do not those
things that pertain to the making of apparel. Now when as you can both
labor and spynne, why are ye careful for raiment? And admit that either by
age, by sickness, by imbecillitie and weakness, ye are not able to do these
things, yet ye should not distruste in the providence of God. But consider of
the flowers of the field. Will ye be worse then insencible creatures?

29 And yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his royalty, was not arrayed
like unto one of these.

And yet I say unto you. C. The sense is this that the goodness of God, which
does shine in herbs and flowers, does excel all that me^ can do with their
power, pomp, and strength: that the faithful might persuade them selves
that they want no manner of thing, so long as they have the blesing. As
concerning the glory of Salomo^, we may read at large in the third chap. of
the first book of kings. And yet Christ says that ye mighty king Salomo^.

Was not arrayed like one of these. M. He says not like unto those, but like
unto one of the^. Behold here, how he prefers one lilly of the field,
before all the glory of the world. Bu. And truly what sylke, what purple, what
shyning tynsyll, The flowers of the field far surmounteth all the glory of the
world.
may be compared to flowers? what is so red as ye rose? what is so white as the
lelie? what has so purple a color as ye violet? surely nothing

30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which although it
stand to day, is to morrow cast into the furnace, shall he not much more do
the same for you, O ye of little faith.

Wherefore if God so. M. This sentence is gathered of that which went before,
to reprove the weakness of our faith. Now he says not if God so clothe the
Lillies, but the grass of the field. The show of apparel is wonderful, in
so much that it excels all the vanity in the world, and yet the grass of
the field is equal with the same, and nothing inferior in pomp unto it. He
argues therefore of the baseness of things, that thereby he might make the
liberality of Gods providence, more wonderful and excellent.

Which is to morovve cast into the furnace. E. That is to say, which
shines to day in the field (being withered and cut down) is to morrow cast
into the furnace.

Bu. Some Grammarians do so derive, the oven of the furnace, that the same
should be somewhat less, moveable, and to be carried about, and made almost
through with metal, and the rest of clay and brick, seruinge to make waters
of herbs for medecin: but this furnace is greater which is spoken of here,
being immouable and made of stone, lome, lime, and sand, to bake bread. Shall
he not much more. M. This is the conclusion of the argument, by the force of an
interrogation, as if he should say. Judge you, can ye deny it? O ye of little
faith. M. Note here how fre^dly Christ reprehendeth, and rebukes by the
which, with a reproach also he shows, whereupon this carefulnes arises,
namely upon the infirmity and weakness of faith, Excessive care ryseth upon
the want of faith.
the which already he has set before our eyes at large, as we have heard.

31 Be ye not therefore careful, saying: What shall we eat, or what shall
we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed.

M. This is the conclusion of this dehortation, in the which he reherseth that
which he spoke before, saying: Be ye not therefore careful.

Saying: What shall we eat. B. Now he expresses ye nature of carefulnes,
which, with the like cogitations trouble many men, saying: What shall we eat,
or what shall we drink, always fearing, least they shall want necessary
food. The like murmuryng care was among the Israelites when they were in the
wyldernes, as we may read at large in the book of Exodus. But this care ought
to be far from Christians, which should still stay them selves upon the
providence of God, who has liberally promised never to fail us.

32 For after al these things do the Gentiles seek. For your heavenly father
knows that ye have need of al these things.

After all these things. C. Here he reproves their gross ignorance, Igno^^
the or^ of exce^ care.
whereof all such cares arise. For whereby comes it to pass that the
unfaithful, never continue in one state, but only that they think God to be
careless in heaven, and not to have respect unto men? So that by this comparison
he declares that they have, but smally profited, and scarsly learned the rules
and instructions of godlynes, which se not with the eyes of faith, how that
the hands of God are full of all good things, to bestow upon them.

Do the Gentiles seek. M. That is, hereunto they bend all their mind, caring
for nothing but this only, thinking all things to be gotten with their labor
and industry having no respect of God, upon whose providence all things ought
to depend, neither are they at quiet until they see plenty of vitailes before
their eyes. This Ge^tillity and Heathenes, ought not to be among Christians.

For your heavenly father knovveth vvherof ye have need before ye ask. M. As
if he should say, I know ye have need: And your father knows the same also,
wherefore doubt not, but he will provide for you. For as he is a father, so
bears he a fatherly love toward his children, always preventing their
necessity. According to the saying of the Prophet. Like as a father pittieth
his own children, Psalm. ^
even so is the lord merciful unto them that fear him.

33 But rather first seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and
all these things shall be given unto you.

But rather. Bu. Some man might say, if I must put away all care, ^ion.
what shall I the^ do? Does idelnes and a careless mind please God? ^were.
The Lord answers, Se that above all things thou honor God, that thou
submit thy self unto him, and walk in his laws, and do those things which
he has prescribed unto thee, so shall he norishe thee, and thou shall not neade
to fear necessity or wa^te of food. C. By this argument, he puts away
gross care. For whosoever will prefer the kingdom of God, he must behave
him self moderatly in gettinge his lyuinge. Neither is there any thing more
fit to brydell the lasciuiousnes of the flesh, that it triumph not in the
race of this life, then the meditation of a heavenly life. By the kingdom of
God is understood whatsouer pertayneth to the glory of God, as the knowledge
of him and his Gospel, by which we come to the kingdom of heaven. And the
righteousness thereof. C. This word righteousness, may as well be referred to God
as to his kingdom. For we know that the kingdom of God consists of
rigteousnes, which is spiritual newnes of life. Bu. They therefore seek the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, which with all their mind, and
a sure faith, give them selves wholely to pure religion, and so frame their
whole life, that God may dwell in them, that they be just and deal justly
with every man, to hurt no man, to defraude no man, but to labor truly for
their living in their vocation, that they and their family may have
sufficient, and that they may give of their overplus to them that need.
Whosoever does these things, he shall be sure not to peryshe with honger, but
shall be a partaker sufficient of the liberality of God. As Paul at large
shows in his epistels. ^4. (...) 11.


34 Care not then for the morrow, the morrow shall care for it self. For the
day present, has ever enough of his own travail.

Cart not then for the morovve. Bu. To the end he might farther inculcate this
doctrine of piety, he reherseth once again that which he declared before, and
commands his to be of good chere. Distrustful care has ever respect unto
the time to come.
He expresses the nature and quality of this distruste, which not being
content with the care of the day present, continually cares for the day and
time to come.

C. Many, yea, to to many are sick of this disease, which think the time to
short if they be about the thing which brings gain, but contrariwyse, if
they be in trouble, need, or sick, every day is thought to be a whole year.
A. Christ reuoketh and diswadeth his from this vanity, saying: Be not
therefore careful for the morrow, that is for the time to come. For so do the
Hebrews use this word morrow. Such is the intemperancy of our flesh, that
it thinks never to have sufficient for it self, but still distrusteth the
providence of God.

The morovve shall care for it self. M. He says not, to morrow thou shall be
careful or to morrow thou shalt have care for the day to come: but the
morrow shall care for it self, as if he had said. What need ye to be
miserable before the time.

For the day present has ever enough of his. M. As who should say: If ye
will be miserable in caringe for those things which pertayne to food and
raiment, why do ye care for those things which belong unto the morrow, when
as the present time has ever enough, that ye trouble not your selves with the
care of ye times to come? Let the affection and labor be sufficient, which the
lord gives to every time. The sum therefore of this doctrine is this, that
we be not otherwise careful for the necessaries of this life, then the lord
has appointed us. First, that we should seek the glory of God, secondly, the
profit of our neighbor, and last of all, the health of our own soul.
Whosoever thus bestows his time, he shall live for ever.

The.vij. Chapter.
IVdge not, that ye be not
Judge not. Bu. Hitherto against the distrusting and sorrowful care of mortal
men for bodily necessaries the lord has disputed. Now he speaks against
rash judgment, in the which all men for the most part do offend. Rash
judgment.
E. Judge not, might very well be turned condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned. For in this place judge is taken for to condemn. Which more
evidently appears by the words of Luke, Luke. 6.
where he goinge about as it were to expound what he means, in saying judge
not, adds by and by condemn not and ye shall not be condemned. C. By these
words, Christ does not precisely forbid to judge, but goes about rather to
heal the disease with the which al men are infected, We see how all men do
flatter the^ selves, every man is a judge in other men's matters, every man
narrowly examineth his brothers ma^ners, and is desirous to bewray his brothers
falte. Al me^ will confess, ye it is a vice intolerable for those me^ to be so
cruel and envious against their brethren, which wink at their own faltes:
yea, this vice was condemned among profane men in old time, by many proverbs:
yet notwithstanding it continued in all ages, and continues until this day:
And now there comes another worse the^ that, namely ye some in conde^ning
others would get liberty to sin them selves. Christ takes away this
wicked desire of biting, of reproving, and reproching, when he says Judge not.
Neither ought ye faithful to blind the^ selves, that they might discern
nothing: but only to refrayn the^ selves that willingly they judge not more
then is mete. For otherwise it cannot be but that he be to rigorous, which has
an earnest desire to judge his brethren. The like saying has S. James. Iam. 3.
My brethren, be not every man a master. Neither does Christ here withdraw
the faithful from doing their duties in teaching, but forbids the^
ambitiously to seek for honor. To judge therefore in this place, is curiously to
enquire of other men's deeds and sayings, whether they be euel in deed, or only
seem so to be, not that they may correct and amend them, but that they may note
them, and get unto them selves an opinion of honesty when they talk with
them. This disease always brings with it much iniquity, that we condemn
some light fault no less, then the great offense: then it bursteth out into
a perverse boldness, in that we rashely have a wrong judgment of every thing,
although in deed they ought to be taken in good part. Now we see to what end
the purpose of Christ tends, namely, that we should not be to desirous, to
curious, and malicious in judging our neighbors. The envious person, the
hypocrite, the self lover, are somewhat sick of this disease. C. But he
which judges by the rule of charity, always first examining him self, he I
say, True ^ment.
keeps the true and right order of judging. Nevertheless it is not only
lawefull for us to condemn all sins, but also it is necessary, except we
will abrogate the laws of God and overthrow his judgment. For he would have
us to be proclaymers of his sentences which he pronounces as concerning the
deeds of men: only that modesty ought to be among us, that he ought to
remain a judge.

C. Therefore when we condemn adultrie, theft, lying, and such like, we judge
not, but do give place unto the Lord which condemns, and has condemned
them. So that whatsoever is condemned by the law of the lord, we may rightly
condemn. But then we go beyond our bonds, when we judge and pronounce of
those things which we know not. Whereupon he said, Judge not.

That ye be not judged. C. Here he pronounces the punishment of such rash,
hard, and cruel iudgers, which desire to discuss other men's matters. As
there is nothing more dear and precious unto us then our fame: so it is very
sharp and hard, to be condemned and subject, to the reproach and infamy of
men. And yet by our own falte we bring that to our selves, which our nature
does so greatly abhor. For what is he that does not more narrowly inquire
out another ma^s fault then is mete? What is he which is not offended at small
offenses. But what is this, but only a mean to provoke the vengeance of God
against us, and to repaye us the like? Esaias ^
As the Prophet Esaias says. When thou shall leave destroying, thou thy self
shall be destroyed.

Whereby we may gather that there shall not want reuengers, which shall not
punish with the like rigor and violence, such as are envious and cruel. But
admit that those rash iudgers of their brethren shall escape the punishment
of men in this world, yet undoubtedly they shall not escape the judgment of God.
In Luke there is added a promise, (...) 6.
Forgive and ye shall be forgeuen, give and it shall be given unto you. The sense
and meaning whereof is this, namely that the lord will bring to pass that they
which show them selves gentle, humane and just to their brethren, shall feel
ye like clemency and gentleness of others toward them, so that they in like
manner shall be lovingly and fre^dly entreated. B. For so it is ordained and
appointed of God, that as we be unto others, so shall they be unto us again.
^er. 17
According to the saying of Solomon in his Proverbs. That which is good
comes to those that seek for goodness, but evil happens to them that seek for
ye same. This one thing let us be well assured of that there is none so evil,
but that there shall be another as evil as he, there is none so ready to defame,
but another shall be as ready to defame him again. And there is none so rashly
ready to judge, but another as rash as he, shall be ready to judge him again:
which for certain is the just judgment of God. And yt is the same which he
says here followyng.

2 For as ye judge so shall ye be judged. And with what measure ye meat, with
the same shall it be measured to you again.

For as ye judge. Bu. Here our Savior Christ to teach that we ought to judge
of others, as we would they should judge of us, uses prouerbiall sentences,
which were commonly used. And are yet common to all men. As this, he that
speaks what he will, shall hear that which he would not. Also the saying of
Homere. As thou speak so art you spoken to again. Christ adds also
another proverb.

And with what measure ye meat. E. As if he should say, if you backebyte
many and do injury, thou shall be sure to have reproach of many, and to be
iniuried again.

3 Why see thou a moate in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest not the beam
that is in thine own eye?

Bu. Here by an allegory he does more plainly express his mind. C. And does
nominate the vice with the which hypocrites are commonly polluted. For when as
like unto hawks, they can pry and behold other men's faults (and that not
only severely but also tragically they can amplify and depainte them) they
reiecte their own faults be hynde them. Men are diligent to note the faltes
of their brethren but not their own.
According to the saying of Ouide, we see not the wallet ye hangs behind at
our backs. Christ therefore reprehendeth both these euels, namely to much
promptnes in beholding other men's faults, which arises for want of charity,
and the wilful negligence also in the hiding and cloking our own faults. Bu.
Let every man therefore take heed yt he amend that vice in him self which he
reproves in an other, specially when he goes about to reprehend a small
fault, having a greater him self reigning in him. As the wise man Cato says.
It is a foul thing in the correctour, when his own fault shall reprove him.

4 Or why say thou to thy brother, suffer me to pluck out the moate out of
thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye.

M. Christ notes here the presumption of impudent hypocrisy, which should be
less, if that the hypocrite could be content only to note in his mind his
neighbors offense. But because he bursteth out and is not afraid openly to
reprehende his brother face to face, neglecting his own faltes far greater, he
is inexcusable, and worthy to be condemned of impude^cy.

5. Hipocrite, first cast out the beam, out of thine own eye, and then shall
thou see clearly to pluck out the moate that is in thy brothers eye.

Hypocrite. A. By a figure called apostrophe, he does inuay against the
hypocrites, and that truly very sharply. For the disease of hypocrisy is
almost incurable. M. For he which is infected with this, is only at this point,
that he would seem to be such a one to other which in deed he is not.
Hypocrisy does so blind a man that either he sees not that which pertains
to him self, or at least he thinks ye other me^ do not se or regard it: in ye
mean time he reprehendeth others faltes, although very small, to this end yt
he might seem to abhor vice, to be a lover of righteousness, and a follower of
ye same And then shall thou see. Bu. By the moate he understands small
offenses, by the beam, greater offenses, which often times are hydden in men.
M. Here we may note that it is not in vain, that Christ at other times was
most meke and gentle toward the Publicanes and sinners, and that he notes
this kind of men with the reprochefull name of hypocrites. It is not in vain
(I say) for he does it to show that the whole and only destruction of these
men is, because they do not know them selves what they are. And therefore, it
is very necessary that such should be called as they are, to the end they
may amend, which may be the cause why the lord did so name them in diverse
places, Math. 15.22 and.23. Luke. 13.
as when he said. You hypocrites, well prophesied Esaie the Prophet of you
and so forth. Yea often times very earnestly he called them hypocrytes. If
therefore we mean to esschewe and avoid this so execrable a vice, let every
one of us first inquire of our own faults proper and domestical, then let us
take upon us to judge of other men, yet not with a desire to calumniate and
hurt, but of brotherly love and affection, lynked with the bond of charity
to reduce him that goes out of the way. For the which matter, read the
second Chapter of saint Paul to the Romans. and the third Chapter of saint
James.

6 Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swyne, least they tread them under their feet, and the other tourning
again all to rent you.

Give not that which is holy to dogs. M. How these things are by order
united to that which goes before, many diligently labor to understand, not
weying that al things are not written of the Evangelists orderly as Christ
spoke them, but those things which they remembered, they committed to writing,
and have made as it were a co^fused mixture of many matters, specially of such
as are sufficient to our salvation. C. But Christ here admonishes the
apostels, and under their person, all those which are teachers of the
Gospel, that they preserve and keep the treasure of the heavenly wisdom only
for the sons of God, and that they do not bestow the same upon unworthy
persons, and profane contemners of God. M. By this word holy, he does very
well teach them how religiously they ought to administer the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, as men that know how those things which were sanctified
in the law, were not communicated to every one. C. But here arises a
question. For afterward he commanded them to preach the Gospel to all
creatures generally. Mark ^
And Paul says, that his preaching was to the reprobate, 2. Cro^
the sauore of death unto death. For there is nothing that shall be a surer
testimony against the unfaithful then the word of God, because by the preaching
thereof they shall be void of all excuse. It is answered thus. Auns^
Because the ministers of the Gospel, and whosoever are called to the office
of teaching, cannot discern between ye sons of God and hogs, it is their
parts without respect to offer the doctrine of salvation to all. For although
in the beginning they see many dull and unapt to be taught, yet for all that
charity forbids to reject them, and to count them incurable. Wic^^ are
(...) to ho^ dog^^
For we must note this, that Christ calls dogs and hogs, not all that
are impure men, and void of the fear of God, and true piety, but such as by
sure tokens do declare that obstinate contempt of God, whereby the disease may
appear incurable. Mat^
In an other place Christ sets dogs against the children of God, when he
says. It is not good to take the childre^s bread and cast it to dogs. But
here he understands the^ to be dogs and hogs which being contemners of
God, do admit no medicine. Hereby it does appear how they do wreste the
words of Christ amiss, which think that he restrains the doctrine of
the Gospel only to such as are apt to receive the same. There were two
causes why Christ forbad the Gospel to be preached to the obstinate contemners
of the same. The ^ries^ ough^ be s^^ the^
For it is a manifest profanation of the mysteries of God, to commit them to
the scornings, iestes, and tauntes, of the wicked and reprobate. Secondly,
Christ sought means to comfort his disciples, that they should not be
discouraged, and so seace to preach to the elect, although they saw the
wicked and reprobate peruersly to reject ye same Neither cast ye your pearls.
M. In respect of the preciouse price, and noblenes of the word of God, ^th.
13,
he calls it a pearl, for ye which we ought to sell all that we have, as we
may read in the 13. chap. followinge. C. Whereby we gather, of how great
price this holy doctrine of the gospel ought to be unto us. ^ Gospel
preciouse ^e.
M. He says your pearls, to declare that it is peculiar and proper to the
faithful. C. The pure use of the doctrine of God is, to feed the faithful
with the word of God, as with their corporal meat: and that the wicked
should be made afraid by the judgment of God. the which if they neglecte,
give not that which is holy to dogs, nor pearls to swyne: or Before
hogs. Bu. By hogs he understands such as wholly drown them selves in
filthy pleasure, and with their blasphemies, do seek to defile the doctrine of
ye Gospel, so much as in them lies.

Least they tread them. C. By this Christ does seem to distynguishe between
the hogs and the dogs: attributing to the hogs, a brutishe dulnes void
of se^ce, and to ye dogs, madness. This experience (trewely) teaches that
there are two kinds of contemners. ^o man^ ^f contem^
As M. We must also note this that he says.

And the other tourninge again, all to rent you. For at the first, they do
feyne modesty, that they may learn the secrets of religion: but when they
have learned it, they turn sodeinly, they deride, they rail, biting and
tearing the ministers of the word, and all such as are lovers of the truth.
1. Timo. 1. 2. Tim. 4.
Thus played Alexander the coppersmith, Hymenaeus, Iuleanus Caesar, the
apostata. Porphirius, and Lucianus with other like unto these.

7 Ask, and ye shall have: seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened unto yon.

C. This is an exhortation to pray: Prayer.
and because we are in this exercise of godlynes (which ought to be our
greatest care) so slow and negligent, he commands the same to be done, by
three manner of speakinges. Neither is it in vain that he says, Ask, seek,
and knock, for least his doctrine should wax cold, he continues still in
stirringe up our dullness.

And to the same end parteineth the promises which he adds, ye shall have,
Promises annexed unto prayer.
ye shall find, it shall be opened unto you.

For there is nothing that does better encourage us to pray, then a sure and
undoubted trust and hope to obtain. for they cannot pray aright which
doubt: yea prayer is a vain and rydiculouse ceremony without faith. Christ
therefore, Prayer is but a vain ceremony without faith.
to allure us to this part of duty effectually, does not only charge us
with that which we ought to do: but does also promise that our prayers shall
not be in vain. And this also is diligently to be noted: first that we may
understand that this order of prayer was appointed and prescribed unto us,
that we might suerly persuade our selves, that God is merciful unto us, God is
ready to grant our petitions.
and ready to here our prayers and to grant us our petitions. Furthermore, so
often as we are prepared to pray, or, so often as we feel that the heat and
force of prayer has not in us his fervent zeal and effect, we must call to
mind how greatly the lord inuiteth and calls us, and how mercyfully he
promyseth that we shall taste his fatherly affections. So it shall come to
pass, that every man, bearing him self boulde, on the grace and favor of
Christ, Chap. 3.
shall conceive a sure trust of prayinge, and shall freely call upon God. As
Paul teaches in his epistel to the Ephesians. But because we are more given
to distrust, then becomes us, Christ to correct the same does iterate one
promise with diverse words. Prayer must have consta^cy
Let us therefore acknowledge our nakedness, and imbecillitie, neither let us
despair. but let us boldly ask, and that constantly. For he says, Ask,
seek, knock. A. Ask, namely that which is lawefull, and according to his
will, Seek diligently, Knock with perseverance continually. C. But, he used
the metaphor of seking, because we thyncke that to be far from us, which our
need and necessity requires. And he used the metaphor of knockinge also,
because the carnal sense of the flesh imagines, that those things are shut
from us which are not at hand in a readiness. To this sentence of Christ agrees
the saying of the prophet. Esaias. 55.
Seek the lord, while he may be found, call upon him, while he is nie.
Again. Prouer. 8
I love them which love me, and they which seek me early shall find me.

8 For who so ever asks, receives, and he that seeks, finds, and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened.

A. To the end we might be more fervent, and desirouse to pray, C. Christ
does here offer unto us his fathers grace and favor: as if he should say,
that god is ready of his own free will to hear us, if so be that we pray: and
that riches are offered unto us, if that we will ask the^. By the which
words he does declare, that they are justly ponyshed, which wanting
necessary things, seek not this remedy against their need. Faithful men have
the lord their watcheman.
It is most certain, when the faithful are often times a sleep, the lord
watches for them, and for their health, and so preuenteth their prayers. For
there were nothing to us more miserable, then if he should look for our
prayers, in this slepy and drousy sluggishenes of the flesh: but he does not
by provocation, but of his own free will give unto us faith, which by order
and time, goes before all prayers. But because Christ in this place, speaks
unto his disciples, he does plainly show, how his heavenly father would
make us partakers of his gifts. Therefore although he does freely bestow
upon us all things, yet notwithstanding, he does command us to pray, to
exercise our faith, and that he might grant unto us which ask, those
things which only come of his mere goodness. Bu. This undoubted promise of
God, ought to stir and allure all men to prayers, seeing that the lord does
promise with so great faith and constancy, he will hear our prayers.

9 Is there any man among you, which if his son do ask bread, will offer
him a stone?

Bu. By these words also, he does anymate and encourage us to pray,
promising that God at the length will hear us and help us, if we ask those
things that are holy, good, meet, and profitable, being nothing the more
infirm and weak in faith, although for a while he do delaie the time, and
put of to hear and help us. C. He uses a comparison of the less to the
more, and compares the malyciousenes of men, to the exceeding goodness of God,
which is so great, that it may well be compared to a bottomless sea:

The love of our earthly parente is in no poincte like unto this. As the lord
by the mouth of the prophet Esaias says. Esaias. 4
Although the mother forgett her children, yet will I never forget you.

10 Or if he ask fysshe, will he proffer him a serpent?

B. The like words we read in Luke, Luke. ^^
saving that he adds this or if he ask an egg, will he offer him a
scorpion? Some go about to expound these words allegorically, but not to the
purpose.

xi. If ye then (when ye are evil) can give your children good gifts, how much
more shall your father which is in heaven, give good things, if ye ask of
him.

If ye then when ye are evil. A. Now he compares (as it was said even now)
ye maliciousenes of men with the wonderful and unspeakable goodness of God.
Bu. For men are evil, and subject to the affections of anger, indignation,
envy, and hatred, as fathers often times do hate and despise their children.
God by (...) own (...) is void (...) affection^
But God, by his own nature is good, and void of all affections, always
sekinge to do good, and that his children may feel his goodness, his
liberality and munificence most abondantly.

Can give your. C. Christ has expressed this, not without great cause, least
the faithful should to much lose and slack the raynes to foolish and wicked
desires in praying. We know how great the intemperancy and bouldnes of our
flesh is in this poincte.

Christ therefore commits our prayers to the will of God, to the end he
should give no more unto us, then he knows to be profitable for us. Wherefore
let us not think that he has no care of us, so often as he fulfilleth not
our desires, because he knows still whereof we have need, and what is
expedient for us. But now because al our affections are blind, the true form
of prayer is to be taken from the word of God. Therefore who so ever desires
to come unto God, ^o. 4. ^n. 5.
by a sure trust of prayinge, let him learn to brydell his heart, that he ask
nothing but that which is according to his will: as S. James admonishes in
his epistell.

How much more shall your father. M. He says not how much more shall god,
but how much more shall your father: neither says he my father, but your
heavenly father, that we may always conceive in our mind this sure trust.

Give good things. B. Luke has. Geeue his holy spyrite, as it were
expoundinge what Math. means by good things.

For what good things ought we to ask of God in our prayers, but a godly life,
that is, that the name of God may be sanctified in us, and that the kingdom of
God may come and approach. These things truly we receive, when as we are
replenished with the spirit of god, which does renew us, and cause us to
seek the glory of God, and a godly life. C. For this always ought to be in
our mind. ^h. 6.
First seek the kingdom of God, and the ryghteousenes thereof, and all other
things whereof ye have need, shall be given unto you. Wherefore the sons of
God, to the end they may pray aryghte, must put of all earthly affections,
and come to the meditation of a heavenly life.

12 Whatsoever therefore ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto
them, for this is the law and the prophets.

What so ever therefore ye vvoulde that men. A. Because of this word
(therefore) some do thinck that this is the Epiloge or conclusion of those
things goinge before as concerning the petition or prayer. Other some do refer
it to the beginning of this seuenthe chapter, where he forbad us to judge. And
others think that Christ had respect to all those things which he affirmed
in this assertion, but specially in the fifth chapter, as though he would
knitt up all those things whereof he had spoken in a short sum. C. But
truly it is more probable to affirm that this word therefore (which is an
illation) is superfluouse and more then needs: for often times we find them
in short sentences, where no necessity imports.

We said before, that Mathewe did not declare one sermon only of Christ, but
rather to collect a sum of his doctrine, out of many of his sermons. This
sentence therefore is to be red severally, Equity.
by the which Christ does instruct his disciples to use equity, and does
briefly show the definition of the same: that we may know, that the cause why
so many mischeues do reign in the world, and why men so many ways are
hurtful, one to an other is, because wittingly and wyllingly, they do tread
equity and indifferent dealinge under their feet: Notwithstanding every man
would have the same straightly observed toward him self, for where as our
own profit is in hand, there is none of us, but we will sircumspectely and
preciselye reason and enquire, what is equity and right. Therefore every man
shows him self an indifferent judge for his own commodity and profit.
Every man for him self is an indifferent judge.
How comes it to pass that we be not so equal judges, when as other men's
profit or loss comes in question, but only because we are parcyall to our
selves, and unjust toward our neighbor? And not only this, but that
which is worse, we endeavor our selves wickedly, to wincke at the rule of
equity which shyneth in our hearts.

Christ therefore teaches, that every man may live rightly and justly with his
neighbors, if he do that to others which he could be content to have done
to him again. So that here he does refell and confute all false and vain
shows which men devise and invent, to hide and cloak their pretenced
righteousness. For without all doubt parfecte equity should continue among us,
if so be that we were such faithful disciples of charity in deed, as we are
teachers of the same in word. M. The false opinion of the Pharyseies ministered
occasion to Christ to pronounce this sentence of equity: for they preferred
the observation of ceremonies, and man's inventions, before the observation of
the works of charity. Esaias. 1. and 58 Amos. 5.
Whereupon the prophets were often times constrained to revoke Israel, from
ceremonies and man's traditions, to the works of charity.

For this is the law and the prophets. C. Christ means not that this only
part of doctrine is showed in the law and prophets, but he understands
that what soever is there commanded of charity, what so ever laws and
exhortations there be, for the imbracinge of equity, ought to be referred to
this end. The sense therefore of his words is, that the second table is
fulfilled, if so be, that we do unto others, as we would they should do vnvs.
According to the which, S. Paul says. Roma 13. Gala. 5.
He which loves an other fulfylleth the law. Again he says. All the law
is comprehended in one word, namely in this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self.

13 Enter in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way,
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.

Enter in at the strayte gate. M. Because this doctrine seemed to the disciples
new and unwonted (as it was heavenly) so ye same seemed incomprehensible to the
wisdom of the flesh, specially in respect of that, whereunto they were
accustomed. Christ therefore added this, admonishing his disciples, to prepare
the^ selves, as it were to a strayte and thorny way, or to a troublesome
journey. Broad is the way. M. By the way the scripture understands the life
of man, The li^ man is (...) either (...) or death^
because it tends as a way either to a coming to life, or death.

And many there be which go in thereat. C. He says, that many go the broad
way, because me^ do destroy one an other by their perverse ensamples. For
whereupon comes that every man willingly and carelessly casts him self to
destruction, but because they think they perysshe not, when in deed, in the
midst of the route they perish? And on the contrary part the small number
of the faithful makes many altogether bent to wickedness: for we are not easily
brought, to renounce the world, and to frame our selves and our life, to the
manners of few, for we think it an absurd thing to be brought from the
multitude or greatest number, as though we were not part of ma^kinde. And
although the doctrine of Christ does constrain us (as bond) does bring our
life into a strait journey, and does separate us from the multitude, and join
us to a few: yet notwithstanding, this precisenes ought not to let us to
aspire and come to life immortal.

14 For strayte is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leads unto life,
and few there be that find it.

For strayte is the gate. Bu. The sense of this place is, that there is a
certain institution of life, which is uneasy, hard, sharp, and therefore it
does abhor the minds of the people, but this sour and unsavory life has
most pleasant fruits, which brings to everlasting life. But where as the
way is narrow, that commethe by our corrupt nature and imperfection, in that
we can not make our life subject to the yoke. There is no cause therefore, why
we should complain, but we must ascribe the same to our wicked inclination.
Man^ has (...) ends.
Last of all we must note here the two ends of man, which are here put of
Christ, to one of the which we must run at the length: that is to say,
either to life or perdition.

15 Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in shepes clothinge, but
inwardely they are ravening wolves.

Bevvare. C. This is a most profitable admonition, declaring that is more easy
to be deceived, then to obey and harken to wholesome counsel, for of our own
free will, we incline to falsehode and deceyte. yea, and although there were no
deceiuer, yet we seduce and beguyle our selves. By these words therefore our
savior Christ does teach, that always his church is subject to diverse
seducinges, and so to be daungerouse for some, to fall from the faith, except
they be vigilant and diligent to beware. The Jews, for the most part did hope
that they should have a happy state under the kingedome of Christ, and to be
exempt from al strife and trouble. Therefore he admonysheth his disciples to
persiste and continue, if they covet to prepare them selves to avoid the
deceytes of Satan. For the lord will have his church exercised with a
continual warfare in this world. wherefore that we may show our selves to be
his disciples to the very end, docillitie is not only sufficient (as to suffer
our selves to be governed with his word) but also our faith must be armed,
because often times it is assalted of satan. This trewly is the greatest
thing, if we suffer our selves to be ruled by the godly and faithful ministers
of Christ. (...)
But because false teachers do arise, except we watch diligently, and be armed
with co^stancy, we may easily be withdrawn from the flock. To the which
perteyneth the saying of Christ, that the sheep do here the voice of the
shepeherd, (...)
and not to regard the voice of a stranger, but to fly from him. Whereby we
may gather that there is no cause why the faythefull should be discouraged or
troubled, when wolves do crepe into the sheepefoulde of Christ: when false
prophets go about to deface the true faith: but rather ought to be of good
chere, and to watch. For it is not without cause that Christ bids them
beware. Wherefore if our own slothfulness ^o not trouble us, we shall easily
eschew all trappes and snares, and (truly) without this trust, we could not
be bold enough to beware. Now, when as we know that the lord will not
frustrate our expectation, by any of the assaltes of satan, let us go on
without fear cra^inge of him the spirit of discretion, which seals our
hearts with faith of his treweth, and bewrays the wyles and deceytes of
Satan, least we should be begyled. Of false prophets. C. A prophet is taken
for the teacher, showing forth the pure word of God: to the which a^ false
prophet is contrary, which pretendinge the name of God, has a show of a
prophet. There shall arise says Christ false Christ's, and false prophets,
Math. 14.
and shall do great miracles, and wonders, in so much, that if it were
possible, the very elect should be deceyuod.

Which come to you. M. That is, which join them selves unto you, and feign
the^ selves to be on your side, being neither called nor sent. Of the which
prophets the lord complayneth in the old testament, saying. I sent not
prophets and yet they went.

In sheep clothinge. C. Here he notes their falsehod and hypocrisy. Ierem.
23.
They feign (says he) them selves to be sheep, when as they are nothing
less. Christ shows, that deceyuers want not their coullered cloak.

But inwardly they are. M. These false prophets Paul also does depaynt.
Acts. 20
I know (says S. Paul) that after my departure there shall come wulues among
you, not sparing the flock. Moreover of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them.

And in an other place. I beseech you brethern, mark them which cause
deuission and give occasions of evil, contrary to the docttrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them, for they that are such, Roman. 16.
serve not the lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with sweet
preachinges; and flatteringe words, deceive the hearts of the innocents. 1.
Cor. 11.
Read also the.xi. chapter of the 1. epistell to the Corinthyans, and the
second chap. of the.2. epistell of S. Peter. M. Here is to be noted the
hypocrisy of the moonkes, 2. Petr. 2.
and begginge friars, which by their sheep clothing have deceived the whole
world, and miserably have spoiled the sheep foulde of Christ. The monks and
friars. go in shepes clothinge.
A. The which thing I would to God the kings and princes of the whole world
(specially they which would be counted Christians) would dyligentely way and
consider. For they, by their bodily apparel, by their gesture, voice, and
external show, do measure sanctimony, symplycitie, and honesty: but in their
minds, they are stout, covetous, cruel, and maliciouse. Neither do they seek
to do the work of piety, and to profit their sheep with wholesome counsel,
but rather to enriche them selves, to fill their belly, and to disperse and
spoil the flock of Christ, M. The manifest and open coming of the wulfe can
scarce be avoided without harm: what shall then com to pass, and what shall
we look for, if he come privily, being covered with a shepes skyn? surely great
destruction, murder and tyranny. And although a prophet give alms
lyberally, and fast excedingly, although he preach feruentlye, and leads an
angelical life, yet for all that, we must not credit that which he teaches
altogether, but we must follow the counsel of S. John, and prove the
spyrite, whether it be of god or no, whereupon Christ adds these words
followinge.

16 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thystells.

Ye shall know them by. M. He which said before, beware of ravening wulues,
shows now how we shall know them.

Ye shall know them says he by their fruits. As if he should say, ye shall not
need to doubt, for they will bewray them selves. C. for except this difference
were put, the authority of all teachers without exception might come in doubt.
For if any great danger be feared in teachers and no way found to avoid the
same, it must needs be, that all be suspectted, and there shall be no better
remedy, then to shut our ears against them all. Christ therefore to the end
he would not detract any reverence from his Gospel, and sincere ministers and
teachers of the same, commands us to judge false prophets by their works,
or fruits. Wherefore the Papists are to shameless, which because they would
make us to be envied obiecte unto us the saying of Christ, to beware of false
prophets: and by their cries, they bring to pass, that ignorante men for want
of skill do rashely condemn us. But trewly who soever does seek to harken to
the counsel of Christ, it is necessary that he judge wisely without
parciallitie, according to truth and verity. We truly do not only willingly
grant, that false prophets are to be taken heed of and eschewed, but also
diligently and sharply we exhort the simple, that they will beware of them
and avoid them.

Only we admonyshe according to the prescripte rule of Christ, that they
have first aright knowledge and judgment, least the simple in rejecting the
word of God, be ponished. For between a parfect and just commission, and a
preposterous hatred, there is great difference. But the Papists very
wickedly do abrogate the commandment of Christ, Pap^
which bringinge in a wrong fear, do fraye away miserable sowles from
inquisition, and diligent circumspection. Let this therefore be the first, that
those which by fear do reiecte or shonne the unknown doctrine, do it amiss,
and not by the commandment of Christ. Now it restethe to see what fruits
Christ assigns, when he wills us to judge of false prophets by their
fruits. T^ of^
P. There are two manner of fruits, evil opinions, and evil manners. For
always heretics have some manifest wicked opinion, which is impossible to
happen into the church of Christ. They are deceived there, which restrain
these fruits to life. The d^ h^
For when as the most wicked deceyuers do boasts them selves, with saiued
sanctimony and holiness, and with certain pretenced shows of an austere
life, this examynate rule must needs be uncertain. We cannot deny, but that
at the length hypocrisy will be known, because there is nothing more hard
to be kept secret than the simulation of vertewe: but yet Christ would not
make his doctrine subject to such an unjust and obscure judgment, that it
might be measured by the life of man. Therefore under this word fruits is
contained the manner and form of teachinge, yea, that is the special note to
be considered. John
For hereby Christ proves that he is sent of God, because he seeks not his
own glory, but the glory of his father, which sent him. Ob^
If any obiecte that few have that gift of wisdom, ^tion.
to discern good fruits from evil: we answer as we said even now, ^were.
that the faithful are never destitute of the spirit of discretion, when need
requires. In the mean time let us remember that all doctrines ought to be
brought unto the word of God: and therefore in judging false prophets, the
analogy of faith to bear the rule. P Wherefore, to the end we may judge
aright of doctrine, it is necessary that we keep the rule, that is, the
certain and true meaning of the scripture, of all the articles of doctrine,
which plainly and manifestly may be showed out of the scriptures, of the
prophets, and Apostelles, without the diminishinge of the scriptures. Let the
testimonies also of the church of Christ be sought, after the Apostels,
specially in those writers, which are well known to be pure, that we may
understand the perpetual unity of the Catholyke church, that no false opinion
without testimony and warantyse suffici^ent, be brought into the church.

Then let us see what God has given in charge to his prophets, to his
apostels, and ministers of his word, because thereby fydelitie and truth may be
discerned. As for example, if we set before our eyes those things which
saint Paul has written, (...). 3.
as concerning the duty of a bishop, that only description shall suffice to
condemn the Pope. Wherefore it is no marueyll if the Pope and his sacrificers
go about to forbed the judgment of false prophets. ^ope is ^a rave ^^lfe,
^octrin (...) Paul.
M. But who is so blind, that when he sees the rapacitie and greedye desire to
devour, knows not the wulf, how so ever he be clothed in a sheep skin.
For Do men gather grapes on thorns.

By these Proverbs which were then commonly used, Christ does prove and
confirm that none can be deceived of false prophets, but he which willingly
will not se: because good fruits do show who are the servants of god, and
deceitful fruits do show a false prophet, even as the fruit declares the
tree. Bu. Every tree in his kind brings forth fruit, even so every techer
brings forth such doctrine as he has conceived by the spirit. Wherefore we
must judge of his doctrine, whether it parteyne to the glory of God, to the
iustifycation and merytes of Christ, to the setting forth also of the sincere
and parfecte love toward our neighbor. The which, if it do, we may
boldly adiudge him to be a faithful and true teacher.

17 Even so, every good tree bryngethe forth good fruits. But a corrupt tree
brings forth evil fruits.

C. Here is to be noted, that men cannot do well, unless they be first good. O
generation of vipers (says Christ) how can ye speak good things, when ye
your selves are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks. Math. 12,
A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things.

And an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things. Acts. 15
Also in the acts it is written. The hearts are purified by faith. For who^
soever is regenerate by the spirit of god, it is necessary that he testify
by good works, that he is a good tree, although his works do taste somewhat of
the natural gaale which is in him always.

18 A good tree can not bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit.

B. As if he should say. As the tree is known by his fruit, so is the
teacher, (if any man mark) by word and doctrine. Bu. But there are certain
heretics, which have abused this place of scripture apointing to the^ selves
two diverse beginninges, saying, that there are two contrary natures between
them selves.

But we ought not to refer the words of the lord, to any other end, then
he has spoken them: but we ought rather to consider, to what end, and for
what occasion he spoke them. So long trewely a good tree bryngethe forth no
evil fruit, as he abides in his good state: and an evil tree, abides in the
fruits of his sins, so long as he conuerteth not to the fruits of
repentance. For none, abiding in that which he was, begins to be that
which he is not.

19 Every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast
into the fire.

Every tree which. Bu. Here by the way he shows ye great and cruel
ponishement, The ponishement of false prophets.
prepared for false prophets, and al those which delight to persist in a vain
and pretenced show of godliness. He goes on still with the allegory, signifiing
that they shall be tormented with cruel fire, which either seduce others by
false doctrine, or do not express the true faith of the mind by good works.

M. Here therefore we see, that it is not sufficient only to refrain from
doing of evil, but also it is required of us to do that which is good. John.
15.
For this vine which is Christ will not have unfruitful branches united unto
him, in who^ the fruitful are pourged, that they may bring forth more fruit.
Math. 25.
And in an other place, they are accursed not which take away the goods of the
poor, but which do not feed them. Moreover in ye same place, the ministers
are comanded to cast the unprofitable seruante into utter darkness, and yet
he had not lost any of his masters money, but he had this ponishment, Math. 5.
because he brought no gain. And after this manner the unsavory salt is cast
out of ye doors, although it do no hurt in corrupting, but because it does not
take away the corruption.

Is hevven down and cast. E. Christ shows not here what shall happen to
evil and corrupt trees, (as referring it to a time to come) but he speaks
in the present time, that as trees that are corrupt, they shall presently be
hewn down.

20 Therefore by their fruits, ye shall know them.

Bu. He repeteth again and brings in a conclusion necessary for us at al
times, namely ye false prophets at the length shall be known by their fruits.
B. Let us observe therefore this canon, or rule at this day, and let us count
al the^ for false prophets, which speak the immagination of their own
hearts, and not by the mouth of the lord: let us take heed of the^, let us flee
from such, and repel them.

21 Not every one that says unto me, lord, lord, shall inherit the
kingedome of heaven, but he which does the will of my father, which is in
heaven.

Not every one. C. Christ now does farther exte^d his talk, neither does he
only speak of false prophets which only to devour and spoil, Hyerlinges.
enter into the flock: but also of hierlinges, which under the pretense of
pastors, do subtly creep in, when as notwithstanding they have no affection
of godlynes. And although this doctrine does comprehend al kind of hypocrites,
what degree or place so ever they be of: notwithstanding properly he touches
now false teachers, which would seem to excel all me^. Neither does he only
direct his talk unto them, yt he might take away the security in the which
they lie, as it were drunken: but also he does admonish the faithful, yt they
attribute not to such vain titles, more then is convenient and necessary.
Finally he does show yt so sone as the doctrine of the gospel does begin to
bring forth fruit, in so much yt it has gotten unto it many disciples, there
will not only be many of the common sort of people, which falsely through
dissimulation and hipocrisy will give their name: but also among the company of
pastors the^ selves, there shall be such deceit, that with their lives and deeds
they deny ye which they profess with their mouth. Therefore whosoever coueteth
to be counted, a disciple, he must do his endeavor to adict and give him self
sincerely to the meditation of a new life. For it is not enough to profess the
faith with the mouth, but a good conscience is also required, and the spirit
of renouation. Lord, Lord. M. He does not only rehearse ye liplabour which he
touched a lyttel before, but also he expresses the property of the hebrew
word, which increseth that with doubling or multiplying, Ierem^
which before it heaped together, of the which kind also was that which the
prophet has: the temple of the lord, Chap^ ^
the temple of the lord. In Luke this sentence seems to be a general
obiurgation. Why do ye call me lord, lord, and do not those things which I
co^mande you. But because this corruption does very much arise of false
teachers, he does expressly inuey against the^. Shall not enter into the. C.
Here some do think that the kingdom of heaven is to be taken for ye lif to
come: other do expound it to be taken for the church. As if he should say, he
shall not be of the number of my disciples, and of my faytheful. A. Both these
expositions may well be taken and allowed. But he that does. M. The will of the
father and the son is al one, and the words of Christ are the words of his
father. ^n. 4.5.6
For he came to do the will of his father, and not his own will, as he
witnesses in ye Gosgel after John. He therefore that does the will of the
father does the will of Christ. B. To do the will of the lord, is to express
the same, and to endeavor our selves with all our minds to that which he
commands, although we be unable to perform the same. For the lord in this
life does not require of us to perform and fulfill his commandments, but to do
the^: whereupon in the law he says. Here O Israel, ^t. 6.
and take heed ye thou do thereafter. For he knows how sore we are molested
with this sinful flesh, that we can not fulfill al things, and that we cannot be
clean and void of sin. Wherefore S. John says. ^hn. 1.
If we say that we have no syn, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. And yet the same S. John says, if we say yt we have felloship with him,
and walk in darckenes, we lie, and do not the truth. Again. (...). 3.
Every one yt is borne of god, sins not: and he cannot sin because he is
borne of god. A godly man therefore can not syn, because he is not willingly
given to syn and wickedness, as the wicked are: but always has a delight in
the law of the lord: yet notwithstanding, because he has no good thing in
his flesh, he commits many things which he hates, which are sinful. (...).
7.
whereupon Paul says. The good which I would, do I not, but ye evil which I
would not, that do I. If I do that which I would not, then is it not I yt does
it, but sin that dwells in me. But because ye inward man is not delighted
with sin, but is wholly given unto Christ: god imputes not syn unto him.
Wherefore they are no sins, no more the^ they are deltes, which ye creditour
has forgiven, though duly thou owe the same, and do not pay. C. Furthermore
to do the will of the father, does not only philosophically signify the life
and manners of men to be framed according to the rule of virtue, (...) 6.
but also to believe in Christ, as it is said in John. By these words therefore
faith is not excluded: but is pointed as it were a beginning, from whence the
rest does ensue. A. Herevpo^ S. John says, (...). 3.
This is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one an other as he commanded us.

22 Many will say unto me in that day: lord, lord, have we not prophesied
through thy name? And through thy name have cast out devils, and done many
miracles through thy name.

Many will say. Bu. Here he reherseth one thing twice, and does inculcate that
which he spoke before. C, For he cyteth hypocrisy to his tribunal seat. For
look how long they have place in the church, they both flatter them selves,
and deceive others also. He says therefore, yt there shall com a day in the
which he will pourge his florth, The day of judgment. Math. 25. 1. Cor. 4.
and cle^se the chaff and dust from the pure wheat. In that day. B. He
understands the day of judgment, in the which ye good shall be separated from
the evil: and the sheep from the goats: and when al secrets shall be revealed.

Have we not prophesied in thy name. E. To prophecy in the name of Christ, is
to teach under the authority of Christ: as when it is said, Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the lord. Math. 21.
Or as some others do expou^de it in thy name, yt is in thy power and strength.
For alwais these speches. by thy name, or in thy name, or for thye name, to the
hebrews (from whom they com) signify no more the^ if thou sholdest say, by
thee. John. 17.
Even so when Christ says to his father, I have declared thy name unto men, it
is, as if he had said, I have declared thee. Also whereas it is said in yt
scripture often times, deliver us for thy name sake, it is in efecte thus.
Deliver us for thy self. The like manners of speech also ar these, I beseech
your grace, your majesty, your honor, and it may please your lordship and
such like. The which are nothing else the^ I pray you, and it shall please
you. Therefore to prophesy in ye name of Christ in this place does properly
signify to do ye office of teaching by his authorite This word prophesy in this
place, 1. Cor. 14.
is taken very largely, as in the.14. of the 1. to the Corin. He might truly
have used more simplely this word (preachinge) but not without cause he put ye
which was more honorable, External profession is nothing.
whereby he mighet the better express, ye external profession was nothing how
gloriouse so ever it seemed unto me^. Bu. Many will boste (says he) that they
have showed them selves excellent teachers, and interpretours of the
scriptures in ye church. And have cast out devils. A. He reherseth one kind
of miracles for examples sake: then generally he addethe.

Miracles.
And done many miracles. C. To do miracles in the name of Christ is nothing else
then to work wonders, by his power, aid, and government: for although ye name
of miracles is restrained to one kind of miracles, yet notwithstanding in this
place, and in many other, it does signify al kind of wonders. M. Here we se
ye God lendethe his power to evil ministers sometimes. As to Baala^, Nume. 24.
1. Sam. 10.
to Saul, whereupon this proverb came, Is Saul also among ye prophets? Math.
10.
To Judas ye traitor also, who received power of Christ to cast out devils. to
heal the sick, and to do al things as the other Apostels did. Furthermore we
do read ye many claue unto Paul, Philip. 2.
which afterward fell from him, whereupon he complains, saying. All men do
seek their own, and not that which is Christ's, The which no doubt for ye
manner of the time, did wonders, cast out devils, and prophesied. We must not
think therefore, that they are happy and streightway blessed, and truly
aperteining to Christ, which do miracles, signs, and wonders in this world by
the name of Christ. Wherefore we read that Christ answered the three score and
ten, which were returned, bosting of the miracles which they had done, Luke. 10.
thus, Rejoice not in this, that devils are subdued unto you: but rejoice in
that your names are written in ye book of life. And Paul reproving the
foolishenes of the Corinthia^s which they conceived by miracles, 1. Cor. 13.
ye same being set apart, he requires love at their hands. We must note also
farther what Paul teaches, yt the devil by his subtlety and craft can
tra^seforme him self into an angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.
and show miracles by his ministers, to corrupt the truth of ye gospel: yt
which comes to pass by the permission of God: because men love not the
truth: 2. These. 2,
As Paul in an other place writes. He shall destroy the aperance of his
coming, even him whose coming is after the working of satan, with all lying
power, signs, and wonders, and with all deceiuablenes of unrighteousness, among
the^ that perish: Even as it happened to the Jews also in the old testament.
Finally we se by this place, ye prophecy, casting out of devils, and all manner
of miracles, do nothing at al profit those yt have the^: neither ought we to
think the^ holy, beloved of god, or aperteining to his ki^gdome, because in
this place we here, that many such, shall be rejected of Christ in the day of
judgment. Deuteronomy. 1^ Math. ^
We must not believe therefore every one that is a worker of miracles, as we may
read in Moses, and in Matthew followinge.

23 And then will I knowledge unto the^: I never knew you: Depart from me ye
that work iniquity.

And the^ vvil I C. that is, I will make manifest unto them, I will openly
show or declare,

I never knevve you. C. By these words he does utterly deny and reject the^,
affirminge that he never counted them among the number of his, although they
boasted the^ selves to be heads and pillars of his church. And therefore he
bids the^ depart which by a false title have stolen a false profession for a
time, saying. Depart from me. Paul does seem to have taken yt which he writes
out of this sentence of Christ: when he says, The lord knows who are his, 2.
Ti^
Let him depart from iniquity what soever he be that calls on the name of
the lord. For the first part te^deth to this end, yt the weak should not be
troubled by ye defection or fall of some, whose name was great, and of fame.
For he denies the^ to be known of ye lord, although they seem gloriouse in the
sight of men. In the second part ye Apostel exhorts all those which will be
counted the disciples of Christ, that they in time depart from iniquity,
least Christ forbid them his presence, when he shall divide the sheep from the
goats.

Which work iniquity. M. Here he calls those that wrought miracles,
workers of iniquity: because they did good with an evil mind, full of craft,
subtlety, and hypocrisy. Such were ye scribes and phariseis in their
fastinges, prayers and alms deeds, of the which we have spoken before,
Neither must we understand here ye christ speaks of adulterers, murderers,
vserers, dru^kerdes, and such like, but of such as bear a show of holiness,
and would seem, above all me^ to parteine to the kingdom of god. So Paul
calls the false apostells subtle 2. C^
and crafty workers. M. Wherefore let us consider, by what spirit they are led,
which after the manner of the Jews, at this day, ask signs, as though that
they would believe the treweth if they might see signs.

24 Whosoever therefore hears of me these words, and does the same, I will
liken him unto a wise man which buylte his house upon a rock.

M. These words do seem to be the conclusion of that which went before in the
21. verse, He that does the will of my father and so forth. And that also is
euydent in Luke, which says. Why do ye call me lord, ^p. 9.
lord, and do not those things which I command you. Who so ever comes
unto me, and hears my words and so forth. To here, in this place is taken
to understand, as in many other places also And does them. Bu. By these
words he teachethe, that it is not enough to here the word of God, except
thou endeavor thy self to do that which he commands in the same. According
to this place, ^e. 11.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Also S. James
says. See that ye be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your selves. ^ust be (...) of the (...) and not ^rs only
For if any manne hear the word, and declares not the same by his works, he
is like unto a man beholding his bodily face in a glass, and so forth. For
there are diverse men at this day and has been always, which think that
relygion consists in often hearing the word of God, and in disputing of the
same at common metings: But our lord Jesus Christ here pronounces, that true
piety does not co^siste in knowledge and talking, but in the action and
conversation.

Which builded his house. To build, is to make, erecte, or set up some
spirytuall workmanship. The same allegory uses Peter, saying. If so be that
ye have tasted how graciouse the lord is, ^^tr. 2.
to whom ye come, as unto a living stone, disallowed of men, but chosen of god
and preciouse: and ye as living stones, are made a spiritual house. Upon a
rock. The rock is Christ, and true and parfect godliness, I mean Faith,
workinge by Love.

And so treweth it self is the foundation, by the firm, and immovable power
of Christ: the house is the work, which is done, and all the conversation of
the whole life.

25 And a shower of rain descended, and the flouddes came, and the wyndes
blewe, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, because it was grounded on
the rock. A shovver of rain. Bu. The shower of rain, the flouddes, and the
wind do signify the sundry and manifold dangers, temptations, persecutions,
disseases and such like, wherewith men are vexed and troubled. B. For all
these things do plainly show and manifest, whether we be builded upon the
rock Christ or no. C. For then trewely we do receive the doctrine of Christ,
when we can resist all the assaults of Satan. The like saying has S. Paul
to the Corinthyans. And it fell not. A. That is, 1. Cor. 3.
no temptation is able to overthrow the house of this wise man. B. for the
faith and sure trust of the Godly fully knyt unto Christ can not be confounded,
neither can the gates of hell, and all the power of satan, how so ever he
cause a tempest, prevail against this. 1. John. 4.
For greater is he that is in them. than he that is in the world. And they
which trust in the lord, Psalm. 125.
shall be even as the mount Syon, which may not be removed, but stands
fast for ever.

26 And every one that hears of me^ these words, and does them not, shall
be like unto a folish man which builte his house upon a sand

And every one which hears. Bu. Now the lord shows the contrary part of
the parable, to the end it may appear more plain, and the more stir up the
hearers.

The se^ce of this must be gathered by the former part, every part being
repeated and set one against an other. C. For seeing it is hard to discern the
true professors of the Gospel from the false, by such parables our savior
Christ does show, in what thing they do chiefly differ. For he co^pareth the
false profession of the Gospel to an imperfecte building, which stands for a
time, being at every storm and tempeste, in danger of destruction, because
it wants a sure foundation.

These words. C. This rellatiue These does not note one kind of talk, but
the whole some of doctrine. For the Gospel, except it be fully fixed in men's
minds, it is like unto a thyn waule, which is erected on hye, without any
stay or strong fondation. His words therefore are in effect, True faith.
as if he should have said, that the same is a true faith which is deeply
rooted in the heart, and is so knitt to a constant mind, that it will not one
inche give place to any temptation. For all they build upon the sands,
which dig not inwardly, even to the denyinge of them selves.

Hypocrisy.
Which build on the sands. Bu. The sand signifies false hypocrisy, feigned
sanctimony, and those things which arise of the same, as trust in creatures,
invocation of saints, choice of meat and apparel, fastinges, hypocritical
prayers, and such like. who soever trusts in these, makes a sandy and
frail fyckle foundation. There is a common proverb, thou buyldest on the
sand, and others also like unto these, Thou striuest against the stream, Thou
drawest water in a sieve, Thou castest stones against the wind: which all are
spoken against those, and applied to them which go about any thing that
will be unprofitable, and to none effect.

27 And a shower of rain descended, and the flouddes came, and the winds
blewe, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

Temptations, are a custom to hipocrites.
C. By these words Christ does signify, that true piety and godlynes
cannot well be distinguished from hypocrisy, til such time as it comes to a
trial. For the temptations wherewith we are proved, are like unto floods or
troublesome waves: which easily ouerwhelm unconstant minds, whose lyghtenes in
calm weather is not known.

28 And it came to pass, that when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at his doctrine.

C. When he had given the people a taste of his doctrine, every man that heard
him was amassed, because a new and unwonted majesty, did draw unto it the
minds of men. Bu. The talk of Christ was lively, fervent, and pearcing the
minds of men, in so much, that it moved the herers, and specially because it
was new in the peoples ears, whereupon they said afterward, what manner of
thing is this? Mark ^
what new doctrine is this? For with authority commanded he the foul
spirytes, and they obeyed him. Math. ^
The multitude therefore was amassed, because the doctrine of Christ, was joined
with a majesty. In the which doctrine the efficacy of the spirit was included.

29 For he taught them as one having power, and not as the Scribes.

M. Some expound this place so, as though the Evangelist should say, that
Christ therefore taught with aucthorytie, because by his authority he forbad
that which the law granted, and required that, which the law commanded
not, thinking the.5. chapter before, so to be the fulfylling of the law, that
it should fulfill that which was imperfecte in the same. But if they mark
well the sentence of Christ, they shall find that he adds nothing to the
law, but rather does restore the law which before was broken, and obscured by
the Scribes and Phariseyes, to his former place.

Wherefore others, a great deal better, did understand this sentence,
saying, that this authority, was a certain vigor and force, of parfecte
doctrine and verity, with the which Christ did instruct the people standinge
before him. And there is no doubt, but that the doctrine of Christ was of great
force to the people, when as the doctrine of the Scrybes and Phariseies, was
obscure, feeble, and cold.

E. And trewely the Greek word, for the which we read the authority, does
signify power and right to do any thing.

B. But here it signyfieth authority and power of the spirit, persing the
hearts, which parteineth to Christ, and the true mynisters, although, not by
like measure. For it is given to every one by measure. And some have the same
more plentifully then other some.

The.viij. Chapter.
WHEN he was come down from the mount, much people followed him.
When he was. C. Now Matthewe comes to the pithe of the history. Before he
said that Christ ascended into the mount, and then he brought in many
principelles of the doctrine of Christ. And now he adds that at the same
time that he preached in the mount, he healed a Leaper. The which miracle
Mark and Luke do also declare, although they show not the time. Much people.
M. The great multitude of people, which are here said, to follow: flocked, and
came unto him a little before, as the Euangeliste showed, saying. (...) 4.
And there followed him a great multitude of people from Galilee, and from the
ten cities, ^consta^ ^e mul^
and from Jerusalem, and from Jury, and from the regions that lie beyond
Iordane. Notwithstanding the inconstancy of the common sort of people is to
be noted, who for a time, have a fervent desire to know the truth, but when
persecution comes, they fly, and are suddenly gone.

2 And lo there came a Leper and worshipped him, saying: Master if thou will
thou can make me clean.

And lo there came. C. In this (truly) appeared the divine power of Christ:
(...) diui^ hereby (...)
that only with his word, and the touching of his hand, he suddenly put
away the leprosy of the man. M. By such workyng of miracles, greater faith,
credit, and authority, was gotten to the word of God. Neither without cause,
was the healyng of bodies joined to the cure of souls. For Christ is the true
Savior of the whole man, (...) is the ^uior (...) ^ody ^e.
not only of the soul. but also of ye body: the which he will plainly declare
in the end of the world, when as he will bestow on us the benefit of
everlasting life. C. But although the leprosy were of an other kind then that
which the Physicians call Elephanthiasis in Greek (which leprosy also makes
amans skin like unto the skin of an Elephant) yet notwithstanding, it is
welenough known, that this disease was incurable. For if it continued any long
time, it was seldom heard or seen, that any man was delivered from the same.
Which worshipped him saying. B. What signifies here to worship, Chap. 1.
the other two Evangelists do show, which declare this same history. Mark
instead of he worshipped, has, he bowed the knee, Chap. 5.
or kneled down. Luke says, he fell down at his feet on his face. Luke. 17.
Also the Samaritane which was cleansed when he returned to give thanks, Luke
5.
fell down on his face at Jesus feet. And Simon Peter fell down at Jesus
knees also. C. The Leper therefore, by bowyng of his knee, showed some sign of
reverence. We do know that Adoration, was a common use among the Jews, and
among them in the east parts. Wherefore many think that the Leper did not
worship Christ in his mind with any divine worship, but did honorably salute
him, as some great Prophet of God. But with what affection he worshipped
Christ we dispute not. But what he objected unto him we see, namely yt he
could make him clean if he would, by the which words, he acknowledges a
divine power to be in Christ. And Christ when he answered that he would,
shows that he attributes more unto him then appertains unto a man. For he
must needs be of great power, which only with a word or beck, can restore
health unto men. But whether the Leprose man did believe Christ to be the son
of God, or whether he were endewed with this power as Moses, or won of the
Prophets, this is plain, that he doubts not, but that the gift of health
is in his hand and power. But where as he speaks under condition. If thou
vvilt thou can. It is not contrary or repugnaunt to that certainty of
faith, which God requires in our prayers, neither ought men to hope for more
then God does promise. The Leprouse man was certified by no oracle or promise
of God what Christ would do. Therefore he should have done rashely if he had
gone beyond these bounds. For he only affirms that he was so persuaded of
the power of Christ that he doubted not that it was in his will to cure the
Leprosy. Then he offers him self unto him to be healed, notwithstanding
uncertain what would come to pass, because the will of Christ as yet was
not known unto him. So that here we have propounded unto us an example of
modesty in this leprouse man, Modesty.
which commits his clensing and health to the will of Christ. B. Even so
in all prayers for external things, the godly person will always add, not
my will, but thy will (O father) be done: If it shall be to thy glory heal me,
put away this evil. And he will not absolutely or bluntly say, deliver me or
heal me, because he knows not whether the thing which he asks be good in
deed, and apt to the setting forth of the glory of God, to whom he wholely
commits him self. Hereuppon comes that which Paul writes, Roma 8.
saying: We know not what to desire as we ought, but the spirit makes
intercession mightily for us, with groninges which cannot be expressed with
tongue.

3 And Jesus putting forth his hand touched him, saying: I will, be thou
clean, and immediately his leprosye was cleansed.

And Jesus putting forth. M. Now on the other side, we must note the goodness
of Christ, which so gently heals and receives those that were diseased.

Touched him. C. In the Law the touching of a Leper was a heinous thing: But
truly because such is the purity in Christ, Christ's innocence and cleanenes.
which takes away all spots and filthe, he does neither defile him self
in touching the Leper, neither yet does he transgress the Law. For he taking
upon him our flesh, Ephe. 5.
has not only vouchsafed to touch us with his hand, but has knyt him
self also to us in one body, so that we are members of his flesh, and of his
bones, neither has he only extended unto us his arm, but also has descended
from heaven even into the lower parts: And yet for all this, he has no spot,
but abiding holy, has taken away all our filthe, and has sanctified us, and
made us without spot or wrynkell. But when as he could have healed the
Leprouse man with his word only, to the testifying the affection of mercy, he
puts unto it also the touching of his hand, and no maruelle, when he would
take upon him our flesh, to purge away our sins. The (...) Christ wa^^
kind. (...)
Wherefore the putting out of his hand, was a sign and token of his exceading
grace and goodness.

B. Mark adds, that Christ had compassion on the Leper, when he put out his
hand. For the documentes of the mercy and great goodness of Christ, with the
which he would allure the people unto him, were so beneficial, and ought
also being rehearsed to increase in us faith toward him. For when as he
offered him self to the Leprouse man which prayed in faith, he will offer
him self also unto us when we pray with like faith.

Saying: I will, be thou clean. Bu. For so much as Christ is the excellent
curer and physician both of the soul and body, most excellent and mighty.
Christ physi^
Let no man hereafter seek unto creatures, in whom there is no help for
succor. For the God of al Gods, has given unto us his only son Jesus
Christ to be our Savior, to whom except we power out our prayers alone, we
can never excuse our selves truly of impiety. And immediately his leprosy
was. A. In this appeared the wonderful power of Christ, as it is said, that
he healed the man that was afflicted with so great and grievous a disease, so
sone as he prayed him. Who therefore hereafter dare once doubt of his virtue,
power, and unspeakable goodness toward us?

4 And Jesus said unto him, see thou tell no man, but go and show thy self
unto the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a witness unto
them.

And Jesus said to him. C. Some (that they might excuse the Leper) think not
that he was seriously in deed forbidden of Christ to publishe the miracles,
but that rather it was unto him a provocation thereunto But they are of a better
judgment in this point, which think that he was forboden, because his full
time was not yet come. For Christ would not be glorified by and by: therefore
he would have certain of his miracles for a time kept secret, and in
silence, until it was full and convenient time to have them known. ^good in^
being ^ary to (...) will, (...) not him
Wherefore we must thus think that the Leprouse man by this his preposterous
affection and favor that he had of Christ, deserved no praise, but rather
discommendation, because he obeyed not the commandment of Christ. ^n. 15.
If he would have given thanks to the author of his health, he could have
done it no better then by obedience, which is more esteemed of God then
sacrifice. So that we are taught by this example that they do very peruersely
which give place to a rash and unadvised zeal. (...) with ^ow^


Go shevve thy self to the priest. M. Here the Leprouse man was separated
from the people by the mystery of the priests, according to the Law,
furthermore it is appointed in the Law, that those which are cleansed, should
be allowed and received again (by the law) of the priests, and being
received, (...). 13.14.
should offer for their cle^sing that which the Law commands. C. And
because the ceremonies of the law were not as yet abrogated, Christ would not
contemn or despise them. Finally, the end why he sent the Leprouse man was,
that the priest by his judgment should allow the benefit of God: and then
he that was healed should show by his offering, a token of his gratitude and
thankefulnes. Christ therefore in sending the Leprouse man to the priest, does
testify that his purpose was nothing else then to set forth the glory of God.
Furthermore, Christ would here have the Leprouse man to go unto the priests,
and to show him self unto them: that is, to prove whether he were truly
cleansed or no. That being allowed by their judgment, and the gift offered,
they might have a testimony against them selves, of their wicked behauioure in
striuinge against Christ. And that is the same which the lord him self says.

For a testimony unto them. C. For he speaks of the whole order of
priesthode, that all excuse might be taken away when they hard the miracle.
Neither does it make any matter that Christ commanded the Leper to be silent,
because he would not have the memory of the miracle always hyd. When as
therefore the Leper by the commandment of Christ, came into the sight of the
priest, it was a testimony unto them, that they should be inexcusable, if
they would not receive Christ for the minister of God: and also all occasion of
sclau^der was taken away since yt Christ did not break one jot or title of
the Law. E. There are some notwithstanding, which take this word testimony
for a law or statute, as it is said in the Psalm. God gave this for a law
unto Israel, or for a testimony. But the former exposition does better agree
to the present circumstau^ce. For if the priests had been curable, if they had
not been obstinate they might have been brought by this testimony or miracle
unto Christ, but to condemn the unbelieving, this witness of Christ is
sufficient. Bu. But here it is to be marueiled at, with what bouldnes the
Papists and Popyshe apostels the Monks, and sacrificing priests, Popish
auriculer confession is here grounded.
could upon this place teach their auriculer or ear confession to be grounded
upon the law of God. In this truly their senses are very gross and dull. They
will have the Leprosy allegorically to be sin. And the Pope annoynteth his
shauelinges, and sacrifyinge priests to be discerners of the spiritual
Leprosy, by the which consequently they would seem to prove their ear
confession. We grant to the priests in the old law, that this power was
given unto them, to the end the people might know that all their cleanenes
and the judgment thereof did depend upon the priesthood: Notwithstanding
wickedly the sacrificing Papists take this unto them. C. For who ever read in
the Leuitical law, that ye priests there were appointed to here confessio^s,
but they fly to this allegory above named, Such is their argument. The law
gives to the Leuitical Priests ye knowledge of Leprosy, therefore let us take
it upon us. Sin is a spiritual Leprosy, therefore let us be examiners of
sin. But this is a more infallible argument. Sithe the priesthood is
removed, it is necessary that the law be removed also, all priesthoodes are
removed to Christ, and fulfilled and ended in him. Therefore to him only, all
the right, and honor of priesthood is also removed. Moreover their allegory
is very unfit, that sets among the ceremonies, that law which is merely
pollitique. Chrysostom also teaches that Christ did this for the Jews sake,
Chrisost. in homel. 12. De muliere Cana.
that he should not be counted a breaker of the law. And where as they
affirm that this ear confession has been of great antiquity, their own
Chronicles declare the contrary: For the testify that there was no certain
law or constitution of it, before the time of Innocent the third, who decreed
that every one should come to confession twyse a year, without the which he
said that men should have no entery into Paradise. It is not much above
three hundred years paste since this was decreed by Innocent. In consi, Late.
lib. 4. sente^. 14
Sozomenus reports that this constitution of bishops was dilligently kept
in all the Weste churches, but specially in Rome, whereby he proves that it
was no universal ordinance of all Churches. He says farther that this was
the manner of Constantinople, till a certain woman fayninge that she came to
confession, The devout confession of a harlot to a popish priest.
was found under this filthy couerlet playing the whore with a Deacon. For the
which act, Nectarius, a man notable in holiness and learning, bishop of that
church, took away that bawdy couerlet, Nectarius bishop of Constantinople, took
away auricular confession.
and repelled the custom. Now, if auriculer confession were the law of God,
how durst Nectarius repel and destroy it.

Wherefore they must condemn him, and the church of Constantinople, which
for a time put it away, and all the churches of the East parts, if they will
have it, to be the Law of God. But that we may confute it by authority
sufficient.

Let us consider what Chrysostom says, I do not lead thee (says he) into a
stage of thy fellow servants. Chrisostom. hom. 2. in psalm. 25.
I do not compel thee to disclose thy sins unto me^, rehearse and utter thy
conscience unto God: show thy wounds to the lord the best Surgeon, and ask
salve of him, yea, show to him that will reproach thee with nothing, but will
most gentelye heal thee. And saint John says. 1. John.
If ye confess your sins, he is faithful and just to forgive you your
sins, meaning not a Popyshe priest, but that priest which is a priste for
ever after the order of Melchisedech.

5 And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion,
which besought him saying.

M. This history also Luke has in his seventh chapter, although it seem
otherwise unto some. C. In words this is only the difference that Matthewe
says, the Centurion came unto Christ: But Luke says that he sent certain
of the Jews, which should do the message for him. But Matthewe not
unadvisedly attributes that unto him, which was done in his parsone and name.
But in all the circumstaunces, the two Evangelists do so agree, that it
should be a ridiculous thing to feign two miracles for one. Finally there is no
doubt, but that the band of soldiers which were under the Centurion, had
their station in the city of Caparnaum, as the legions were wont to be divided
for the safegarde of cities. There, when he beheld the manners of the people
to be very vicious and wicked: Math^
as we know that Caparnaum which was a city bordering on the sea coasts,
was more vicious then all other cities: that notwithstanding it let not him
one whit to condemn the superstitions of his country, that he might have a
taste of true and sincere Godliness.

Wherefore he comes unto Christ, saying.

6 Master my servant lies at home sick of the palsy, and is greuouslye
payned.

Master my servant. B. The Greek word signifies a child, a son, and a
servant. Although Luke case it, (...) by a word not ambiguouse, which
signifies a servant. C. But where as Luke adds that this servant was dear
to the Centurion, he does by that means prevent the doubt which otherwise
might trouble the minds of the readers, for we do know that servants are
not of such price unto their masters, that they would be so careful of their
life, except they have got their favor by singular endeavor, or diligence,
or faithfulness, or by some other virtue. Luke therefore does signify that he
was not of the common sort of bondmen, but a faithful and virtuous servant,
and such a one as was in great favor with his master.

Hereupon it came that his master was so careful for his life, and gives him
so great a commendation. We have therefore here a worthy example in this
Ethnicke and Heathen man of godliness, and of a mind rightely directed by the
spirit of God. For always they which are of God, (...) 6. ^s. 4
acknowledge that their lord is in heaven, so gently and uprightly they deal
with their servants. Of the which matter saint Paul in the sixte to the
Ephesians writes.

Lies at home. C. It is manifest by both the Evangelists, that this was a
sudden Palsy, which at the first coming brought danger and hasarde of
life. For those Palseys which are not extreme, want the torment of pain. But
Matthewe says, that the Lad was grievously payned. And Luke says, that he
was at the point of death. So that both of them do seek to set out the glory
of the miracle. Bu. Now let us learn by this man's example in all our
tribulations to come unto Christ, ^ation ^o bring ^o ^c.
and to open all the sorrows of our mind unto him, and to crave his sure and
undoubted help. Luke adds that the messengers said, he is worthy that thou
do this for him, or he deserves this at thy hands, for he loves our nation,
and has buylte us a Synagoge. By the which words there is no doubt, but that
the Jews did give him a singular report and commendation of godliness. In
buylding a Synagoge, he did plainly declare him self to be a favorer of the
Law. Wherefore they do not without cause pronounce him to be worthy, to whom
Christ does offer him self as to a godly worshipper of the lord, to benefit
and help him. B. And truly he knew the Jews to be the people, and to have the
word of God, and his counsels committet unto them, (...).
and therefore he loved them, and sought by his benefits to win them. For he
was constrained with that spirit (with the which Cornelius was forced) to
give him self to fasting and prayer. Neither can the holy ghost chose but
offer him self to the elect, how ignoraunte and infirm and weak soever
they be. Notwithstanding here appears the great and wonderful blyndnes of the
Jews, The blindness of the Jews
that they would by their consent and furtheraunce transport the grace of God
(which they them selves disdainfully refused) to a Gentile and Heathen man.
For if Christ were the minister and dispensator of the gifts of God unto the^,
why do not they them selves receive that proffered grace, before they bring
strangers unto it? Therefore in this they condemn them selves.

7 And Jesus said unto him, I, when I come will heal him.

A. Luke has, and Jesus went with the^. B. Where the incomparable goodness and
submission of Christ is to be considered. For although the Centurion were a
heathen man, and his messengers also puffed up with a vain show of holiness,
yet notwithstanding by and by, of his own free will, he offers to go and see
the servant of the Ethnicke. What deed can be more gentle and loving then
this? yea what is he that will not look for help at his hands?

8 The Centurion answered and said: Sir, I am not worthy that thou should
com under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.

The Centurion answered. C. Because Matthewe sought to be brief, he brings
in the Centurion speaking in his own person: But Luke more amply expresses
the same saying, that he sent these words in message by his friends: But the
sense and meaning of them both is all one.

There are two special things to be noted in these words. Two things here
to be noted.
The Centurion sparing Christ, for honor and dignities sake requesteth Christ
that he would not weary only may be restored to life. Humility.
A marvelous humility to be considered in an Ethnicke and Heathen man It may
be that he being accustomed to the manner of the Jews, for modesties sake,
took it not unworthily that he was counted a Heathen man, and so was a fearde
that he should do injury to the Prophet of God, if he should constrayne him
to come into a Gentile, Heathen, and unclean man. But whatsoever it was, it is
certain that he speak unfeignedly with his whole heart, and that he had so
reverent an estimation of Christ, that he durst not inuit him to his house:
Yea, as it follows in Luke he thought not him self worthy to talk with him.
R. A wonderful grace truly of modesty, which is not only set before our
eyes to maruayle at, but also to follow. We shall immitate the same, if we
truly acknowledge what we are by nature in the judgment of God. For it will
come thus to pass, that how excelent soever we seem in the sight of men, yet
we shall down with our pecockes tail, and shall think our selves worse then
the most abject kind of me^. C. Notwithstanding, it may be demanded, by what
reason the Centurion was moved so highly to extol Christ, and that which
follows to, makes the matter more obscure.

But speak the word only. C. Or speak by word as Luke has: for
except he had known Christ to be the son of God, it had been superstitious
to attribute ye glory of God to a man And truly it is not to be thought
certainly, that he was truly instructed in the divinity of Christ, of the
which all (almost) at that time were ignoraunte. But Christ imputes not his
words to error, Answer.
but affirms them to proceade of faith. And this reason constrained many
interpretours, to think Christ to be celebrated as the true and only God, by
the words of the Centurion.

But it is more probable, that this godly man being persuaded by the rare and
manifest works of God in Christ, did simplely think the power of God to be
in him. And no doubt by hearing he understood somewhat of the promised redemer
and Messiah. Therefore although he did not as yet understand plainly that
Christ was God manifested in the flesh: Yet notwithstanding, he was so
persuaded, that the power of God was declared and publyshed in him, and that it
was his office to show forth the presence of God by miracles. So that he
does not supersticiously ascribe unto man that which is only proper to God: but
he attributes that to Christ which was given him from above, and believes
that he is able to heal his servant. If any will yet object and say, that
nothing is more proper to God then to bring to pass that which seems unto him
good, and that this power can not be granted to a mortal man without
sacrilege: Aun^
It may easily be answered again. Although the Centurion did not so
subtly distinguishe, yet notwithstanding, he did not attribute this power to
a mortal man, but to the power of God, the minister whereof, he was certainly
persuaded to be Christ. Therefore he acknowledging the grace of healing, to be
a heavenly power, he does not bind it to the presence of the body, but is
contented with the word only, out of the which he knew so great force and
power could come.

9 For I also my self am a man subject to the authority of another, and have
soldiers under me, and I say to this man go, and he goes: and to an other
come, and he comes: and to my servant, do this, and he does it.

For I my self also am a man. M. Here the Centurion confirms by his example
the confession of his faith of the power of Christ, bringing in an argument
of the more to the less. For he esteemed more the divine power which was in
Christ, then the rule and domination which he had over his soldiers and
servants. B. As if he should say, I am nothing at all like unto thee in
power, which as yet am under the subjection of another man, where as thou haste
all things in thy hand: and yet with my word can I make my servants to do
any thing, my soldiers at my commandment are obedient, and those which are
under my rule, grudge not to fulfill my mind: How much more then canste thou
do with thy word whatsoever thou will in all things, as in healing diseases,
in restoring health, in putting away death, and in restoring life? ^xample
Magi^s and ^rs of ^es.
M. Here al they have an ensample set before them which are magistrates and
masters over housholdes, that they may learn by their power to acknowledge
the power of God, and think upon his divine word and commandment. If our
words be so much able to prevail among men, that whatsoever we say and
command, they do and fulfill, when as notwithstanding we our selves are
miserable men, and nothing differing from others: how much more has the
word of God his power, in ruling all universally. Furthermore, let them gather
of their own obedience after this sort. Behold, thou art a man, set under
the power of another, and thou say unto this go, and he goes: to another
come, and he comes: and to the third do this, and he does it: loking and
requiring of them their due obedience. Therefore if so great obedience, be
showed to thee which art a man subject to others, the which thou also
requirest to be done as a duty, ^nce.
tell me I pray thee how thou will behave thy self, if thou be disobedient to
thy lord (of whom thou have received that power, and in whose name this
obedience is done to thee) if he say unto thee go, and thou go not, come,
and thou come not: do this, and thou do not? B. Here also we must note yt
all things that are good proceed of God, and are done by his power, according
to the saying of S. Paul. It is neither in the willer nor in the ronner, but
in the mercy of God. For who will not much marvel at the great goodness of
God, if he way how littel this Centurion (being an Ethnike, and the more
profane by reason of his affairs in the wars) had heard of Christ, and
how much be believed? Let all flesh therefore humble him self to the
majesty of God: the which except he of his goodness revoke to life, it must
needs perish.

10 When Jesus heard these words, he meruailed: and said to them that
followed him, verily I say unto you: I have not found so great faith in Israel
When Jesus heard these words.

C. Although admiration belong not to God, because it arises of new things
and unlooked for, notwithstanding it might happen in Christ because he taking
upon him our flesh, was endewed with man's affections. B. He meruayleth
therefore in respect of his humanity, at so wonderful a miracle of the
goodness of God, that so great faith should be given to an Ethnicke, and
Heathen man, being rudely brought up in respect of his faith in so much that
he should excel the people of God in the excellency of faith. B. Before, God
being known almost only in Jury, now of a profane man, he is more known
then of many of the Jews. A new thing truly and strange, worthy of
admiration. And said to them that follovved him. B. To the end ye people
which followed him might also marvel, and might have a desire to immitate the
faith of the man, he says thus unto the^.

Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith in Israel. C. The
which words are spoken (as the Logicians term it) Secundum quid non
simpliciter, The faith of the Centurio^.
that is in respect of his faith, not simplely that he did excel in general.
For if we consider all the parts of faith, the faith of Mary excelled in this
that she believed her self to be with child by the holy Ghost, that she might
bring forth the only begotten son of God: furthermore because she believed
the son which should be borne of her, to be his own maker, Christ
commended the Centurions faith for two causes.
and the creator and redemer of the whole world. But for two causes specially
Christ did commend and prefer ye faith of this Ge^tile and heathen man,
before ye faith of the Jews, namely because yt of so Centurion, this Ge^tile
and Heathen man, requires no sign at all, but does affirm his only word
to be sufficient for him. Christ was coming unto him, not because there
required any necessity, but to prove and try this faith of ye man. wherefore
he does specially co^me^d this faith, because it is satisfied with the word only.
He says not here com lord se and touch, no he desires not any corporal
presence and tuchi^g, but he believes such efficacy to be included in the word,
yt thereby he knew the health of his servant might be recovered. And
hereupo^ may be gathered a general rule, namely although God would have our
saving health wrought in the flesh of Christ, and does daily seal the same
by Sacraments: Notwithstanding, we must seek the certainty of the same out
of his word. For except this authority be attributed to the word (that we
grant that so sone as God has spoken by his ministers that our sins are
forgeuen us, and that we are restored unto life) all the sure trust of
salvation does fall away. By this place also we understand that the
Centurion was no Israelite.

11 I say unto you that many shall come from the East, and VVeste, and shall
rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.

A. Now Christ taking occasion of the faith of the Centurion, does in few
words touch the calling of the Gentyles, and the rejecting of the Jews.

C. For as Christ in the parsone of the servant propounded a taste, and as it
were the first fruytes of his grace to the Gentyles even so he does teach
his dominion, to be a token of the calling hereafter of the Gentyles, and of
the dispersyng the faith throughout the whole world, neither does he only
teach that they shall comme out of the countries which are at hand, but also
out of all the parts of the whole world. And although this be declared
already by many of the Prophets: notwithstanding in the beginning, it seemed
absurd, and incredible to the Jews, which immagined that God was bound to
the sede of Abraham. Wherefore not without admiration this was heard, that they
which were strangers and foriners, should be of the household, and heirs of
the kingdom of heaven. And not only that, but this, that the covenant and
league of salvation should by and by be publyshed, that the whole world might
grow into one body of the church: when he says that the Gentyles which
should come to the faith, should be partakers of the same salvation, with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Bu. They rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in
the kingdom of heaven which being partakers of the promises of God which he
made with the holy fathers, do at the length possess the kingdom of heaven
with them, being made the sons of God, coheyres with Christ, and fellows
with the saints. C. To be brief, this sentence is as much as if he should
have said, they shall have the same life. Whereby certainly we may gather that
the same saving health which is exhibited unto us in Christ, was exhibited in
times paste unto the fathers. Neither should the kingdom be common to all,
except there were but one faith, which is the only mean to obtain the same.
The same manner of speaking the lord used to his Apostles when he said, I
apointe unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed to me: Luk^
that ye may eat and drink at my table in ye kingdom.

12 But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, there
shall be weping and gnashing of teeth.

But the children of the. M. This is the other matter which we said Christ had
here in hand, namely of the rejecting of the Jews. C. But it may be
demanded, Qu^
how Christ calls them the children of the kingdom which were nothing
less, the^ the sons of Abraham? For truly they which are alienate from the
faith ought not to be numbered in the flock of Christ. It may be answered, An^
yt although they were not truly of the flock of Christ notwithstanding because
they had a room Abraham, that properly ye inheritance of the kingdom of
heaven did pertain unto them, at the least in respect of God him self: then
(as yet) they were holy branches, of the holy root. And truly that denial
or forsakinge which afterward followed, does sufficiently declare that they
were then accoumpted of the household of God. M. Therefore because the promises
of the kingdom, and the testament, did properly pertain unto ye Jews, they are
worthily called ye sons of ye kingdom. Of this matter Paul does dispute at
large in his epistle to the Romans. ^^a. 9.
C. Secondly we must note that Christ Abraham. Notwithstanding Christ
pronounces that they shall be united to the end God might admit strangers
into the bosom of Abraham, and deny the children: B. that the last may be
first, and the first last. M. So that it is not to be thought, that the
Lord would have all the Iewyshe children of the kingdom to be cast out, but
he has selected and chosen to him self certain of them, as saint Paul
writes to the Romans.

(...). 11.
Even as we may not think that all the Gentiles shall be saved, but that the
chosen of God, shall be gathered from among them.

Into utter darkness. C. There is a secret antithesis, in this word utter
darkness, for Christ does signify that out of his kingdom (which is the
kingdom of light) there reigns nothing but darkness.

For the Scriptures when they make mention of darkness, do signify
metaphorically, a horrible kind of pain, which the tongue of man in this
life, cannot express, nor the heart imagine. Bu. So that by these grievous
threatenynges, Christ went not about to dismaye the Jews, or to bring them
into despair, but rather to draw them out of the mire and puddell of
incredulity, and to win the Gentiles unto him, who came to save both the
Jew and the Gentyle. There shall be vvepynge. M. This is a Metaphor, by the
which he compares that unhappy state and condition of the damned, to captives
sytting in a dongeon or dark place, full of horror and fear, who are
constrained by an evil conscience, ^^ment ^^ro^
and fear of the judgment to come, to weep, wayle, mourn, and gnashe their
teethe. And thus thought he good to set forth the torments of damned souls.

13 And Jesus said unto the Centurion go thy way, and as thou beleuest, ^o
shall it be unto thee. And his servant was healed in the self same hour.

And Jesus said unto the Centurion. M. Now the Lord aunswerynge the
Centurion grants him his petition, as if he should say, be of good chere,
and quiet thy mind. For go thy way, in this place, has such signification.
Neither is this a simple commandment to go unto his own, (which should
carry with it ambition) but it is an assent or agreinge to that which was
demanded. 2 Samuel 14.
So David consentinge to the woman of Thecoa, said: go home to thy house, I
will give a charge for thee. Mark. 5.
So we read that Christ did often times, send away the afflicted after they
had obtained consolation at his hands, saying: go in peace, John. 4.
and be whole from thy plague. And in another place he says, go thy son
lives.

And as thou beleuest so shall. Bu. In few words, evidently he declares the
efficacy of faith. Faith brings to pass, and is the cause, The efficacy of
faith.
that we receive that by the power and operation of the holy ghost, which we
believe of the word of God. The Centurion believed that the Lord could heal
his servant lying sick, therefore the lord healed him.

C. Hereby it appears how lovingly our Savior Christ pours out his
grace, if he may have the vessel of faith open unto him. For although our
Savior Christ speaks unto the Centurion, notwithstanding there is no
doubt but that by his example he would have us all to have the like faith.
Moreover we are here taught, The want of faith is the cause that our prayers
are refused.
what is the cause that God does oftentimes reiecte our prayers, surely our
incredulity and unbelief. Wherefore if in faith we come unto him, we may be
sure our prayers shall be hard.

So shall it be unto thee. M. These words do not only express and set forth
the goodness of Christ, but also his omnipotency, by the which he has in his
will and power, life and death, health and syckenesse, yea, The omnipote^cy of
Christ
only with his assente, he restored this servant (which was even now at
the point of death) to health and life. He says not go thy way, I will
pray unto my father for thee, or for thy servant, but he says go thy way,
be it unto thee according to thy faith, which in deed signifies his
authority and power, either to grant or deny us our petitio^s. And his
servant was healed. A. Because the Centurion believed that Christ was able to
restore his servant to health, he reaped the fruit of his faith, namely the
health of his servant.

In the self same hour. M. By this we see that Christ promyseth nothing
falsely, or in vain, for he healed his servant in the same hour or at the
same time.

Man must tarry the lords leisure.
But this does not always happen unto us by and by: for it is not our part to
appoynte God a time, or to lymyt him, but to tarry his leisure.

A. Let it suffice us that he has a care over us, if so be that we abide in
him, by a fyrme and constant faith. For faith obtayneth all things at the
hands of God. Whereupon they speak truly which say that a Christian faith
does justify, pourge, save, and remit sins, pacify, and make a quiet
conscience, that it makes the sons of God, that it opens a way to God the
father, The effects of faith.
that it brings to pass that we are heard of God, that it overcomes the
world and all the lusts of the flesh, that it works charity, patience, and
all virtue in the hearts of the faithful, and that faith makes all things
possible unto us.

These and many other, are the fruytes of faith.

14 And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wyfes mother lying
in bed, and sick of a fever.

And when Jesus was come. C. The Euangeliste Matthewe brings not in this
story orderlye, as we may gather by Mark, who names only four disciples
which waited on Christ: after the calling of the which disciples, he says
he went into the Synagoge, and from thence he says that he went strayghtwaye
to Peter's house. Whereby we may gather that Matthewe did not exactly observe
the time. The Evangelists do seem to set forth this, as a special miracle,
not that it was more excellent then others, or more worthy of remembrance, but
because Christ offered to his disciples a domestical and familiar show or
token of his grace: and because the healinge of one woman might give and
minister occasion to many to come to him to be healed, and to receive their
health. Into Peter's house. B. The apostels did not so forsake all things,
that they would never use them again: they gave them selves, and all that
they had, yea, they committed their soul and life into the hands of the
lord, being ready for his sake to forgo all these, if necessity and occasion
should require. But in the mean time they used those things so far as it
was lawefull, and so long as their ministry and office would give them
leave, not rashely forsakyng their parents, their wyses, their children and
family, but caring for them so faithfully and diligently as they could: the
which thing, this history sufficiently proves, which witnesses that Peter
being called to the ministry of the word, had a house a great while after,
and a necessary care for the same. Also, when Christ was dead, Peter said
unto Thomas, to Nathanaell, to the two sons of Zebed, and to two other of his
disciples, I will go a fishing, they said unto him, we also will go with thee.
So (truly) they forsook all things, that they gave them selves wholely to his
will and calling, first seking to fulfill that which pertains to ye same. He
savve his vvyfes mother. M. Mark says that some which came with Christ
into the house of Simon, Man
told him of the woman's sickness. And Luke says: they prayed for her. Luk^
In the which there is expressed an example of faith and love: of faith in
the power and goodness of Christ. For except they had believed, An (...) of fa^
love.
that Christ by his divine power could have delivered the woman from her fever,
to what end should they tell him of her, and pray for her? It was enoughe
for them to believe that Christ would, and could do it wyllyngly: That is,
that he was able and good to do that which they prayed for.

Secondly, we may see the example of love in this, that because they show an
other bodies disease unto the lord praying him to heal the same.

And sick of a fever. C. C. Luke says that this woman was taken with a great
fever, briefly setting forth the power which Christ by this miracle declared:
For it was a sure and certain declaration of the power of God, to take away so
great and grievous a disease out of hand, only by touching with his finger.

15 And he touched her hand and the feuar left her, and she arose and
ministered unto them.

And he touched her hand. C. Although Christ with his beck only could
restore health unto this woman, notwithstanding he touched her hand, either to
declare his affection, or else because he thought this outward sign to be
proffitable. For we know that outward signs were used commonly according to
the manner of the time. ^ultes (...) not be ^ed.
B. Furthermore he joined words to his touching, to teach us that health
came from his word, and yet not to be looked for without the sacrifice of his
flesh. And the fever left her. C. Luke says that he rebuked the fever. The
which kind of speakinge, although it seem hard to the reader, not
sufficiently exercised in the scriptures, yet it is not void of reason: For
the fever and all other kind of diseases, as ho^ger, ^^es are (...) messen^
pestilence, and such like are the somners, and messengers of God, by whom, he
executes his judgments. Therefore as by his commandment and beck, he is
said to send out such messengers, so he does restrain and revoke them as it
seems to him best. And she arose. A. So sone as this woman received her
perfect health she arose. And ministered unto the^. M. That is, she prepared
meat and other things pertaining to the bodily refectio^. By this place we are
admonished to use the gifts of God to his service and glory, because we have
received them at his hands, ^. 4.
according to the saying of saint Paul. What have thou O man that thou haste
not received.

16 When the even drew on, they brought unto him many that were possessed
with deuels. And he cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all that
were sick.

When the even drew. Bu. Hitherto Matthewe has rehearsed certain particular
or special benefits, now generally he comprehends an infinite sort,
whereby he may sufficiently and plainly prove the lord Jesus to be omnipotent,
and loving toward those that are his. He receives therefore al those
mercifully which were offered unto him, and heals the^ without delay. Many
that were possessed with deuels C. Not all that are vexed with the deuel (as
was Job) are Demoniakes or possessed: But they are such, Demoniakes.
in whom Satan does reign, whose minds he rules at his will and pleasure.
There is no doubt, but that there were many among the Jews, which were
possessed with unclean spirits in the time of Christ, and Satan because of
Christ's coming did the more rage: which thing came not to pass without the
wonderful providence of God. For Christ hereby had the more occasion offered
to set forth his glory. And he cast out the spirits with a word. C. That
is, by his power, commandment, strength and rule. C. Luke adds, and
says, that these sick persons were healed, by layinge on his hands.

For the laying on of his hands, was a sign of reconciliation under the law.
Wherefore not without good cause Christ lays his hands on them, whom he
absolueth from the curse of God. It was a solemn manner of consecration, as in
an other place is more largely declared. But we say, that Christ here
simplely laid on his hands on the sick, The mercy of Christ.
that in commending them to his father, they might obtain favor, and
deliverance from their diseases. And healed all that were sick. A. That is,
he refused none that came unto him to receive their health, so gentle and
loving was he.

17 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Esaias, when he
says: he took on him our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.

That it might be fulfilled. M. We may not so understand this place, as to
think that Christ did therefore heal the sick, that the scripture might be
fulfilled, and that else he would not have done it: But rather we must think
that this piece of Scripture was put, because this thing should come to pass
by Christ, and because it was so decreed of the father.

He took on him our infirmities. A. This place is in the three and fifty
chapter of Esaye. Esaias. 53.


C. This prophecy seems to be cyted smally to the purpose: Esaias speaks not
of miracles, but of the death of Christ: Neither of temporal benefits, but
of the spiritual and everlasting grace. And that which was certainly spoken
of the vices of the mind, Matthewe refers it to corporal diseases.
Answer.
The answer is not hard, if so be that the Readers way and consider, not
only what Christ bestowed upon the sick, but also to what end he cured
their diseases. They felt the grace of Christ in their bodies: But we must
have respect unto the end, because it is unfit, to stick and stand in a
transitory benefit, as though the son of God were only a Physician of the
body. What then? Truly he gave syghte to the blind, to declare that he was
the light of the world, he restored the dead to life, to prove yt he was the
life and the resurrection. The like matter we must think as concerning the
halte and the lame. Wherefore let us follow this analogy, that what benefits
soever Christ has showed to man in the flesh, the same must be referred to
the end which Matthewe sets before us, namely that Christ was sent of his
father to deliver us from all evil and misery.

Bu. All these things therefore pertain to this end, that we come and declare
all the diseases both of the body and mind, to this heavenly, faithful, and
mighty Physician. For he came into this world from above, to heal our
infirmities. As concerning the which matter, read the second chapter of the
first epistle of S. Peter. 1. Petr. 2.


18 When Jesus saw much people about him, he commanded that they should go
unto the other side of the water.

C. The Euangeliste Matthewe touches that briefly, which others very
plentifully, and fully do expound. And that which is omitted of Matthewe, the
other two Evangelists do declare: Namely that Christ sought occasion privily
to depart into a deserte place before it was day. Mark ^
And Mark says afterward, that he was admonished of Peter, how that all men
sought him. But Luke says, Luke ^
that the people sought him and came unto him. Now where as Mathewe says,
that he went over to the other side of the water, the other two in stead of
that said, that he went throughout all Galilee, that he might preach in all
places.

19 And a certain Scribe (when he was come) said unto him, master, I will
follow thee whether soever thou go.

And a certain Scribe. C. Matthew in this chapter makes mention but of two
men only that would follow Christ: Luke makes mention of three, which, when
they were ready to give them selves unto Christ, were hindered by diverse
lettes, from the right race: according to the which lettes they receive their
answer.

Master I will follow thee. M. What this Scribe here sought, can not be
gathered by his words, but by the words and answer of Christ it
appears. He seems after a littel taste of doctrine, to acknowledge the
Gospel to be the doctrine of God, and to be moved with violence, and a
certain affection, to follow Christ, not considering what it was to follow
Christ: but by and by he quayled. Carnal^ spellers.
Many such we have in these days, which so sone as they hear of the Gospel,
give their names unto Christ, and profess that they believe in him: but if
there chance to arise a little persecution, by and by they become Scribes, and
forget their profession. This Scribe would follow Christ, but he thought he
should walk a pleasant way, and at his iourneys end have a quiet Inn or
resting place, with good chere, when as the disciples of Chist must pass
through brambles and thorns, and by many troubles to the cross. Therefore the
more he hasted, the less was he ready, his heat was mere cold, his
diligence became negligence. He did, as one that would feign be a warrior,
^ardely ^sh wa^our.
but he would not fight in the same, or in the dust, neither would he want his
ordinary fare, nor stand in peril of the gunneshot. It is no marvel, if
Christ reiecte such soldiers, such disciples, who, as they rashely offer
them selves, so do they rashely pluck back their foot again with shame.
Wherefore let us understand, that we are all in the person of this man
admonished, that we do not rashly, or carelessly boast our selves to be the
disciples of Christ, without any consideration of the cross and trouble to
come: but rather let us before the time consider what the condition of such
must be. For this ignorance calls us to his schole, ^6.
and teaches us to deny our selves, and to take up the cross and follow him
And saint Paul says, ^o. 3.
All they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.

20 And Jesus said unto him: the foxxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nestes: but the son of man has not where to rest his head.

And Jesus saido unto him. M. By this answer our savior Christ does
plainly open and manifest that, which the scribe had hidden, and kept secret
in his breast: he makes not answer to his words directly, but to his mind:
he says not I would not have thee follow me: neither says he, I think
it good that thou follow me. but he so answers him, that he can not find
in his barte to follow him. As if he should say, there is no cause why thou
should look for any earthly power, commodity or gain. And if thou
therefore follow me, thou art much deceived. For I have so little of those
things in this world (which thou sekest) that the foxes, and fowls of the
air are rycher then I, for they have where to rest and dwell, ^e and ^tate
^ste.
and so have not I. They have sure abiding places in this earth: but I have
not where to lay my head.

C. By these words the son of man declares what the state and condition of
his life was. when he was in the earth: but he prescrybeth to all his
disciples, to what order of life they ought to frame them selves.
Notwithstanding it is marvel that Christ would deny him self, to have any
one foot, part or portion of the earth, where to lay his head, when as he
had many godly, and louinge men, which at all times would gentlely receive
and enterteine him: but we must note that this was spoken for admonyshions
sake, least that the scrybe should look (as from a rich master) for a rich
and plentiful reward, when as the lord him self as a guest, or in the way of
entreaty, did lead his life in other men's houses. Neastes. E. The Greek
word rather signifies shadow places. Aust. aduersus Fau. li. 22 chap. 48.
Ciprianus aduer. Qui. lib. 3.
S. Austine in his.22. book against Faustus, and in the.48. chapter, calls
this word neastes, lodginges. Even so Ciprian calls them, in his third
book to Quirinus, for the birds, beside their neastes, have holes to save and
cover them in the time of tempest, as in hollow trees, in stone walls, and in
the eaues of houses.

The son of man. B. Christ here in this place, and in other places, calls
him self the son of Adam, or the son of man, to abase him self to the
loweste state of men, and to show his humyllitie. It is whollye agreeable to
that which Paul saeth, Philip. 2.
He made him self of no reputation, taking on him the shape of a servant, and
was found in his apparel as a man. This kind of speakinge therefore does
very well express the misery of man's nature, with the which Christ being
indewed, it must needs be, that he is partaker with us of al our infirmities,
sin only excepted.

21 And an other of the number of his disciples said unto him: master, suffer
me first to go and bury my father.

And an other of the number A. Here is now another propounded before our eyes,
which askinge leave for a time, is more slow, and less ready to follow
Christ, whom notwitstanding he restrained, and suffered not to go. C. The
Scrybe was driven from the fellowshippe of Christ, because he immagininge, that
he should lead a pleasant life, rashely offered him self. But this man
(trewly) who^ Christ kept back, was infected with the contrary salt. For
when as he should have obeyed the calling of Christ out of hand, he was let
by the infirmity of the flesh, thinking it a hard matter to forsake his
father: and it is lykely, that his father was a very old man, when he said.

Suffer me first to go and bury. For this saying does declare that he had not
much time behind: as if he should have said, suffer me to tarry with my
father, and to serve him in this his old age, till he dye. He preferred the
duty (which he ought unto his father) before Christ. Luke. 9.
Luke says, that he was commanded of Christ to follow him. For the which
Matthew says, that he was one of his disciples. But to be short, he refused
not his calling, but desire the liberty to be given him for a time, until he
had discharged his duty, toward his father. His scuse is as much in effect,
as if he should have denied him self to be free, until his father were dead.

22 But Jesus said unto him, follow me, and suffer the dead to bury their dead

Follow me. B. Here this word follow, is not only taken to cleave unto
Christ by faith, and to embrace his doctrine, but also to leave all
impedimentes, which might let and draw him back, from being a minister of
the gospel, which more plainly appears by the words of Luke when he says,
Luke. 9.
that our savior Christ said, Go thou and preach the kingdom of God. C By
this answer of Christ therefore, Our heavenly father must be obeyed before
our earthly father.
we understand, that children ought so to reverence, obey, and cleave to their
fathers, that they leave the same without respect, so often as God calls
the^ to another matter of greater weight and importance: I say all duties
apperteyning to men must cease, when God commands us to wait on him, to
obey him, and to follow him. And to this effect perteyneth the saying of
Christ, in an other place. Luke. 14.
If any man come unto me, and hate not his father and mother, his wife and
children, his brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he can not be
my disciple. C. Now al men must way and consider, what God requirethe of them,
and what the vocation whereunto they are called requires also: least that
earthly fathers hinder them, and withdraw them from the service of their
omnypotent and heavenly father, to whom all duty specially parteyneth.

And suffer the dead to bury. C. By these words Christ condemns not the
burial of the dead: for it were a filthy and beastly thing, to cast out the
carcases of the dead, and not to bury them.

And we know that the ryte and ceremony of buryinge, was given from above unto
men, and received, and used of the saynctes, to confirm the hope of the
resurrection. Only the meaning of Christ in this place was to teach us, that
what so ever does call us from the right race, or does stay us in the same,
does sauoure and taste of nothing but death: as if he should have said They
only live rightly, which apply their studies, and al parts of their life, to
the will and commandment of God. And those which bow and bend to the world,
and which neglect and disobey God, to show them selves obedient to men, are
like unto the dead, which in vain and to no purpose occupy them selves in
having a care of the dead. M. And so in the former place, The^ live (...)
wor^ dead^ God.
he calls them dead, which are alienate from the true life, that is, which
believe not in him, being deprived of the grace of God. which have a greatter
care for worldly matters, then for those things which parteine unto God: which
neglecting God give them selves to the world wholly, as says S. Paul, 1. T^
speakinge of the widow. She that lives in pleasure is dead, being yet
alive. In the later place, he calls those dead, which by temporal death have
ended their lives. suffer (says he) infidelles to be with infidelles, and one
infidel to dwell with an other, and one of them to dye with an other, suffer it
(I say) rather then that should be a set unto thee to serve me. C. This man
therefore was called of Christ, (as Luke more plainly declares) to be a
minister, and preacher of the Gospel: But because the preaching of the same,
suffered him not to sit at home with his father. Christ worthily plucketh, and
draws him away, as it were from his father. Bu Whereby we may gather that they
are worthy of the divine calling, and do truly follow Christ, (...) follo^
christ.
which seek not their own. that is, which under the name and title of Christ,
hunte not after titles, richesse, pleasures, and other vain and corruptible
delights of this world. Moreover they follow Christ trewly, which despise
all things, in respect of the truth, to whom, nothing in the world is more
preciouse then God, which for the name of Christ, forsake their parents, yea,
the most preciouse and derest things in this life, if need shall require. C.
Furthermore as in this, the wonderful goodness of God appeared, which
vouchesafed to bestow so excellent an office, upon so weak a person, so it
shall be nedeful for us to note, how that the vice that was in him, was
corrected, and not favored with sufferaunce.

23 And when he was entered into the ship, his disciples followed him.

And when he was entered into. Bu. Now Mathewe proceeds to show a great
many other excellent miracles of the lord Christ: amongst the which, the
alleying of the cruel tempest was the first, by the which he delivered his
disciples, from shipwreck, and from present death. C. But because a littel
hereafter there is mention made again of the lake, when it is said, that the
hogs were carried into the same. whether it be the self and same sake, it is
not agreed upon among al me^. All men will confess, that the waters of
Genesareth were sweet in taste, (...)
and wholesome for use: but Strabo affirms that the lake of the Gadarenes, was
so hurtful and perniciouse, that beasts by drinking thereof, did and do lose
their hear, nails, and hooues. There is no doubt therefore but that there were
two lakes, and the one far distante from the other. but it is out of all
doubt and controversy, that we ought to understand this, to be the lake of
Genesareth, over the which when Christ was paste, he went to the Gadarenes,
which of Matthew are called Gergesites. (...) 4.
But they which gather and suppose by the diversity of the name, that there is
an other history declared, (...) 8.
contrary to that which Mark and Luke describe, are (while they go subtly
about to prove the same) deceived. For the regio^ of the Gergesites, was also
called Gadarena, of a famous city called Gadaris. In Hieroms age and time,
the name was altered, so that he calls them Gesarenes, according to the
common manner then. But notwithstanding we deny not but that the hogs were
carried by the deuylles into the lake of the Gadarenes: but when Christ says in
the fourth of Mark, let us pass over to the other side, we can expound that
of no other then Genesareth.

Now it rests to consider of the time, when this should be, which can not
be gathered by Mathewe or Luke. Only Mark says, that the same day at even,
when he left preachinge the Gospel under the parable of the seed, he said,
let us pass over. Whereby it appears that the Euangelystes observed not the
order of times. the which Luke plainly proves, when he says, It came to
pass on a certain day: by the which words he declares that he did not
greatly travel to show what was done before, or after.

His disciples follovved him. C. Mark says, that there were with Christ
other ships: but Christ and his disciples were in one ship. Luke resiteth
the same words. Mathewe is more brief. But in some and efecte they agree,
namely that Christ gave him self to quiet and rest, and he being a sleep,
there arose sodeynelye a great tempest. Matthew therefore has these words
following.

24 And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much, that the
ship was covered with waves, but he was a sleep.

And behold, there arose. A. It is most sure and certain, that this tempest
arose not by chance, but it was raised by the lord, for the disciples sake,
to the end he might teach them, how weak they were as yet in faith.

Wherefore they were to be instructed in this point. But we must note, We can
not be in the fellowship of Christ without danger.
that when Christ is present with us, we are subject to many dangers, with the
which we are assayed and tried, even to the last point: For he is come to
help us, not altogether to set us free.

In so much that the ship was covered. Bu. With these words (although in
a brief sum) he comprehends the outrageous blastes of wind, the blacknes
of the air, the high surginge of the waves, the breakyng of the roaring
billowe, and the troublesome tossing of the ship: by the which they were in
danger.

But he was a sleep. C. Although the sleep of Christ were natural,
notwithstanding to this use, that thereby ye disciples might perceive and
understand his infirmity the better. Let us not say as many do, that Christ
feigned a sleep to prove them: no we must rather think, that he slept
according to the condition and necessity of his humane nature:
notwithstanding, in the mean time his godhead was awake, whereby the disciples
might have comforted them selves, being persuaded that help and aid should
come from heaven. Let us understand therefore, that all this was done by the
providence of God, that Christ slepte, that the violent tempeste arose, that
the waves covered the ship, and the ship was in danger of shypwracke.
Trouble is a trial of our faith.
And hereby let us learn that so often as any trouble aryseth, our faith is
tried of the lord, and if there come any sickness, let us also be persuaded
that the same is for the trial of our patience: or else at the least to
bewraye our infirmity: as we see here, when the waves covered the Apostles,
their infirmity and weakness was discovered which before was hid. Bu. To
this end therefore, let us refer all kind of euels, with the which the
church of God is commonly afflicted, as persecutions, wars, seditions,
dearthes, tempests, dissentions, plagues, and such like, with the which
experimentes the almighty uses to try our faith.

25 And his disciples came unto him, and awoke him saying: lord save us we
perish.

M. This here seems to be a godly kind of prayer. For what better remedy
could they seek for then to call for help being in danger at the hands of
Christ? But when Christ condemned them of infidelity, we must see in what
point they offended. There is no doubt, but that they were to boulde, and had
to much confidence in the presence of the carnal master. The (...) fear.
For as it appears in Mark, they prayed not symplely, but they came unto him
and said: master, carest thou not that we peryshe. And by Luke it appears
that they had a confused kind of fear, when they said. Master, master, we
perish. They ought to have known, that the deity could not be oppressed with
sleep. But they kept them selves quiet until present danger urged them, and
then exceading fear stirred them up, and persuaded them, that they should not
be saved, except they awoke Christ. And this was the cause why he accused
them of infidelity.

26 And he said unto them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith, then he
arose, and rebuked the wyndes and the sea, and there followed a great calm.

Why are ye fearful, O ye of little. Bu. Now it follows how Christ
behaved him self in this danger, and after what sort he delte with his
disciples, being paste hope almost. First he blames the imbecillite of their
faith in this that he teaches, how they ought not to quayle in perilles, but
constantly with an undoubted mind to hope for present help from the hands of
the lord and savior. Notwithstanding, of this reprehension of Christ, a
question may be moved, namely, whether all fear ought to be condemned, and
repugnant to faith. Qu^
At ye first he reprehendeth them not symplely, because they feared, Au^
but because they were full of fear, they were out of measure afraid. Then he
opposes faith against their fear, and declares that he speaks of their
immoderate perturbation, which did not so much exercise their faith as it did
shake their minds. Hereby it appears that all kind of fear is not contrary
to faith, for if we fear nothing, then there aryseth a wonderful
carelessness of the flesh, so that faith languysheth, sin increases, and
the remembrance of God vanishes away. So we see that the fear which
exercises faith, All (...) fea^^ evil.
is not of it self evil, until it exceadeth: the excess consists in this,
if the tranquillity of faith be troubled or disquieted, which ought to
areste in the word of God. Then he arose and rebuked. A. Christ would try his
disciples, but he would not suffer them to perish: therefore he rebukes the
wyndes, and there followed a calm. C. he commanded the sea and the wind to
be quiet, not that the lake had any sense, or understanding, but that he might
show that the power of his voice did pearce even through the deaf elements.

And there follovved a great calm. M. This trewely brings an unspeakable
joy and comfort to all the elect. For in this place we learn that there is
nothing in this world, so hard, so cruel, and desperate, which Christ can
not rule, tame and overcome. C. Neither does the sea and the wind alone (which
are void of sense) obey the rule and power of God, but the very wicked also,
for all their obstinacy, are constrained to couche. To this place agrees the
saying of the prophet David, (...) 46.
when he says God is our hope and strength, a very present help in trouble.
Therefore we will not fear though the earth be moved, and though the hills
be carried to the myddest of the sea. Though the waters thereof rage and swell,
and though the mountains shake at the presence of the same. Again. The lord
makes wars to cease in all the world: he breaks the bow, and knappeth
the spear in sonder, and burns the chariots in the fire. M. It is most true
therefore that the bishops of Rome affirm, that the ship of Christ, which is
the church, can not perish, it may be assalted, and beaten, and filled with
waves, but in the end it will escape, and possess a calm. They speak the
truth. It appears no less by this place. And we rejoice. But let them see,
whether they be in the ship with Christ or no, which perish not: then let
them see whether they them selves are not they which trouble the church or
no, which ouerwhelming the truth, replenishe and ouerlade the same with men's
traditions.

27 But the men marueyled saying: what manner of man is this, that both winds
and sea obey him.

C. The Evangelists Mark and Luke attribute this saying to the apostels. for
after they had said that they were reprehended of Christ, they add that they
cried out with fear, saying, what manner of man is this? Notwithstanding this
saying did more appertain to others, to whom Christ, as yet was not known.

Yet we allow them both. Here now the fruit of the miracle appears, At
what time miracles do profit us.
when the glory of Christ is celebrated. For the^ miracles do profit us, when
we wonder at the power of God in Christ, and submit our selves wholly to his
will.

Bu. Wherefore let all men learn here, when they are delivered from evil, that
they have respect to God alone, to give to him all glory, and to be thanckfull
unto him for his benefits.

28 And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the
Gergesites, there met him two, possessed with deuilles, which came out of the
graves, and were out of measure fearce so that no man might go by that way.

And when he was come. B. By an other excellent miracle, or benefit, the
lord seals his power, and declares it to the whole world, manifestly
approving him self to be lord, not only of the disseases, and elements of
the world, but also to be the ruler of Satan, the prince of this world.

Into the country of the Gergesites. C. We have already a littell before
confuted their error, which affirm that Mark and Luke, declare an other
history then this. For when as the region of the Gadarenites, is said to be
that which lies over against Galilae, of all the three Evangelists, and all
the circumstaunces also do agree: who will be persuaded that these things
happened at diverse times?

There met him two, possessed C. This one only difference gave occasion of
error to the interpretours, to disseuer Matthew from the rest: because he
names two, the other Evangelists, rehearse and make mention, but of one only.
Augustine.
But the conjecture of Austine is probable, who thinking that there was two,
says, that they made mention but of one of them, which was more famous then
the other, because of his exceading fercenesse, for the which cruelty and
fearcenes, the miracle seemed more wonderful in him. And trewelye we do see
that Luke and Marcke do persist in amplyfying with many words, the cruel
fearcenesse of the devil: the which makes much with the conjecture of S.
Austin. Where as Luke says, there met with the lord a man, out of the
city, it is uncertain whether he understand him to be a citizen of the
Gadarenites, or whether he went out of the city to meet with Christ. For
when he was commanded to go home (as you may read in the story) and to preach
to his famelye and kinsefolke, the grace and mercy of God, Marcke says, that
he went and preached in the ten cities, which was a regyon nigh to the
Gadarenites, and oueragaynst Galilae: whereupon it is gathered that he was not
a Gadarenite by birth. Moreover Matthew and Mark, do in no point affirm, that
he came out of the city, but out of the monumentes or graves: and Luke
declares that he lived in the wyldernes. These words therefore of Luke (There
met him a certain man out of the city) are thus to be expounded, that
before Christ came nere unto the city, ye posessed met with him in the midst
of the way. But they which think that the man dwelt in the graves, because
the devils are either delyghted with the smelles of dead carcases, or with the
savor of sacrifices, or because they would get those sowles by disceite,
which covet to be near their bodies, theye I say, that think thus, are
deceived, their divination is not worth a straw. The unclean spirit did
rather keep this miserable man among the graves, to the intent he might strike
him with continual terror, by the sorrofull sight of death: as if he should
lead his life among the dead, being thrust out from the company of men. The
devil persecuteth men to the death.
By this also we learn, that the devil does not only torment men in this
present life, but also persecute even to the death. And were out of measure
fearce. S. The Evangelist does descrybe here the strength, power, policy,
and kingdom of satan, that afterward the virtue and power of Christ may the
more appear. C. There is no man so stout, whom this horrible spectacle will
not make afearde: But we ought all to have this thought within our selves, that
we are held under, by the tyranny of the devil, until we are delivered by
God, through the grace of Christ Jesus. A. Mark adds, that no man could
bind him with chains because that when he was often bound with fetters and
chains, he pluckte the chains in sounder, and brake the fetters in pieces,
neither could any man tame him. C. But naturally he could not break the
chains: whereby we gather, that extraordinary motions of Satan ar sometimes
permitted, whose force does overcome our sense, and common reason.

There is more strength seen often times in frenzy persons, in their madness,
then when they have their health, wits, and parfecte strength. Neither can it
be denied, but that the devil does play his parts in such, so often as god
does permit him. But the force and violence which the Evangelists do describe,
here did far excelle. Sa^ ran^
By the which we are taught how fearful and horrible a thing it is to be
under the tyranny of Satan, neither must we fear the vexation and torment of
the soul, less then the disquietnes and trouble of the body.

29 And behold. they cried out, saying. O Jesus thou son of God, what have we
to do with thee? art thou come hither to torment us before the time.

And they cried out. M. Now the Evangelist begins to rehearse, both what they
did and said unto Christ. A Mark, (which speaks only of one) says thus,
when he spied Jesus a far of, he ran and worshipped him. C. This is the order
of ye history, when the possessed came to mete Christ, he commanded the
unclean spirits to go out of the men: then they did beseech him that he
would not trouble them before the time. Therefore they prayed not before he
spoke. Neither was Christ troublesome unto them, before he constrained them to
go out of the men.

But we must note, that they came not so willingly into the sight of Christ, as
they were driven thereto by the secret power of the holy Ghost. For as before
they were wont to vex men by furiouse violence in the graves, at their
pleasure: so now the higher power constrayneth the^, to come to the trybunall
Seat of their judge against their wylles. ^an and his ^dome is ^tr unto ^st.
Whereby we may gather, that all the kyngedome of Satan is subject and
obedient to the rule of Christ. Finally theye are constrained openly to
declare Christ to be the delyuerar of men. Yea, they are constrained to
worship him, and their obstinate complaints, are witnesses how unwilling
their confession was, being exhorted by vyolence, saying.

What have we to do with thee. A. This is an Hebrewe phrase of speech, in
the Scriptures used. ^ 16. ^ng 9. ^ra, 35.
As this, what have I to do with you, ye sons of Saruia? again. What have
thou to do with peace? Also. What have I to do with thee thou king of Judah. By
this voice, they would feign have escaped the hands of Christ, but because
that they parceyue them selves to be bownde, that in vain theye should fly
from him, they complain them selves to be troubled before the time, and they
mix with the complaint, a certain kind of besechinge. So that we se the
deuilles to look at the hands of God, for nothing else but cruelty, and yet
notwithstanding they cease not to swell with their pride against God.

O Jesus thou son of God. M. The deuylles do confess Jesus to be Christ,
even as do all the reprobate, but they believe not that they may be saved by
this Jesus: but contrariwise they think, that he is come to tormente, trouble,
and vex them.

But the reason why Christ does not reiecte and refuse openly, this confession
of the devil (as he did in the fourth chapter of Luke) is this, ^ 4.
because the discord was well enoughe known, to the end al evil report
might be put away.

But as towchynge this present place, this ought to be sufficient and enough,
that the deuylles humblelye besechynge him, did outragyouselye frott and fume
against him. To torment us. They complain them selves to be tormented, (As
some say) because theye were constrained to set the man free, and at
liberty, which before they molested and vexed. Others refer this torment,
which they make exclamation against, to the day of Judgment. But we must
rather understand this place, that the deuylles being made afraid by the
presence of their judge, thought upon their ponyshemente: for although Christ
held his peace, yet their evil consciences did accuse them. For as the thieves
when they are brought to the sessyons, or judgment seat, conceive in their
minds the deserved ponyshemente: even so it must needs be, that the devils,
and all the wicked ones, should tremble and quake for fear, at the sight of
God, the Celestyall, mighty, and terryble Judge: no less, then if they
presentely felt the pains and tourmentes of hell fire. The deuyls knowing
that Christ should be the judge of the whole world, it is no maruayle, if
they were afraid of tormente, at the sight of him.

M. Theye knew they had deserved tourmente, Christ's coming brings
torment. to the wicked
therefore theye had leauer that Christ, as yet had not come: so shall he
come to all the wicked, which by the testymonye of their own Consciences,
look for nothing else, at the coming of Christ, but everlasting
ponyshement and pain.

As to wchynge the fond and couryouse question which sum move, whether the
day of judgment was known to the^, or no, It is supersluouse and vain.
Say ye so sir? Before the time. Surely his meaning was, Answer
that the time for the ponyshment of the reprobate, was ever too soon: For
they would feign put it of from day to day. Marcke adds that when the
devil was asked what his name was, he answered Christ that he was named
Legion. The which answer Christ did extorte out of his mouth, to the
end the greatenesse of his mercy and grace, might have the more praise and
commendation.

It was no maruayle if the man were so out of measure trowbled, when he was
possessed of one that comprehended in him self an army of deuylles. Therefore
the glory of Christ, in this greatelye appeared, that with his voice, he did
subdue not only one devil, but a Legion. And hereby it appears how
miserable a creature man is, Man's mysery.
if he be destitute of the grace of God. for then we do not only lie open and
ready for one devil, but we are receptacles for thousands, for legions, Luke.
8.
for an infynite sort. Luke adds, saying, that they requested him, that he
would not cast them into the deep, which request they made, because they
would be at liberty to do more harm.

Satan desires to be among men.
For it is the deuylles desire to wander still among men, and to seek like a
roarynge lion, whom he may devour. It greueth the devil to be drowned in the
deep, where all occasion of hurtyng is taken from him. To be short, all that
the devil seeks for, is to bring man to pardition and everlasting damnation.

30 And there was a good way of from them, a great heard of swyne feeding.

Bu. Here this foul and ougly Satan, depainteth him self what he is: For he
craves not at the hands of the Lord pardon or forgiveness, or any other
excellent gift, but a foul, unclean, and abhomynable mantion, namely that
he might have license to enter into the heard of swyne. Such trewely at this
day, are the requests of the sons of the devil: They ask not holy things
meet for men, but fylthy and unclean things, which argues that their
affection is corrupt, beastly, and abhomynable. And as their affection is
brutishe, so are they in all poynctes to be compared to brute beasts, to
filthy and unclean hogs.

31 Then the deuylles besoughte him, saying: if thou cast us out, suffer us to
go our ways into the heard of swyne.

Then the deuylles besought him. C. Some affirm, that they desired to enter
into the hogs, because they are ennemies to all the creatures of God.

This trewely we will confess to be true that they endeavor them selves wholly
to peruerte and overthrow the order of nature, appointed of God,
notwithstanding it is most certain that they had a farther respect and
regard, that is to say, that they might make all the inhabitauntes of the
country, by the loss of their hogs, to speak evil of Christ

For when as the devil did burn the goods of Job, and overthrew his house,
Satan ^teth no ^ture b^
he did it not for the hatred that he bare to the stones and timber of the
house: but that thereby he might cause the holy man, impaciently by the loss of
his goods to rage against God.

Suffer us to go into. M. This imbecillitie and weakness of Satan, Satan do
not^ witho^ parmi^ God.
is set forth unto us in many places of the scripture, that without the
permyssion of God, without his sufferance he can do nothing, no not so much as
the hogs, that he can harm without gods parmission, much less unto man
may he do any thing, Job. 1.
which is the excellent creature of God. For this matter read Iobe, and the
xxii. chapter of Luke, where our savior Christ says. Luke ^
Satan has sought to syfte you even as wheat is sifted.

32 And he said unto them go your wais. Then went they out, and departed into
the heard of swine. And behold, the whole heard of swyne, was carried with
violence headlonge into the sea, and perished in the water.

And he said unto them. C. Christ does not this to grant or fulfill their
desires: but by this occasyon he mente to prove what the Gadarenes were:
paraduenture he gave the deuylles leave to enter into the swyne, for a
ponnishemente of their wickedness.

Moreover Christ suffered this, for the promotynge and aduauncemente of the
glory of God, to the setting forth of the which, all his doings tended,
(even as the intention of these spyrites is directed to obscure the same) and
to the farther declarynge and publyshynge of the miracle, as declares the
Euangelyste.

For except this had happened to the swyne, none would have preached this
miracle in that Countreye, sauinge, only the two men which were delivered
from the devil. But now the swyneherdes ran home and told all the matter
as it was done, then the men of the Cyttie came forth, and all the
inhabitauntes there aboutes with them, so that now in a moment the power and
glory of Christ is set forth in all that regyon. This place teachethe us,
how fondely certain profane men tryffle, which feign the deuylles, not to
be escentiall spyrites, but to be the wicked affections of men. For how
should couetousenesse, ambition, creuelltie, and deceyte, be removed, and
dwell in the hogs? Let us understand therefore that unclean spirits, are
the ennemies of mankind: and such, that they would bring him to all kind of
destruction.

And they peryshed. C. Behold the disposition of Satan, whoo is given
altogether to destroy, unless he be let and hyndered by the power of God.
^s pro^.
Furthermore thou may see here the providence of God, by the which the two
possessed were preserved from peryshinge, by the malice of the devil: by the
which providence, we our selves, and all that we have, is preserved from the
destructyon sought by those wicked spirits.

33 Then the heardemen fled, and went their way into the city, and toulde
every thing, and what had fortuned unto the possessed of the deuyls.

Bu. All these things were done by the divine prouydence of God: that by this
means the miracle might have the greatter fame, and that hereby also it
might have the more credit among men, being approved, by so many
protestations and witnesses. M. We see therefore, how smaule the deuylles
prevailed in attayning their purpose, nay rather how greatly they were
deceived of their expectation. For there is no man that doubts, but that they
sought to hurt Christ and the men of that countreye, which lost their
hogs: but their mallyce in the end did only redownde to the loss of the
hogs.

By this therefore we see, how wisely the divine power of God is wont to
confound the crafty devises of Satan, ^mal ^th to ^ge ^god^y.
and to make them folishe, and to none effect, so that his malice is
constrained to serve contrary to his own opinion and will, to the glory of
God, and to the setting forth of his praise.

34 And behold, all the city came out and met Jesus: and when they saw
him, they besoughte him to depart out of their coasts.

And behold all the city. C. Here we have a worthy document, teaching us,
that all which acknowledge the hand and power of God, do not profit as they
ought, in submittinge them selves, by true pyetie, to him. The Gadarenes,
perceuing the miracle, were afraid (as plainly appears by the other
Euangelystes) and that because the majesty of God did so brightly shine in
Christ. Very well: but what followed? They besought him to depart. Than this,
what could be worse? They them selves were scattered sheep: the shephearde
comes to gather them together: yea, God by his son reached out his arms,
that by his embracing he might carry them up to heaven, which were overwhelmed
with the shadow of death. The ingratitude of the Gadarenites
They did rather covet and desire to be depryued of the salvation offered, then
any longer to have the presence of Christ. They seem to be offended because
of the loss of their hogs. But Luke notes a farther cause, that theye were
greatly afraid, and trewely they being mad angry, by the loss, did not pray
him but did more sharply compel and expulse him. But where as they reverenced
him as the mynister of God, and yet notwithstanding wished him farther from
them, we se that they were touched in no point with the grace of God. And
trewely although all the wicked do worship God, and do greatly endeavor them
selves to please him, yet notwithstanding if they might have their desire,
they would be far enough from him: The countenance of god is terrible to
the wicked.
because his countenance seems terryble unto them, so long as they thyncke
him to be a judge rather then a father. Hereupon it comes to pass that the
doctrine of the gospel (then the which nothing can be more pleasant)
seems so sharp and sower unto them. Even so at this day, when men publicly
and privately go about to measure the kingedome of God with their commodyties
and proffytes, they can have no taste of the grace of god. This was an evil
sign and token in the Gadarenes, that they were more afraid by the loss of
their hogs, then they were comforted and made glad, by the salvation of their
sowles. Whereupon Christ affirms, Luke 14.
that he can not be his disciple which forsakes not al, and follows him.

The.ix. Chapter.
HE ENTERED also into a ship and passed over, and came into his own city
And he entered into a ship. M. Because the salvation of mankind, does only
consiste in the knowledge of the Son of God, and because Christ came to win
the world, he could do no less in deed, then declare him self to the
world. And although this were done by the miracles that went before, yet
notwithstanding, because it could not be done sufficientelye, he thought
good to give unto this people, a proof or trial of his power. Wherefore in this
wonderful healing of the man disseased with the palseye, we must note and
mark the declaration of the power of God, to whom all things are constrained
to obey.

And came into his own City. C. This place does teach us, that the city
of Caparnaum was the place where Christ was borne, because he did often
times frequente the same. For there is no doubt, but that this same history is
declared of the three Euangelystes, although one of them more subtly then an
other does bring in the circumstaunces.

Luke says that the Scrybes came out of diverse parts of Judea, in the
presence of whom Christ healed the man sick of the palsy: notwithstanding
he shows afterward, that many by the mercy of Christ were healed. For
before he commethe to speak of the man, disseased of the palseye, he speaking
in the plural number, says. The power of the lord was present to heal
them. But there parteyned no small fame and praise to this miracle, that a man taken in all the parts of his body, being let down with ropes, he
lyinge in his bed, should soddeynely arise whole sownde, and in parfecte
health.

Notwithstanding there is another more special reason, why the Evangelists
do so long persiste in this, then in the others: namely because the Scrybes
took disdain at Christ, that he should take upon him authority and power
to forgive sins, but because it should appear so, unto them for certain, he
would have his authority sealed, and ratified, with a visible sign.

2 And behold, theye brought unto him a man sick of the palseye, lyinge in a
bed. And when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said unto the sick of the
palsy: son be of good chere, thy sins be forgeuen thee.

And behold they brought. Bu. The Euangeliste Marcke does descrybe the manner
of his brynginge more at large, saying. And they came unto him bringynge one
sick of the palseye, which was borne of four men. And when they could not
come nyghe unto him for the prease, they uncovered the roof of the house,
which he was in. Mar^
And when they had broken up the roof, they did with cords let down
the bed wherein the sick man of the palseye lay. Br^^ love.
By the which we must note, the syngular dyligence, and most fervent love of
them, which carried the sick man, the which trewely they declared in so easily
vncouerynge the roof of the house.

And when Jesus savve the faith of them. God trewely is the only knower of
Faith, and sercher of secrets, but yet they showed a token of the same by
their diligente labor and industry: because they would never have taken upon
the^ so many troubles, neither would they have assayed what they might
prevail (so many lettes being against them) except that a sure trust had
fully persuaded their minds of good success. No^ im^^^ Fa^^
so that the fruit of their faith appeared in this, that al means and ways of
coming to Christ, being shut and stopped, they were not for all this
weryed or void of hope.

For where as some think that Christ was privy to their faith, which was
hydden, their opinion seems to be too stricte and precyse. M. In the mean
season, notwithstanding we must note, that Christ does in these cariers of
the man, (...) is the ^to ob^ur pur^ the (...) of God
sick of the palseye, note a special faith. Whereby we may see, that in all
kind of works, Christ has respect unto Faith. For the Euangelyste says,
not here, when he saw their works, but when he saw their faith.

Son be of good chere. M. This brings great consolation to the conscyences
of sinners, that God will vouchesafe to receive sinners as his sons.
Furthermore by this word (be of good chere) he requires faith of the sick
parson, and also encourages him, and comfort him, as phisitio^s do
oftentimes their pacientes. C. Now when as Christ, by the faith of the
bearars, ^on.
healed the man, sick of the palseye, it is demanded of some in this place,
what one man's faith does profit an other. ^were.
First of all we know for certain, that the faith of Abraham did profit his
posterytie, when as he embraced the couenaunte and promise made to him and his
seed.

The like we ought to judge in all the faythefull: because by their faith,
they spread out the grace of god to their children, and posterity, yea, and
that before they be borne. ^ithe of ^rntes ^th in^
And also the same takes place in children and young infantes, who for want
of age, are not apt to have faith. But they which are ripe of years, whose own
faith is insufficyent, whether they be strangers, or of the fame line, or
kynred, an other man's faith in respect of the eternal salvation of the
soul) does nothing proffyte them, but only mediate. As thus. Prayers are
not without proffite, by the which we desire of God, that he will turn the
hearts of the unbelieving to repentance: hereupon it is plain that our faith
does proffite them, notwithstanding so far, that they shall not obtain
salvation, until they have obtained the unity of that faith. But where as
there is a mutual condesente, and agreement of faith, it is well enough
known, that there is a mutual help, yt is there (in like manner) one man's
salvation, is helped by an other. this is also without controuersye, that the
unbelieving are endued and blessed with benefytes, for the electes sake.

As touching this present place, although Christ is said to be moved by the
faith of other men, yet notwithstanding the man disseased with the palseye,
could not obtain remission of his sins, but by his own proper faith.
Christ did restore health, oftentimes to unworthy parsonnes, Math. 5.
even as God does daily suffer the Son to rise both upon the good and
evil: but he reconcileth us to him self, by no other means then by faith
only.

Wherefore in this word Of them. there is a figure called Synecdoche,:
because Christ had not so much respect unto them that carried the man, sick
of the palsy, but that he beheld his faith also. Bu. If any man therefore,
believes entreats, or prays for thee, and thou deny the word of God,
their faith, entreaty, and prayer, does nothing at all proffite thee.
Ezech. 14. and. 18.
For the Prophet most manifestly says, that the righteousness of the
fathers, can not deliver the children from the evil which hangs over them.
And the same Prophet does teach, that every one shall live by his own
righteousness, and dye by his own vnryghteousenesse.

Thy sins are forgeuen thee. C. Here Christ does seem to promise to the man
sick of the palseye, an other manner of thing then he sought: but since he
intended to restore unto him the health of the body, he begynnethe first to
take away the cause of the dyssease, and does also admonysshe the man, what
the cause of this dissease was, and how he should obtain his desire. Sin is
the cause of corporal disseases.


For because men for the most part, do not count the griefs which they
suffer, to be the scourge of God, they desire only ease in the flesh, and are
altogether careless of their sins, even as if the sick man should seek
for remedy of the grief present, neglecting the dissease it self, which
was the very cause of the grief and pain. But trewelye the only delyueraunce
from all kind of evil is, to have God favorable, loving, and merciful unto
us. Sometimes it comes to pass, that the wicked and ungodly escape out of
many euilles, God being nevertheless, as yet against them: but while they
think them selves to have escaped all, by and by the same come upon them, or
else greater ouerwhelme them, which plainly declares that there is no way
nor end to be had, till the wrath of God be appeased: as he him self does
witness by the mouth of the prophet, Amos. 5.
saying: If he escape the lion, the bear shall meet with him, and when he
comes into the house, and layethe his hand upon the wall, the serpente
shall byte him. This therefore is an old order of speaking in the scriptures,
to promise remission of sins, when the mittigation of pain, or ponishmente
is sought. Herevppon also we have an order in prayer descrybed unto us, that
we being admonished of our sins, by feelynge of affections, should first
be careful to obtain pardon, that God being reconciled unto us, may
withdraw his hand from ponishynge.

Deuteronomy. 28.
A. But to approve yt the dysseases of the body come of sin, read the eighte
and twenty of Deutronomy, John. 5.
the fifth of John, and the eleventh of the first epistell to the Corinthes.
1. Cor. 11.
M. We must note also, that Christ said not here, thou have now satisfied,
or go and make satisfaction for thy sins, but he said, thy sins are
forgeuen thee: A. signifiinge that remission of sins comes freely. M. And
that is the preaching of the gospel, which sets forth this grace to the
whole world, the which, the couetouse, false, and hypocryticall priests,
have always resysted, and do at this day no less strive, repugne, and most
spitefully gainesaye the same. They can in no wise abide the same. And why?
surely because it brings no gain. And hereupon it comes to pass, that
Christ at no time did teach his disciples to satysfie for sins, but did
teach them, to pray for the remission of sins, As appears in the lords
prayer, forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

3 And behold, certain of the Scribes said within them selves, this manne
blasphemeth

And behold certain of the Scrybes. B. That thing is gaul to the spyder,
which to the Be is honey: even so, nothing can be so well done or spoken,
which to the evil and wicked, shall not be judged evil. There was a great
multitude of people, which in so great a miracle gloryfyed God: but the
Scrybes and Pharyseyes found out somewhat to discommend and dispraise. So the
first are last, and the last first, and every tree brings forth his fruit.

Said within them selves. E. The Greek word is doubtful, in so much that
we may understand it, that they murmured among them selves. But it is
better that we understand it, that they spoke thus secretly in their minds,
for because it follows. Jesus knowing their thoughts. B. This word said
within them selves therefore, is taken for the thought, as we may read in
the psalms, Psal^
and many other places of the Scripture, as this, in the tenthe psalm. I said
in my heart: and so forth, for I thought.

This man blasphemeth. C. Here the Scrybes accuse Christ of Sacryledge, and
blasphemy, because he usurps that to him self, (as they say) which is
proper to God. The other two Euangelystes add, saying, who can forgive
sins, save God only? But there is no doubt, but that a slaunderouse mind
forced them to this synister and wrong judgment. If they had thought any
thing worthy reprehension, why did they not inquire and reason of it:
Furthermore, where as the saying was ambiguouse and doubtful, and Christ spoke
no other then the Prophets were wont before, when they were witnesses of the
grace of God, why do they take that in the evil part, which might be taken
in the best part.

First, therefore it is euidente that they were full of malice and spighte,
which so gredely take a light occasion to condemn Christ and his doings.
They thought evil in their hearts, to the intent they might privily speak
euel of him to such as they them selves were, behind his back. They said well
(truly) when they attributed the authority and power of remission of sins
to God only: but they thought amiss, when they imagined the same not to
pertayne unto Christ being God manifested in the flesh. It became them to
demand, by what authority Christ took so great a thing upon him: but they
without any inquisition, fayninge him to be a mortal man, make haste rashely
to condemn him.

B. They understood not that Christ was God: And yet notwithstanding these
Scribes were more holy and religiouse, then a great many, namely then those,
which affirm that they can absolve from sins, and that by indulgences, they
can forgive sins, for such blaspheme the name of the lord. ^y for^ ^innes
(...) man.
Only the lord remitteth and forgeueth sins, the minister of the lord, does
only pronounce out of the word and the mouth of God, that God has
forgeuen, and will forgive sins. For all power is the lords for ever, and
the ministry the ministers only. As concerning the which, read the.xx.
chapter of saint John. ^0.


4 And when Jesus saw their thoughts he said, why think ye evil in your
hearts?

When Jesus savve their thoughts. S. This is spoken by a Metaphor, of the
body to the mind, for to know or understand. So that this sentence when he
saw their thoughts, is as much to say, when he knew their thoughts.
Theophilacte, uses this word (saw) but Chrysostom has instead of the
same, (knew) Why think ye evil. (...).
C. Now Christ shows a plain toke^ of his divinity, in yt he bewraieth
their thoughts. For no man knows what is in a man but the spirit which is
within the man. Christ tarried not till they uttered and declared their mind,
but does preuente them before. Whereupon they might see that to be in Christ
which is in God only, that is to know the hearts and thoughes of man. Mark
therefore says that he knew and perceived in his spirit their thoughts: as
if he should have said, it could not be perceived of flesh and blood what
was in the heart: but Christ by his divine spirit perced and entered into the
same. He says that they thought euel in their hearts, not because it grieved
the^ to have that transferred to a mortal man, which God does only take unto
him self, but because so proudely and maliciously, they reiecte God so
mercifully offeringe him self unto them.

5 For whether is easyer to say: Thy sins are forgeuen thee, or to say,
arise and walk?

M. Christ proves by these words, that he has power to remitte sins, and
that by the most certain testimony of all men, that is to say, of the divine
power and efficacy, which no deceiuer or false Prophet can usurp unto him
self. Whether is easier (says he) to say, and so forth. C. As if he should
say, when it is as hand a matter to restore a dead body to lymmes, as to
remitte sins, it should not seem strange and wonderful to you that I
remitte sins, when I do the other. M. If I had said to the sick man, arise
and walk, ye would not have accused me of blasphemy: but when I said, thy
sins are forgeuen thee, I seem to you to be a blasphemer. Wherefore? Because
it belongs to God only to remitte sins. Now answer ye, which of these
two is most easy: namely, not only to restore and help this sick person
being incurable, out of hand, with a word, but also in a moment without
touching, and prayer to make him perfect and sound: or whether with a word to
forgive him his sins. C. Notwithstanding Christ seems not to reason very
perfectly, because look how much the soul does excel the body, so much
does forgeuenes of sins, excel the health of the body. But I answer that
Christ does apply his talk to their capacity, Answer.
who as they were sensible, so they were more moved by external signs, then
by all the spiritual power of Christ, which pertayned to everlasting life
and salvation. So in another place, John. 5.
he proves that the efficacy of the Gospel is of force to quicken men,
because in the last day he shall with his word raise men out of their
graves. This argument therefore was of force enough to refell and confute the^,
who esteemed nothing more then the visible miracle, in so much that they could
not deny, but that lawefully he forgave the sins of the sick man, when he
restored his health and strength to him again: because out of this effect,
the remission of sins appeared.

6 But that ye may know that the son of man has power to forgive sins in
earth. Then says he to the sick of the palsy, arise take up thy bed, and go
unto thy house.

But that ye may know. M. Christ goes about to prove that he is no
blasphemer, but that he did the thing, and could do it again, by his just
power and authority. For he which does no more then that which is in his
power to do, does not amiss, neither can he be a blasphemer.

The Greek word, for the which we read (power) signifies both power and
right. Christ did all things by his divine right, Christ did remitte sins
in deed: his ministers do but pronounce remission of sins.
not by any unjust or usurped power. C. This power therefore which he
chalengeth to him self, differs far from that, which was commits and
given to the Apostles, and which the ministers of the church at this day use,
for they do not so much remitte sins as they do testify that they are
remitted. When they promulgate the embassage committed unto them. A. as we have
spoken a little before. By these words Christ does not only affirm him
self to be a minister and a wytnes of this grace, but also to be the author
of the same. That the son of man. Z. This Periphrasis does set forth the
property of the thing, for he would show him self in all things sin only
excepted, to be a perfect man and like unto us. C. But to what end pertayneth
the restraynte. In earth. For what does it proffite us to get pardon here,
except the same may as well be granted in heaven, and ratified there?
Answer.
Christ spoke thus, because remission of sins should not be sought a far
of, being offered to the hands of men in his own person. For we dare not
presume at any time to say that God is merciful unto us, except he approaching
show him self familiar unto us. Now because for this end and purpose
Christ came into the earth, that he might offer the present grace of God
unto men, he is said to remitte sins in earth: Because in him and by him,
the will of God is made manifest, which before according to the sense of the
flesh, was hydden above the clouds.

B. Let us therefore consider this, to thend we may wholely depend on him,
which only can save us from our sins.

Then he says to the sick of the palsy. A. Now the lord tourning him self
to the sick man, declares of how great power and authority he is. When he
bids him to arise, take up his bed, and to get him home to his own house.

7 And he arose and went home to his own house.

M. Least any man should think that the words of Christ were void of force
and effect, The Ch^^
M. or that he did any thing without divine power, the strength and efficacy
of his words is showed, when that he which was sick of the palsy, arose
before them all, and went home to his own house. Behold therefore the
testimonial letters of this heavenly Ambassador Christ, by the which his
power was well approved. What had the Scribes and Phariseis to say against
this? Being envious and blind, they held their peace. What said the rest that
stood by? it follows.

8 But the people that saw it, marueiled and glorified God, which had given
such power unto men.

But the people that savve it. C. For the admiration which Matthew speaks of
here, the other two Evangelists have fear: notwithstanding, it is the purpose
of all men to teach that the power of God was not symplely known by and by,
but that all men were stricken with great admiration and fear, in so much
that they were constrained to give the glory unto God. But the fear which
followed the admiration, was to this end, that they should not disturb
Christ, but reuere^tly submit them selves unto him as unto a Prophet of God.

And glorified God. C. In this they seem to err very much. For although they
see but a man with their eyes, yet they ought to conceive of him in their minds
somewat more then of a man. The cause of this their error was for that they
believed not that God was manifested in the flesh, according to the sayings of
the Prophets long before.

9 And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man (named Matthewe)
sitting at the receipte of Custom, and he says unto him follow me. And he
arose and followed him.

And as Jesus passed forth. Bu. Now the Eua^geliste teaches by an new example,
that the lord forgeueth sins, to those that obey and believe in him. For the
chief point of our faith ought specially to be showed by many plain
examples. Notwithstanding this example differs littell from that which went
before. For in the same he taught that the sins of the faithful are truly
and fully remitted: And the same he teaches in this example also: but this he
adds, that Christ does draw us away from the custom of sinning, which is
a certain special grace of God: and being received into grace and favor,
he does defend us against all the calumniatio^s of hipocrites. The example
whereof is Matthewe our Euangeliste him self in this place.

Sitting at the receipte of custom. E. That is, at the toule gathering place,
or at the toule boothe, or at the custom house, in the which Telones
(according to the Greek word that is, a Publicane) sat requiring tribute,
tole, or custom, which in Greek is called Telos. The Publicanes were such
(as it is said in another place) which were hated and infamous among the Jews,
who thought that they had cruel injury done unto them, to pay tribute unto
forreners or strangers. C. In that therefore that Matthewe was called from the
touleboothe (which was an office and place of rapine and unjust exactions) and
received not only into the felloweship of Christ, but also called to the
office of an Apostell. In this (I say) we have a plain and manifest example
of the grace of God: (...) mer^^d.
For Christ did seek and chose to that office not only Idiotes (as we may
term them) and simple, groce, and unlearned men, to beat down the wisdom
of this world, but also this Publicane, who did lead an unclean life, that
it might be a show and token of his free grace, mercy and goodness, and that he
might teach in his person, that the calling of every one of us, did not
depend of the merits of his own righteousness, but upon his mere liberality
and goodness. Matthewe therefore, was not only a wytnes and preacher of the
free grace and mercy offered in Christ, but he was also a type and testimony
of the same. Christ called not the Phariseis and Iusticiaris, to be preachers
of his grace but sinful men, that even the persons them selves should set
forth that grace which by words they should preach. C. And now in this,
Matthew shows him self to be thankful, An example of humility.
that he was not a shamed to Chronicle him self what he was, and to put in
writing that all the world may see what his beginning was, to the end that in
his own person, the grace of Christ may the more appear. After the same
manner saint Paul says: This is a true saying and worthy of al men to be
received, 1. Tim. 1.
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am the
chief.

Whose name was Matthevve. Where as Mark and Luke call him Leuy, it
appears that this was his proper name.

Follow me. Bu. Christ drew Matthewe unto him with his secret^ power and
strength, touching his heart inwardly, but outwardly he moved him with his
word. The effect of his calling was follow me. C. There is no doubt, but
that Christ used more words, and declared for what end he called him, as
more certainly may be gathered by the words of Luke, who says that he arose
forsakyng all things, and followed Christ. For it was not necessary to
forsake all, except he had been called to be a domestical and familiar
disciple of Christ.

Bu. He says therefore follow me, I say cleue unto me, hear me, behoulde me,
do that which I command, and wholely frame thy self according to my example,
that thou may serve me in the ministry of the word.

Note here two things.
And he arose and follovved. M. Two things Obedience.
A. A wonderful truly and sudden conversion of the man. M. He disputes not
at al how he should live, but he rises from all his gain forsaking all, and
follows naked Christ. Furthermore, he stands not with Christ to reason
whether he should go, but with out delay, all things set a part, he follows
Christ. Gene. 12. a Hebr. 11. b
Even so Abraham being called, went out of his fathers house, not knowing
whether he should go. Thirdly he little wayeth and considers, that he
follows him, whom the heads and rulers of the people do persecute: It had
been an easyer matter to follow him whom all men had in reverence and
estimation. Neither should he make delay or long tarying, which is called
from the pit of mysery to continual happiness. And truly as in the conversion
of Zache the power of Christ did more appear, then in calling Peter the
fysherman: Even so this calling of Matthewe, does more set forth the power of
Christ, then the calling of Peter: Because it is as hard for a Camel to go
through the eye of a nedel, as for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Riches are a let unto us.
So that hereupon we may gather that we ought to despair of no rich man,
because the grace of God pertains to all men. And our Savior Christ says,
Luke. 18.
that which is impossible with men, is possible with God. Let us rather pray
if we see a rich man that will not follow Christ, that he with his power and
holy spirit, will voutchesafe to draw him.

10 And it came to pass as Jesus sat at meat in his house: behold, many
publicanes also, and sinners that came, sat down with Jesus and his disciples.

And it came to pass as Jesus. A. Luke does more plainly express this,
saying: And Leuy made him a great feast in his house: the which seems to
disagree from that which was spoken before, where it is said that he forsook
all and followed him. But it may easily be answered thus, that Matthewe
setting all impedimentes and lettes aside, gave him self wholely unto Christ,
yet not so, but that he reserved somewhat pertaining to household to him self.
Paul by the example of the soldiers, exhorts the ministers of the word
that they keep them selves free from all impedimentes, which might hinder the
work of the church saying. No man when he goes a warrefare, troubles him
self with the business of this life. But he means not in so saying that any
man when he goes a warrefare, should divorce him self from his wife, forsake
his children, and renounce his house, that he may only addicte him self to
the war: Even so nothing withhelde Matthewe from followyng of Christ
whethersoeuer he called him, although he had a respect to his house and
faculty, so far as his calling would suffer him. This great feast is not
so much referred to ye multitude of ghestes, as it is to the abundance and
cost of the fare or chere. For we must note that Christ was not of such
austeritie, but that he would suffer him self to be feasted of rychemen, so
that luxury were avoided. And there is no doubt, but as he was a singular
example of temperancy, so he exhorted those that sat at meat with him to
avoid excess, and to receive moderate fare. M. This feasts also was a sure
and certain declaration, that Leuy did not follow Christ with heavy chere,
but with a joyful and glad mind. A. So may we read of Zache which received
Christ. For it is written, Luk^
he received him joyfully. M. And hereupon it comes that the Scripture in
setting forth the joy of the world to come, uses this comparison or
similitude of feasting as in the threescore and five chap of Esaias. Esaias ^
And our Savior Christ does the like, when he says: Luk^
you shall sytte upon my table in my kingdom, that ye may eat and drink.
Because therefore Matthew did so willingly receive his calling, he would by
this means show the joy of his mind, to prepare a feast for Christ, and
that a great one.

And behold many Publicanes and sinners that came. (...).
M. These two are often times joined together, Publicanes and sinners, as when
it is said a friend of Publicanes and sinners. (...)
And there came unto Jesus Publicanes and sinners. Whereby it appears that
their order of life was diverse. Some men think that those were the sinners,
which were excommunicate of the Jews as notorious offenders in some manifest
crime. ^s.
Or else those, which being of a more dissolute life, had familiarity with
every Gentile and Publicane, which among the Phariseis was counted a heinous
offense. For it is likely that the Gentiles dwelling among the Jews, had many
of the Jews to associate and keep them company, not regarding the rytes and
ceremonies of the law: neither the institutions of the fathers, which thing
caused them to have the public and common reproach of other sinners. C. Where
as therefore it is said here, that there came sinners (that is men of a wicked
life or infamouse): it is done for this end and purpose, that the Publicanes,
when as they them selves, were hated and of evil report among al men did not
abhor the company of such as they them selves were. For as a littell
correction with shame, does humble and beat down those, which have sinned:
Even so to much severity makes other some to despair, so that all shame
being set aparte, they give them selves to all kind of filthynes. To require
tribute or tole, was no great offense, or heinous sin: but when the
Publicanes see that they are rejected as profane and detestable persons, they
seek comfort by their company, which having an evil name, do not despise them
for their infamy. In the mean season they myngled them selves with
adulterers, with dronkardes and such vicious persons, whose wickedness they
would have disalowed, if yt they had not been of all men hated, and publicly
defamed. Bu. Matthewe pretended by this feast, to give occasion to our Savior
Christ to call other Publicanes, to the same repentance, and the same taste
of grace which he felt. For they which truly believe in the lord, seek by
all means, to procure other men to come into the felloweship of the grace of
God, that they may convert from their sins unto the living God. The godly
covet to have more in their fellowship.
These men spare not I say, neither for cost, nor labor, so that they may
bring this thing to pass.

11 And when the Phariseis saw it, they said unto his disciples: why eats
your master with Publicanes and sinners.

And when the Phariseis savve it. M. Here the nature of a Pharisey and
Hypocrite is set forth. The nature of an Hypocrite.
Bu. Hypocrites because they want the light of faith see nothing, neither can
they judge aright of divine matters. No, they understand not the grace of God.
Therefore they glorify not God, but do marueyle at them selves, thinkyng them
selves to be more righteous then all men: again they contemn and despise
every one in respect of them selves, specially such as by some wicked deed
have gotten an evil name. Of the which matter we have a worthy example set
before our eyes in this place, in the Scribes and Phariseys, which set upon the
disciples of Christ with these words. Why does your master eat. C. By the
which words they go about to withdraw the hearts of the disciples from their
master, castinge that in their teethe, which at the first sight might seem
shameful and odious. For to what end else should he be their master, but to
bring them from the common life of men, to lead a more holy and godly life.
But he has now brought them (as it might seem) from an honest and tolerable
state of life, to a profane liberty, that they might de^^le them selves with
unclean feasts. This exprobration and reproach, might have stirred and moved
the disciples being rude and flexible, and nothing grounded as yet, to forsake
their master. But they do very well, being not sufficiently prepared and armed
against such a calumniation, to differ, and refer their quarrel to their
master. For Christ takes their cause in hand and confirms them, as you
shall here anon. But first mark how they which by the judgment of men, did
excel all others in the knowledge of the Law, and holiness of life, how they
(I say) set them selves above all other against Christ: By this thou may
understand that it is most true which is spoken by the mouth of the lord,
Luke. 16.
saying: That which is highly esteemed among men, is abominable in the sight
of God. Moreover these Scribes and Phariseis do all things by craft,
subtilty, and deceit. For they obiecte nothing against the lord him self,
Backbiting.
knowing that he was not without sufficient understanding, but they bend their
subtle force against the disciples to beat down them, being altogether
vnapointed, and unarmed. Bu. A good man accuses him to his face, whom he
would have amended and corrected: but the spiteful calu^niator, the
reprochefull sclaunderer, and shameless bacbiter, privily accuses, not that he
may redress and reform any thing that is amiss, but to the end be may
satisfy and accomplish his desire, and malicious stomach.

12 But when Jesus hard that, he said unto them: They that be strong need not
the Physician, but they that are sick.

But when Jesus hard that. M. Our Savior Christ being not asked, makes
answer, although he knew that they thereby would be never the better, yet
notwithstanding for his disciples sake he answers and gives a reason of his
doings, both to avoid the offense and also to still the murmuringe of the
Phariseys. By the which we are admonished to answer all the calumniations of
the adversaries, so often as need shall require, for the herers sakes, yea
although we know before that they will persiste and abide in their foolish
opinion, but specially such as are carried by the spirit of envy against the
truth.

They that be strong need not. C. By this answer of Christ it appears,
that the Scribes and Phariseis sinned two manner C. Afterward he shows that
he must take upon him the office of a Physician, Ch^ P^^ sy^
because he was sent of his father to call sinners. For although our Savior
Christ began with obiurgation, yet if we covet to proffite in his doctrine,
let us chiefly note that which he put in the second place: that is to say,
that he came to quicken the dead, to justify the gilty and condemned, to wash
the unclean, to bring the damned out of hell, to cover the naked with his
glory: and to renouate those with blessed immortality, which before perished
in the corruption of flesh.

If we consider and find this to be his office, and that this was the end of
his coming: If we remember that for this cause he took upon him our flesh,
shed his precious blood, did suffer the most cruel death of the cross, and
descended into hell: it shall never seem absurd unto us, that he seeks to
save the most wicked sinners in the whole world. He seems unworthy to thee
of the grace of Christ, whom thou abhorrest: Why was Christ then made a
sacrifice, and curse, if he might not reach out his merciful hand to
sinners? Now if disdain crepe into our minds, that the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the Supper of the lord, do join us to fylthy and sinful men,
in so much that their society and company might seem to defyle us: then by
and by we must descend into our own consciences, ^rs ^not to ^ysed.
and judge our selves arighte without parciallitie. And this examination will
bring to pass, that we shall willingly suffer the impure and unclean, to
wash in, and at the same well with us without respect of persons, that we
reiecte not, that righteousness which he offers to all the wicked, that life
which he offers to the dead, and that salvation, which he offers to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel.

13 Go ye rather and learn what that means I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Go ye rather and learn. A. By these words our savior does reiecte the
Scribes and the Phariseis, commanding them to go and learn, seeing they will
not learn of him. C. He sees that they are unapt to learn, and not
tractable, therefore he sends them away. Bu. Beside that he casts in their
teethe their ignorance in the scriptures, in the which they were counted
studious and skylfull.

C. Or else truly he declares that they are at controversy with God and the
Prophet, which being cruel through pride, disdain to help the miserable,
and to bring medicine to the sick. I will have mercy. Bu. This sentence is
taken out of the.vi. chapter of the Prophet Osee, where the Prophet preaches
of the vengeance of God against ye Jews, because they worshipped God with
outward sacrifice, their minds being void of piety, and their manners
alienate from integrity and righteousness. A. This word (not) is here taken
for (rather) as the sentence following in the same chapter declares, saying
and the knowledge of God rather then sacrifice or burnt offeringes. C. For the
Prophet co^de^neth not sacrifice, although afterward they should be taken away:
but he would have mercy to be preferred before sacrifice, and does teach that
the lord does not regard outward holiness, nor the righteousness which
consists in sacrifices, but true godliness and charity unfeigned. For those
things which God has appointed in his church, he has appointed for this
end, that we might be the more exercised in the knowledge of God, and in
showing compassion toward our neighbor. But men do very much abuse the
institutions therefore, when as they have no respect to the end, for the
which they were ordained. He therefore which has not a care of his neighbors
health, but is a straight obseruer of external rites, does bewray and declare
his own hypocrisy: as these iusticiaries, who rejected the Publicanes and
sinners, and suffered them to perish, had not Christ called the^ unto him and
cured them. We must so think therefore of sacrifices, as ways and means to
come unto God, which notwithstanding are of no force except a sound and
perfect truth be annexed unto the same. Bu. So that our Savior Christ did
very well oppose this general sentence of religion to his adversaries. C. For
under this word (mercy) he comprehends all the parts and duties of
humanity, which we owe unto our brethren, as by the name of (Sacrifice) he
means all seremonies and external things.

For I came not to call the righteous. Bu. Now, Christ having respect to that
which he spoke even now, that he came a Physician into the world, by a
certain illation and exposition, he concludes the whole disputation, and
those whom before he called whole and strong he now calls righteous: Not
that he means them to be righteous in deed, but because they bosted and
thought them selves to be righteous, as did the Phariseis. These thinking them
selves to be absolute, persuaded the^ selves that the grace of God pertained
nothing at all to their perfection and this was the cause that they did not
call for the mercy of the Lord.

For what need have ye righteous of mercy? So that here their offense was
great, in so much that the Lord in an other place said. John 9.
If ye were blind then had ye no sin, but now ye say we see, therefore
your sin remains. Luke, 16.
Again he said, Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God
knows your hearts.

C. Wherefore although this was spoken to refelle and confute, the pride and
hypocrisy of the Scribes, yet notwithstanding, generally it contains a
profitable doctrine. For we are taught that the grace of Christ does no
otherwise proffite us, then when we acknowledging our sins, and syghing under
the burden of the same, come humblely unto him for release and pardon.
Furthermore, infirm and weak consciences, are erected and lyfted up by sure
trust and confidence: because we ought not to fear that Christ will reiecte
sinners, for whose salvation, he descended from his heavenly glory into this
wicked world. M. But we must note that he says not, I came to constrayne
sinners but to call sinners. The mercy of God is the medicine of the soul.
Whereby we may gather what kind of persons the medicine of the grace of God
would have us to be, namely such as are desirous of salvation and wyllyng to
receive the same: for he rejects the unwilling.

Math. 5.
Hereupon it is written, Blessed are they that hunger and thyrste after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Neither does Christ say here, I am
come to call some or a few, but generally all: excludynge none. C. But we
must note this also, which follows. To repentance. That we may know, how
that pardon is granted unto us not to sin or offend still, but that
afterward we may lead a godly, holy, and virtuous life. For upon this
condition he does reconcile us to his father, that we being redeemed by his
blood may offer our selves lively sacrifices, as saint Paul says: The grace
of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men, and teaches us that
we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we should live
soberly, and righteously, Tit. 2.
and godly in this present world. To the which also agrees the saying of
Zacharias, That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, may serve
him without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. Luke ^


M. For repentance is nothing else but a conversion of the mind, Rep^
and an alteration of the former opinion: Esaias ^
as appears by the saying of the Prophets, Turn unto me and ye shall be
safe. Again. Ezec^
I will not the death of a sinner, Acte^
but that he turn and live. Also, repent and amend that your sins may be
done away.

14 Then came the disciples of John unto him, saying: why do we and the
Phariseis fast for the most part, but thy disciples fast not.

Then came to him the disciples. M. It is not the least among the miracles of
the wisdom of God, when that he does oftentimes manifest and confirm his
truth, by the resistaunce and gainsayinge of the wicked. The which thing (as
in all other places) so in this may manifestly be seen: whereupon truly no
small proffite comes unto us, by the rebellion of the Phariseis.

Why do we and the Phariseis fast. C. Luke in his fifth chapter, brings in
the Phariseis speakinge in their own person, Luk^
and Mark seems to join the^ both together. Man
Neither is there any doubt but that the Phariseis by this wicked deceit and
wyle, pretended to win and allure the disciples of John on their part, and to
make the^ contend with the disciples of Christ: The co^gruitie in prayers and
fastinges, was a plausible provocation and intisement of society: but the
contrary opinion and reason of Christ, was an occasion of discord and privy
hatred, to waywarde and curious persons being to much addicted to their own
wills. By this example we are admonished and taught wisely to take heed, least
by some light pretense, the wicked and crafty men do sow discord and
dissension among us. For Satan is wonderful busy in this practice: and again
it is an easy matter for us to be troubled about nothing. But we ought
specially to take heed, least that the unity and agreement of our faith be
cut asunder by such external rites and ceremonies, and lest the bond of
charity be broken. With this disease many are infected, in that they seek more
then is necessary to stablishe the ceremonies and elements of the world, ^os.
2.
as Paul says. Furthermore, there comes another euel of curiosity and
disdain yt is, ^ositie.
every one seeks to bring all the world to his example. If any thing please
us, we covet straightway to have the same a law, that others may depend upon
our arbitrament. Now forasmuch as we do read that the disciples of John
labored with this disease, ^es con^ not in ^de ^s.
and were taken with these snares of Satan, let us learn and understand, that
sanctimony and piety is not placed in external things: and let us learn also
to brydell our selves with the byt of moderation and equity, least that we
seek to bring al men to our opinion, but rather let every man have his own
liberty. M. Furthermore, that the disciples of John were envious against
Christ, for a certain zeal they bare unto their master, it is evident by S.
John, where he says: There arose a question between John's disciples and the
Jews, about ye purifying. And they came unto John, (...) 3.
and said unto him Rabby, he that was with thee beyond Iordane, (to whom
thou barest wylnes) behold the same baptizeth and all men come unto him. But
here the Phariseis being the authors of this question, do obiecte the
disciples, not the^ selves alone, to the end they might burden and charge the
cause of Christ with the authority of John: As if (reproching) they should
have said. Thou bear an outward show of holiness, and thou will seem to sow
the doctrine of a more perfect life: how comes it to pass then that ye do
not only profane your selves with the company of sinners, but also do temper
and refrain your selves from the works of your own religion, as fastinges
and prayers, with the which we exercise our selves diligently?

But thy disciples fast not. A. Luke has, but thy disciples eat and drink.
C. But as concerning prayers and fastings, we must think thus, that John did
exercise his disciples, with a certain rule and prescripte order, and to this
end, they had certain days appointed them to fast, and a certain
prescripte form of praying and appointed hours: Therefore we must count
these prayers among external rytes. For although the invocation of God in
spiritual worshipping, has the pre-eminence, yet notwithstanding that order
being framed and applied to the rudenes of men, is worthily nu^bred among
ceremonies and indifferent things, the observation whereof ought not to much
to be urged. But why the discipline of John was more austere then the
discipline of Christ, we have spoken already, and shall have hereafter a more
convenient place to speak of the same. B. In the mean time let us note how
that these Phariseis do very well express and paynte forth the hypocrites of
these our days. Hypocritical holiness.
For nothing is counted holy among hypocrites, but that which does altogether
differ from the common manner and custom of life: that which is austere and
straighte that (I say) seems unto them most holy.

15 And Jesus said unto them: Can the brydegromes children mourn so long as
the brydegrome is with them? But the days will come when the brydegrome shall be
taken from them, and then shall they fast.

Can the brydegrome. E. The Greek text has. Can the children of the bryde
chamber, which is more then the children of the brydegrome, or the brydegromes
companions, or the household gestes.

Christ answers here to their objection when they said: Thy disciples
fast not. C. And he excuses his disciples by the circumstaunce of the time,
because God as yet would receive them pleasauntly, even as if they were at a
marriage or wedding. For he compares him self to a brydegrome, which
chereth and delyghteth his gestes by his presence. Many think that this
similitude is taken out of the testimony of saint John the Baptiste, when he
said: John. 3.
he that has the bryde is the bridegroom: the which opinion although it be
not to be disalowed, yet notwithstanding it is not infallible. This is
sufficient unto us, that Christ affirms that he will spare his disciples so
long as he is with them. And least any man should have envy at them for the
commodity of this short time, he shows straight that they shall be more
sharply handled afterward For the day will. B. Now he shows that the
bridegrom must be taken from them, that is his carnal presence for a time: and
that then they should taste of many troubles, and that then in time they should
give the^ selves to mourning, to fasting, and prayer Signifying that they in
the beginning being rude, ought ge^tly to be entreated, and being tender as
yet, ought not to be oppressed with grievous works. But afterward when they were
fully renewed, they should want nothing of those things which pertayne to new
men, the which thing they boldly declared, both in the Acts of the
apostles, and also in their Epistles. A. This sentence therefore agrees with
that saying of Christ, where he says: When I sent you without wallet or
scrippe, and shoes, did ye want any thing? And they said no. Luke. 22.
Then he said unto them: but now he that has a wallet, let him take it up,
and likewise his scrippe. And he that has no sword, let him sell his coat and
by one. C. But the excuse which Christ brings in this place, depends upon
this, that fasting and prayers do belong to matters of sorrow and trouble: I
mean extraordinary prayers, of the which mention is made here. For Christ
went about to inure his disciples with great troubles by little and little, whereby
they might learn to suffer, neither would he lay upon the^ as yet much, Two
things are here to be noted.
till they had gotten unto them more strength. Here two lessons may be
gathered. The first is this,

16 No man puts a piece of new clothe in an old garment. For then takes he
away the per^ from the garment, and the rent is made worse.

No man puts a piece. C. By two similitudes our Savior Christ co^^^emeth
the next sentence: of the which the one is taken of garments, the other o^
wine vessels. B. He intended by these parables to declare, that at the first
great and intolerable burdens not necessary, ought not to be laid upon his
disciples, being weak and altogether rude: These bu^ ^ens ^^re fastinges and
extraordinary prayers, the which works are so spiritual, that no man can be
sufficiently exercised in them so sone as he enters into religion. These
works proceed from the holy ghost: which was the cause why Christ never
comau^ded them. The diversity of wits requires some moderation, that one
(...) may apply him self to another. If a man require some great and laborouse
work to be done of him which is sick, the sick man faints, and for
weakness and imbeculitie he is unable to do it. Fas^ be vs^ volu^ will, (...)
by co^
If a man con^trayne those to fast which can not bear it, it is then a
violent thing done by co^pulsion, neither does it make them the better, but it
brings to pass ye Hypocrites thereby are more arroga^t, that is, like unto
Phariseis. If Christ thefore at their instant would have burdened his
disciples being rude, and as yet nothing at all spiritual, the^ he should have
done nothing, but have made them more insolent and shameless Hipocrites. He
co^pareth the^ therefore to an old piece of clothe, which being worn, is soon
torn and rent: to this if thou sow a new and strong piece of clothe, it
marreth the seame, and the rent is worse. Then he compares them again to
earthe^ vessels, which are not of strength sufficient to abide the force of new
wine, being as yet vnspourged. So that by this he does signify, that he
bears with his dysciples, being yet but young scollers, and not ablee to do
that which they should by reason of infirmity. This similitude therefore is
very ^pte, seruinge right well for this matter.

Although it might seem not in all points to agree. For Christ compares
not his disciples to oulde bottelles, and oulde clothes, as though they had
been worn before by long use: But he compares them to such things, because
they were weak and not strong. The sum then of this doctrine is, that al
are not to be brought to one form and manner of life, because the condition is
not alyke, neither do all things with all men agree: So that the weak must be
spared, least they synke under their burden, and be overcome with violence.

17 Neither do men put new wine into oulde bottels: else the bottels break,
and the wine runs out, and the bottels perish: but they put new wine into
new bottels, and both are saved together.

Bu. Old wine was wont to be put after the manner of oil into Goats skins,
even as we do put it into our wine vessels. They therefore that are skillful in
vintage, or making of wine, brewe their new wine into new vessels, and their
old wine they put into old vessels. For they which put new wine into oulde
vessels, suffer double loss, that is to say: when the new wine works or
spourgeth, the vessels break, and the wine perishes. Luke only adds
saying: And there is no man which drynketh of the old that will by and by
drink of the new, (...).
for he says the oulde is better: Which sentence agrees very well with that
which went before. C. For by this the Phariseis are admonished that they
attribute not more then is mete and convenient to old custom.

18 While he thus spoke unto them, behold, there came a certain Ruler and
worshipped him, saying: my daughter is even now disceassed, but come and lay
thy hand upon her and she shall live.

While he thus spoke. Bu. Now the Euangeliste retourneth to the description
of the deeds or benefits of Christ: and by this present history, he shows
that our Savior Jesus Christ is lord, (...). 1.
both of life and death, who (as the apostell says) has put away death, and
has brought life, and immortality, unto light through ye Gospel. C. But they
which imagine that this history differs from that which Mark and Luke
describe, are so plainly confuted, by the order of the text, that the matter
needs no long disputation. All three Evangelists (say they) make mention,
that Christ was entreated of the Ruler to com home to his house, to heal his
daughter. Now by this means it should seem not to be al one, because Matthew
pretermitteth this name of Iayrous, and Mark and Luke make mention of the
same: Again Matthewe brings in the father him self saying, my daughter is
even now departed. And the other two say, yt she was but even now at the point
of death: and that Christ was certified that she departed, even as he was
coming with Iayrous to the house. But there is no absurdity in this that
Matthewe briefly and in few words touches that, which ye other two
Eua^gelistes discourse at large. But when as all things do so aptly agree,
when as so many circumstances unite and conioyne in one, yea in such wise, that
three fingers as it were at once, do demo^strate and point out one thing, there
is no reason, why they should draw this narration to diverse times. The three
Evangelists with one consent do declare, that Christ was entreated of the
Ruler of the Synagoge to come home to his house, and in his journey, how a
woman diseased with the flure of blood, by the privy touching of his garment
was healed, and how Christ (at the last when he was come into the Rulers house)
raised up his daughter. Truly there is no need here of any long circumstance,
to prove that these three Evangelists declare in this all one history. Let us
now therefore come to the matter.

Behold there came a Ruler. M. This seems here to be the intent, meaning, and
purpose of Matthewe: That when as after the manner aforesaid, Christ had given
an answer to ye phariseis of their demand, and also had satisfied ye
disciples of John, of whom he was counted for a wicked man, for a glotton, for
a friend and companion of Publicanes and sinners, and for such a one as
instructed and exhorts none of his to piety and godliness. Whilst (I say)
they had this opinion of him, behold occasion is offered, by ye which, not with
words, but by the power and finger of God, is declared, whether the Phariseys
with the disciples of John, were more holy then Christ and his. By the which
not the hypocrisy of fasting is set forth, but the power, strength,
beneficence, and mercy of God. Mark and Luke say, that he was a Ruler of the
Synagoge, the which kind of men, truly, the more honor and estimation they
had among the people of God, the more enemies they were to Christ. And yet for
all this, the Ruler of the Synagoge, comes not to those holy and devout
fasters, but unto Christ Jesus although he was counted of some an abiecte and
of no credit. Christ has power to call all men to repentance.
By the which example we are taught to despair of no sort of men. And
worshipped him saying. C. Worship here is taken for bowynge the knee as we may
gather by the words of Mark and Luke: Neither did this Ruler, this Iayrouse,
give unto Christ any divine honor, but he worshipped him as a Prophet.

My daughter is even now disceassed. Although it appear by the other two
Eua^gelistes, that the faith of this Ruler went not so far that he thought
that Christ was able to restore the life of his daughter: yet notwithstanding,
there is no doubt but he being reprehended of Christ, had a better hope
afterward then he brought from home at the first. But Matthewe studying and
endeuourynge him self, to be short, and briefly to declare the thing as it
was done, shows that in the beginning, which was done afterward and lastly.
Notwithstanding the history must be ordered thus, that at the first Iayrouse
desired Christ to heal his daughter of her disease, afterward he requested
him to restore her from death to life, after I mean that Christ had encouraged
and strengthened him.

Affliction makes us to come unto Christ.
M. Here we see the proffite of afflictions in this, that the Ruler being
brought unto Christ by the necessity of his daughters death, sought for help
at his hands, where as otherwise he would have had nothing to do with him for
fear of the Jews. But come and lay thy hand. B. Here is to be noted how
truly our Savior Christ said, Math. 8.
when he spoke of the Centurion, that he found not so great faith in Israel.
For he requested not Christ to come to his house, but had him that he would
speak the word only, and his son should live: But this man does not only
beseech him to come to his house but also to lay hand upon his daughter: so
that he believed not as did the Centurion, who thought that he could do all
things with his word only. C. Here therefore we have a worthy example of
the sufferaunce of God. This man here attributes no virtue or power unto
Christ, but only by touching with the hand: And so sone as he heard by ye
messenger that she was departed, by and by he is quite without hope of any
farther remedy. M. He believed that the presence of Christ, (as of some holy
man) might much prffite her. John ^
So Martha and Mary said unto Christ. Lord if thou had been here, our
brother had not been dead. So Naman the Syrian, 4. Ki^
despised the commandment of Elizeus, because he came not unto him personally
to touch the Leprosy. John ^
So also an other of the Rulers of the people said unto Christ: Sir. come
down I pray thee, or ever that my son die. We see therefore that the faith
of this Ruler was very weak. In ye which notwithstanding, he was not forsaken
as we shall here anon.

19 And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did his disciples.

And Jesus arose. M. Here appears the wonderful clemency and gentleness of
Christ. The Jews excluded all those out of the temple which confessed
Christ, John ^
and yet for all that Christ casts not the same in the Rulers teethe, neither
says he, why come thou unto me, whom ye so hate and abhor? Now that
thou art oppressed and grieved, thou runnest unto me for help. Moreover, he
did not obiecte against him the imbecillitie and imperfection of his faith,
saying: Do thou think that I am not able to restore unto thee thy daughter
without the laying on of my hands? What should I go with with such a one? He
did not thus say, but quietly rysinge, grants the asker his request. C.
Therefore, whereas he harkeneth to his prayers, and animateth him to hope well,
^e does ^cte us ^hstan^ ^ur in^e.
and to trust for the best, it is a document, that how little so ever his
faith were, yet was it not rejected. Although therefore we have not so parfecte
a faith as we ought to have, yet nevertheless there is no cause why our
weakness should let or dyscourage us to pray still. And his discip. M.
Marcke says that much people followed him, and thronged him. and Luke says,
as he went, the people thronged him. The people are very curiouse often times,
to behold strange and unwonted things, as we may here well perceive. Every
man desired to see a miracle, and therefore they thought they could never come
nighe enoughe unto Christ: in so much that they thronged him.

Christ therefore in his time, when he went about to heal the sick, and to
do miracles, had many followers and gasers on, but a few hearars, that heard
as they ought to hear. So that when any cross or trouble came, they forsook
him, and left him alone.

20 And behold, a woman which was disseased with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him and touched the hemme of his vesture.

And behold, a woman. Bu. The story begone, is broken of in the midst, and
the miracle which happened in the way is set in, and (as it were)
interlyned. As the hystorye of the leprouse man, and of Peter's wives mother,
sick of a fever, does teach and declare that Christ is the physician, ^se
^ole ^auen ^on.
and lord of all disseases, even so does this history also of the woman
troubled with a bloody issue so many years, teach the like, and declare unto
us yt there is nothing so incurable and far gone, which can not be healed, by
the virtue and power of Christ. Twelve years. The Evangelists do expreselye
say, that this flux of bloudde continued by the space of twelve years: she
notwithstanding seeking all that time for remedy, in so much, (...) 5.
that she spent all her goods upon physic: by the which the glory of the
miracle does the more appear.

M. Let us now see therefore, what this woman did in things without hope of
remedy, of what force Faith is, and also what the power and benevolence of
Christ can bring to pass.

Came behind him, and touched. A. Marcke says, that when she heard of Jesus
she came into the preace behynd him. There is mention made then that she heard
of Jesus: and no doubt she did so, namelye of such as made report of Jesus, by
whose fame she was moved to seek for health. Now it was necessary, that
those things which she heard of Christ were not common or human, or such
reports as are wo^t to go of phisitio^s for their cures. For hereby she could
conceive no hope of health, having so often proved what they were able to do
by that faculty.

It is necessary therefore that those things which she herd of Jesus were
deuyne, and not human, whereby she was brought to that faith, which
afterward she declared. But what were those things that were so divine?
Surely even the same which he did every where: whereby he declared him self
to be one, to who^ there was nothing to hard, which could heal all kind of
disseases, which came to this end, to help the misery of man, and therefore
he is that true Messiah, which was promised of God to come in these later
times by the prophets: which received all with gentleness and good will,
which despised none, which offered him self to all: to be short, which was
the saving health of mankind.

21 For she said within her self: if I may touch but even his vesture only,
I shall be safe.

C. Whereas this woman thinks within her self, that she shall be whole, if she
may but only touch the vesture of Christ, it was trewely the singular
motion of the spirit of God, neither ought it to be thought a common matter.
Superstition in imitation of saynctes.
We know how arrogantlye superstition daunceth in foolyshe and rash
imitation of saints: but truly they are apes, and not imitatours or
followers, which usurp any syngular example, without the commandment of God,
and by their own immagination, rather then by the direction of gods spirit.
It may be, that the faith of the woman had some falte, and error annexed with
it, which Christ by favor might suffer and forbear.

Fear is contrary to faith.
Trewely in that she trembles and fears, her own conscience accusing her, it
is a sign of doubt which is contrary to faith and void of excuse. Why came
she not rather unto Christ, without delay? If reverence stayed her, yet
notwithstanding, from whence should she have hoped for help, but only from
his mercy? How comes it to pass then that she fears offense, if she had
been persuaded of his favor? Christ for all this voutchesafeth to receive her
faith, according to that which we said even now, that God does deal
mercifullye and lovingly with those that are his, receiuinge to his favor
their weak and imperfecte faith, not imputynge unto them their fault and
imparfection. The woman therefore (Faith being her guide) comes unto Christ.
But where as she does rather seek her health by touching of his vesture, then
by coming unto him by prayer and entreaty, peradventure she did it by an
indiscreet and rash zeal, declinynge a littell out of the way, specially
when as a littell after she declares that she did com doubtingly with a
troubled mind. But admit that she was led by the spyrite to do thus, yet
notwithstanding this abides sure, that our faith ought not by private example
to be carried hither and thither: because we ought whollye to ground the same
upon the word of God, according to the saying of S. Paul. Roma 10.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing comes by the word of God. A. Marcke
adds, saying, And straighte way the fountain of bloudde was dried up, and
she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.

Sickenesses and disseases are plagues for sin.
Bu. Whereby we may note that syckenesses and infirmities, are called plagues,
by the which God does scourge men, to make them to know them selves, and to
amend. And then it follows. Jesus straight way felt in him self, that
virtue proceeded out of him, and turned him about in the prease and said: who
touched my clothes. C. This seems an absurd thing, that Christ should bestow
grace upon any one, not knowing upon whom he bestowed it, or who received any
benefit thereby. Trewly there is no doubt, but that wittingely, Auns^
and wyllingelye he healed the woman, yea, there is no doubt, but that by the
secret operation of his holy Spirit, he drew her unto him, to the end he
might heal her: but he asks who it was after a strange sort, because the
woman her self should come forth openly, and witness that she was healed. If
Christ should have borne witness of his miracle, he should not have been
credited, and therefore the woman being afraid bears witness of that,
which happened unto her, and openly declares the same: whose confession was of
great force-

22 But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said: Daughter be
of good comfort, thye says has made the safe. And the woman was made whole
even the same time

But Jesus turned him about. M. The woman not only for the kind, but also
for the manner of her dissease, for shame, crepeth backewarde, as though she
had stolen privily this benefit of her health. But Christ, partly for the
setting forth of the glory and power of God, and partly for the
corroboratinge and strengthenynge of the weak faith of the rular of the
Synagogge, would not suffer that which he had done to lie hyd, but requiringe
both the confession of the dissease, and also the acknowleginge of the
benefit, he brings her forth in the midst of whom he was towched.

Daughter be of good. A. Here ryseth a ques- It was said a lyttelle before:
And Jesus knowinge, Ma^^
that virtue had proceeded out of him, And Luke has, I feel virtue to go out of
me. Moreover, Luk^ ^ and (...)
the virtue of the lord was present to heal them.

Also. All the people sought to touch him because that virtue went out of him.

When as therefore the power of the lord does heal, why says he here, Thy
faith has made thee safe? M. He says so for two causes, The one is, that
although it be true, that the power, virtue, and strength only of Christ,
did heal the woman, as it did others also, notwythstanding, because this
virtue is such, as happens unto none, that is, it happens unto none, but to
those that have faith: and only faith being that which is capeable of the
power of Christ: It is truly said, that this woman is healed by the faith
which she had in Christ. These two therefore must be joined together, that is
to say faith, and the virtue of Christ. For how great soever the virtue of
Christ be, yet it offers not it self to any unfaithful person: as it is
said in an other place, (...) 6.
he could not do many miracles in his country, because of their unbelief.
Moreover, except the virtue of Christ be present, and the wonderful goodness
of God, all faith in him is but vain. So that it may well be said, This woman
is saved by faith, but the power, grace, and virtue of Christ has brought it
to pass: and again it may be said, she is saved by the power of Christ,
when as notwithstanding she was not saved (without faith) by the power of
Christ. After the same manner we must think of faith and the grace and
goodness of God. We are said to be saved by faith in Christ Jesus, when as
notwithstanding in deed we are saved by the grace and mercy of God. Whereupon
saint Paul says: Ye are saved by grace. Again he says, According to his
mercy he saved us. But because no unbelieving person is saved by the grace of
God, and none can be partakers of the goodness of God without faith, and because
it is necessary, that the grace, goodness, and mercy of God, be apprehended by
faith in Christ Jesus: ^race (...) to^ the (...) sal^
It comes to pass that salvation and ryghteousnes, be ascribed unto faith.
Faith can not be without grace, neither can grace be without faith. And
therefore Paul, when he had once said, ye are saved by grace, least any man
should think that it was done with out faith, or that it could be done
without faith, he adds by and by. For ye are saved by grace through faith.

(...) 2.
The other cause why he rather said, thy faith has saved thee, the^ my virtue
has saved thee, is this, that he might confirm the woman in the same faith
which she had taken, and that he might show that this was the way to attain
salvation, and to be partaker of the power of God. The which he should not have
done, if he had said, my virtue has saved thee, for so he should have
preached his virtue: but should not have declared the way to apprehende the
same. By faith only we obtain remission of our sins.
C. Now as Christ attributed the healing of the woman to faith: So it is sure
and certain that by faith we obtain remission of our sins, by the which
we are reconciled unto God. Mark adds saying, daughter, Mark. 5
thy faith has saved the, go in peace and be whole of thy plague. C. Whereby
we may gather that the benefit which she had received, was then truly
ratified and confirmed, when she hard that of the mouth of Christ, which
already she had found true by experience. By these words therefore the
conscience of the woman is corroborated and confirmed.

So in another place although the sins of the synful woman were remitted: and
Christ also had said unto Simon as concerning her. Simon. Luke 7
Many sins are forgeuen her, because she loved much: Notwithstanding to the
end he might certefie her as concerning this thing, he said thy sins are
forgeuen thee. A. Now let us return to the history of the Ruler of the
Synagoge. Mark, as concerning that matter says thus: While he yet spoke,
there came from the Ruler of the Synagoges house certain which said: Thy
daughter is dead, why diseasest thou the master any farther? We have already
showed of how small and weak faith this Ruler was: then, how by the example
of the woman healed aforesaid, he was not a little erected and confirmed: but
now again by these messengers, he is made as feeble and weak as ever he was.
By the which example the temptation of faith is depainted unto us, how the
same is resisted by the judgment and sense of reason. For he being erected
and lifted up by the words of Christ, which he spoke unto the woman saying:
Go in peace thy faith has made the safe, conceived in his mind greater
things of Christ then he did before: but by and by, this message being
brought by his servants, his trust is laid in the duste, because he never
came so far as to believe that Christ by his power, was able to raise up the
dead. But what said Christ unto this? Does he altogether reject the man
wavering in faith? No truly. For hearing the word that was brought, he says
to the Ruler of the Synagoge. Fear not, only believe. Luke says, fear not,
only believe and she shall be safe. C. The messenger of death brought despair,
because he craved nothing at the hands of Christ, but to help her that was
sick. Christ therefore forbids to shut the enteraunce and way to grace by
fear and distruste, to the which grace, death can never be a hynderaunce.
Faith makes all things possible unto us.
For in that he says: Only believe, he declares that he wants not power, so
that Iayrouse would admit and receive the same, which can be done by no
other means then by faith. And truly even as it fared with Iayrouse, so
comes it to pass with many of us.

For God often times would deal a great deal more liberally with us, if we
were not so hard of belief: but our straightnes, our precisenes, does let
and hinder him to power his gifts plentifully upon us. To be short, in this
place we are A. On the contrary part, Mark 9.
all things are possible to him that believes.

23 And when Jesus came into the Rulers house, and saw the minstrelles, and
the people making a noise.

C. The Eua^gelistes rehearse mourning, to make the faith of resurrection more
sure, for Christ reprehended and blamed greatly their lamentation and wepinge,
as appears in Mark, when he said, why make ye this a do and weep? Matthewe
plainly affirms that there were mynstrelles, which thing was not wont to be
except the party were certainly known to be dead, and their exequies and
funeralles a preparing. And although they used after this fashion, to honor
their dead, and to furnishe and deck their burial: Yet notwithstanding, we
see that the world is not only ready to nourishe, but also to stir up their
own vices, and to add unto the same. If we be desirous to know what absurd
fashions the Gentiles used, in bewayling their dead: we may read Lucianus,
where he writes of mourning. Lu^ lib. ^ Lu^
This use was a sign of humanity, but we must always observe a mean in all
our doings. For where as there is hope of eternal life, Ho^^ ^geth^ ^tion.
there is comfort and consolation. But when as we give the brydell, liberty,
and the full scope to weping, lamentatio^, and mourning, then are we clean
without hope: and we do also thereby resist God and his will. Therefore
immoderate lamentatio^ is a sign of infidelity. 1. (...)
The faithful can measure their mourninge, but the unbelieving fret against
God, and are overcome with sorrow. Read the apostell Paul to the
Thessalonians. Where the apostell dehorteth Christians from unmeasurable
mourning, saying in the end of the same chapter. Wherefore, comfort your selves
one another with these words.

24. He says unto them: get you hence, for the maid is not dead but slepeth.
And they laughed him to scorn.

He says unto them. C. Mark and Luke say that none were admitted to go in
with Christ to the raising of the maid save only three of the disciples of
Christ, and the parents. Matthewe being more brief pretermitteth the
circumstaunces. But the cause why Christ would have so few witnesses at the
raising up of the maid, commaundinge them also very straightely that they
should tell no man, seems to be this: This maid was the first, that Christ
raised from death to life: and therefore he would be seen to do such an
unwonted thing, but of a few witnesses. For as he revealed him self more and
more, by succession and continuance of time: so he kept an order in his
disciples, that he might manifest his truth to some in the beginning, and to
other some more late: having always respect in all things, to reveal the
glory of his father, in that order, in that time, in that place, and to those
mynysters, that his father had appointed him before to do. (...). 2.
So he revealed that to the shepeherdes, which he did not only hide from the
hye priests, but also from other holy men. (...). 10.
So at the first he would have the kingdom of God preached only to the
Jews, as we may read in the tenth of Mathewe, and afterward to be preached
throughout the whole world. Also that which he spoke to the people in
symilitudes, and parables, he afterward expounded to his disciples. And even
among them he had a certain choice.

For in this place he preferred these three disciples before the rest, because
no doubt he determined to use them in greatter things. This therefore was a
special thing, which they now might by this miracle behold, namely that
Christ was lord of life and death, which mystery he thought good to reveal
but to a few, being such as he had specially chosen.

He commands the rest to depart, either because they were unworthy to bear
witness to such a miracle, or else because he not would have the miracle
obscured, and not manifested, the people making a hurlyburly round about him:
this was only sufficient, that the maid, whose carcass lay before their eyes
dead, should arise sodeinely alive, and in full and parfecte strength. ^ion.
For the maid is not dead. M. What? Did not Christ know that the maid was
dead? ^were.
Yes trewely, he knew well enoughe that she was dead, to her father and
mother, to the people which mourned, yea, to the whole world, and to her self
also: but to Christ the son of God, to whom all things live, she was not
dead, but a sleep, slepynge to the glory of God, loking for her resurrection
So that he truly says, the maid is not dead. But sleeps. not denying her
to be dead in deed, according to nature, but so speaking, as ye matter was in
his eyes, not as it appeared unto them, which bewailed her death. C. To sleep,
Death is compared to sleep
in the scripture is taken often times for to die: neither is it so said of
the good only, but also of the wicked. It is said of Steven, when he had thus
spoken, Act. 7.
he fell a sleep. And of Lazarouse, Our fryende Lazarus is a sleep, but I go,
John. 11. 1. Cor. 15. 3. King. 14.
that I may awake him. Moreover, it is written, Of the which, some remain as
yet, other some are a sleep. Also of wicked Jeroboam, it is said, And
Jeroboam slepte with his fathers. Both the wicked and the godly sleep unto
the lord, and shall be raised of him: but this is only believed, of the godly,
which know that God is not the God of the deadde, but of the lyuinge, and
that al things live unto him. Hereupon the Christians with a singular faith,
called the place of buryall,

Coimeterion, which is in lattine, Dormitorium, and as much to say in english,
properly a sleping place, which commonly we now call a Sepulcher, a Tomb, or
a Grave, but here in this place Christ takes it otherwise. For Christ makes
a special dyfference between sleep and death, to the end he might bring
hope of life: as if he should have said, She is not so dead, that she
slepeth in death, but she slepeth for a time: it is sleep, and not death, for
ye shall see her arise by and by, whom ye think to be dead.

And they laughed him to scorn. A. Luke adds knowinge that she was dead
they laughed him to scorn. C. It is no marvel if the lord were deryded of
ignorante gross, and unlearned men, which being altogether trobled with
profane mourninge, regarded not the end of his doings, nor his purpose. And
this parteyned not a little to the commendation of the miracle, that they were
so doubtful of the maids resurrection.

25 But when the people were put forth, he went in and took her by the hand,
(and said damsel arise) and the da^sell arose.

When the people vvre put. A. Now Christ takes the miracle in hand, but not
before the people were put out of the house, for those causes, that we declared
even now.

He went in and took her by. C. There was necessity why be should take her
by the hand, but he did it for their sakes which were present. Outewarde
signs are of no force.
Outward signs are of no force, sauinge that it pleases the lord to use
them. All miracles depend upon the commandment of God only, not upon the
outward sign, which is adjoined for man's sake. A. In Luke it is said, that
Christ cried. C. The which cry, profited nothing her naturally, to the mouyng
of her senses which were dead, notwithstanding, Christ thought good to show
the force of his voice, whereby he might bring men in ure to here his
doctrine. Herupon it apereth of what efficacy and force, the voice of Christ
is, which pearceth even to the dead in such wise, that it reuiueth and
quickens in death. Therefore Luke says, that her spirit came into her
again: as if he should have said, that the same being called by the power
of Christ, was by and by at hand. B. But Mark does seem more specially to
gather the werdes of Christ, affirmynge that he said Tabita cumi, which is,
if a man interpret it, It is more true to read it Calita with L. and not with
B.
damsel, I say unto thee arise.

For this word Cumi, is an Hebrewe word, and is as much to say in english,
arise, but Tabita, is a Calde word, or of the Syrian tongue, and signifies
maide^. Base words trewely they were, and used among the common sort of
people. For it is certain, that Christ used the vulgar tongue, which was
most used among the multitude, specially when he did talk with them.

And the damsel arose. A. Marcke says, and she walked.

M. These words are spoken to the amplifiyng, and settinge forth of the power
of Christ, in that not only he raises her being dead, and contrary to the
manner of the prophets, he raysethe her after a commaundinge sort with his
word, not by prayer, as they did, but he so raises her, that sodeinely she
is alive: and not only alive, but walking, free from all sickness and
dissease. What physician can so raise up any body that is sick, that he shall
arise by and by and walk? We do read that the prophet Elyzeus, 4. King. 4.
raised up one that was dead, but far after an other manner then Christ did
here. Acte^
Also we read how that Peter raised a woman, which was a disciple, from
death, but not without prayer before. Moreover the maid is said to be twelve
years of age, least any man should think her to be an infant, which was not
able to walk.

26 And this rumor went abroad into all the land.

A. The other two Evangelists say, that the standers by were greatly
amassed. M. which serves greatly for the commendation of the miracle. Neither
were the seers of this miracle amassed without a cause. For it was a special
argument, and manifest token of the great power of God. Whereas therefore it was
so strange and unwonted a thing, it made them amassed. A. In the mean
season, the fame of this miracle is spread throughout the whole country. Marcke
and Luke add, that Christ commanded them to tell no man, C. For although
Christ did not allow all men to behold this spectacle of the resurrection,
yet notwithstanding the miracle could not be hid any long time. Neither was
it convenient to suppress and keep under the power and virtue of God, by the
which the whole world should be prepared to life. Why then does he command
the parents of the maid to keep scilence? Peradventure he would have them
scylent for a time, not so much for the thing it self, as for the order and
manner of doing of the same. For we se here that he sought opportunity, as in
other places also. M. Moreover Christ on the one side knew the curiousenes of
the people, on the other side, that the exceeding malice of the hye priests
against him, would have been stirred up by the publishyng of these great
miracles. John ^
In so much that the common sort of people would have attributed unto him,
some kind of preposterous honor and dignity, and the hye priests, would
have been moved more and more to seek his destruction, hearing that he did
such wonderful things, Math^ and. 17
when as the time of his glorifiyng was not yet come. Of the which matter read
the twelfth, sixtene, and seuentene chapters followynge. M. In Marcke it
follows, that he gave commandment, that she should eat. This
commandment he gave to confirm the truth and certainty of her
resurrection, least that it might seem but a vysion or fantasy. Whereupon
he would not give her any thing himself to eat but commanded her parents
to geeue it her. (...).
So after that Lazarouse was raised from death, he caused a feast to be made.
Peter also by this argument confyrmeth the resurrection of Christ, because he
did eat and drink with the lord after his death. (...) ^0.


27 And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying and
saying: O thou son of David have mercy on us.

And when Jesus departed. Bu. By a new proof, and a new benefyte, he
declares to the whole world, that there is no dyssease so incurable, which
the lord is not able to heal.

Two blind men follovved. C. The other two Evangelists omytt this miracle,
because as sayncte John says, they determined not to set forth all the
deeds of Christ: (...).
but gatherynge the chyefest among a great maynye, go about to prove him to
be the Messiah.

Matthewe says here, that two blind men had their syghte restored unto
the^: but not so soon as Christ was wont to help others that were
dysseased, afflicted, and troubled. For he gives these two no answer, they
crying still after him, as he went, but as it were, faynynge that he hard
them not, suffered them to follow him to his lodging, and there at the
last, he asks the^ what they thyncke or believe of his power.

^en ^h (...)
Therefore, both in deed and words, he takes a trial, and just examination
of their faith, and patience, in sufferyng them to cry, as thoug he regarded
them not. M. There is no doubt, but that by the occasyon of the other miracle
going before, and by the fame of his benefytes which was spredde throughoute
the whole world, they were moved to follow after Christ, saying.

Have mercy on us. C. They express not their suite: for it is enoughe for us,
to call upon God for our mysery M. Furthermore they calling for mercy,
require not that which is vain, or without effect, but such mercy as did
not only consyst in the affection of the heart: but also which in deed, did
help their mysery: which was being blind, to be restored to their sight.

Thou son of David. C. They call him the son of Dauyd, because the promise
which was made unto David, was commonly in the mouths of the Jews. They
counted him not therefore as a prophet, but they esteemed him even as he was, to
be Christ the redemer of the whole world. B. And it is lykely that Jesus was
then commonly thought, to be the Messiah promised before in the law and
prophets.

For all the people at that time looked for Christ, In so much, Luke. 3.
that they took John to be the Messiah. Whereby we may see how inexcusable
the obstynacye of the Pharyseys was, which would not acknowledge the time of
their visytation, Faith doubts no peril in coming to Christ.
being admonyshed of the same by so many signs and tokens. M. Moreover it
appears how little faith, thinks upon danger. For it was decreed among
the chief Rulars of the Jews, John. 9.
that every one that confessed this Jesus, to be Christ the son of Dauyd,
should be cast out of the Synagogge. Notwithstanding these blind men were
nothing afraid of this commandment. For their cry does sufficiently
declare, how sound in faith they were.

28 And when he was come into the house, the blind came unto him. And Jesus
says unto them: Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say unto him:
Lord we believe.

And when he vas come into the house. The lord does not at the first here
our petitions, to the end he might make us the more fervent in prayer.
B. The lord suffers these blind men to cry after him til he came to his
lodging, whereby he might make them more earneste, and try them, and make their
faith an exaumple for us to follow.

The blind came to him. A. That is they went into the house, into the which
Christ was entered before them.

M which is a syngular exaumple of the steadfast faith, which ceasethe not to
hope, although at the first time the petition be not granted, but continuethe
mutable, till the purpose be obtained.

Such was the faith of the woman of Syrophenesia. Matthew. 15
Believe ye that I am able to do this? B. He asks them if they believe,
teachinge that faith is required to the obteininge of the power of Christ, and
the will of God, and that the same faith, by the which we believe in Christ,
can heal and save of his own proper nature and force, without the benefyte of
prayer.

For he says not, do you believe, that I can obtain this at the hands of God?
but do you believe that I can do this. By the which words wholely, such a faith
is required, by the which we attribute the dyuine power unto Christ, to obtain
any benefit at his hands. Answer.
We answer, when at the first, they had confessed him to be the son of
David, they were persuaded somewhat of his grace. For by this tytell, they
declare him to be the redeemer of their countreye, and the aucthor of all good
things.

Faith, therefore comprehends the mercy of God, his fatherly love, his
omnipotency, the good will of Christ also, toward man, with his power and
strength. But because men do commonly attrybute less to the power of God,
and virtue of Christ, then they ought, this question is not without reason,
moved to the blind, whether they believe that Christ can do that which they
profess with the mouth.

And for this cause their faith is commended, because they believe him to be
the son of Dauyd, being in so humble and base estate. Lord we believe. A.
Him whom before they called the Son of David, they now call Lord,
attrybutynge unto him no doubt, the honor of a Messiah.

29 Then towched he their eyes, saying: according to your faith, be it unto
you.

Then tovvched he their eyes. M. It is not necessary that Christ should toutche
their eyes, (for he could help them with his word only,) but for the
blind men's sakes only: namely that hereby their faith might be much
helped. Even so we count the couching of such, as we think to be saynctes
and holy men of great force. Christ therefore waying the imbecillitie of
mankind, to the end he might help the faith of the blind, touches their
eyes: the which no doubt confyrmed much the trust and hope of these blind
men, to receive their syghte. Hereby we see, the nature and goodness of
Christ, who always indeuoureth him self, to help our imbecillitie, in those
things which require a constante faith.

Saying, according to your faith, be it unto you. E. By this short
sentence, the lord teaches us that all things ought to be asked of him in a
sound faith, and that the faithful do ask nothing of him in vain. For
these ask nothing but that which they are persuaded of, by the holy ghost,
and do it to the glory of God.

30 And their eyes were opened. And Jesus charged them, saying. Se that no man
know of it..

And their eyes were opened. A. Parfecte health follows Faith. (...) F^
Although a syngular benefyte is here declared, to be bestowed upon the two
blind men, yet notwithstanding, hereupon we may gather a general doctrine,
That if we pray always in faith, we shall never suffer the repoulce in our
petitions.

Again, if these two of little faith, and being as yet nothing at all
furnyshed in faith, obtained that which they could desire, much more then
shall we with our faith, at this day prevail, which are endewed very
plentifully with the spirit of adoption, if we come unto God, bearing our
selves boulde upon the sacrifice of a mediator. And he charged them, saying:
let no man know of. B. This warns and exhorts us from preachinge openly
the glory of God, by our own intrusion, and rash zeal, without occasion
mynistred by Gods holy spirit, that is, before we be sent.

31 But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his name in all the la^d.

C. In that, these two, having received their sight, publyshe by and by the
benefyte which they received, contrary to the commandment: they deserve
blame. For it is not as some feign, that Christ forbadde them, to the end
they should be the more desirouse to publyshe the same abroad. There is some
cause why they should be forbodden, which is unknown to us: but these men
being moved with a rash zeal, ^eale.
did spread his same abroad, before the time. A. wherefore, that which they
did, was worthy of reprehension, B. although they emed to do it to the glory
of Christ. He which is a Christian in deed, will always seek to perform
and fulfill the will of God, and will also beware that he prefer not his own
will before the will of his master, being certaynely persuaded, that Christ
never forbids any thing to be done, that is symplely good, But where as the
name of Christ, was nevertheless set forth by their disobedience, which
happened to some for the best, ye ought to be ascribed to the goodness of God,
and not to their disobedience. (...) 1.
C. So Paul was glad, that Christ was preached by any occassion: but yet he
never commended those that did so preach. M. Let us therefore learn symplely
to obey the commandments of God, how so ever it seems good in our eyes
too do the contrary. ^^d in ^o of^ dis^ ^od.
For it does not become a man to seek to be wyser, then the wisdom of God it
self, which commands nothing without special reason. and weighty matter
leadynge the same. We know right well, what happened to Saul: because he did
contrary to the commandemente of God, (...) 15.
in reserving part of the pray of Ameleche. Again we are not ignorant, 3.
King. 20.
that the man which would not smite the prophet, according to the word of
the lord was slain of a lion. And why would he not smite the prophet?
Math. 16.
Because he thought it evil so to do. The like did Peter, when he went about
to persuade Christ, John. 13.
that he should not suffer him self to be crucified of the Jews. Also, when
he would not permit Christ to wash his feet.

32 As they went out, behoulde: they brought to him a dombe man possessed of
a devil.

As they went out. Bu. The blind men being scarce gone, there comes an
other, very miserable, unworthy of help, and yet sekyng a benefyte, to whom the
merciful lord denies nothing. For he is rich, The lord is rich in mercy.
and plentyfull to all those that call upon his name, The treasury of the Lord
is never empty, yea, though he spend and bestow innumerable riches. He is
that bottomless well, ever open, to the end men may draw, drinck, and be
satisfied. The fathers have tasted of this goodness of God from the beginning
of the world, and yet he has enoughe in store for us and our posterytie,
even to the worlds end.

Behold, they brought to him a dombe man possessed. This miracle only Matthew
makes mention of, the other two speaking nothing of the same. It is probable
and likely, that this man by nature was not dombe, but when he was delivered to
the devil, the use of his speech was taken away.

His ponishement was so laid upon him, that it might appear by manifest
signs, that his toungue was held by the evil spirit. M. For Satan
specially at that time was wont to obscure the glory of God, in the gifts of
seeing and speaking, but specially in the use of speaking. For in him, of whom
mention is made here, and in him, of the which is made mention, in the twelthe
of Mathewe, and of an other in the seventh of Marcke, we se that Satan took
away the use and strength of their speech, or at least, stayed and let the
same.

33 And when the devil was cast out, the do^be spoke, and the people marueiled
saying: It was never so seen in Israel.

When the devil was cast out M. Here we se that Christ does not only help
them which come to seek his help of their own free will, but those also
which were brought by others as it were against their will. For the
Evangelical history does witness, that four kinds of men were healed and
helped of Christ. Canaan. The third sort are they which he came unto, and
healed of his own voluntary will, John. 5.
being not called, or sent for, John 9.
as the man which was sick of the dissease thirtye years, and the man also
that was borne blind: Luke. 7.
furthermore the son of the wyddowe, which was

And the people marueyled, saying. C. This miracle is wholly in it self
simple, good, and a manyfeste token of the kyngedome of God: but here we se,
that it is not taken and received in this manner. for if it had, then would
the multitude have received this deed of Christ, then would the Scrybes and
Pharyseyes have embraced, not only the deed, but the doer of the same also.

The common sort of people, were of a simple affection, being nothing
vaine-gloryouse, nor of a malyciouse spyrite: Wherefore with pure eyes they
could behold the deed of Christ, and with an indyfferent judgment, symplely
judge that which was true. Thus could not the Pharyseies do.

It was never so seen in Israel. C. This exclamation of the people seems to
excede to much. For God had declared his glory and power to that people in
time paste, by greater miracles. But paraduenture they have respect to the
end of the miracle, that then all men hoped for the coming of the Messiah.
We must note, that this voice was not premeditated, but burste forth at
suddein by a certain admiration, which they had at the miracle.

34 But the Phariseies said, he casts out devils, through the prince of
diuills.

M. These Phariseies, these hypocrites, could not deny, but that this deed
was divine, and done by the power of God, and yet they calumniate, and rail
upon Christ Even so at this day, Go^ ^mies.
the enemies of the treweth, can not deny, but that the Gospel is preached,
and yet nevertheless, they rail, they speak evil, and persecute the same.
C. But hereby we se how furiouse, and mad the Pharyseys were, which were not
afraid to speak against the excellent work of God, with open reprochefull
mouths. An^ a (...) or ch^
For we must note the Antithesis, between, the praise of the people, and the
blasphemye of the Pharyseis. For where as they say it was never so seen in
Israel, they confess the glory of God, by the which confession, the madness
of these dogs, the better apperethe, which dare blaspheme God, even to his
face. M. And although they can not deny the deed it self, or affirm it to
be evil, or that it was of no force, or ye others had done the like. yet
notwithstanding they can not suffer the people, for this cause, to give glory
unto the deed of Christ, but craftily transport the same from him, to an
other: seking to alyenate, and counterfaite the glory of Christ, and to rob
God of his honor. And not contented with this they seek to bring unto the
miracle al ignominy and reproach, when they ascribe all to the devil, as
though Christ had done all that he did by the power, aid, B^ ra^ ^teth w^^
and assistaunce of the devil. Wherefore we are taught by this place, when
piety comes to the extreme poyncte of blindenes, there is no work of God
so manifest, which it will not peruerte.

But this is a monstruouse and execrable thing for mortal men to rise against
their maker: but let such be sure that they shall not escape the ponishment
and wrath of God: for he reuengeth him self upon the wicked, after long
sufferaunce. (...) 12.
As concerning the prince of the deuylles, read the twelfth chapter of
Mathewe.

35 And Jesus went about all cities and towns, teaching in their Synagoges,
and preaching the glad tydinges of the kyngedome, and healynge every
sickness and every dissease among the people.

And Jesus went about. M Now Matthew reherseth that again which was already
declared in his fourth chapter.

C. But this is spoken to the end we may know how that all the mynysterye
and office of Christ is not orderlye descrybed, because he was continuallye
occupied in his function, namelye that he might publishe the doctrine of
salvation, then that he might ratifye and confyrme the same, with miracles
adjoined to it. M. Therefore that earnest desyer, and wonderful diligence of
Christ, in prosecutinge and fulfyllynge the office, which he had taken in
hand, that is, to teach and heal, is to be noted.

Whose diligente care and study, is to be noted in this, that he is not one
whytt stayed or hindered by the wicked reproach of the Phariseyes aforesaid.

(...) christ (...) to ^a^e re^the (...)
Whereby the mynisters of Christ are admonyshed to follow his example, and not
to suffer them selves to be moved by the slaunderouse reproaches of the wicked
and to forsake the people of God, but to prosecute and follow dylygently their
office and calling. And preaching the gospel. M. He says not speakinge the
Gospel of the kyngedome, but preachinge, that we might know what affection,
what mind, and what spirit ought to be in him, which preachethe the Gospel
of God. To preach according to the Greek word signifies, to praise, to
celebrate, and to commend some thing to many, or to all men. Therefore, where
as Mathewe says, that Christ went about, and preached the Gospel of the
kyngedome of God, he means, that with a good will, and boulde spyrite, he
praised, celebrated, and commended the grace of Gods kyngedome, which was
then offered, the reconcillyation of mankind, and the restoration, and
renewynge of all things. The Gospel.
It is called the Gospel of the kyngedome of the effect: because by this
means, God gathered the people which were myserably dyspersed to him self,
that they might raygne with him in all felycitie, and joy, and peace.
Notwithstanding let us remember that we submytt our selves unto God, that we
may be carried up of him into his heavenly glory. Healynge every dissease
among. Read for this matter in the fourth chapter of Matthewe, Math. 4.
and that which is noted there.

36 But when he saw the people, he was moved with compassion on them, because
they were destitute, and scattered abroad, even as sheep, having no
shepehearde.

But when he savve the people, he was moved M. The Euangeliste, being not
content with his description of the circuyte of Christ, of his doctrine, and
healynge of infyrmities, he now shows how he considered, in this cyrcuite,
the state and condition of the people, in so much that he takes compassion
upon them, and expressethe his mind and affection toward them. He was
moved with compassion. C. The Greek word signifies the bowelles of mercy and
the Hebrews call the bowelles of mercy, a vehemente and godly affection.
Whereupon Zacharias says, For the remission of their sins, through the
tender mercy of our God.

C. Therefore the euangeliste says, that Christ was verily grieved in mind,
and that his affections were moved upon the dissipation, and scatterynge
abroad of the miserable people, of whom there was no count made of those,
whose office was specially to gather to gether, and to feed the people of God.

He also declares and proves him self therefore to be a faithful mynyster of
his Father, in carynge for the health of his people, for whose sake he took
our flesh upon him.

Christ being i^ heaven cares for his. church.
And although he be now received up into heaven, yet has he a care for his
church still, and a respect to his sheepefould, in so much that he defends
the silly flock of his poor sheep, from cruel, ravening, and blouddy wulues.

Because they were destitute as sheep. E. There is no beast more destitute,
and that nedethe more the help of a shepehearde or guide, then sheep have.
The old interpretation, and Hierrom, Hillary, and Chrysostom, have, being
vexed.

And scattered abroad. E. The Greek word signifies cast of, or dispersed,
which commonly is spoken of such things, as are negligentlye without order or
regard, cast here and there. The security of the high priests.
C. By the which words we may gather, how great the security and
slothfulness of the high priests was, who being appointed to set forth
the doctrine of God, became idell and slow bellies. They being arrogant and
proud, boasted them selves to be the heads of the people: but Christ
notwithstanding acknowlegeth never a one of them to be a pastore. We may at
this day behold the like arrogancye in the Papacy, The Papacy is replenished
with ravening wulues
which is replenished with titels and names of pastors, and curates, but in
deed, they are worse then the rauenynge wolves. There are an innumerable sort
of them, which under this titell and pretense, destroy and devour the people.
To be short, when as they are dombe dogs, they are not ashamed to brag and
boaste of their pryncipalitie and governance. But we must here what Christ
says, that no idell and negligent parsons, are sheepeherbes: and that those
are wandering and straying sheep, which are not gathered into the
sheepefoulde of God, by the doctrine of the Gospel.

37 Then says he to his disciples, the harvest trewely is plenteouse, but the
laborers are few

Bu. He means that there are very many of the people desyrouse of the
doctrine of the Gospel: but few mynisters apre and meet to instruct the
people to godliness, and to labor in the mynisterie of gods kyngedome.

He uses here an Allegorye, taken of a rusticall matter. B. For by the
plentiful harvest, he understands the great multitude of people, prone, and
redye bente to here the word of God, and those also which thyrsted after the
trewthe of the Gospel. C. For although the greater number did reiecte, by
filthye ingratitude, the proffered sauinge health, yet did God esteem the small
handful of his elect, more the^ the whole world besides. But the laborers are
fevve. Although there were many that intruded them selves, yet because there
were few that behaved them selves faithfully, he counts them not among the
workmen. 2. Co^ Phillip^
Paul when he complained of the evil laborers, he had respect unto their
boastinge.

M. When as Christ therefore calls them labourars, which are mynysters of
his Church, he means that the ministry and dispensation of the Gospel, is
not accomplyshed and fynysshed with idelnesse, but with labor, with work,
Gala. ^
and travail. This was the cause that Paul so often times said: Phill^
I fear me least I labor in vain. again, Help the women which labor
with me in the Gospel: also, 1. Ti^
And which specially labor in the word and doctrine.

38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send laborers
into the harvest.

Pray ye therefore the lord. B. By these words our savior Christ
sufficientely declares, The ^ters (...) are f^ labo^^
that it is not in man's power and strength, to send labourars into the
harueste: but that he must pray the Lord of the harueste, namely the father,
that he would send woorkemen or reapers into the harvest. Whereupon Paul
writing of this thing, says. Such trust have we, through Christ to
Godwarde, not that we are sufficyent of our selves, to thinck any thing, as of
our selves: but if we be able to any thing, the same comes of God, which
has made us able to minyster the new testamente.

And he speaks of his mynysterye toward the Corynthyans, whom he made by
his preaching, the epistel of Christ, 1. C^
written by the spyryte in their hearts, that is, true Chrystians.

For God by his holy spiritie works all in all. When as then no man at any
time shall be a sincere and fit minister of Christ's Gospel, neither shall any
teach as they ought, except the lord stir them up, and indue them with the
gifts of his holy spirit: so often as we see need of good ministers, it is
necessary that we lift up our eyes unto him, and crave the remedy at his
hands. And truly if we look about us circumspectly, we shall find that there
was never more need of faithful harvest men then there is at this day.

That he will send laborers. E. The oulde Greek translation, signifies
that he would cast out laborers. And so have many very ancient Lattin books
also. But the new interpretour thought good to turn it thus, that he would
thrust out, that we might understand, that they must be sent very shortly, or
else, that they must be thruste out with violence against their wills into
the work of God. The which thing Hierome noted, citing this place. B. We must
pray therefore unto God, that by his holy spirit, he would make preachers,
and send them out into the whole world, without the which there can be no
preachers in deed. (...) 10.
Saint Paul therefore says very well: How can they preach without they be
sent? As if he should have said, It is not possible that any man should
preach the Gospel truly, except he be appointed and called to the same by
God. Bu. Neither shall the prayers of the faithful be unprofitable or in
vain, as wicked men immagin, which think that the omnipotency of God does
rule, guide, and govern all things without our prayers. But the wicked
worthily peryshe, which prefer with all their might wicked and ungodly
pastors and flatterers, ^o. 4.
and tourning away their ears from the truth, are turned to fables.

The.x. Chapter.
AND WHEN
And when his twelve. M. This chapter agrees with ye which went before. The
sendinge forth of the Apostels to preach.
For Christ taking occasion of the compassion and mercy which he had on the
people by his office, (for he is the good and true shepeherde) he begins
now to consider the people, and to send them true shepeherdes. C. Here
therefore the vocation and calling of the Apostels, is described unto us, not
as it was before when the lord prepared them to their office, and chose them
into his fellowship. For now they are called to the present function, they are
commanded to prepare them selves to the work, commandments are given unto
them, and least they should want authority, they are replenyshed with the
power of the holy ghost. At the first therefore they were chosen in hope of the
labor to com: But now Christ tells them that the hour is come, in the
which they must set their hands to the work. Notwithstanding, we must note
that as yet Christ speaks not of the continual Apostelship, but only of the
temporal preaching, by the which the minds of men might be stirred and lifted
up, that they might be the more attentive, to hear the words of Christ. Now
then, they are sent that they may declare in Jury, that the time of their
visitation and saving health is at hand: Afterward Christ appoints and
ordayneth them to preach the Gospel throughout the whole world. Here only he
takes them unto him as helpers, to get unto him audience, which his voice
alone could not bring to pass afterward he sends them (as I said even now)
into the whole world. His twelve disciples. M. This number of twelve in the
scriptures, and works of God. is holy and excellent. For this did note and
signify the instauration, and reforming that should be of the church. A
mystery contained in the number of twelve.
For as the people did spring of twelve Patriarchs: even so now, the relics
or remnaunte, being scattered abroad, Christ calls to remembrance his
ofspringe, that they might have a sure and certain hope of his restoring. And
although the kingdom of God did not so florishe in Jury, that the state of the
people was whole and sound: but rather that people which was now miserably
fallen and decayed, in despising the grace and mercy to them offered, by their
ingratitude, deserved double destruction: Yet notwithstanding, this stayed and
let not, Psalm. 110.
but that a new people might be borne again. Afterward it came to pass, that
God sent from far the rod and Scepter of the power of his son, out of Sion,
that there might spryng out of that well head, such a one as should
plentifully water all the four parts of the world. Then did God gather from
all parts his people Israel, that they might grow and increase into one
body, yea, and not only the dispersed and torn members, but such men also as
before were altogether alienate from the people of God. Therefore the Lord
appointing (not in vain) the twelve as Patriarchs, testifies the renuinge of
the church. Admit now that he admonished the Jews by this number, of the
end and cause of his coming. But because they gave no place to the grace of
God, he begat unto him self a new people. If we have respect to the
beginning, this might seem a ridiculous thing: but the end which was
wonderful, and the fruitful propagation of the church, declares, that the
Apostels do far excel the Patriarchs, both in the degree of honor, and
also in the fertillitie of succession. M. To be short, as the multitude and
people of the Jews, came of the carnal generation of the twelve sons of
Israel, even so the multitude of the faithful (which in number passes the
sand by the sea side) by spiritual birth, came of ye twelve Apostels For if
Paul speak truly, 1. Cor. ^ Gala. ^ ep. Ph^
in saying that he begat those, which he brought unto the faith of Christ:
Why then should not the like be said of the rest of the Apostles? According
to this example, the Bishop of Rome observes the number of twelve, in the
election of his Cardinals, whom he choseth instead of the Apostels.

His disciples. E. Luke says, Luke ^
that Christ afterward called them Apostels.

He gave them power. Some old Greek books have (as it is here.) He gave
them power against unclean spirits. Other some have (as the old interpretour
also) He gave the^ power of unclean spirits. The which ambiguitie and
doubtful speech, being mislyked of Hilary, he reads it, He gave them power
to cast out unclean spirits. The Greee word signifies power and
authority, to do any thing, the which power truly among men, wanting the
strength and faculty, to execute the Law, is void of the effect: But in
divine matters it fares not so. For to God the faculty and power are joined
together. Wherefore, because the disciples receive here power of Christ the
true son of God, they receive also with the same, the virtue and strength,
which is able to work the effect. Whereupon we read in an other place, Luke ^
that these two, faculty, or authority, and power are joined together. The
(...) of the ^stels (...) first.
But because the Apostels were of no reputation almost among men, and the
Embassage which was committed unto them, was altogether divine: Furthermore,
when as they did neither excel in wit nor eloquence, and again, the
excellency and newenes of the thing required, more then possibely could be in
man: It was necessary that they should have farther authority from some other.
Bu. Furthermore when Moses should promulgate and set forth the Law, the
Lord prepared him authority, by many signs and miracles: Therefore it was
convenient that now likewise by tokens and wonders he should get credit to
the preachers of his Gospel. Doct^ with thor^^ small (...)
For truly without the authority of the teacher, the doctrine it self seems
weak and of small force, although otherwise it might seem sufficient. ^wefull
^yra^
C. Wherefore Christ seeing before hand that his Apostels by showing of
miracles, should get great credit and reverence among the people, he endeweth
them aboundauntly with heavenly power. And hereupon the lawefull use of
miracles may be gathered: which was to seal, ratify, and confirm the
doctrine of the Gospel. Wherefore the Papists are falsefiers, and wicked
deprauers of the works of God, in separating the word from miracles.

To cast them out. M. By this it appears that they received not power to do
with the deuels as them listed, but to drive, expel, and cast them out. They
could not therefore send them into men, and use their works to the
destruction of mankind. For they received power so, over all kind of
diseases, that they might make of those that were sick, whole, those that were
blind, to see, those that were dombe, to speak, and those that were lame, to
walk, but the contrary, by this their authority and power they could not do.

2 The names of the twelve Apostels are these. The first Simon, which is
called Peter, and Andrew his brother James the son of Zebede, and John his
brother.

The names of the twelve are. Bu. It was necessary that the names of the
Apostels should be put in writing, because it was not mete that the heads of
our religion, the special witnesses of the catholic truth, and the lights
of the whole world, should remain unspoken of. M. This also is the manner and
wont of the scripture, not to suffer the names of those whose works God used
to his ministry to lie hidden in oblivion: but to express them by their
names, what they were: partly that we may know that they are not neglected of
God which serve him, and partly, that we being myndefull of their faith,
should follow their godly example. For it brings unto us great vtillitie
and proffite, to know them by name, whose ministry and service God has
vouchesafed to use, (...) 5. ^lip. 15
for our great commodity and saving health.

Even so Moses does Chronacle their names, by whose industry and labor the
tabernacle was made. And in an other place, their names are rehearsed, which
brought back again the Ark of God, (which David made) into the Tabernacle.
The first Simon. H. Here we must note that the other Evangelists do not
rehearse the Apostels names in the same order that Matthew does least that any
man should make Peter the chiefest of all the rest, because he is put here in
the first place. For the other two Evangelists rehersing the Apostels names
by couples, place Matthew before Thomas. And Matthewe him self (for modesties
sake) prefers Thomas. Gala. 2.
And Paul reherseth James in the first place saying, James and Cephas, and
John, which seemed to be the pillars. Wherefore the Evangelists are symplely to
be understood, who placed Peter and Andrewe, or Peter, James and John, in the
first place, for no other consideration then because, they were first in
vocation and calling. C. Very fondly therefore the Roman bishops build their
suppremacy upon this place. But admit, grant, The Romish supremacy is very
fondly buylte upon this place.
that Peter was chiefest of the Apostels, yet notwithstanding, it follows not
that the thing which was of force among twelve, should extend it self to
the whole world. Admit that he was first numbered, yet it does not thereupon
follow that he should be chief or excel the rest. Which is called Peter.
A. Of this word Peter we have spoken before in the fourth chapter And Andrew
his brother. How this Andrewe came at the first unto Christ, John. 1.
saint John plainly in his first chapter declares. James the son of Zebed.
E. The Greek text has only, James which was of Zebede, and leueth out this
word, son, but the old intepretour, because it was understood (as
appears by the article) puts it in. We may read of this man's death in ye
Acts of the Apostels. And John his brother. Acts, 12.
This is that disciple whom Jesus loved, John. 13, 19. and.21.
as he him self witnesses in the Golpel which he write.

3 Philippe and Bartholomewe, Thomas, and Matthewe, which was the Publicane,
James the son of Alphae, and Lebbeus, whose syrname was Thaddeus.

Phillippe and Bartholomevve. Bu. These were two grave and excellent men,
although no mention is made of them in the holy scripture. Thomas. This is that
Thomas Didimus, John. 20.
which after the resurrection touched the perfect body of Christ.

Matthew which had been a P. A. The interpretour adds this word (had been) to
make the matter more plain. M. For by this remembrance or rehersall, The
modesty of Mathewe.
the Euangeliste Matthewe shows him self thankful for the inestimable
mercy of Christ toward him, which turned not away his face from a
Publicane, but vouchsafed to receive him to his grace. Hereby we learn not to
hyde and obscure the grace of Christ, which happens unto us, but to preach
the same, 1. Timo. 1 Acts. 26. 1. Cor. 15.
although it be to our own reproach. For it pertayned to the glory of Christ.
that of a Publicane he was made an Apostell. A. So Paul in diverse places
reherseth what he was before his calling, to enlarge and set forth the mercy
of God. M. Also note, that the other Evangelists add not to Matthewe, the
name of a Publicane. For it is better that a man remember his own fault then
another do it. But we in these days use the contrary, for we hyde our own
faults, and bewraye all that we can by other men, if it touch the hurt of
their good name.

James the son of Alphe. He is called James the son of Alphe, to make a
difference between him and James, the son of Zebede. Of some, he is called
James the less, or the yo^ger. And Lebbeus whose surname is Taddeus. Bu. This
man is said to have three names. For he was called Judas, the brother of
James, and Thaddeus, and Lebbeus.

4 Simon of Canaan, and Judas Iscarioth, which also betrayed him.

Simon of Canaan. Bu. This Simo^ of Canaa^ was so called of Cana, Luke. 6.
Acts. 1.
a town in Gallilae, as Hierom thinks. Luke says, yt his surname was
Zelotes. For Cana, is as much to say in Lattine Zelus, which is in English
zeal. So that of Zelus he is called Zelotes. And Judas Iscarioth. M. He is so
called either of the town where he was borne, or else of the trybe which is
called Isachar. Which also betrayed him. A. This is spoken by a figure called
Anticipation, by the which we do commonly prevent that which follows, with
some note or tytell: as this also. John ^
It was yt Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wyped his fete with
her hear. M. Here also we must note, No fe^ship o^ foun^ but (...) before
ungod sone.
that there is no fellowship so holy, so pure, and clean, but in the same
there is found some evil person. Wherefore we must take heed that for one
evil man's sake, we reiecte not all the good, and that for Judas sake we
reiecte not all the Apostles. Math ^
For the church shall always consiste, of good and evil, of faithefull men
and Hypocrites, until the high Judge come and separate the Goats from the
Sheep.

This lewd and fylthy person, defiled not ye integrity and ministry of
Saints, how great soever his transgressio^ was. Let us therefore note, that
godly, virtuous, and honest men, are not always defiled by the company of the
wicked and ungodly, specially if they be ignorant of his wickedness: neither is
the doctrine of truth and the administration of Sacraments the worse, for the
unworthiness of the minister.

5 Jesus sent forth these twelve in number, whom he commanded saying: Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and enter not into the city of the Samaritanes.

Jesus sent forth these twelve. E. The Greek word signifies that they were
sent forth with commandment and straight charge given unto them, as we shall
here by and by. It may be thought that the Lord used this word (sent)
because the Prophets make mention oftentimes of sendinge, and of those that
were sent. And the lord him self expounding this word, says thus: Verily,
verily, I say unto you, John. ^
the servant is not above his master, neither is the Apostel greater then he
which sent him. The (...) an Apo^
The Apostels therefore are the messengers, and Ambassadors of the lord, to
declare his commandments to those to whom they are sent.

Go not into the way of the Gentyles. C. Here more plainly appears that
which we touched even now, that the office of the Apostels pertained to no
other end, then to make the Jews to hear Christ atte^tiuely, by putting them
in mind of the salvation which was at hand. Therefore now he does limitte
the^ to preach to the Jews only, but afterward, to sound forth their voice
into the whole world. The reason is this, Because he was sent of his father,
(...) 15.
being a minister of the circumcision, for the truth of God to confirm the
promyses made unto the fathers. (...) 17.
For God made a special covenant with the seed of Abraham. So yt for the
promise sake, Christ would have the first fruits of his Gospel to be
bestowed upon the Jews, (...) 2.
but when the fulness of time was come, the^ would he have it preached also to
the Gentiles. For after his resurrection, (...) 16.
he gave them this general commission, saying: Go ye into the whole world
and preach the Gospel to all creatures. M. Saint Paul, to confirm this,
says: The word of God ought first to be preached unto you: but because ye put
the same from you, (...) 13.
and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, behold, we turn to the
Gentiles, for so the Lord commanded us. I have made thee a light of the
Gentiles, that thou be the salvation to the end of the world. (...) 5.


And Christ him self says: I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. And enter not into the city of the Samari. The Samaritanes
and the Gentiles, were all one, saving that the Samaritanes received outwardly
the law of Moses. ^g. 17


Of these we may read in the seuentene chapter of the fourth book of Kings.
Read also the fourth chapter of John. (...) 4.


6 But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

C. The first place he assigns to the Jews, because they were the first
begotten, yea, because God counted them only of his household, and all others as
strangers and foreners. He calls them also lost sheep, both that the
Apostels, being touched with mercy, should the more spedely, and with more
earnest study seek to help them: And also that they might know that even
now they had plentiful occasion ministered unto them to work. The Jews
which were nere unto God, and the promised seed and lawful heirs of eternal
life, are said notwithstanding to be lost, until they had recovered health
in Christ. What then to us remains, which in honor and dignity are not
to be compared unto the^? M. Christ teaches us therefore wherein perdition
consists, and in what salvation also stands. They to whom he sent his
Apostels, were not lost corporally, but spiritually, because they were out of
the feding and custody of Christ. C. Moreover, Christ gave the name of sheep
to the reprobate, which properly were not of the flock of Christ, because
the adoption pertained to all people. Math. 8.
As in an other place he calls them sons, or the children of the kingdom,
which afterward for their vnbeliefes sake, shall be cast out into utter
darkness. To be short, by the name of sheep, Christ commends the Jews to his
Apostels, to the end they might bestow their labor upon them, because none
can be counted of the flock of God, but they which are gathered into the
shepefolde.

7 Go and preach, saying: the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Go and preach. Bu. Now he gives them commandment what they shall preach,
namely, that they refer all their Sermons to the kingdom of God. R. This
kind of preaching has a certain similitude of the voice of a crier, whose
part is to declare and proclayme the coming of the king, that thereby the
minds of the people may be prepared to receive their king joyfully. C. Even so
by this proclamation of the Gospel, Christ would have the minds of the
people comforted with the hope of the redemption at hand.

The kingdom of heaven is at hand. M. Luke says, the kingdom of God is at
hand, but in the same sense and meaning: namely that ye Jews might know king:
Thirdly, that no earthly or corruptible felicity is promised unto them, but
such an heavenly joy as never shall have end. Bu. To the same effect and
purpose, all they which preach in the church of God at this day, ought to
dyrecte their Sermons, namely that they teach truly what the kingdom of Christ
is, how and after what sort it reigns here in us, and how we shall reign
with the same in heaven.

8 Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, cast out deuels: freely
ye have received, give freely.

Heal the sick. C. As he armed and endewed them with power, so he commands
them to be his faithful and liberal ministers, and he forbids the^ to hyde
that which was committed unto them, for the health of all men. A. He
commands to heal the sick, to cleanse the Leprous, and to raise the dead,
that thereby the hearers may more easily receive the doctrine of the Gospel. C.
Moreover, by these miracles he declares wherefore he was sent of his father,
and what is the end also of his Gospel. These miracles therefore have a
certain analogy and similitude with the office of Christ, The end of
Christ's coming.
that we may know that he came to us, being the author of all good things,
to deliver us from the tyranny of Satan, from the stynge of death, and the
curse of the law, and to help to clear us from all sin, diseases, and
myseries.

Freely ye have received. M. Christ knew that this Embassage might help the^ to
great gain. For what would not the sick man give to receive his health? What
cost would the parents spare to have their children being dead, raised
again to life. Therefore by express words he commands them to bestow
that liberality freely, which freely was also given unto them. C. Signifying
that they were not endewed with those gifts for their own glory and praise,
but that they should be as it were conducte pypes, for the grace and mercy of
God to pass by: as if he should have said. Consider from whence this power
came unto you, even as it came not unto you through your own merytes or
deserving, but by the mere grace of God, even so see that without any reward
therefore, ye give freely again. The (...) pryde^ in (...).
We know by experience how loathe all men are to part from that which they
think to be proper to them selves or their own good: And how lusty every man
is, if he perceive that in him self, which is wantinge in his brother, and
how ready by and by he is to despise him: The which being forsene of Christ,
he gives them a precise commandment to give freely to every one that wylyngly
seeks for the same. Now Christ has in his ministers exhibited his grace,
according to the prophecy of Esayas, saying: Esaias. ^
Come to the waters al ye that be thirsty, and ye that have no money, Come bye
wine and milk, without money or money worth. He shows also here that non
can be sincere ministers of his word, and dispensators of his grace, but such
as can be contented to bestow their work and travail freely: but as for all
hierlinges they do but corrupt and profane ye office of teaching. We (...) to
byc^^ the (...) God. 4. Ki^ Acte^ Math. ^ John. ^
M. But how odious to God this turpe lucrum is, this selling of his gifts, it
appears by many places of scripture. As by the example of Gihezi, by the
example of Simon Magus, and by the example of the biers and sellers which were
scourged out of the temple. The which examples I would to God were well
examined, and indifferently wayed by the bishops of Rome, The (...) are P^
which do nothing but make marchaundise of all that ever they have yea, they
are as peltinge pedlers, with pouling packs, and in deed to speak the truth,
they are in no point for honesty and true dealing, to be compared unto them.
Also this prohibiteth not Preachers and godly ministers, which freely and
willingly serve Christ, to be nourished and maintained with public stypendes,
according to saint Paul, who says: If we sow among you spiritual things,
think it not much if we reap your corporal and carnll things.

9 Possess not goulde nor silver, nor brass in your pursses.

E. The Greek word signifies rather to prepare, and provide that which we
have not then to possess that which we have already: that these three, gould,
silver, and brass, may be referred to that which follows: ^eading ^here ^en.
in your pursses. For of these three things money was wont to be coined,
which at the first was made of brass and Iron, then of silver, last of all
of goulde. (...) 9.
Luke as it were expounding this word (prepare) says: Take nothing to your
journey, neither staff nor scrippe. ^e. 6.
And Mark he says: And he commanded them that they should take nothing in
their journey. And again Luke faith: (...). 10.
Bear no wallet neither scrip, nor shoes. By these words he forbids
nothing else but distruste, and a preposterous care for necessary things.
Because such was this Embassage, that Christ would have his disciples to
compass all Jury in a few days, and shortly to return unto him again,
that he forbids them ^o carry scrippe or wallet, which should have been a
trouble and let unto the^ in so hasty a journey. But some ignorauntly imagine
that this was given a commandment for ever to the apostels, and ministers of
the word to observe. But they are deceived, for this restraynte pertayned
only to the Apostels, and no longer then till this journey was fynyshed,
because with speed they should pass the same. And therefore Mark says,
that they were shodde with Sandales.

10 Nor yet scrip toward iour yorney: neither two coats, neither shoes nor
yet a rod. For the workema^ is worthy of his meat.

Neither yet scrip. B. Christ would have his disciples once to have trial and
experience, that nothing should be wanting unto the^, if so be that they were
faithful ministers: and therefore he sent them forth naked as it were, and
destitute of these things, but for no long time. For we may read that Paul
took a cloak for his journey, And Peter was found having a sword. (...) 4.
(...)
And therefore we read an exposition as it were of this place, and of the
mind of Christ, when he said: When that I sent you forth without scrippe or
wallet, or shoes, did you want any thing? And they said no. (...)
He said therefore unto them, But now he that has a wallet let him take it up,
and likewise his scrippe.

Whereby first we understand that it was commanded but for a time, then that
it was commanded to the end, the Apostels (as it was said even now) might
perceive that nothing was wanting to the faithful ministers of Christ. Nora
rod. C. In this word rod or staff, the Evangelists do seem to disagree.
For by Mark as it should appear, they are permitted to have a staff: And by
Matthewe and Luke, they are denied it. But for somuche as the Hebrewe word,
(...) Sebet, is ambiguous, the Evangelists, although they write in Greek,
took this word Rauedon, a rod, diversely. Therefore Matthewe and Luke
understand such staves, as are burde^some and weighty to the bearers. But
Mark means a walking staff, which men commonly carry in their hands by the
way to ease and lighten them selves. For it is manifest that it was the
custom in those days, to carry a stycke or troncheon, or walking staff in
their hands which took any journey to go. Whereupon Jacob said, Gene. 32.
Exodus 14. 4. King. 4.
with my staff came I over Iordane. The Scripture also makes mention of
Moses rod, and of the rod of Elizeus.

For the vvorkeman is worthy of his meat. C. By these words our Savior
Christ preuenteth a doubt which might arise. For it might seem a very
straight and hard matter to travail through all Jury, without any kind of
provision, either of meat, drink or apparel. Christ therefore says that
they must not fear necessity or penury, because wheresoever they shall come
they shall be worthy of meat. M. As if he should have said, it is a common
proverb in all men's mouths, The labourer is worthy of meat. Wherefore it
pertayneth not to the labourer to be careful for meat. Endeavor your selves
rather to labor faithfully, putting away all care for meat, for to whom
soever ye shall come, he shall minister unto you Notwithstanding we must
understand this place so, that the labourer must seek his meat at his hands
for whom he works. As plainly appears by the words of Christ, when he
says, In the same house tarry still, eating and drinking, Luke. 10.
such as they give. For the labourer is worthy of his reward: and into
whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are
set before you. 1. Cor. 9.
And Paul also says, Who goes a warrefare at any time, at his own proper
cost and charges? Who planteth a vyneyarde and eats not of the fruit of the
same? Who fedeth a flock and eats not of the milk thereof. And in an other
place he says. Gala. 6.
Let him that is taught in the word, minister unto him, that teaches him in all good things.

11 But to whatsoever city or town ye shall, come, inquire who is worthy in
it, and there abide till ye go thence.

But to whatsoever city. B. By these words our Savior Christ does
answer an objection that might be made against him by his disciples. As if
they should say. Thou sendest us forth empty,

A. No man peradventure will acknowledge us for laborers. C. To this cogitation
which might arise, Answer.
he answers and preuenteth it, commau^ding them to enquire in every city,
who is worthy in it. By the which words he bids them seek dillige^tly, if
they could find such men as were godly, in whom the fear of God might be
found, and religion, and of whose docillitie and aptnes to learn, there might
be some hope, that to such they might offer their labor and work. M. He
calls them therefore worthy, which are ready and apt to receive the
preaching of repentance, and the kingdom of God, that this grace of christ
might have some place in the^. Before he said: Go ye rather to the lost Sheep
of the house of Israel: And in the words followyng he says, Whosoever shall
not receive you, nor will hear your preaching: When ye depart out of the house
or that city, shake of the duste of your feet.

In the which words we see the contrary, that whosoever receives the
messengers of peace, and hears their words, are worthy. Luke instead of
inquyre who is worthy in it, has, and shall receive you.

Such as these were worthy, Zache, Luke ^
Matthewe, Mary Magdalene, the Thief, and Paul, Wort^^ ^uers (...) Gosp^
which truly received the grace of the kingdom of Christ.

Such were worthy, of whom Christ speaks thus, saying: Verily I say unto
you, the Publicanes and Harlotes, shall enter into the kingdom of God, before
you. We may not therefore in this place so construe the words of Christ, as
though he called those worthy only which were no sinners: for if that were
so, why did Christ keep company with Publicanes and sinners, and offered his
grace unto them? Math^
Which also said, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

Or we may symplely understand those to be worthy, which study integrity of
life, and in whom the fear of God is, and religion, as we said even now.

And there abide. C. This also pertains to making haste in their journey.
For if they should have made any long tarience in one town, then must they
needs have shifted their Inn often, least they should be ouerchargeable to
one man. When as Christ therefore commands the^ to abide and tarry at their
first June until they go from thence unto another city, he signifies yt they
must make haste, that the Gospel being published in one city, they may go
by and by to another. And that this is the meaning of Christ it appears more
plainly by the words of Luke, when he says. Luk^
Go not from house to house. For this had been unseemly for the Apostels being
Ambassadors of the heavenly kingdom so to do.

12 And when ye come into an house, salute the same. E. Certain old Greek
books add these words, saying: Peace be unto this house. And so has the
old interpretours also. C. Because ye disciples could not discern ye true
and sincere worshippers of God, from those yt were conte^ners and despisers, ye
lord commands the^ to salute fre^dly every house ye they com into S^
For a salutation, is an entrance or beginning of talk. Even now, they were
admonished to go unto those houses, in the which the study of godliness, was
known to florishe: but because sometime it comes to pass that they which
are of great fame, and are well accounted of, bewraye their own impiety when
trial is made, it was necessary that this commandment should be given unto
them. The sense and meaning therefore of this place, is this. Prove at your
first coming whether the goodmen of the houses to whom ye come, can be
content to hear you willingly or no: and whosoever shall gladly receive and
embrace your doctrine, abide with them that your salutation may be confirmed.
But if any refuse or reiecte the same, depart out of hand from them, and
withdraw and pluck back from them, so much as you may, your salutatio^
again. M. This salutation seems to be that which Christ commanded to his
disciples saying: (...)
In to what house so ever ye enter, first say peace be in this house. After
this manner the Jews were wo^te to salute one an other. Christ therefore
would that his disciples should use this wonted benevolence of saluting, to
the end they might win the minds of those, which by the Gospel, should
be brought to the kingdom. And therefore he says, first say. For a
salutation is a sign of benevolence of friendship, and of love, by the which
we wish well unto those, to whom we come. Whereupon Christ commands us
to salute not only our friends after the manner of the Gentiles, but also our
enemies.

13 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it be not
worthy, let your peace return to you again

And if the house be. Bu. As if he should have said by this token ye shall
truly know who are worthy, namely they which receive your preaching. A.
Therefore if ye house be worthy, that is, if the goodman of the house be
worthy, that is to say: If he receive your salutation. For Luke says in
stead of this. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon
it, yt we may understand that the peace which the goodma^ of ye house
deserves, is so offered, that it pertains to the rest of his household also,
and that it shall rest upon the whole house, if it be received of ye good man
of the house. Furthermore, that the dignity of the house does consiste in the
good man of the house, it appears by Luke, when he says, If the son of
peace be there. And this is the special goodness of God, All the household and
family is blessed for the good man of the house sake.
which appeared in the old testament also, because he appointed ye grace of
the covenant and promise, not only in ye lord of the house, but also with him
he took all that were of his house: as appears in Noe, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob: and in Zacheus also, when Christ said: Luke. 19.
To day peace is entered into this house, because that he also is made a child
of Abraham.

But if it be not worthy. M. Luke has: but if he shall not receive you, yt
is, if he be not worthy, and declare it in not receiving you Let your peace
return. M. That is, get you by and by from them and so much as you may
retracte your salutation, again. For his words are in effect thus, Because
they for their ingratitude are unworthy to have the blessinge of God, which
ye wish unto them, break of your communication, and go to some other.

14 And whosoever shall not receive you, nor will hear your preaching: when ye
depart out of the house or that city, shake of the duste of your feet.

And vhosoeuer. M. Hitherto the lord instructed his apostels, how they
should shonne and avoid the unworthy, and get them selves to those that were
worthy.

Now he teaches them, what they shall do if they chance to come to any that
be unworthy, and contemners of the grace of God. He has told the^ how they
should behave them selves to the worthy. Now therefore he shows them of the
unworthy: and first of all he sets before the^ a mark or token, to the
which they must have respect, and according to the which they must judge of the
worthy with who^ they abide, and of the unworthy, from whom they depart:
namely, if they be received, and heard, or not received, and not heard, that
by this means they may very well know, who are worthy and who not.

And he does not only command his disciples to depart from those, which by
ingratitude reiecte the grace offered unto them, but also to shake the oust of
their feet against the^, and by the same to testify what horrible
punishment, shall come in time upon such as contemn the Gospel. And also by
this severe denunciation of the vengeance of God; Christ would comfort his
disciples, least they should be dismayed and discouraged for the contempt of
his doctrine, and least the ingratitude of the world, should let or state
them in their business. And we se how Paul bearing him self bold on this
consolation, 2. Cor. 2.
did boldly despise all the contumacy of men, that he might go through even the
midst of troubles constantly, and bosteth him self to be a sweet savor unto
Christ, although the savor of death to them that perish. The Gospel is of
great price unto the lord.
Moreover, this place teaches how much the lord estemeth his Gospel: and
truly for so much as it is an excellent treasure they are to unthankful,
which reiecte the same being offered unto them. And for so much as it is the
scepter of his kingdom, it can not be despised and set at naught without
reproach unto him.

Shake of the duste. M. Our Savior Christ is not content to have them only
depart from those yt are unworthy, but also he would that they should give some
testimony of the greatness of their fault, and of the punishment to come. C.
And as he comme^deth the doctrine of the Gospel here, that all men might
receive the same reverently: Even so he bids his Apostels to be preachers of
that vengeance which he denounces unto the^: which thing could not be unless
they burned with a seruent zeal of that doctrine which they preached. A mete
man to preach the Gospel.
We must note therefore that none can be a fit teacher of the heavenly
doctrine, unless he be so affected, that he do forsake and contemn his self.
M. The shaking of, of the dust is a sign of cursyng and defyinge of the^. C.
Which thing is very lykely to be used of the Jews, because Christ speaks
here as of a known thing: as if the Apostels by this outward sign had
witnessed the inhabiters of that place to be so polluted and defiled, that even
the earth by their infection also was corrupted.

M. And so this shaking of, of the duste, should be a testimony to the
unbelieving, and contemners of the preaching of the Gospel, that hereafter
they might have no excuse, that they heard not the embassage of the kingdom
of God. For Mark adds. For a witness unto the^, Chap. ^ Luke ^
But Luke says. For a wytnes against them. As if he should have said. This
duste which cleaves unto our feet, since we came into this city of yours,
shall be a wytnes in that day, if you would deny us to be there, and to have
preached the gladtidinges of the Gospel unto you. Of this commandment we have
an example in the Acts of the Apostels, where it is thus written. The Jews
moved the devout and honest women, and the chief men of the city, and
raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled the^ out of their
coasts. But they shoke of the duste of their feet against them, and came to
Iconium. Act^
And in an other place. And when they said contrary, and blasphemed, he shoke
his raiment, and said unto them: Act^
your blood be upon your own heads, from hencefoorthe will I go blameles
unto the Gentyles.

C. So that we see, The the h^^ th^^ G^^ co^ h^
how that no crime does more offend God then the contempt of his word:
For he does not so precisely bid us to deteste either Adulterers, or man
slears, or any kind of wicked persons, as he does bid us to deteste these.
Whereupon, being not content with the deed alone, he would that his disciples
should threaten them with words, as appears in Luke, where he says: Go
your ways into the streates of the same and say, even the very dust of your
city, which cleaves on us, do we wype of against you: Lu^^
Notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God was come nie
upon you.

15 Verily I say unto you: it shall be easyer for the land of Sodoma, and
Gomorha in the day of judgment then for that city.

Verily I say unto you. C. Least that the threatnyng going before, should
seem vain our Savior Christ pronounces, that they which despise the
Gospel, shall suffer more grievous punyshement then the Sodomites. M. And to
persuade this more seriously, he confirms it with an oath. In the day of
Judgment. There are some which by this day of judgment understand that
time, in the which God took vengeance upon the Jews, by the Romans: But
Christ speaks not of this time. For he understands the general day of
judgment, in the which all men must give accoumptes, and receive
punyshement, according to their deeds. For the temporal burning of Sodom, was
an example of the everlasting fire to come, as in the Epistell of saint Jude.
(...) Jude.
God was wonderfully styrred to wrath against Sodom: Wherefore if that
city was then so abominable before God, it shall no doubt, have far
greater punishment in the day of judgment. Therefore, Christ names Sodom
above all other cities, not only because the plague and punishment of the
same, did exceade all others: but because it was consumed by the power of God,
with a synnguler kind of destruction, that it might be an example for ever,
and the name odious also and abominable. And yet notwithstanding, ^odo^ ^albe
^ntly (...) at of iud^ then ^fers ^ospel
it is no marueyle, if Christ do pronounce here that the Sodomites shall be
more gently entreated at that day then the unbelieving, which refuse to hear
the Gospel. For when as men do deny the authority of their maker, and will
not vouchesafe to hear his voice, but do refuse the same, which inuiteth and
calls them to grace: This impiety I say, is as it were the heap of all
other mischiefs and wickedness. But and if so great and grievous a plague insued
the repulse of the obscure preaching in those days. What terrible punishment
remains for those which reiecte Christ so openly and plainly, crying and
calling unto them? Furthermore, if God punish so severely the contemners, what
shall happen and befall such as are furious enemies. which, with opprobrious
tongues and blasphemous talk, defy the Gospel of Christ, and cruelly, with
fire and sword persecute the same. Last of all, The public wealth consists
in embracing the Gospel.
by this place we may learn in what the weal public or health, proffite,
and commodity of the city does consiste: namely in the obedience, and
diligent hearing, and embracing of the word of God, and not in worldly peace
and unity, not in the flourishing estate of mundane affairs.

For what shall the pleasant cituation of Sodom, the sumptuous building, and
the great abundance of treasure in the same, help or proffite in the day
of judgment? Surely nothing at all. Read for this matter the syxtene chapter
of the prophecy of Ezechiell. Ezech. 16.


16 Behold, I send you forth as sheep among Wolves: be ye therefore wise
as serpents, and innocent as Doves.

Behold I send you forth. Bu. Now our Savior Christ sets the dangers
before his disciples which they must suffer for preachinge of the truth. And
in this he follows strong and valiant captains of the wars, who, to the
end they may make their soldiers more ware, tell them beforehande all the
dangers and perils of the battle. C. And so the commandments and charges,
which Matthewe hitherto has rehearsed, did pertayne to the former expedition
and haste of their journey, which should be ended in a few days: But now
Christ proceadeth farther and armeth the again the time to come, yt they might
know, how that they were not chosen only for that short time to preach the
Gospel, but also for a longer time, yea, to compass a greater province, more
uneasy, and requiring greater travel and pain. He admonishes them therefore
here of those perilles which they should suffer after his resurrection. For
although they were not brought by and by into the field of this warrefare,
whereof Christ speaks, yet notwithstanding, it was proffitable for them to
be put in mind of such things before they came to the end at such time as
they happened, they might the better bear them.

This (truly) in the first sendinge also, was true, that the Apostels were
like unto Sheep in the midst of Wolves: But because the lord sparing their
infirmity, suffered not the Wolves for all their cruel madness to hurt them,
it is properly referred to the time to come, in the which the Lord suffered
them more sharply to be entreated. For before the resurrection, the brydegrome
being present, they were partakers of all the joys in the marriage: But after
the brydegrome departed from them, that pleasure, that joy ceased, and then
their condition and state of life, was so austere, that they felt them selves
not to be appointed with this armoure in vain.

Bu. And truly (as the proverb says) the darts which strike and pearce
unawares, Forewarni^g of dangers is profitale.
and at a sudden do more terrify us, and make us afraid, then those, whereof
we have a sight before they enter. The lord therefore here does not dissemble
or hyde any thing, but rather does so exactly describe and paynte forth the
persecutions, the crosses, the prysonme^tes, the bonds, and torments, that
they may discern them, as if they were present before the^. C.
Notwithstanding, it may be, that Matthewe sets the talk had at diverse
times in one place, as if it had been spoken all at one time. Luke. 10.
For Luke says, that the same things were spoken to the three score and ten
disciples, which were joined to the Apostels. This truly is without all
controversy and doubt, that the success of the journey, which they now took
upon them, was not forshewed by the these words but that the disciples were
rather fore warned of the whole race of their Apostelship.

As sheep among. Bu. This truly is a worthy image and spectacle, expressing
and setting forth, the great danger and peril which hangs over all the
heads of those that are preachers. Than the sheep nothing is more simple, more
innocent, and more cowardishe or dastardlike. But by sheep, perfect men, and
innocent, which depend only upon ye providence of God, are understood. Such
Christ calls his, because they should be the servants of the lord,
destitute of all the help of man, that they acknowledging them selves to be
sheep, may have respect to their shepeherde, and to become and prepare them
selves as sheep appointed to be slain. Bu. But among all the fowerfooted
beasts of the earth, there is nothing more ravening, The pr^chers o^ Gospe^
often ^shepe (...) to the ^ter.
more gredy, and more crueller then the Wolf. Therefore search, covetous, and
cruel men, and the insaciable tyrauntes of this world, are signified by
Wolves. But how cruel and desirous of blood soever men be, Wol^ this (...)
God can mittigate and assuage their cruelty, which at his pleasure tameth
the wild and cruel beast. In that therefore God suffers ye greatest part
of men to despise his Gospel, and seeks not to tame them, he does it to try
and exercise his ministers. And although all men by nature are Wolves, which
are not regenerate by the spirit of mekenes, notwithstanding, Christ here
speaks specially of those which are furious enemies to the Gospel: who
hearing the voice of the shepeherde or pastor are so far from mekenes that
they run headlong into all madness. The Lord therefore sends forth his
ministers, to be among the Wolves and tyrauntes of this world, to have many
enemies against them, and to be compassed about with many dangers, to the
end they might discharge their office and duty with great trouble. And to
the end their probation and trial might be the more sharp, he commits
not unto them weapons to defend them selves by violence and strong hand, but
unarmed and naked, he offers them to the teethe of the Wolves. Be ye
therefore wise as Serpents. C. That is, be ye circumspecte, and take heed of
all things, after ye be in the mids of Wolves least ye offend, and receive
some harm: but notwithstanding be ye subtyle sober and wise, that you do
injury to no man, that you break not the bond of charity, yea, direct your
wisdom only to this end that ye may proffite many by preachinge of the
Gospel. A. The which, (fear of all men being laid a part) ye ought boldly
to preach. The effect therefore is this, that they ought so to temper their
wisdom in taking head, that they be not to fearful, and slow in executing
their office. For we see that such as will be compted circumspect and ware in
their office, are very fearful and neglygent.

It behooved trewly the disciples of Christ being beset with dangers on every
side, to be vigilant and ware: but because the greattest danger was, least
they should be let by slouthfulnes, and negligence, he commands them to
follow with all sincerity, their vocation. And this he expresses by a double
similitude. ^ome and ^ency is ^ed of (...)
Serpents, knowinge that they are hated of all things, they declyne and
shonne, with great care, what soever is ennemie unto them: even so, the care
of life is commanded to the faithful, least they should rashely danger them
selves, and willingly commyt them selves to every peril. On the contrary
part, the doves, although they are fearful by nature, and subject to many
harms, yet notwithstanding, they flee symplely, loking always to be stricken,
and do often times submit them selves to the snares of the destroier. To this
simplicity, Christ exhorts his disciples, least that to much fear should
let them in ronninge their race. A. To this spiritual wisdom, and Christian
symplicitie, not only the ministers, but also al men ought to give them
selves. B. As the Apostell Paul exhorts, (...) 5.
saying. Take heed therefore how ye walk circumspectly: not as unwise, but
as wise men, redemynge the time, because the days are evil. wherefore be ye
not unwise, but understand what the will of the lord is. And in an other
place he says, (...). 4.
Walk wiselye toward them that are without, and lose no opportunity. C. Let
this wisdom therefore of the serpents, teach us which are Christians, to
beware and take heed of wicked men, and the crafty assaults of Satan, least
we admytte any thing against the will and glory of God.

To be short, we se here, that all the carnal wisdom of this world, is
condemned of Christ, upon the which, the grettest part of men, do to much
ground them selves, when they look this way and that way, and round about
them, where they may be in safety. And so fearing to danger them selves,
they do at length quite renounce Christ.

17 But beware of men, for they shall deliver you up to the councelles, and
shall scourge you in their Synagogges

Bevvare of men. A. Although many restrain this place to them only, whom
before Christ called woulues, yet notwithstanding, it is better to take it
indefinitely: as if he should have said, ye must walk wiselye among men, who
are altogether for the most part full of harm and deceit. C. But Christ by
these words seems to be contrary to him self. Answer.
that here is noted an other kind of taking heed, not that they should
depart from their office, being dysmayed with fear, but that they should not
be troubled out of measure, when euyls do arise at a sodeine. For we do see
that many men being beset with danger on every side, unlooked for, do faynte
and quail by and by. Christ therefore would have his disciples se before
hand, what would follow afterward, that they might frame and prepare their
minds betime to suffer trouble. To conclude, Security must be avoided.
he soundethe the trompet unto them, that they might with the better cheer
and courage prepare them selves to the battle. For as to much forecast does
weaken and dyscourage some, even so to much securytie and carelesnes, does
make at it were other some drunk, so that in soddaine desstruction they perish.

For they shall deliver you up. M. Now he shows the reason wherefore his
Apostelles should take heed of men: because they should suffer much evil at
their hands. He says not, They will goo about to deliver you, or to beat
you, or to betraye you, but most certainly he affirms that they shall deliver
them up to the counselles in deed, and scourge them. C. By the which words
we may easily gather, that those troubles which Christ now declares to his
Apostels, ought not to be restrained to the first expedition or sendyng forth,
in the which they had no experience of any such thing. This was the end of the
forewarninge of Christ, that they should not be dysmaied with fear at any
time because it was a rare virtue, and seldom seen, for poor men when they
came in ye presence of princes, to be of stout mind, and to be troubled with
worldely tumulte.

To the counselles. E. The Greek word Synedrion, signifies the sitting of
the senators, and judges, and chief of the people, which we commonly call the
sessions. And shall scourge you in their Sy. B. The greek word signifies the
temples where the people met together, it signifies also the assemblies of
people, as in this place.

M. Hereby trewely we may note that the adversaries of Christ, although they
show them selves to be wulues and brute beasts, rather then men, yet
notwithstanding they would seem to condemn the ministers of Christ, The
subtlety of tyrants.
as schismatikes and seditiouse persons, not by violence, but by just
judgment, by law, by the consent of the people, and by publyque authority,
when as in deed these kind of men, neither regard people nor maiestrate: but
do only seek with earnest study, to abuse their affections, ye nothing might
seem to be done of hatred, or of a sinister affection, but by law and
conscience. After this manner when they had taken Christ him self by their
soldiers, and might have slain him out of hand without any more busynes,
they did rather seek first to bring him before the counsel of the elders and
high priests, and there to condemn him: then being condemned by the
authority and consent of the counsel, he was delivered to the deputy to be
ponyshed, who brought him to the people to be condemned, and afterward was
scourged of him, and delivered again to the people to be put to death Hereupon
the Evangelists Mark and Luke write at large. Mark. 14 Luke. 22.
After the same manner Peter and John, Acts. 4.5.6.7.
were violently handled, and all the rest of the Apostels. And of Peter being
bound, it is said, that Herod after the passover would bring him forth to
the people. Steven also was brought before the counsel.

18 And ye shall be brought to the head rulers, and kings for my sake, in
witness to them and to the Gentiles.

And ye shall be brought to the head rulers. C. By these words Christ
admonished the dysciples that they must not only fight in Iewry, but in
places of farther distance, that by long preparation, they might arm them
selves to war. M. By this place also we se that Christ had an evil opinion
of all the pote^tates of the world, and not without cause: For look how much
more dignity they are of in this world, and the more power and authority
they have, The p^tes of (...) world^ ^nemies
so much the more are they given to persecute Christ and his doctrine,
whether they be counsels, common assemblies, maiestrates, or kings: that is,
the whole seat of judgment, all the power of the world, which was ordained
of God to the ponishement of the wicked, and to the praise and mayntenaunce of
the good and godly. Whereby it appears, that Satan, the prince of this world,
has obtained tyranny in this world, to stir up all the force of the
world, against Christ the son of God, and that in so perverse a manner, that
he has made that power, rule, and authority, which by God was appointed to
ponishe the wicked, and to suppress all impiety, to defend his own kingdom,
and to impugn and resist the kyngedome of Christ. Sath^ ^deth (...) of tu^
And that which is most subtle, and craftye of all other, is this: he does
so handell and use the matter, that he makes the maiestrates, princes, and
kings believe, that they do good service unto God, when as in deed they do
the contrary, and are such, of whom Christ speaks, saying. The hour will
come, John. ^ Math ^ Math^ Luk^
in the which, who so ever kylleth you, will thinck that he does god good
service. For my sake. M. that is as much to say for my names sake. In
witness to them. C. The sense and meaning of this place, is this that ye
disciples must witness the will of God to forrayne princes, and far
countries, to the end they might be inexcusable. A. Herby let the ministers of
the word learn, that their labor is not in vain, although they be
rejected of wicked men, because the word that they preach, shall be a
testimony in the day of judgment against them.

19. But when they deliver you up. take ye no thought, how or what ye shall
speak: for it shall be given you even in the same hour what ye shall speak.

But when they deliver you up. B. After he had admonished them of the great
and manifold dangers which were at hand, he now shows them by whose aid
and help they shall overcome them, to the end he might comfort them. C.
For Christ in vain, should have exhorted his disciples an hundred times,
except he had promised unto them also that God should be their helper, and
that also by his power they should certaynely have the upper hand. Herby we
may gather, that it was far from the purpose and meaning of Christ, to
discourage his disciples, by telling them of the perils to come, they being
before very desirouse no doubt to discharge their duty. It is a great
thing trewelye to abide the countenauce of princes: for not only the fear,
but shamefastnes also, does oftentimes abashe, and beat down the minds of
good men, What then if princes in a rage and angrye mode burst forth, and do
thonder at it were? Christ notwithstanding would not have his disciples to be
careful: because the holy ghost shall put in their mouths what to speak For
the more a man knowing his imbecillitie, distrusteth him self, the more he
fears, except he know from whence to have help. And we do see, that many
do therefore faynte and quail, because they measure the success of those
things which they take in hand, by their strength, which in deed is either
very small, or none at all. ^rou^ ^ught ^d vp^ only.
Christ therefore forbyddeth his dysciples to have respect what theye are
able to do, or what they may bring to pass by their own might, and
commands them to depend only upon the trust of gods grace, and might.
B. For he promyseth them health and victory, not that thereby their life
should be in sauegarde, but because the glory of the gospel should triumph,
and stand irremoueable. As this is much more dear unto Christians then the
other, so theye cannot live amiss, when the glory of the Gospel florisheth.
Take ye no thought. E. Or be not careful. The greek word signifies to
think, carefully or pensiuely. C. Then Christ would not have his Appostells
void of all care: because it was profitable to have them somewhat careful, to
the end they might ask with an earnest mind, by prayer, Immoderate care is here
condemned.
ye spirit which Christ promises unto the^: but pensiueful care, with the
which men do to much trouble them selves, he takes away.

For while they consider with the^ selves what shall come to pass, if they do
this, or that, and rest not them selves in the providence of God, they are
myserablely disquieted. And trewely they are worthy of such disquietnes and
vexation, which do not attrybute this honor to the providence of God which
in deed is able to help and deliver them from all tourmente in due time.

20 For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks
in you.

For it is not ye that speak. A. As if he should say, ye ought not to
measure constancy by your own strength, which in deed is most necessary
in the presence of kings. Give this glory therefore unto God, and doubt not but
that he will give it unto you, although your own strength fail you: ye must
believe that there is nothing so hard, but that be in you is able to overcome
the same.

C. Neither do I speak here, of your faculty and power, but of the power of
the holy ghost, which directs the tongues of the faithful, to the pure
confession of Faith. And least they should be terryfied by their present
imperfection and lack, he promyseth unto them, that they shall receive help
and aid even in a moment. Help comes from the lord in time of need.
For often times the lord does leave the faithful destitute and without the
gift of eloquence, so long as he requires no testimony of them, but when
necessitye requires, he makes those which before were as dombe men, passing
eloquente. Even so in our time we have seen diverse martyrs, which when they
were rude, being called to the confessyng and publishinge of their faith,
have wonderfully excelled in the gift of eloquence, and apt speakinge. M.
Therefore Christ more plainly in an other place says, Take ye no thought,
how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall speak. For the holy ghost
shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.

But the spirit of your father. M. This (says he) ought to satifie you, that
the spirit of God shall be present with you. For wisdom and fortitude is
requisite, which things he will bestow plentifully upon you. Consider you
that you are unable to do this of your selves, but the lord by his holy
spirit will help you.

M. This place teaches us, of what authority, credit and estimation the
wrytynges of the Apostelles ought to be amongeste us. The credit and
aucthoritye of the Apostles writings.
For if the spirit of God spoke in the Apostelles, why should we not esteem
of their words, as of the words that proceed out of the mouth of God. Seeing
they have this testimony of Christ, we can not be deceived in obeyinge their
godly doctrine. But we may err if we follow and credit them which boast of
the succession of the Apostelles, in whom no spark of the spirit of God,
neither by life nor doctrine does appear. That gross dulnes and obstinate
blyndnes of the woorlde is to be lamented, by the which it has been brought
to pass, that those, in whom the spirit of God spoke, have been slain. The
Prophets and Apostelles spoke boldelye, and constantly preached the Gospel,
by the feruentnesse of the spyrite of God and yet notwithstanding they were
counted as seducers, and were slain, and that of the people of God. This so
great obstinacye therefore of the world, is to be left to the just judgment
of God.

21 The brother shall deliver up the brother unto death, and the father the
son: and the children shall arise against their fathers and mothers, and
shall put them to death.

B. He does greatly express the danger, to the end he might give them
forewarninges, and also strengthen and comfort them. For nothing in the whole
world can be safe, sure, and certain unto them, which will publish and set
forth the Gospel: no in this case they may scant trust their own brethren,
their children, or their parents. For the word of Christ abides for ever,
Math. 12.
when he says: he that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers
not with me, scatters abroad. Sath^ doth^ alwa^ ^gain^
Satan with all his kingdom and power, houldeth continual war against
Christ and his kingdom, the which furor and outrageous rebellion, no force
of nature is able to wythstande. 2. Ti^
For he has the wicked as bond and captyue, at his will and pleasure. Therefore
it is in his hand to stir and set brother against brother, the son against
the father, and the father against the son, yea to set all men one against
another.

C. Notwithstanding they are deceived, which think that this does only happen
to the faithful, to be delivered of their brethren to death. For it may be
that the father persecute the son of a good zeal, if he perceive him to be
an Apostata, and one that declyneth from the sincere worshyping of god: Deu^
yea the Lord in this case byddeth us to forget flesh and blood, and to
revenge and defend the glory of his name: Neither (truly) do all men spare
their kinsmen, where the fear of God and relygion does floryshe, but had
rather that all should perish, if necessity did so require, then that the
kingdom of Christ should decay in any one point, and that the Doctrine of
salvation should be extinguished, and the true worship of God abolished.
Wherefore if we were godly minded, this one thing were a just occasion of
hatred, the which although it seem contrary to nature that one brother should
hate another, yet does our savior Christ here affirm, that it shall come to
pass for his names sake that it may be fulfilled which he says in another
place: I am not come into the world to bring peace, but a sword.

22 And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake, but he that continues
to the end shall be safe.

and ye shall be hated Hear our savior Christ foresheweth that his Disciples
shall be hated of all men, Math^ Math^
that is of all evil men, for many be called but few are chosen. For my sake
That is for me, as is showed before. Here we must note that it is the part of
Christians, so to live, so to behave theymselues, and so to suffer all things,
that Christ only may be the cause of the hatred and persecution which they
suffer. ^^n is ^^e of a (...) man.
This therefore is and ought to be a comfort unto us, that if we suffer for
Christ, the^ are we his, then are we chose^ out of the world, then shall we say
with the apostel Paul: We labor and suffer rebuke, ^o. 4
because we have a steadfast hope in the lyuinge God, which is the savior of
all men, specially of those that believe. But he that continues. ^^rance ^de.
B. This promise of health is a great consolation and comfort, in so much,
that how great so ever the dangers be, if faith be present, it is able to
lift up a discouraged faint heart. For he that only continues to the end,
committinge him self under the tuition and protection of the Lord, he (I
say) at the length shall be safe, although he be delivered to the death, and
hated of al men. This safety and health is promised not by resistinge, (...) 1.
but by sufferynge as the lord more plainly in another place declares, saying.
In patience possess your souls. This truly is a wonderful consolation. They
which fight under princes ar doutful of the victory: ^arde ^e^
but Christ here promises victory without al doubt, to the^ that fight to the
end. A. Let us not therefore fear or doubt to fight for the glory of God
although ye whole world rise against us, because a happy and prosperous end is
promised unto us of the son of God, which is a faithful keeper of our
salvation, (...) per^ to (...).
if we continue. To the end. This teaches us that it is not true patience
which continues not to the end. Many men say, Is it possible for any man to
suffer these things continually? Trewly whatsoever he be that suffers the
trouble that is laid upon him for Christ's sake, may continue without
yrkesomnes to the last cast, yea to the very end. We must not therefore call
to mind how long, (...) 9.
but we must have respect unto the end. Hereupon the Apostell says, So
run that ye may obtain. (...) 12.
Also, Stretche forth the hands that were let down, (...). 12. a.
and the weak knees. And in an other place. Let us run with patience unto
the battle, that is set before us, lokinge unto Jesus, the captain and
fynisher of our faith, and so forth. What does it proffite a man to labor in
the silver mine, and to saint before he attain the syghte of the silver.
Does he not lose all his labor and travail? yes undoubtedly. What does it
proffe the ronner to run, if he faynte in the myddest of the race, shall he
have the game or reward? No undoubtedly. Not without cause therefore does
the Scripture in so many places exhort us to patience and perseueraunce. Hebr.
6
Let us not therefore be weak or feeble, but followers of them which receive
by faith and patience the inheritance of promise, which is everlasting life,
after the travail and pain of this life.

23 But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into an other. For
verily I say unto you, ye shall not goo through all the cities of Israel,
til the son of man be come.

When they persecute. C. By these words Christ preuenteth that which might
be objected thus. If we must bear the hatred of all men in the world, when
shall there be an end? Chist answers, Answer.
Although ye can be no where in peace and sauegarde, yet must ye not despair:
but when you are cast out of one place, you must prove and try whether your
work and labor may take place in an other. But certain interpretours are
deceived, which thyncke here that this is a bare permission or sufferaunce,
when as Christ rather commanded his Apostels to do that which he would have
done. For he which has suffered one persecution, would willingly give over by
and by, like unto an old beaten soldier, which being once maimed in the
wars, goes no more to the same, but lives on his pe^tion at home in peace.
The souldyers of Christ must fight in the battle of this life to the end.
But Christ here gives no such vacatio^ and ease to his soldiers, but will
have them without ceassing to pass through to the end. To be short, the
apostels are commanded so sone as one battle is done to begin a new, and not
to think them selves absolved or dismissed, for fightinge two or three fields
Neither are they permytted to flee into caves and dens, where they may lie ydel:
but although their labor com not to good succes in one place, ye lord exhorts
the^ to go forward, M. yt if ye gospel of his kingdom will not be admytted in
one place, they preach the same in an other, without delay. C. But under the
commandment there is also some liberty granted. For we must thus think of
flying persecution. All that fly persecution, Persecution may be eschewed.
are not presysely to be condemned: neither is flyeing in all points without
exception, lawefull. Many of the aunciente fathers in time paste were to
earnest in this point, which condemned flight in persecution, no less then a
certain kind of denying Christ. For if this were true, some part of
ignominy should redounde to Christ and his Apostels. Again, if it were
lawefull to fly without difference or exception, there should be no difference
in persecution, between the good shepeherd and the hiered servant. We must
observe therefore the mean which saint Augustine prescribes to Honoratus,
August. ad Honor.
least any man forsaking his abode or hold, for fear, should either betray
his flock into the hands of the enemy, or else give a cowardly example: and
yet notwithstanding says he, let no man rashely danger him self. If any
urgent matter require, it is necessary that the Pastor venture his life for the
flock, but if there be no great necessity, it may be that his absence may
proffite the church of God more.

Verily I say unto you. C. This can not be referred to the first sending out
of the disciples, but ought rather to be referred to the whole Apostelship.
Notwithstanding, in this there is some hardness, what the coming of the son
of man here signifies. Some expound it to be such good success of the
Gospel, that all men should acknowledge the kingdom of Christ, and should
look for the renewing of the kingdom of David at his hands, And some refer
it to the destruction of Jerusalem, in the which Christ showed him self to be
a revenger of their ingratitude. But it rather seems to be a consolation given
to the Apostels specially. Christ is said to come when he does remedy those
things that were paste hope. Christ therefore promised that he would come,
namely by the power of his spirit, to declare his kingdom, that the glory
and majesty might appear unto the Apostels, which as yet was unto the^
unknown.

24 The disciple is not above his master, neither is the servant above his
lord.

B. Now the lord exhorts them according to the commandment before given,
all fear of perils and dangers set aside, to preach the Gospel bouldly, and
with a stout courage, throughout the whole province. And first he confirms
them by the example of him self, who being their Lord and master, suffered
great persecution, and had greater torment to come: and that which was most
detestable of all, they called him which proceaded from God, for the health of
man, but specially for the Jews, him (I say) they called Beelzebub, ascribyng
to him the power of deuels, and saying that he had a deuell. For so much as
therefore the master him self, the lord and goodman of the house, had partly
experience of these things already, and had more to come: he does very well
command his disciples, his servants, and household, that they with a willing
mind suffer the like. Truly so great is this consolation, that it takes away
all sorrow and grief, when we consider that we are of like state and
condition with the son of God. Our Savior Christ therefore propounds this
similitude, to the end his disciples might frame them selves according to his
example. We are the disciples of Christ, as he was troubled and suffered the
same patiently, so must we. For it were a shame for us to refuse that whereof
our master thinks no scorn. To this place agrees that in John: The
servant is not greater then his lord, if they did persecute me, they will
also persecute you.

25 It is enough for the disciple, that he be as his master is, and that the
servant be as his lord is. If they have called the lord of the house
Beelzebub: how much more shall they call them of his household so.

C. Christ speaks here not of perfection but of similitude and likeness: as
if he should have said, there is nothing more mete, then that the disciple
frame him self according to his masters example. Therefore the Greek
participle Catertismenos, in Luke does not signify perfect, but apt and fete.

If they have called C. When as Christ calls him self the lord of the house,
it is as much, as if he had called him self the lord of the church: as the
Apostell comparing him to Moses and the Prophets calls the^ the householde
servants, ^ebr, 3.
but him the son and heir. ^are the ^herne of ^^ste.
For although he exalts us to such excellent dignity, that he makes us
his brethren, yet notwithstanding he is the first begotten, and the head of
the whole body, to conclude, in him consists all rule and power. Wherefore
there is nothing more absurd then to desire to be in the number of the
faithful, and to murmur against God, when as he makes us according to the
Image of his son, whom he has made lord over his householde. For to what
end serve the pleasures of this life, if we seek to have place in his house?
To be short, we are to fine and nyce if we disdain to suffer those reproaches
which our lord and king took upon him without grudge.

Beelzebub. B. In all the Greek books, ye last syllable is altered, so that
it is there called Beelzebub. But in Hebrewe it is called (...) Baal-zebub So
they called the chief of the feigned Gods of the Philosophers, whom the
city Accaron worshipped: and the lesser gods were called Baalim, which at
this day in the papacy are called Patrones, or advocates. But for so much as
Baal-zebub is as much to say as the captain or patron of flies, some think
that it was so called of the abundance of sacrifices, which were so many that
the temple did swarm with flies. Others think a great deal better, that
men did call for help at the Idols hands against the flies, which greatly
troubled the place. For when as Ochozias sought for an answer
superstitiousely as concerning his health, of the immage, ^ng. 1.
he called him by the name of Baalzebub. whereby it appears that it was no
name of reproach.

Finally as holy and devout men, translated this name Gehe^na, to hell, to make
the place infamouse: so for the hate and detestynge of the Idol Baalzebub,
they called him the devil. Whereupon we gather, that the reprobate, to the end
they might make Christ detestable to al men. Blasphemy
let not to defame him with opbrobryouse words, as if he had been a devil,
and the greatest ennemy to religion and godliness. Wherefore if it shall chance
us to have the same ignominy: that which begins in the head, and is
finished in the members, ought not to seem new unto us. Ignomy and reproach is
always common to the children of God.
Bu. It is a common custom now adays for the faithful ministers of gods word,
to be called sediciouse, schismatyques, heretics, rebels, churchrobbers, and
charmers, which reproaches we must learn to suffer pacie^tly after the example
of Christ the son of God.

How much more shall they. M. Behold how in the application of the proverb,
Christ had rather say, the lord of the house, and the household, then the
master and the servants. In the which thing he sufficiently declares how much
he would have those yt are his joined unto him: no doubt with the same
affection, John. 15.
with the which he says in an other place, Now I say not that ye are not
servants but friends. Wherefore it can not be but that he has a continual
care of the faithefull, because they are of his householde and friends.

26 Fear them not therefore: For there is nothing close, that shall not be
opened: and nothing hyd, that shall not be known.

Fear them not. M. He gathers ye thing, by the equality before said which he
would persuade, namely yt those enemies are not to be feared which persecute,
eue^ to death. Therefore he says when as they dealt so maliciousely with the
son of God, which excelled al men, ye ought not to be let with any fear, but
ought boldly to discharge your dewetie.

For there is nothing close. C. When the Apostelles should see the Gospel so
contemptyble and despised, and the smaule number of the faythefull also, it
might discourage and make them void of all hope. This doubt Christ helps
by the way, declarynge unto them that the Gospel must be preached a great
deal farther, and that by the same the obstynacye of men, shall at length
be revealed. For although this saying (Nothing is so close, that it shall
not be revealed) is a prouerbiall sentence: here notwithstanding it ought
specially to be restrained to the doctrine of salvation, which Christ
affirms to have in time the upper ba^de, Truth at the length overcomes.
how much so ever men seek to oppress the same, Although this doctrine was
sometime preached in the temple openly, notwithstanding, because it was
rejected, it was hid as it were, as yet in secret corners: but he affirms
that the time will come when the same shall be publyshed openly. The which
thing, as we know within a littell while after, came to pass. And because
this promise might refreshe and chere up their minds, Christ exhorts them
boldly, and manlye to accomplysshe the same, and not to fear, allthoughe the
Gospel as yet seemed unto them base and contemptyble, but to be preachers of
the same.

That shall not be open. A. The old latten translations add, (in time to com)
for the which the Greek text has, which shall not be revealed. That which
is spoken in the fourth chapter of Mark, was spoken peradventure at an other
time, and in an other sense: notwithstanding because they are short sentences,
the matter may agree with this place of Matthew. Mark. 14.
For after that Christ there had commanded the apostels to manifest their light
unto all men, eue^ as burning candels, he adds by and by: There is nothing
secret which shall not be opened. Luke. 8.
But the light of the gospel was kindeled as it were in darkness to the
Apostelles, Luke, 12.
that being lifted up by their ministry, it might shine throughout ye whole
world. M. Yet there seems to be an other use of this proverb, which may be
Joseph, David Susanna, and others. The other use of this proverb serves to
make us shon and avoid all those things yt are evil, because that god being a
just judge, will not suffer ye impiety of the wicked to lie in secret, as
says s Paul. I would not have you judge before the time, until the coming of
the lord, 1. Cor. ^
which shall lighte^ al things that are in darkness, and shall bewray the secrets
of the hearts, the^ shall every man have praise of god. But the first exposition
of all agrees very well with the meaning of Christ

27 what I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in the light. And what ye here in
the ear, that preach ye on the house tops.

M. Christ now goes forward to exhort his disciples, that they think not
them selves to be in secret, or yt they hide not that in darkness which they
have received of him. As if he should say, Those things which I have committed
unto you in darkness, yt is when ye were together alone, would I have made
manifest, that is, I would have you preach the^ openly in the light to all men.
Where ye must now cast away al fear, and show your selves abroad. B. He
sets here light against darkness, he joins to the ear, hearing, and to
the house topps preaching. He means by speaking in darkness, to commit somewhat
to the mind by secret talk. Therefore they speak in the light, which tell
openly and plainly ye which they have heard. Even so, to here or tell in the
ear, is to receive or commit somewhat by private metinge together. For men use
commonly to whisper in the ear when they would not be heard of other me^.
Therefore to preach in the house tops is to disclose to al men yt which was
committed unto them, and openly, manifestly, and plainly to utter that which
was before given the^ in secret. This is spoken according to the manner of that
region, where their houses ar so builded, yt a man may stand or walk upon the
tops of them the ridges of the houses being flat and leaded much like our
galleries. Whereupon it is written in the book of Moses thus. Deuteronomy. ^
When thou buildest a new house you shall make a battelment or wall about the
roof or top of thy house, that thou lade not blood upon thy house if many fall
there from. Iudg^
And in an other place we read thus. And there were upon the roof of the
house about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Sampson played.

28 And fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul. But rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body into
hell.

And fear ye not. B Hitherto christ has armed his apostls aginst ye fear of
infamy. C. and now with a singular reason he animateth and encourages the^
against the fear of death, because men ought to despise this vain and
mortal life, in respect of the immortal and heavenly life, whereunto they are
created. (...) earthly ^aine.
For here consists the some, if the faithful way and consider wherefore they
were borne, and what their state and condition of life is, they shall find that
there is no cause why they should so carefully seek after this earthy and
terrene life. But the words of Christ are more full, and fruiteful: For he
teaches, that the fear of God is dead with the^, which depart from the
confession of the true faith, for the fear of tyrants, and seek not to put
out of their minds a brutishe and beastly stupor, and dullness, which by the
terror of death, makes them to cast from them the confession of the same
faith: for we must note the Antithesis, between the two contrary fears. If
the fear of God be choked, by the fear that is in men, does it not appear,
that we attribute then, more unto them then unto God him self? And so it
follows herevppo^, that we rejecting ye eternal, and celestial life, make our
selves like brute beasts. Only goo has power of everlasting life and death.
Him we neglect, because ye fear of men does withdraw our minds: does it not
plainly appear, that we esteem more our corruptible body, and the lif
thereof, then the everlasting state and condition of the soul? yea, the
heavenly kingdom of God seems nothing so preciouse unto us, as does the
momentany and vanyshyng shadow of this corporal life. Thus therefore the
words of Christ must be resolved: Understand ye, that immortal souls are
given unto you, which being only subject unto the will of God, come not into
the power of men. Wherefore let not your faith quayle, for no terrors or
threteninges of men. For how comes it to pass, that the fear of men does
prevail in the conflict, but only because we esteem more of the body, then of
the soul, and less of everlasting life then of a shaddowe.?

Which kill the body. C. Where as Christ by these words does attribute unto
men power to kill, it is spoken by a certain kind of granting. For God does
oftimes give liberty unto the wicked, that they being puffed up with the
trust of their power, The wicked is desperate.
might venture desperately upon every thing, as though theye could do all
things without harm, but it tourneth at length to their own destruction.
Pylate said unto Christ, know thou not that I have power to crucify thee,
and power also to loose thee?

When as nevertheless, John. 9.
he could do no thing without the permission of God, of whom he received that
power, which he abused, as it is there said. The wicked persuade the^ selves
that they have power to do what they list.
Although therefore in vain the wicked do boaste them selves, as though the
lives of the godly were in their hands, and although God stays and brideleth
their rage and madness, so often as it seems good unto him, yet
notwithstanding they are said to kill by his sufferaunce, because often times
he permytteth them to execute their tyranny.

But are not able to kill the soul. M, Now he reasons of the impotencie and
unableness of tyrants, the which, how so ever they rage and swell can do
harm to nothing, sauinge to the body, because the soul is not in their
hands, neither can they kill the same. Wherefore Luke more plainelye
expresses the same, saying: And after that, Luke. 12.
have no more that they can do. By the which words Christ teaches his
Apostells to contemn and despise the cruelty of tyrants, the which although
it be showed to the extremytie, yet can it not hurt a godly man, as touching
his everlasting health. Tyrants have no power over the soul of man.
Although the wicked by the permission of God, kill the body, it makethe no
matter, they do but fynishe that which Nature had begone, for if they as
instruments had not done it, nature it self would in short time have done the
same. For what is he that shall escape death? But rather fear him, which
is. M. Now by a collation of the divine power of god he proves plainly that
the cruelty of men ought to be despised. As if he should say, If ye
fear those which by some means may hurt and ponyshe, why rather do ye not
fear him, which is able to hurt in every respect, which has power not only
to kill the body, but also the soul, and to cast them both into hell. It is a
small matter to kill the body, because it shall be restored again. For the
tyrant has not destroyed him when he has killed the body of a man. He has
dyminished nothing of our salvation, which has taken away this life, which
at the length al men must forsake whether they will or no at the good pleasure
of God. But he which has made both the body and the soul, he it is only
which can kill not only the body, but also the soul, and that euerlastingely
into hell. Him therefore, if thou be wise fear alone, the which if thou fear
in deed, then shalt thou contemn and set at naught al worldly tyrants also.
C. But when as these two members in one knot do agree, certain ignorant and
unskillful men, take this part severally amiss, affirming ye men ought not to be
feared. For Christ sets the virtuous and holy fear of God against the
perverse fear of men, which withdraws us from the right and perfect way.
Which is able to destroy. M. Of tirantes he said simplely, they kill the
body, but of God he said, which can kill both soul and body. Moreover he
adds, into hell as if he should have said, If you stand so much in fear of
tirants, which hate you, yt you despise the commandment of God your heavenly
father, beware least you seking to save this carnal life, lose not only the
same, but the eternal life also. For your father being provoked to anger, is
able to cast both soul and body into hell. Luke has, Luke. 12.
After he has killed, he is able to destroy and cast into hell. M. These
things S. Paul considered when he said, If I preach the Gospel, I have
nothing to rejoice of, for necessity is put unto me. But woe is it unto me,
1. Cor. 9.
if I preach not the Gospel. To be short, the experyence of al times
teaches us how necessary this exhortation is to the mynisters of Christ, and
generally to all the godly: For there was never any time, in the which men did
not exalt them selves violently against God, and sought not to destroy the
Gospel.

29 Are not two littell sparrowes sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not
fall to the ground without your father.

Are not two litel sparrovves. A. This depends of that which went before.
B. For Christ by this reason armeth his Apostels against the persecution of the
world that nothing can happen unto them without the will of their heavenly
father, Godd^ ^uidenc^
who suffers not vile birds (in comparison) to light upon the ground without
his will. C. By the which words Christ declares that tirantes although they
rage never so much, yet that they have no power upon the body, without his will
to who^ al things in heaven and in earth are subject. Therefore they do very
fo^dly which fear the cruelty and tyrany of men, as though they were not
under the protection of god. So that in perils this is the second consolation
unto us, that for so much as god is the keeper of our life, we may safelye rest
and commit our selves to his providence: yea, we do unto him injury if we
commit not our life unto him because he does vouchesafe to take charge and care
of the same. M. And to the end Christ might evidently prove that which he
goes about to persuade, he uses very fete examples, notwithstanding such as
have need of a special faith. C. For he extends the providence of God
generally to all creatures, that of the more to the less he might declare us
to be saved, defended, and protected, by his tuition. There is nothing of
less price and estimation among us, then sparrowes. For men in times paste, A
(...) conf^
have soulde two sparrowes for a farthing. And as Luke says five for two
farthings: and yet notwithstanding God is ready to defend them, that no harm
happen unto the^ by chance. Will he now thyncke you neglecte the life of man,
which has such a care over sparrowes? no, be ye well assured Christ settethe
not here before you the exaumples of the Patriarchs, or Prophets, in the
which he might declare the providence of God wonderfully, Neither does he
make mentyon of the strong and savage beast, but of the least, of the most
common, and cheapest foul, namelye of the little sparrowe.

Neither does he only bring in the sparrowe, but also the price of the
same, which is small, that one alone bearethe no value or price: and therefore
he is feign to couple two of them together, the price whereof was but a
farthynge, then the which, in money there could be no smaller value.

And one of them lyghteth not to the ground. This is the Hebrew phrase, and is
used instead of, (shall not perish) And it is spoken for this cause, for that
birds, (when they die of their own accord, or when they dye being shot or
killed by any means) do fall to the earth dead: where as otherwise they flee
alofte. M. He says not generally, and they fall not to the ground: but he
says, and one of them does not fall: by the which, he teachethe us that God
has not only a care for us in general, but also particularly for every one
of us For if he have taken charge so of every sparrowe, that not one of them
without his providence and will falls not to the earth: how much more has
he taken charge of men, created, and made, after his own similitude and
likeness?

But this is contrary to the opynion of some, which rather philosophycally
then divinely immagine, that God has not a care over every creature in the
earth, where as Christ affyrmeth, that al creatures are distinctely and
pertycularlye under the hand and protection of God, to the end nothing
should seem to be done by chance. For trewelye the will of God is contrary
to Fortune and chance, ^cle of ^tune ^u^
and we grant, that in the nature yt self of all things there is chance:
but we say, that nothing does happen by the tournynge whele of blind
Fortune where the will of God does govern or bear rule. Without your
father. C That is, without the will of your father. As if he should say, he
is your father, and not the father of sparrowes, how then can he have less
care over you then over sparrowes.

30 Yea, even all the hears of your head are nombered.

Yea, even all the hears of. M. All these things which he has spoken of
hitherto, have a meruaylouse Emphasis and force. For when he might have added,
How much more shall not ye be killed without your fathers will? that one care
might have answered an other: he does not so, but to the end he might
show them that not only their life, but other things also, of small
reputation, and counted of them superfluouse, are in like manner under their
fathers prouydence, he says, All the hears of your headde are nombered. As
if he should say, Not only your life, your bodies, and other things that are
dear unto you, but also your hears, how lyttel so ever they be esteemed, are of
care and charge to your heavenly father, in so much that they are nombered
unto him: So that there is nothing in you, to the which he has not some
respect. For he says not in vain they Are nombered. that he might show
forth a singular and special care. For all things that are nombered and
told, are nombered to the end none of them whereof we keep tale, should at
any time be lost. To the which effect pertayneth this word of the
preterperfect tence, or time which is already past, which he uses here. For he
says not they shallbe nombered in time to come, The care of the lord for his
children.
but they are already nombred. As if he should say, even from the time of
your creation, the Lord has taken and does take charge of you. C. Wherefore
we must consider the providence of God, not as vain and curyouse men do, but
that we may have matter of trust and confidence, and be styrred to the
invocation and calling upon God.

31 Fear ye not therefore, For ye are of more value then many sparrowes.

Fear ye not M. Now he concludes that they must not fear, and also
exhorts his discyples to lift up their minds.

B. As if he should say, if God have so great a care for you, be not a fearde,
but go to and discharge your deuty with a bold and constante mind. This
truly brings great consolation if a man conceive the same in his mind with
a sure and vndoutted faith. For all things are dispensed and given by the
hands of God, without whose prouydence the least thing in the whole world can
not be brought to pass. Ye are much better then. C. This generally is true
of all men, for whose sake sparrows were created, notwithstanding this is
properly spoken of the sons of God, who excel otherways, then by the right
of creation. 1. Petr. 1.
A. For they are borne a new not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the
word of God, which lives and lasts for ever. C. But this dignity
pertains no other wise unto men, then by the free estimation and grace of
God, which vouchesaueth to receive the unworthy, as worthy. Bu. Since Christ
therefore says, ye are much better to your father then sparrowes: there is no
cause why ye should be afraid of men, who are under the subjection of God.
Therefore leave the care of your life and death unto him, neither be ye
dismayed for any fear of the wicked, because he can rerestraine their force,
and frustrate their deuyses and imaginations against you.

32 Every one therefore that confesses me before men, him will I acknoweledge
also before my father which is in heaven.

M. The Greek text has, whosoever acknowledges in me, I will acknowledge in
him, Instead of, whosoever acknowledges me, I will acknowledge him.

For he spoke thus (as the new interpretroure thinks) according to the
manner of speech of the Hebrews, who often times use this letter (...),
which serves in steed of the preposition. In.

C. Now Christ amplifieth that which he spoke eue^ now of the contempt of
death, to this present use and purpose: because we must fight against the
horroure of death, least that the same do call us from the true confession
of the Faith, which God most strayghtly requires, and the world refuses.
Therefore it was necessary that the disciples of Christ were strong, and of a
hauty stomach, to this end, that they might be alwais ready to martyrdom.
M. For here the argument is taken for true equytie. For what can be more
right and just, then to have that servant denied of his lord in the time
of his glory, and victory, which denied him in the time of war? Again,
what can be more pleasant, then to have the servant acknoweledged in the time
of the glory of his master, which in the time of humylitie and persecution,
claue unto him. with all force and might, even to the basardinge of his life.

C. Therefore the confession of Christ, The^ on (...) is (...) all (...)
although it be neglected of the greatest part of men, as a tryffel: Here
notwithstanding it is accounted of, as a special worship of God, and a
singular exercise of pyetie: and not without great cause. For if that
earthely kings, for the defending and mayntainyng of their glory and renoume,
and for the encreasynge of their richesse, call their subjects to armoure, and
appoint them to war, why should not the faithful supporte, defend, and
maynteine the glory of the heavenly king, at least with their tongue? Wherefore
it is most sure that they extinguishe and deface the faith, (so much as in them
lies) which inwardly suppress the same, as though the outewarde profession
were superfluouse and vain. For Christ does not call us here his witnesses in
vain, by whose mouth his name in this world is celebrated and glorified.
Christ I say, will have the profession of his name set against al false
religion: and because it is an odiouse thing, he bids us to declare a
testimonye, F^ be^ wr^ m^
to witness, or to acknowledge, because he would not have the faith of men lie
hidden in their hearts, but openly pronounced and set forth unto me^ And
whosoever hides and keeps this faith silent, does he not frustrate the son
of God, and shut him self also out of the doors, and expulse him self as none
of his family? There is required trewely a more plain and manifest confession
of the faith, of such as are teachers, then of private men: furthermore,
because all men have not faith alike by measure, he which has the most of the
spirit, ought to give the greatteste ensaumple: notwithstanding there is no
faythefull man, whom the Son of God requires not to be a witness.

For that which Peter commaundethe pertayneth to all the faithful, when he
says, Sanctify the lord in your hearts: Be ready always to give an answer
1. P^
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. In the
which place, hope is taken for says. C. But where, when, how often, how,
and to what end our faith ought to be professed, it were a hard matter to
constitute any certain law: but the occasion must be considered, least that
every one of us in time neglecte our duty. Moreover, we must crave at the
hands of the lord the spirit of fortitude and wisdom, the which being our
guide, we shall know what we ought to do, and observe also that which he has
commanded.

Bu. Finally, to profess Christ in this place, is truly to publyshe the
truth of the Gospel, that is constantly to acknowledge Christ to be perfect
God and man, and to be the only salvation and righteousness of the world, by
the which the faithful are justified. Hereby we see that it is not enoughe for
a Christian man to have Christ in his heart, unless also he profess him openly
before men according to the measure of the faith that is given unto him, (as we
said even now) according to his office and calling, and as opportunity shall
serve. If any man therefore be called to the confession of the faith before
Tyrauntes, then ought he openly and plainly to confess Christ, even as if
God him self should require testimony of him. The which that he may do in
deed, he ought to pray unto God, that he would vouchesafe to give him a sure
trust and confidence with the spirit of boldness. B. Again, Christ is
denied, when we do not acknowledge him to be true God and man, when we deny
him to be our Savior, our righteousness and redemer, and when we think not his
doctrine to be the infallible truth, or when we are ashamed of him, (...). 26.
either for malice, conte^pte, or fear. Of contempt and malice that wicked
king Iulianus denied Christ: ^ers of ^^te.
for fear, Peter denied him. At this day the Jews and Turks not knowing the
mysteries of the gospel, do maliciously deny him. They deny him for fear,
which either by the terror of death, of torment, of banishement, or of
prysonme^t being asked of the magistrate. do deny them selves to be lovers of
the Gospel. But some willingly and without constrainte, do confess Christ to
be the only priest the mediator, He that confesses not Christ outhe
dishonor Christ.
and the only everlasting sacrifice of the faithful, purgation, redemption
and righteousness. Whosoever now acknowelegeth not this, he does plainly deny
Christ and not only deny him, but he takes away also the glory of his name.

Him will I confess also. M. That is, whosoever acknowledges me for his
lord and only Savior, and is not ashamed (as says Mark and Luke) of my
doctrine before men, but boldly and truly confesses the same: him also will I
acknowledge for mine, and commend him to my father. There is a promise
therefore added here, which should inflame our hearts, and make us zelouse in
this behalf. For how much does the promise excede that which he requires?
Surely there is almost no comparison, saving that it pleases him of his
merciful liberality to bestow it upon us.

33 But whosoever denies me before men, him will I deny also before my father
which is in heaven.

M. Mark somewhat more at large affirms this, saying: Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me and of my words, in this aduouterous and sinful generatiom:
Mark. 8.
Of him also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of
his father with the holy angels. Luke. 9.
Luke in like manner has the same words almost in effect. C. If therefore
the promise before, be not sufficient, to encourage us to acknowledge Christ,
then let us give ear, to the severe threatninge, that Christ when he shall
come to judge the world, shall deny al, which for fear, shame, or contempt,
have denied him before men. Now let the enemies of the cross of Christ go and
flatter them selves in their dissimulation, when as Christ does blotte them
out of the book of life. For whom shall God at the last take for his
children, but those which are offered unto him by Christ. Where as Christ is
said to come in the glory of his father and of the angels, the meaning is,
that his glory shall be reveled plainly to the whole world.

34 Suppose not that I came to send peace into the earth: No I came not to
send peace but a swearde.

Suppose not that I came. C. By these words our Savior Christ declares,
that he should not need the labor, help, and ministry of his apostels, if the
whole world with one consent, would subscribe to his Gospel. But because the
greatest part is not only against it, but seeks diligently to ouerwhelme the
same, we cannot without contention and the hatred of many men acknowledge
Christ. Christ therefore admonishes his Apostles to prepare them selves to
the battle, because it is necessary that they war which profess the
Gospel And so he preuenteth two offenses, which otherwise might have troubled
and disquieted the minds of the weak. For when as the Prophets promised
every where, that the state of the kingdom of Christ should be quiet and
peaceable, what could the Apostels look for, but that all things should be
quiet, and in peace whersoeuer they came? Now for somuche as Christ is our
peace, and the Gospel also does reconcile us unto God, Answer.
and in the consciences of the godly: and it comes not to the unbelievers
though it be offered unto them: they will never the sooner also come into the
grace and favor of God: Whereby it comes to pass that the Embassage of
peace works in them, the greater disquietnes and tumulte. For, because Satan
which reigns among the reprobate, and bears rule in them, is mad, and
rages against the name of Christ, so sone as the doctrine of the Gospel is
published, their impiety which before lay a sleep, is now awaked, and
styrred up. So that Christ which properly is the author of peace, for the
malice of me^, is made the cause of tumulte. Whereupon Christ says here,
think not that I am come to send peace, but a sword. Bu. As if he should
say, Christ ^swer^^ wyck^^
I would not have any of mine to think that I came into the world to bring
such peace, as the world looks for, and desires, namely a secure,
voluptuous and luxurious peace. For Christ is not the author of sin, or the
fautor and mainteiner of vice and wickedness.

No I came not to send peace. Bu. Christ truly is the prince of peace, and his
kingdom is the kingdom of peace. John ^
For he gives peace unto those that are his, and he leaves to them peace, but
that peace which the world can not give, yea that peace, which the world can
not abide but hates. Chri^ peace^ godly.
For the peace of Christ passes all understanding, and is the peace of
consciences, by the which we agree with God, whose wrath we believe to be
appeased for Christ's sake: and therefore we walk in his commandments, and
we avoid the co^cupiscences of the flesh, we agree with all good men, and we
contend against all euel and perverse men. The mundane peace has respect to
nothing, but to that which pertayneth to the world. S. This therefore is the
conditition of the Gospel, to stir up discord among men, Gene^
although not by his own nature, but because that is the doctrine of the
Gospel which the deuell hates, that is Christ whose heel the Serpent
seeks to hurt. Moreover, because the Gospel reproves the world and the
wickedness thereof, therefore it is hated and evil spoken of, according to the
saying of Christ in an other place. The world loves darkness more then
light, because their deeds are euel. And for this cause, ye Gospel is called
a swerd, that is an instrument of war, by occasion. C. Hereby let us learn
how wicked we are by nature, which do not only despise so precious a gift and
jewel, but also impute to it all kind of evil: When as in deed it is ye right
way, the straight pathe, and ordinary mean to bring us to all virtue, to all
quietness, and to direct our steps to ye everlasting life in heaven.

35 For I am come to set a man at variau^ce against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against the mother in
law.

For I am come to set. E. The Greek word for the which, the old
interpretour has separate, signifies to divide that into two which before
was united and joined in one. The which thing Chrisostom also notes writing
upon this place.

Furthermore, in this place man is put for son, according to the Hebrewe
phrase, for he says, a man against his father. M. To the end Christ might
express and declare, that this discord should not be after the common manner,
or wonted sort, he brings in the degrees of consanguinitie and nature,
affirming that he will separate them with the sword, which he came to send
into the world. For among those persons, there were chiefly wont to arise
for the words sake bitter and cruel contentio^s. For the more the persons by
nature are joined together, the greater and more sharp is the contention
between them. When the Gospel is preached and received of the son, ^p^ ^ture
^se of
but rejected of the father, by and by, mutual discord does arise, which in
deed does properly spring of the dissimilitude and variety of the minds, not
of the Gospel or lord him self. For this happens through the fault of the
wicked (as we said even now) contrary to the nature of the Gospel. (...). 4.
That which the Prophet Malachy teaches of John the Baptiste, belongs to
all the ministers of Christ, namely that they are sent to this end, to
turn the hearts of fathers to their children, and the hearts of children
toward their fathers. ^e^s ^^ed ^e ^hri^e.
And truly the malice of ye wicked brings to pass, that they which before
were joined together, are so sone as they hear the voice of Christ,
separated, and divided into contrary parts. A. To conclude, Curssed be that
peace whose bond is not the only truth of Christ.

36 And a man's enemies shall be they of his own household.

Bu. This does the Gospel in these days bring to pass, that they which
were in time paste of the household, that is special friends and
acquaintance, shall be afterward enemies and strangers one to an other. So
that Christ foresheweth that they in the world shall come to such confusion,
that the law of nature shall not be regarded, and all humanity quite
banished. For when the Prophet Micheas does bewail the case of those whose
enemies shall be of their own house, Miche. 7.
he declares the destruction and confusion to come. The like our Savior
Christ affirms, shall come to pass, when his Gospel is preached: which at
an other time had been incredyble.

Bu. But here the godly have great need of wisdom and warines, being
conuersaunt among them, with whom there is nothing in safegarde: to the end
they may seek for help at the hands of God. C. Neither does Christ mean
that this shall endure always, that they of one household, shall have
dissension still among them selves for the Gospel, as certain curious men
imagine, who think that they cannot be the disciples of Christ, without they be
banyshed from their parents, from their wife children, and household: But
rather all lawefull conjunction is fulfilled and accomplished in the unity of
faith. Christ only admonishes his disciples that they be not troubled so
often as such debate and discord happens, but rather to consider the
sayings of the Prophets, by the which they may comfort them selves again.

37 He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me: And he
that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.

He that loves father or mother. C. Because this is very straighte and sharp
for ama^ to make those his enemies, which should by nature be most nere unto
him, therefore Christ says now, that without it come so to pass we cannot
be his disciples. He hiddeth us not put from us humane affections, natural
inclination, or mutual love: but only he goes about to restrain all that
is of such mutual love among men, that godliness and true religion can not
have the pre-eminence. Let the husband therefore love the wife, Humane love
ought not to withdraw us from the spiritual love of Christ.
the father his son, and the son his father, but so that their humane love
withdraw them not from the spiritual love of Christ, which is to observe
and keep that which he commands.

Bu. All things therefore that are in the world, be they never so precious,
never so dear unto us, ought to be despised for Christ's sake, and the truth
of the Gospel. For the lord names a most straight bond, in the which he
comprehends al things that are dear unto us, as glory, fame, honors,
riches, friends, pare^tes, wife, children, goods, lands, and all things that
God has lent unto us. Yea and in Luke he uses a more severe saying: Luke 4.
If any man come unto me, and hates not or forsakes not father and mother,
wife and children, sister and brother, yea, and his own soul, he cannot be my
disciple: But all in one sense.

R. For Christ teaches us that we must not seek for the terreine and
corporal felicity of this world in his kingdom. And to hate, in that place
of Luke is not taken in evil part, as to envy the parents, the wife and
children, or in malice to vex and trouble them: But thou must have such an
affection toward them, that thou love the son of God nevertheless above
all things. Of this holy and devout hatred, we have a worthy example in
Abraham, Gene. 22.
who had rather be cruel toward his only son, even to the death, then he
would in any point show him self disobedient unto God. C. To be short, if
the love of our fre^des hinder us in followyng Christ, we must boldly resist
the same, Philip. 3.
as did S. Paul who accoumpted those things that were vauntage unto him,
loss, for Christ's sake. Is not worthy of me. Instead of this Luke has, he
cannot be my disciple.

M. If a man knew what honor it is to be in the number of Christ's disciples,
he would seek by all means to brydell and ouercoue his affections.

38 And he which takes not up his cross and follows me, is not worthy of
me.

C. This our Savior adds, that we might know that we can not be his
disciples by no other means, then by suffering troubles and persecutions for
the Gospels sake. If we be troubled and vexed because there is discord for the
Gospels sake, between us and our parents, and our children, and our friends,
then let us call to mind the condition, that Christ does lay the cross upon
all his Apostels and disciples. The^ and ^tion^ ^ther.
B. For truly, the kingdom of God cannot be preached in the world without
cross and persecution. Wherefore he is more sure of nothing then of the
cross, John ^
which earnestly follows Christ, preaching him, and bearing testimony to
the world, that the works thereof are evil. For the saying of the Apostell is
most sure. 2. T^
All those that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. C.
But under this cross let us consider that we are the fellows of Christ,
which shall bring great consolation to our minds, for he says: And follovveth
me Here let us learn two things, first, that the faithful must Heb^
Whereupon the Apostell says, loking unto Jesus, the captain and finisher of
our faith, which for the joy that was set before him, abode the cross, and
despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
And S. Peter also says. 1. Pe^
Se that ye follow his footesteppes. But it should appear by the words of
Luke, that this ought not to be done ones alone, but daily. For he says, Luk^
If any man will follow me, let him deny him self, and take up his cross daily
and follow me. The
B. Every man has this cross when he suffers for the Gospel, either by
prysonment, banyshement, loss of goods, fire or swerd, and such like, with
the which the wicked ones of this world, from time to time cease not to vex
and moleste the children of God. The cross is not that kind of castigation or
punishment, which many have in times paste laid upon them selves willingly by
whypping, or cruel beating of them selves, or by abstayninge from meat and
drink, or by going barefoote, which foolyshe superstitious acts were
observed of the Monks and Friars, ^^kes ^^ru^^n ^vain
but that is the cross of Christ, whereof we have told you already.

39 He that fyndeth his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my
sake shall find it.

He that fyndeth his life. E. That is, he that has respect to his life in
such wise, that he will not adventure the same for my sake, he truly shall
lose his life.

C. Therefore, least that the former doctrine which is very hard, and
grievous to the flesh, should by it self have small effect. Christ in this
sentence confirms it by two ways. For he pronounces that such as are to
ware, and circumspecte, when they think that they have very well defended
their lymmes, they shall be disapointed of the same, and lose it: And again,
those which neglected their life nothing at all regarding death, shall have no
loss, because they shall save it. E. We know that there is nothing more
precious and dear unto us then our life: For the lyfes sake we do and undo all
things. C. so great love have we to the same. Wherefore it was necessary that
Christ should both promise and threathen, to the end he might animate his
disciples to the contempt of death.

To find the life, in this place signifies to possess the same, as in a sure
haven. To those yt are so desirous of this earthly life, that they will suffer
no danger, but flatter them selves with the vain trust in prosperity, and
think always that they are in good case when they suffer no trouble, (...) a
(...) de^ ^o ^en.
to such worldlynges I say, death is a perpetual destruction.

Contrariwyse, to the faithful, which willingly offer them selves to the
death, cou^ting all things that are in the world as vain for Christ's sake,
to these (I say, and saint Paul says with me also) death is a great
advantage, for they are restored to a better life. Bu. They which escape
prysonment and death, by denying Christ and his Gospel, seem in the face of
the world to save their lives, but in deed they have lost them, and have
provoked the everlasting wrath of God, and damnation upon them, unless in time
they repent. On the contrary part, he that manly stands to the fire, loses
his goods forsakes his wife and children, and all that he has, seems to the
world to have lost his life, when as he in deed has gotten everlasting life
with a crown of glory for ever. For my sake. C. He says for my sake, because
there are many which dye oftentimes rashely for ambitions sake, for murders
sake, True matters.
and some will seem to dye for the truths sake, when they maynteine heresy.
Therefore I say, Christ adds very well, for my sake, showing unto us for
what cause only we ought willingly to suffer violent death. Mark adds, and
for the Gospels sake. Shall find it. Mark and Luke have, Shall save it. This
is a singular comfort and consolation, that he which loses his life for
Christ's sake, does commend the same into the hands of Christ, where it shall
find everlasting rest and felicity.

A. Let us beware therefore, that none of us be punyshed as a murderer, as a
thief, as a backbyter, or as a busy body in other men's matters: But let us
suffer affliction according to the will of God, 1. Petr. 4.
committing our souls to him by well doing, as unto a faithful creditour.

40 He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me, receives
him that sent me.

M. This also is a great consolation against the trouble of excommunication and
persecution, (which they should suffer) of the which we have spoken before.
Now being not content in telling the punyshementes that they should suffer
which rejected the Apostels, he proceadeth farther, We are the^ members of
Christ's mystical body.
and shows what proffite the worthy receivers of the Apostels have, namely
such proffite, that he which receives them, receives Christ him self, and
his heavenly father also which sent him: that men might hereby know how
dear they were both to him and to his father also. C. Finally, he speaks not
so much of the receiving of the doctrine, as he does of the receiving of the
men. We must note therefore the purpose of Christ, who testified that which
he saw, was fit to help their infirmities: Namely that if any man received
them friendly and gently, that then it was as acceptable unto him, as if they
had liberally entreated and entertained him in their person, and not only this,
but also that they do offer to God the sacrifice of a sweet savor. C. But we
must note here to whom Christ speaks these words, surely to his Apostels
and disciples: Seducers preach not the word of the lord.
Therefore he speaks to them that do his will, not to seducers which preach
not the word of the lord, but their own fancies and dreams, abusing these
words of the lord, as if they were true ministers, when as in deed they be
false Prophets. In John the lord very plainly says: Verily, verily, I say
unto you, he that receives whomesoeuer I send, Iere. 23.
receives me. But these false Prophets ro^ne before they be sent, they
speak, but not of the Lords mouth.

41 He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward: And he that receives a just man in the name of a just
man, shall receive a just man's reward.

Bu. Now he shows at large the reward, which he will bestow upon those
that receive his messengers, to this end no doubt that his ministers might
have the more sauoure among men. C. He begins truly with the Prophets, but
at length descending to the lowest degree, he comprehends all those that are
his disciples

Therefore without exception he commends the true worshippers of God, and the
lovers of the Gospel. But to receive in the name of a Prophet, and of a just
man, is as much, as to do them good for the honor of the doctrine, and in
respect of piety and godliness. For although God has commanded us generally
to love al men by the bond of charity: notwithstanding worthily he brings
his to a hier degree, that men might have special care and consideration of
them above others. According to the saying of saint Paul, Gala. 6.
Let us do good unto all men, but specially to the^ of the household of faith.
Shall receive a Prophets reward. C. Diverse interpretours expound this
diversely. It seems to some that a mutual recompense or satisfaction is noted
here, because the Prophets of God give again spiritual benefits for earthly
things. But it this exposition be allowed, what shall be the reward of the
just. Other some understand it, that they shall be fellows and companions of
the same reward, which is laid up for the Prophets and the just, because
they were benefitial toward them. Many refer it to the communion of Saints,
because, as we by our beneficence and liberality do testify that we are one
body with the servants of Christ, even so by this means we are made
partakers of al good things, which Christ does communicate and bestow upon
the members of his body. But it rather seems to be understood symplely, the
reward of a Prophet, that is a reward that may answer the dignity of the
person to whom the office shall be committed.

42 And whosoever shall give to one of these little ones to drink, a cup of
cold water only (in the name of a disciple) verily I say unto you, he shall
not lose his reward.

And whosoever shall give. C. To amplify this he promises a reward to every
one that does the least part of the duty of charity, namely to give a cup
of cold water. He calls them little ones, not only which are lowest in
degree and basest in the church, but all his disciples also, which are
disdained of the world. So in an other place he says, (...)
fear not littell flock. A cup of cold water. A. By this the lord
declares that he does not so much regard the gift, (...)
as he does respect the mind of the geuer, neither the work, so much as he
does the will of the worker. As we may read of the wydowe, I^
who castyng two mytes into the treasury, is said of Christ, to cast in
more then all the rest.

Verily, verily, I say unto you. M. Because it seems incredible to man that
he has done any such excellent thing in giving a cup of cold water, he
affirms it with an oath, saying: Verily, verily, I say unto you, he shall
not lose his reward: Where we must note that he says not, he shall receive
his reward: but he shall not lose his reward, to prevent our cogitation, by
the which we persuade our selves that we shall receive no reward for so small
benefits. For so says the Apostell, ^6.
God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor ye
proceadeth of love, which love ye show in his name, which have ministered unto
the saints and yet minister.

The.xi. Chapter.
AND it came to pass, that when Jesus had made an end of commanding his
twelve disciples, he departed thence, to teach and to preach in their
cities. (...).

And it came to pass. B. Luke says that they departed and went through the
towns ^reaching the Gospel, and healing every where. ^6.
And Mark has the same words in effect. Notwithstanding Christ him self
would not give over his duty, as many slow bellies and idell prelates do in
these days, which neither preach the^ selves to the people, nor yet provide
that others may do it for them.

C. So sone therefore as the lord had sent his disciples to preach in Jury, he
him self went to preach in Galilae.

Of commanding the twelve. C. There is great force in this word of
commanding: because Mathewe declares that they had not free liberty in their
Embassage, but it was prescribed unto the^ what they should do, ^e of ^excel
^^her
and how they should behave the^ selves. Bu. By this place we may gather that
there is no work so excellent as the office of teaching. For the lord him
self, which did exercise him self in the most excellent works of God, did
esteem nothing more the^ the preaching of ye word, neither did he any thing
more often, or more fervently. And by this it is manifest that there is no
worship of God more acceptable, then the study of the word of God. For the
lord pronou^ceth them blessed, which hear the word of God and keep it. He
says also to Martha, as concerning Mary: Mary has chosen the better part
which shall not be taken from her. For she sat at ye feet of the lord and
heard his word. In their cities. E. That is, in those cities in the which
they had preached before. Luke. 10.
For the other Euangeliste says, that the lord sent them by two and two,
before him into every city and place, whether he him self would come. A.
Wherefore it was said before, ye shall not go through al ye cities of Israel,
before the son of man be come.

2 When John being in prison, heard the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples.

When John being in prison. B. Luke writes that Christ (before the disciples
of John came) had restored the wydowes son to life, which dwelte in ye gate
of the city of Naym, in the presence of many people, whereupon they were al
taken with fear and glorified God saying. A great Prophet is risen up among
us, and God has visited his people. For God can by no better means declare
his favor unto me^, then by sending unto the^ his Prophets, which may
thoroughly instruct them in his knowledge. Therefore there went forth a rumor of
him through out all Jury, and throughout all the regions that lie round about.
And the disciples of John showed him of all these things. In prison. B. The
Greek text has, John being in bonds. He sent two of his disciples. C. The
Evangelists mean not that John was moved to know the mediator by miracles:
But because he saw that Christ began to wax glorious, thinking now that a
convenient time was come to confirm the testimony that he bare of him, he
sent his disciples unto him. A. Not for his own cause, but for his disciples
sake: who thought better of their master then they did of Christ, as we may
read in the third of John. John. 3.
C. Also their diuinatio^ is but vain, which feign John Baptiste, being now
at the point of death, to demand the questions following of Christ, that he
might report it of his mouth to the fathers that were dead. But it is plain
and evident that this foreru^ner of Christ sent his disciples, to the end they
might be confirmed in the knowledge of ye Messiah, he him self having travailed
in ye same before, yt they might embrace Christ faithfully without delay.

Hereby al ye ministers of God are taught to send all men unto Christ. All men
must be sent unto Christ.
B. And what soever they be that teach the truth, they will acknowledge the^
selves with S. Paul to be the ministers of this master only. 1 Cor. 4.
But it is the point of all false Apostels to make the^ selves masters, and to
lead about with the^ disciples, Acts. 20.
as S. Paul declares saying: There shall arise from among you men speaking
perverse things, to draw disciples after the^. On the contrary part those
that are true pastors, direct and send their disciples unto Christ, giving
authority to him which is the master only. John. 3. d
C. John in ye beginning did acknowledge that he was not the bridegroom. This I
say, may be an example to all the ministers of the Gospel.

3 And said unto him: Art thou he that shall come? or do we look for an other.

E. The Greek word signifies both tences, as, Art thou he that art
coming, or is it thou that shall come? M. He speaks as if he were doubtful,
when as notwithstanding he doubted not, as sufficiently appears by S. John.
John. 1.
But he declares by this, that his disciples were not as yet well confirmed in
ye which he had taught the^. C. It was a common principle of piety among the
Jews, that Christ the author of perfect health and felicity, should come.
Wherefore of this matter he moves not the question but only demands, whether
Jesus be the promised redemer or no. For after they were persuaded of the
promised redemption in the law and Prophets, it was necessary that they
should embrace the same, being offered in the person of Christ.

4 Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and show John what ye have heard and
seen. B. Luke writes, that Christ in the same hour, cured many that were
troubled with infirmities and plagues, and of euel spirits, and unto many yt
were blind he gave sight, and that the^ he said: Go your way and bring word
unto John what things ye have heard and seen. Chap. 7.
C. For as John bare the person or represented another man, so Christ
commands to tell him, yt which his disciples should mark most. But where
as he answers not simpely, first he does it to this end, that he might (as he
thought it best) declare the matter it self: then that he might give a more
free argument of teaching to his crier or foreru^ner.

5 The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cle^sed, and
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor receive the glad
tydinges of the Gospel.

The blind receive. C. This place is taken out of the prophecy of Esaias, Esa^
that the disciples of John might know that a Prophet did witness of the
kingdom of Christ, under the which kingdom God did promise him self so liberal
and beneficial, yt he would bring help and remedy to al mortal men. And there
is no doubt, but yt he speaks there of the spiritual deliverance from all
euels and miseries. But Christ (as it was said before) shows by external and
visible signs yt he came a spiritual physician to heal the souls of men. And
so it came to pass yt the disciples of John went their ways fully satisfied,
with a perfect answer. John
M. Christ therefore did rather seek yt the thing should declare it self, the^
that he him self would bear any testimony of him self: as he does in many
other places also. And the poor receive the. The Greek text has. The poor
are preached, that is, consolation and tranquillity, is declared to ye
afflicted and sorrowful. C. This second place also is taken out of ye prophecy
of Esaias, Es^^
and is in effect like unto the place yt went before, because the same
teachinge that the treasures of grace are offered to ye world in Christ,
expresses that Christ was sent specially to the poor and afflicted. Christ
brings this prophecy, partly to indue those that are his with humility, and
partly that he might take away the offense which the carnal sense might
conceive, by his poor, base, and conte^ptible flock. For as we are proud by
nature, so nothing is esteemed of us, except it be decked and set forth with
vain pomp and forniture. But truly the church of Christ, because it is
collected and gathered of poor me^, it is very base and contemptible in the
sight of the world: yea, and the same despises nothing more the^ vain pomp,
and pompelike vanities. Hereupon comes the contempt of the Gospel, because
it is not received of every one that is in honor and high estate nay, there
is none that do more reiecte the doctrine of the Gospel the^ such. But how
perverse and wicked this estimation is, Christ him self shows us by the
nature of the Gospel it self seeing that it is appointed and prepared for none
but such as are poor and afflicted. Whereupon it follows that it is no new
thing, (...) are a ^ynde^ to re^ ^e Go^
and therefore ought not to moleste and trouble us, if the Gospel be despised
of great and honorable men, which being puffed; up with their riches, leave
no place in them for the grace of God, to abide and dwell: Yea, there is no
cause why we should marvel though it were rejected of the greatest part of men,
when as small is the number yt is chosen of God to salvation. Christ therefore
here does declare unto us what they are which be mete to perceive and receive,
ye grace of salvation which is there offered. And by this means, he calling
miserable sinners, gently to the hope of salvation, confirms their minds
with a sure trust. For it is most sure, yt they are called poor in this
place, which are of poor and miserable estate and which are despised of many.
R. But we must note dilligently the whole answer of Christ, because thereby
he shows a reason of all those miracles yt he did. For saving that ye
miracles of Christ contained certain private commodities in them, they were
done specially for this cause, to declare yt this Jesus the son of Mary, was
ye true Messiah and the son of God. (...).
And Christ himself co^me^deth this use of miracles, not only in this place,
but also in many other places; as when he says, I have greater wytnes then the
witness of John. For the works which the father has given me to finish, the
same works yt I do, bear wytnes of me, yt the father has sent me. And in an
other place he says, The works that I do in my fathers name, bear wytnes of
me: and immediately following, he says, If I do not ye works of my father, ^o.
believe me not. But if I do, and ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye
may know and believe that ye father is in me, and I in him. And John him self
speaking of the use of ye miracles says, Many other signs truly did Jesus in
ye presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book. These ar
written yt ye might believe yt Jesus is christ the son of God, and that in
believing, ye might have life through his name.

6 And blessed is he, that is not offended (...) at me.

C. By this sentence our Savior Christ declares, that whosoever abides
firm and constant in the doctrine of the Gospel, must resist offenses which
come to let and hinder the success of faith. He does arm us therefore against
offenses: Offenses.
because we shall never want occasions to put from us the Gospel, until we
exalt our minds above al offenses. First of al therefore we must learn to
fight against offenses, that we may persiste in the faith of Christ. Neither is
Christ falsely said to be the rock and stone of offense, whereat many shall
stomble. The which truly comes through our own fault, but he remedieth this
vice when he pronounces all those to be blessed which are not offended at
him: whereby we may gather, that the unfaithful shall have no excuse, although
they excuse them selves to be hindered with many lettes. Christ is a stombling
block to the wicked.
For what should let them to come unto Christ? or what should be the cause
that they should forsake Christ? Namely because he with his cross, seems
conte^ptible, deformed, and full of reproach unto the world: because he calls
them to take part of his afflictions: because his glory and majesty being
spiritual, is neglected and not regarded of the world, because the nature of
our flesh, does altogether abhor his doctrine. And finally, because by the
policy of Satan, many do arise which defame, both Christ and his Gospel, and
make the same odious. B. Furthermore, this sentence did properly pertayne to
the disciples of John: Whose eyes the holiness of John had so blinded, that they
could not discern the excellent majesty of Christ, from the dignity of
John, for they thought Christ to be far inferior to John. For they were
offended by the humility of ye lords co^uersasion, because he lived not from
the company of men, in such straightnes of life as their master did. Here we
learn that severity and straightnes of life, ought not to be regarded,
neither yet despised, but salvation and health comes only by Christ. For
John confessed him self to be inferior to Christ, when as notwithstanding,
he excelled Christ in straightnes of life.

They measured, salvation and righteousness by severity of life, and their own
works, and therefore they despised Christ and his disciples. Even as we at this
day judge holiness by external things, and are deceived by hyppocrisie. B. He
says therefore blessed is he that is not offended at me, that is which by no
means can be discouraged and driven from me that he may believe me to be the
savior of the whole world, and commit him self unto me.

7 And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the people concerning John.
what went ye out into the wyldernes to se? A reed that is shaken with the
wind?

And as they. Bu. Now ye lord sets forth at large the praise and virtue of
John the Baptist. Neither does Christ without cause set forth the praise of
John when ye disciples were gone, Luke. 7.
as Luke plainly declares For by this he teaches us to avoid al suspision of
adulatio^ and flattery: and yet notwithstanding, not to defraude or detract
from any man the praise and dignity which pertains unto him. But ye use
cause, and profit of this co^me^datio^ of John is manifold, and may be taken
many ways: M. First, because the people which stood by and heard this message
of the disciples of John, might be confirmed in some wrong opinion, and contempt
of John, because of his C. Furthermore Christ commends John to the people,
to the end they might call to mind that which they herd of him, and might
credit his testimony: For his name was famous among ye people, and they spoke
very reverently of him, but his doctrine was of less estimation, yea, few
there were which gave

A read that is. Bu. By the read shaken with every blast of wynd, 2. K^^
declining and bending now hither, now thither, is signified the vacillatio^
and shaking inco^stancy of inconstant me^, at every light occasion. In^
Whereby we may learn that all light and inconstant men, are unmeet for the
ministry of the Gospel. For John changed not his mind but being in prison
continued in the same opinion that he was of before. Wherefore they which
intend to profit the church of God, and to be allowed of him, must be pure,
simple, and constant, in the work and business of the Gospel of Christ.

8 Or what went ye out to se? A man clothed in soft raime^t? Behold, they that
were soft clothing are in kings houses

C. They are deceived which think that this is spoken to condemn costly and
princelyke apparel: there are many other places where luxury in apparel, and to
much po^pe is reprehe^ded. But the sense of this place is more simple, namely
that there was no such thing in the desert, by the which the people should be
drawn thither. For there all things were untilled, wild and barren, which
could bring nothing but werines: as for those things that did delighte, they
were in the kings courts.

9 But what went ye out for to se? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and more
then a Prophet.

Bu Now Christ comes to the effect and ground of the commendation of John,
to the which the circumstaunce of the place is referred. He says therefore,
what went ye out for to see a Prophet. M. As if he should say. Because not
without occasion ye went forth with such speed into the deserte to John, it
must needs be that ye went to see some great and excellent sight. Went ye forth
to see a Prophet? For it must needs be that ye sought for some singular thing
in John. Truly your expectation is not deceived. For ye saw a Prophet, yea,

And more then a. C. By the which words he does not only confirm the
authority of John, but does also prefer his doctrine before the doctrine of
the old Prophets, to thend he might bring the people to the right scope and
end of his ministry. For, because they did not consider wherefore he was sent,
it came hereupo^ to pass that they did proffite nothing at all in his
doctrine. Christ does therefore extol and place him above all the Prophets,
to the end they might learn and know how that some special and excellent
thing was given and committed unto him. M. For whereas the rest of the
Prophets did prophecy of Christ a great while before that he came. (...) 1.
This John did show that he was come already, and did point him out with the
finger. C. But where as he him self in another place denies that he is a
Prophet, it is not contrary to this place. For he was not a Prophet after the
common manner of other Prophets. Whom God had made interpretours of the law,
and messengers of his will to his church: But notwithstanding, he was more
excellent the^ they, because he did not darkely, obscurely, or under shadows
show and declare that time of redemption, but plainly did declare that the
same was already come to the which effect the prophecy of Mallachie
following pertains.

10 For this is he of whom it is written: behold, I send my messenger before
thy face which shall prepare thy way before thee.

B. The Hebrewe text, and the threescore and te^ne interpretours, write this
same somewhat more diversely, notwithstanding in the same sense saying, Behold
I send my messenger, ^^hi. 1.
and he shall prepare (or make ready) ye way before my face: and the lord whom
ye would have, shall sone come to his temple: yea, even the messenger of the
covenant whom ye long for, etc. And thus do Matthew and Luke read it. Whereby
we gather that it was then so read in the common Greek books, the which
they desired rather to follow, then by newnes to offend those, that are
imperfect and want skill. In the Hebrewe text, the words are of Christ
speaking of him self but the words of ye Evangelists are of the father,
speaking of the son. The aungel here, or the messenger of God, is John the
Baptiste. All one way pertains to the father and to Christ his son, by the
which he comes unto us, and we in like manner unto him, in true humility and
repe^tau^ce, with a sound and perfect faith. M. John prepared the way being
sent before the face of Christ, when by the preaching of repentance, and by
the testimony that he bare of Christ, he sent al me^ unto him as to the
savior him self. The which two things are to be noted of us, namely the
preachinge of repentance, and the faith in Christ. For in these two consists
the way to life. Bu. Such a messenger, and of so great things was John the
Baptist, as witnesses his father Zacharias, by these words. And you child
shall be called the Prophet of the hiest, Luke 1.
for thou shall go before the face of the lord to prepare his ways, to give
knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the remission of their sins,
through the tender mercy of our God, and so forth. By and by after this
preaching of John, came Christ into his temple, that is, to his people which
are the true temple of God. According to the saying of S. Paul, ye are the
temple of the living God, which temple is holy. This therefore is the sum of
this place: John excelled in this, that he was the crier and forerunner of
Christ. For although the Prophets in old time did speak of the kingdom of
Christ, yet notwithstanding, they were not placed like unto John before his
face, that they might show him presently and say, Behold the lamb of God,
which takes away the sins of the world.

11 Verily I say unto you: among them that are borne of women, arose not a
greater then John the Baptist. Notwithstanding, he that is least in the
kingdom of heaven is greater the^ he,

B. That which he says here simply: there arose not a greater then John, is to
be expounded by the other Eua^geliste, where he says, Among wome^s children,
Luke. 7.
is there not a greater Prophet then John Baptiste. For here he commends no
other thing in him then the office that was given unto him from above: by the
which the obstinacy of the Jews is more sharply reproved, which despised
the most excelent Prophets of all. C. This excelency therefore is to be
referred to the office that was given unto him to teach: And Christ does so
extolle the name of John, to the end he might make the Jews more attentive,
to the Embassage that he brought.

He that is lest in the kingdom. C. Some expound this amys of Christ
affirminge him by this place to be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.
But the dignity of the person is not here handled, but the excellency of his
office is commended. Therefore it is better to be understood of those which
were made the ministers of Christ in the new Testament, that the majesty of
the Gospel might be above the law. For if John were therefore greater then the
Prophets which were before him, because he came before Christ, which came
by and by after him, or because he pointed him out with the finger: why shall not
an Apostell be greater or any other minister of Christ less, which does not
only preach that Christ came, but also does show the mysteries of his
kingdom, and declare the same to the whole world?

For Christ would have John so praised that notwithstanding, all the same
commendation should tend to the setting forth of the divine grace of his
kingdom, that the same might be the better allowed and accepted. As Christ
therefore would prepare the Jews to receive the Gospel, even so at this day
it becomes us to be stirred up, that we may hear Christ reverently speaking
unto us from the high throne of his heavenly glory, least that he take
vengeance upon us for our contempt, with that horrible curse which he
pronounces to the unbelieving by the mouth of the Prophet in the same place.
Malachi. 4.
The kingdom of heaven and of God is taken for the new state of the church, as
in other places before, because by the coming of Christ the instauration and
repayringe of all things was promised.

12 From the days of John Baptiste, until this day, the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violente pluck it unto them.

C. There is no doubt, but that Christ commends the majesty of the
Gospel, because many with fervent study desired the same. For as god stirred
up John to be the foreronner, and proclaymer of the kingdom of his son, even
so he indewed his doctrine with the power and efficacy of his spirit, to the
end it might pearce the hearts of them, and kyndell their zeal. The (...)
came fr^
It appears therefore that it came from God, seeing that it sprange up so
suddenly after so strange a manner, and is able to stir up so wonderful
motions. But in the second member the restraint is added as appears. And the
violent pluck it. For, because the greater part was nothing the more moved,
tha^ if at any time no word had been spoken of the Prophets as concerning
Christ, he declares that the violence (whereof he speaks) was but in one
certain kind of men. The meaning therefore of this place is this. Now there
is a great concourse of men, as if they would violently rushe forth to
apprehende the kingdom of God. For by one man's voice, they come on heaps:
neither only gredyly, but also with a snatchinge violences as it were, they
receive the grace offered unto them. Notwithstanding, many rage, and are no
more touched than if John should tell them a tale in the deserte, nothing at
all pertaining unto the^. To this effect the mind of Christ in this place
tends, namely that they are in excusable, which contemptuously shut their
eyes, and stop their ears, at the manifest power of God, which as well
shyneth in the teacher, as in the hearers. B. The kingdom of heaven is the new
doctrine of the Gospel. The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, when men
run with great force to the public preaching of the Gospel. Men do
violently pluck the kingdom of heaven unto them, when they burn as it were
with an earnest desire of the kingdom of Christ, in so much that they despise
their life and all that ever they have, so that they may be partakers of the
Gospel and cittezens of the kingdom of heaven. Now by these words of Christ
we learn what is the nature and property of true faith, The (...) of a tr^
namely to harken to the word of God, with a fervent mind, and with an
earnest desire to be instructed in the truth, and not coldly or negligently to
regard ye same.

13 For all the prophets and the law it self prophesied unto John.

C. Now the lord compares the ministry of the Gospel with the Law and the
Prophets: As if he should say. It is no marvel if God do now so mightily
work in the minds of the hearers, because he does not now hide him self a far
of, under dark and obscure shadows, but does show him self openly, to the
end he might establishe his kingdom. Hervpon it follows, that they are
less excusable, which obstinately rejected the doctrine of John, then they
which despised the law and the prophets. M. For that which John preached is
ye very same, whereof the law and the Prophets spoke before. C. In this word
of prophesiing there is a great Emphasis and force: because the law and the
prophets did not set God before the eyes of men, but did shaddowe him, as one
absente under fygures. Now we see to what end the comparison te^deth, namely
that it is not mete that men should wax cold and weary of that, by the which
God offered him self present unto them, But where as Christ now does count
John in the number of the mynisters of the gospel, whom before he placed above
the prophets, it is no absurdity because his preaching, although it be
part of the Gospel, yet notwithstanding it was but a certain rudiment and
principle of the same.

14 And if ye will receive it, this is Helias, which was for to come.

C. Here he does more certainly declare, how John began to preach the kingdom
of god: because he was that Helias which should be sent before the face of
God.

Christ therefore would have that manifest and terrible coming of God, which
is celebrated of Malachy, to be known now of the Jews, when Helias (which is
there promised) has done the duty as it were of a So^ner or parator. M. But
how John was called Helias, we may read in the first of Luke, where it is thus
written of him, And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Helias,
to turn the hearts of fathers to their children, and the unbelievers to the
wisdom of ye just men, to make ready a parfecte people before the lord. C. By
this exception also, which he adds saying, (if ye will receive it) he
declares the hardenes of their hearts, because they were blind in the clear
light. But shall he not be Helias if he be not received? Yes surely, he shall
continue in his estate still. For Christ means not that the office of John
did depend upon them: but after that he had witnessed that he was Helias, he
reproves them of negligence and ingratitude, except they give unto him the
authority which he deserves.

15 He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

M. Christ with his wonted exclamation, stirs up the minds of his hearers,
C. For we know that he is wont to bring in this sentence so often as he
entreats of any seriouse matter, and which deserves more then the common
kind of attention, or geuinge head: Bu. As if he should say, I think there
needs not many words, when as hitherto al truth in this matter is
sufficientely declared* therefore there remains nothing now, but that he
should admytte the treweth, which has ears to hear the same, and is not
altogether void of understanding Notwithstanding he also declares, that the
mysteries whereof he speaks, can not be comprehended of all men, because many
of the hearers are deaf, and dull of hearing. But now because every man's
incredulity and unbelief does not only hinder them selves, but makes other
men slow also, Christ exhorts his elect, whose ears are opened, to be
attentive to this secret mysterye of God, and not to be deaf with the
unbelievers, but to consider diligently of the same.

16 But whereunto shall I lyken this generation? It is like unto children,
which sit in the market places, and call unto their fellows.

But whereunto. A. Hitherto by the commendation of John's mynistery, he
persuaded the Jews to believe the testimony of John, and to receive Jesus, Bu.
beleuynge him to be Christ. Luke. 7.
But of Luke it is added, And all the people, and the Publicanes that heard
him, justified God, and were baptized with the baptism of John. But the
Phariseys and lawyers despised the counsel of God against them selves, and were
not baptized of him.

Therefore the lord does very sharply inueigh against their obstinacy and
unbelief, greatly accusinge the invincible hardness of their hearts. Whereunto
(says he) shall I lyken this generation? C. In these words he does not
comprehend all the men that were in his time, but only the Scribes and
Phariseyes, and such as were their imitatours. For he does bring reproach
unto them, because the lord had tried by diverse means to bring them unto him,
and they with inflexible contumacy despised his grace.

It is like to children. C. He uses a similytude, which is thought to be
taken from the wonted and common pastime of children. For it is not unlikely,
that children so pyped when they daunsed together. And truly Christ seems to
endeavor him self to beat down the pride and haughtye stomachs of the
Pharyseies in comparyng them to children.

17 And say, We have pyped to you and ye have not daunced, we have mourned,
and ye have not wept.

Bu. He says, that they are like unto froward children, who are pleased with
no plesaunte or musical noise, nay rather to rebelliouse and obstynate
persons, to whom the diligence and endeavor of their fellows is never
acceptable, but the contrary is allowed and lyked of them. If it please the^ to
make any merry or pleasant note, then do these men cry and say, we rather
desire mourning: If then they make any sorrowful noise, straightway they wish
for pleasant tunes: so inconstant and mutable are they. A. This simylytude
the lord him self applies to the Scrybes and such like, saying.

18 For John came neither eatinge, nor drinkinge, and they say he has a devil.

For John came. Bu. By an excellent Antithesis, he shows to them all that the
faith and dyligence of God, has omitted nothing of those things which
pertayne to the workyng of their salvation: and again, that they being at
contention with God, do omit nothing that pertayne to hinder their sauegarde,
and to repel and put away the care and benevolence of God: whereby it comes
to pass, that they perysshe, through their own fault and malice.

Neither eating nor. B. John trewely did eat and drink, but because he had a
special kind of food, Cha^
and did abstain from usual and common meat (as it is said before) he is
said neither to eat nor drink. C. This man therefore leading an austere and
straight life, thundered out (as it were) repentance, and severe
reprehensions, even as he that sings a sorrowful song: But the lord him
self as one that sings a pleasant and merry note, more gentelly with favor,
sought to bring them unto his father. But what was the cause that neither of
them both did profit? suerly their stony and stubborn obstinacye. Moreover,
this place teaches us why there was so great difference of external life,
between Christ and John Baptiste, saying that they did all one thing: namely
the lord would by this variety and difference, the more convince and
overthrow the unbelieving, because he framinge and transformynge him self to
their manners, might make them void of all excuse, they nevertheless
continuinge in their obstinacy. Wherefore, if they in those days be void of
al excuse, which by caucared malice rejected the manifold callinges of God,
what shall befall those me^ in these days, whose hearts will not be moved, by
no kind of mellody, I mean neither by the threatenings of Gods word,
neither yet by the sweet promises of the same? He has a devil. C. John was
called a demoniake, or one possessed with a devil, the which we call
commonly frantike, or fantastical, or such a one as is not well in his wits.
Io^^ the^ ne^^
By the which we may note the great malice of the Scribes, Phariseys, and
lawyers, who let not to cavil against this holy and devout man of God,
being the fore ronner, haruinger and preparer of the way of his son Christ.

19 The son of man came eatinge and drinkinge, and they say, behold a
glutton and a bibber of wine, a friend to Publicanes and sinners. And wisdom
is justified of her children.

The son of m,an came. C. To eat and drink in this place, is to live after
the common manner of men. Bu. The son of man therefore came, which tries what
he could do by an other way, because the way of John took no place: this man
Jesus shows him self gentill and tractable to al men, he despises no man,
be uses the common and usual kind of apparel, he shonneth not the feasts of
publicanes and sinners, and yet also theye find somewhat in him to cavil at.

And they say, behold a glotton. A. This reproach of Christ was great
(trewly) and horrible to be spoken. For he being an example of temperancy,
sobriety, and of all virtue, was notwithstanding counted a ryoter, a
drunkerde, and a vyciouse person. ^^ion co^ ^ot in ^tnes
C. Let them therefore mark this place, which think that the chief point
of perfection consists in the outward austeritie of life, and do count that
an Angelical life, if any man be such an abstainer, that he sterue his body
with famine and pinynge honger. for according to this rule John was more
excellent then the son of God. But we must rather note what S. Paul says,
^o. 4.
that bodily exercise profits littel, whereas godliness is profitable to al
things. Notwithstanding we may not under this pretense, give liberty to the
flesh, to live delicatelye in all filthy pleasure after the desyer of the
same: only we must beware of superstition, least that foolish men
(immaginynge that perfection consists in bare elements and outward signs)
do neglecte the true worship of God. M. Last of al we must note in this place
how the reprobate, specially the wise and saints of this world, how they (I
say) can be moved by no reason, neither by the holy and devout life of the
preacher, neither by the wonderful show of miracles, ^stina^ re^.
neither by any humanity, to believe, when as neither the austerytie of John,
nor the humanity of Christ can prevail any thing at all with these men. A.
Saying therefore we are constrained to behold so great obstinacy in men, let
us nevertheless go forward in the mynistery of the gospel with boulde cheer,
pronouncing unto them the vengeance of God, unless they repent.

And wisdom is justified. C. This place is expounded diversely of the
interpretours. Some say that the Jews did justify this wisdom, because their
own consciences accusyng them, and they being judges of their own
incredulity, were constrained to acknowledge that the same was both holy and
godly doctrine which they had rejected: therefore they understand the Jews to
be these sons of wisdom, which gloried and boasted in the name and tytell
thereof. Some think that it was spoken Ironice, as thus. Ironia is a figure in
speakinge, when a man dissembleth in spech, that which he thinks not: as in
scoffing, calling that foul which is fair, or that sweet which is sower.
Do ye allow after this sort the wisdom of God, whose sons ye boast your
selves to be? But because the Greek preposition, Apo, is not properly referred
to the doing parson: there are some which expound it thus. Wisdom is absolved,
loused, or dismiste of her children, that she is no more bond or subject by
any right unto them: as if the inherytaunce proper to me, should be given by my
consent to an other: even as S. Paul says that Christ is justified from
sin, Roma 6.
because the curse of sin has no more right or power over him. Other some
more hard, and with greatter lybertye, affirm, that wisdom was alyenate or
put away of her children. But that the Greek preposition might signify this,
another sense and meaning seems more fete, namely that although they which
are the proper sons, do wickedly slander, and report evil of wisdom, yet
notwithstanding she shall lose nothing of her excellency and dignity, but
shall remain whole and perfect. The Jews, and specially the Phariseis and
Scribes, did boast them selves to be the scholars of gods wisdom, and yet
notwithstanding they trod that excellent nurse and mother of theires of gods
wisdom under their feet. But Christ shows that although wisdom has evil
and unnatural children, yet she shall remain safe without al harm: and that
their malice which wickedly and maliciousely slander shall derogate nothing
of her right and authority. Notwithstanding we have not as yet brought the
sense which seems by the judgment of many men to be proper and agreeable to
this place.

First there is a secret Antithesis or comparison in the words of Christ,
between the true sons, and bastardes, which altogether stand upon vain
tytels and show nothing in deed as if Christ should have said, let them
go forward in their obstinacy, which furiously boste them selves to be the
sons of wisdom, she notwithstanding shall have the praise and commendation of
her own children, which is proper and due unto her.

Therefore Luke more universally says, Of all her children, whereby he means
that the obstinacy of the Scrybes, shall be no let, but that the elect and
chosen of God may go forward and abide in the faith of the Gospel. Therefore
although many Apostatas swerue from the church of God, yet let the sound and
parfecte faith of the Gospel, always abide with the elect, which are of the
true flock of Christ.

20 Then began he to vpbraide the cities, in the which most of his miracles were
done, because they repented not of their sins.

C, Luke expresses at what time, and for what cause Christ so inuayeth
against these cities namely, when he had sent his disciples into diverse
parts of Iewry that in their journey, they might declare the kingdom of God,
he considering their ingratitude, with whom he exercysed the office of a
prophet, a long time without fruit, and had showed many wonders and signs,
he burste out into these words: as if he had said, that the time was now
come, in the which he must go to other cities, after he had proved the dulnes
and malice of the inhabitauntes of that part, where he began to preach his
Gospel, and to work many miracles. But speakinge nothing of his doctrine, he
vpbraideth them, because they were not moved to repentance by the miracles
that he showed among them.

For it is most sure that the lord shows forth the docume^tes of his power to
this end that he might draw men thereby unto him: but because all men by
nature are turned away from him, it is necessary that the beginning should
proceed of repentance. M. We do se therefore what Christ sought for in all his
accions and doings, namely for repentance.

21 VVo unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the miracles which
have been showed among you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they had repented
long ago in sack clothe and ashes.

VVoo unto the Chora. M. Chorazin and Bethsaida, are Cities of Galilae, nere
unto the lake of Genesareth.

For if the miracles had been done in Tire and Sydon. B. Tire and Sydon are
cities adioining to the sea coaste, and sittuate on the border of Galilae, in
the which, not Jews, but vncircumsised Ethnickes and Idolatours dwelte and
inhabited. C. Therefore because infamouse impiety, luxury and other vices were
there, by reason of the nerenesse and borderinge of those cities, Christ
brings in this comparison, whereby he might the more touch and prick the
Jews. For there was none of them which did not count the men of Tire and
Sydon, for wicked conte^pners of God. Christ therefore does not a littell
amplify his woe and curse, when he says, that there was more amendmente to be
hoped for out of those places, in ye which there was no relygion, then out of
Iewry it self. M. He notes therefore a wonderful obstinacy to be in those
cities, in the which he has been often conversant, because the cities of the
Gentyles, being Idolatrouse, and corrupt, could souer be converted to
repentance then they.

But least any man should move troublesome questions, as concerning the secret
judgments of God, we must note, that this saying of the Lord is applied to
the weak and feeble capacity of man's mind, comparing the cittezens of
Bethsaida, and the inhabitants there abouts, with the men of Tire and Sydon.

He disputes not, what thing God saw before, should come to pass of these,
or them, but what the other would do, as by the deed it self might well be
perceived.

For where as the manners of these cytties were so corrupt, and out of all
order, it may be imputed to ignorance, because at no time the word of God was
preached there, neither was any miracles wrought for them to behold, and to
work repentance. But in the cities of Galilae which Christ rebuked, there
was exceeding obstinacy in despising the miracles which he wrought often times
among them, by the power of God. In effect, the words of Christ tend to no
other end then to show that Chorazin and Bethsaida did excel Tire and Sydon
in malice and in the incurable contempt of God. M, And yet notwithstanding
there is no cause why we should contend with God, justice.
because he neglects those of who^ there might be hope, and shows his
power to contemners. For he leaves al those justly to destruction, to whom he
vouchsafes not to show his mercy.

Now if it be his will in taking away his word from some, to have them
peryshe: And in offering the same to other, to exhort them to repentance: who
has any thing at all thereby to accuse him of parcialitie and
vnrighteousenes? Therefore we knowing our own infyrmitie, let us learn to
behold this altitude and highness. For their proud curiosity is not
tolerable, which cannot abide to give the glory and praise of ryghteousenes to
God, but so far as their understanding is able to comprehend the same. In
sackecloth and ashes. C. Those that were wont in time past to mourn and
repent, were wont to be apparelled with sackeclothe and ashes. Sackclothe and
ashes were external signs which were used in solemn repentance when the
people had offended: which made the people the more earnest affected in
repe^tyng their sins. C. Therefore repentance in this place is descrybed by
external signs, of the which there was then a sole^pne use and custom in the
church of God: not that Christ does stand upon this part, but because he
bends him self to the capacity of the common people. ^ence.
We do know that repentance was not required of the faithful only for a few
days, but it was required to the end they should meditate in the same, and
exercise it even to the death. Now if these external signs should still
continue, ^all re^ must ^ded.
then must we wear every day and every hour sackecloth, then must we
continually sprinkel our selves with ashes, because we ought never to cease
from repentance. Therefore this external profession of repentance must not
always be used, but only when men arise from some great fall, and heinous
crime, and turn unto God with a sorrowful heart for the same. And trewly
sackcloth and ashes are signs of offense, to pacify the wrath of the judge:
and therefore they do properly pertain to the beginning of the conversion.

Now, saying men do testify by this ceremony, and declare their sorrow and
grief, it is necessary that the hate of sin, the fear of God, and the
mortifycatyon of the flesh, do go before, according to the saying of the
Prophet, Joel. 2^
Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and so forth. And now we see
wherefore Christ joins sackeclothe and ashes to repentance, when he makes
mention of Tire and Sydon, to whose inhabitauntes the Gospel could not be
preached, without the condemnation of their life past, and the exhortation to
repentance and amendment of life.

22 Nevertheless I say unto you: it shall be easyer for Tire and Sydon in the
day of judgment then for you.

Bu. Now he declares by a comparison the great and greuouse ponishement of
those Cities which have rejected the grace of God offered unto them. The
contempt of Gods word can not escape vnponyshed.
M. Let those cities therefore stand in fear, to whom the truth of the
Gospel has been preached more then to other, unless they show forth the fruit of
the same in their life and conversation. A For truly the contempt of the
word of God, can not escape long vnponyshed.

In the day of judgment. C. There are some which understand by the day of
judgment that time, in the which God ponyshed the land of Iewry: but some a
graet deal better, refer it to the day of iudgmente, which shall be after
the consummation of the world: as before in the tenthe chapter.

23 And thou Capernau^ which art lift up unto heaven, shall be cast down into
hell. For if the miracles which have been done in thee, had been showed in
Sodom, they had remained unto this day.

And thou Capernaum. Bu. This Apostrophe or conversion, has a wonderful
Emphasis: as if a man should reprehende a company of wicked persons and at the
length forsakinge al other, should convert and turn his reprehensio^ to some
one notorious wicked person, and say. Ye have all committed iniquity, wherefore
ye shall al according to your deserts be ponysshed and plagued: but thou
perniciouse and wicked fellow above all other which haste committed so
haynouss offense, that no man in wickedness is like unto thee, thou I say, shall
have far greatter ponishement then the rest. C. Even so Christ namely above
all others, reprehendeth Capernaum, because he was in no place more conuersante
then there. B. This city Capernaum, was the most famous city of Galilae,
both because it was the publyque and common place of marcha^dise, Chap, 4.
all things necessary, being there bought and sold, and also because that
Christ had wrought many of his excellent miracles in the same, as it is said
before. C. This trewely was such a dignity, as none might be compared to the
same, that the son of God chose this city instead of his palace and
sanctuary, in the which he might begin his kyngedome and priesthode. But
surely it was so overwhelmed and drowned in fylthynes, as it no drop or
spark of Gods grace, had once ben seen or hard of in the same: and therefore
Christ pronounces that the more gods benefytes were bestowed upon them,
the more horrible ponishement was at hand, prepared for them. Which art lift
up. A. In two old greek books it is red with an interrogation, as reads it
also the old interpretoure, saying, Shalt thou be lyfted up to heaven?
Shalt be thrown down. that is, thy fame shall have a fall, thou shalt be
despoyled of thy glory, and thou shalt utterly be destroyed.

Because if the miracles had been done in So. M. He terrefyeth them by the
exaumple of the Sodomites, because if they had not so great a consideration,
of the judgment to come, as they should have, that then he might move them
to the same. We se here also, that as some sins are gretter then other some,
so one ponishmente shall be greater then an other, least that we should
rashely heap one sin upon an other. For this cause Christ says, Math
therefore ye shall receive the greatter dampnation. And S. Paul says. Rom^
According to thy heart, being hard and impenitent, thou heapest to thy
self a treasure of wrath against the day of wrath and of the opening of the
ryghteouse judgment of god. They had remained unto. Before we declared that
Christ spoke according to the capacity of man, not foreshewinge what
should have come, if he had sent a prophet to the Sodomites.

But and if this solution be not sufficient to those that are contenciouse, we
answer, that although the remedy for the preservation of the Sodomites was in
the hands of God, yet notwithstanding he showed his justice in destroyinge
them. C. It shall be nedelesse therefore to enter into those questions of
predestination, when as we know that God would not do, neither has he decreed
any thing to be done, without excellent consyderation, as to whom he should
show mercy, and to whom not.

24 Nevertheless I say unto you: it shall be easyer for the land of Sodom,
in the day of judgment, then for thee.

For this matter read the tenth chapter goinge before, and the fyftene verse.

25 At the same time Jesus answered and said: I thancke thee (O father) lord
of heaven and earth) that thou haste hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have opened them unto babes At that time. B. Luke says, that
Christ spoke these words when the threscore and ten disciples were returned,
Luk^
and reioysed that deuylls were subdued unto them. Jesus answered. C.
Although this word of answeringe is very usual, and familiar to the
Hebrews, in the beginning of some communication and matter, notwithstanding
in this place it has a great Emphasis or force. Because that Christ thus
took occasion by the present matter to speak: namely when the threscore and
ten returned with joy, the which thing, the words of Luke confyrme a
great deal better, saying, that Jesus in the same hour reioysed in the
spirit. But whereupon came this reidysynge, but only because the Church being
gathered of a few poor and contemptible men, was no less dear and preciouse
unto him, then if it had been fornysshed with all the nobylytie, power and
glory in the whole world.

And the prayer of Christ being dyrected unto the father, was of more
vehemence, then if he had talked with his disciples. How be it, it is most
sure, that for their sakes, he gave thanckes unto the father, least that the
base and low degree of the church should offend any man. For we do all for
the most part seek for glory: and there is nothing seems less necessary
unto us, then the heavenly kingdom of the son of god, whose glory in deed
consists in ye dregs relics, and of scouringes of the world. According to
the saying of S. Paul, (...) 4.
We are become as it were, the very outswepynges of the world, and ofscouring
of all men unto this time. And trewely this is the wonderful counsel of God,
that he having the whole world in his hand, rather choseth to him self his
peculyar people, out of a base, poor, and contemptyble multitude, then out of
the heaps of nobles and princes, (...) no (...) per^th
who (as it might be thought) should better by their nobylitie and
excellency, set forth the name of Christ, then any other.

But Christ here, sekethe to withdraw his discyples from a proud and lofty
mind least they should despise the base and obscure state of the church in
the which he him self did delyghte, and gave thanks unto his heavenly father
for the same. Now what madness, what blindness, yea, what arrogancye were
there in us if we should deny, gaynesay, or mislike of that, which our
savior Christ him self, being our head, vouchesafeth reverently to receive
and hyghelye to commend, saying. I thancke thee O fa. B. Or I praise thee, or
I glorysie thye name. For these three, I praise, I gloryfye, I give thanckes:
are taken from the Hebrew word, (...) Iadath, which the Gretia^s have made,
Omulogeo, that is, I confess.

C. Christ therefore by these words does testify, that he does quyete and rest
him self in the decree of his father, which disagreeth and differs from the
reason and understanding of man.

Lord of heaven and. C. In this thing therefore he does affirm that he does
gloryfye his father, God is lord of the whole earth.
that he being lord of the whole earth, has preferred babes and younglings
before the wise of the world: For it makes no small matter to the circumstance
of the argument, that he calls the father lord of heaven and earth, God has
power to make blind and to make see.
because by this means he declares the cause of the blyndenes of the wise to
depend upon the will of God: and that by his will also the rude and ignorante
are made to understand his hye and secret mysteries. There are many other
places also where the lord declares that al those that com to salvation are
elected and chosen by him of his tender mercy freely, because the earth is the
lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the world, and they that dwell
therein. Wherefore this Faith is not gotten by the wisdom of man.
For how much would ye flesh rejoice, if faith might be gotten by the
dexterity of wit, by industry, or by learning? Wherefore God beats down the
wisdom of man, to the end the glory of his name might not be obscured, but
brightly shine, in maki^g the foolish things of this world to confound the
wise. C. That therefore which Christ here affirms, seruethe much to the
confirmation of the faithful at this day, and for ever, in that all men ar
stirred to ye acknowledginge of the mercy of god: for so much as there is
nothing in us, that can provoke him to call us, There is nothing in us to
deserve Gods election.
but rather a wonderful heap of sin and wickedness, to stir him to plague and
condemn us, were it not that his mercy is the greater. For truly the Gospel
is not gotten by the wit, labor, or industry of man, but only by the
illumination of the spirit of God. Because thou have hyd thee. A. That is,
because thou have not revealed or opened these mysteries of thy kyngedome to
the wise and prudent. For to hyde, not to reveal, open, or show, are all one.
So in an other place we reed, 4 King. 4.
The lord hyd it from me, and did not show it unto me, 1. King. 20.
and again. My father will do nothing, neither great nor small, but that he
will show it me, and how should he hyde this thing from me.

From the wise and prudent. C. Here it may be demanded, who they are whom
Christ calls wise, and babes, for experyence teaches us, that all that are
unlearned and rude, come not to the perfection of faith, neither are the
learned and wise left in their blyndenesse. Therefore they are defyned to be
wise and prudente in this place, which being lifted up with diabolical or
deuelishe disdain, will in no wise abide to hear the voice of Christ. Paul
with this pride was puffed up, Acts, 9.
but the lord tamed his furiousenes. If we decende to the rude multitude, we
shall find, that as the poisoned and cankered malice of the greatter part
does apere, even so they are left to destruction, with the heads and great
men. We grant trewly, that all the unfaithful do swell with a wrong and
wicked trust in them selves, whether it be through wisdom, or the same of
honesty? or whether they be encouraged by their honors, or richesse, or at
least by some great port, that they bear in this world: notwithstanding
let us note, that Christ here without the naminge of vice, does comprehend
all, which excel in wytt, and learning. Even as also he countethe it not a
virtue to be a babe or a child.

For although Christ be the master of the humble, and gives this rudiment
and instruction of Faith (Let no man be wise in his own conceyte) yet
notwithstanding in this place he speaks of that babyshe and chyldishe
behauyour which is voluntarye: but Christ by this means, amplyfieth the
grace of his father, in that he doothe voutchesafe to extend his mercy to the
loweste sort, and lift the poor out of the dounghyll. Qu^
But here aryseth a question, that seeing wisdom is the gift of God, how
comes it to pass, that the same should be a let and a hynderaunce unto us,
that we can not perceive the light of the Gospel? We must remember that
which we said even now, that the unfaithful do defyle and abuse the
wisdom given unto them: and therefore excellent wits are often times
hyndered, because they can not suffer them selves to be taught: But as
towchynge this place, we answer, Au^
that although the wisdom of the wise, do hinder them nothing at all, yet
may they be depryued of the light of the Gospel. Furthermore, the wisdom of
this world is folyshenesse before God. W^do^^
Also we may gather, that the saying of Christ in this place, is not general,
when he says, that the mysteries of the Gospel are hydden from the wise. For
if, of five wise men, sower reject the Gospel, and one imbraceth the same: and
of so many rude and ignoraunte men also, two or three become the dyscyples of
Christ, then is the saying of Christ here fulfilled: because God does not
banyshe all those from his kingdom, that are noble, wise, and mighty: but
only he shows that the number of those kind of men which shall be called,
is but small. So that wisdom is not here condemned in respect that it is the
gift of God, but Christ only pronounces, that it is of no effect to obtain
faith. I ga^ not^ ther^ ^tion.
Neither is ignorance here so commended, as though it were the mother of
virtue, but he shewethe that the same can not stay his mercy, love, and
compassion toward them that are ignorante, by the which they may be made
wise. Wherefore by this place we may gather, that none by their own wit, but
only by the secret illumynation of the holy ghost can attain to the
perfection of faith. Ro^
As S. Paul plainly teaches in the tenth to the Romans.

26 Trewely Father, so it was thy good pleasure.

E. Or, So O father, it was done, because it pleased thee having poynted the
same before by thy everlasting counsel. M. Here we are admonysshed that the
counselles of God in his works and judgments ought not to be dyscussed, ^es
coun^d pour^n not ^red.
but rather to be praised and commended, only contentinge our selves with
this saying. It is thy good pleasure. C. For trewely God requires no harder
thing of us, then that his will be unto us instead of excellent reason and
justice. He does often times inculcate and beat into our heads, that his
judgments are a profounde depthe and bottomless sea: and yet
notwithstanding we rashelye cast our selves headlong into the same: and if
any thing seem unpleasant unto us, we frett and murmr by and by against the
same, yea, and many burste out into open blasphemies. But the lord prescribes
unto us this rule, that we should thyncke all things that please God, to be
well.

27 Al things are given unto me of my father: and no man knows the son but
the father: neither knows any man the father, save the son, and he to whom
the son will show him.

C. There are some interpretours which do amiss in knitting this sentence to that
which goes before, which think that Christ only spoke the same, to
confirm and strengthen his disciples with greatter faith, to the preaching of
the Gospel. Where as truly Christ seems to speak it for on other cause, and
to an other end. For as before he showed that the church was gathered together
by Gods fre election: even so now he shows how he came unto men through
the grace of salvation. For when many hear, that there are no other heirs of
everlasting life, but such as were chosen before the foundation of the world,
by and by they inquire, how they know the secret counsel of God. And so
they cast them selves in a whirle poole, out of the which they come not easily
again: but Christ aryghte byddeth men to come unto him, to the end they may
receive the certeintie and seal of their salvation. The sense therefore of
this place is, that life is declared and made manifest unto us in christ, and
therefore none can be partaker of the same, but he which enters in by the
gate of faith. Now we se how he joins faith with the everlasting
predestination of God, which wicked men count contrary one to an other. For
although our salvation were alwais hid with god, yet notwithstanding Christ
was the waterpipe by the which he did flow unto us, and is received of us by
faith, by the which it might be firm, and ratified in our hearts. Wherefore it
is not good that we swerve from Christ, unless we mean to for go our
salvation. And no man kovvethe the son. He speaks this, because men should
not have a wrong opinion and judgment of his majesty. The sense therefore
of this place is, that if we will know what Christ is, we must go to the
testimonye of his father, who alone ca^ judge of him aryght, and knows very
well what appertaynethe unto him. For if we judge and immagyne of him, according
to our own mind, we shall rob and despoile him of a great part of his
power: therefore he is not trewly known, but by the voice and testymony of his
father. Allthoughe a voice alone should not suffice without the dyrection of
Gods spirit. For the power of Christ is higher, and more secret, then men
can attain and reach unto, until they are illuminated from above of the
father. Therefore understand that he knows not the father for him self, but
for us, Answer.
We answer yt it was superfluous to repete ye which was spoken already before,
for what does yt former giving of thanks co^taine, but only yt the father
reveled the son to who^ if pleased him? Where as now therefore it is added,
that the son is known of the father only, it is as it were, the shewinge of
the cause: for this thought might arise. What need was there yt the son should
be reveled of ye father, which offered himself to be seen openly of all men?
Now let us note upon what occasion it was said that the son was known of the
father alone. It follows Neither knovveth any man the father save the son.
This knowledge differs from that which went before.

For the son is not said to know the father, because he reuealeth him by his
spyrite, but he is said to know him in as much as he being the lively Image
of the father, Christ is the Image of the the father.
does after a sort in his own person show him visiblye. So that we exclude
not the spirit, but we refer the reuelacion (of the which mention is made
here) to the manner of knowledge: and so very well this text is united in it
self. For Christ confirms that which he spoke before, that al things were
given to him of his father, to the end we might know that the fulness of the
deyty consists in him. This therefore is the some of this text. It is the
gift of the father that the son is known, because by his holy spyrite, he
opens the eyes of our mynds, by the which we behold the glory of Christ,
which otherwise is hydden from us. But the father which dwells in the
mydest of light, being in himself incomprihensible, is reveled unto us by ye
Son, which is the pattern and lively Image of him, to the end that he
should be sought for in no other. A. Whereupon the Lord answered Philip (which
requested that the father might be sheewed to him, John. 14.
and to the rest of the Apostells.) Philippe he that sees me, sees the
father also. Last of all this place sufficiently declares that neither the
unbelieving Jews, The Papists know not the father.
neither ye Turks, nor the Papists which reiecte the doctrine of Christ,
do know the father: when none but Christ can show and declare him unto us.

28. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will ease
you.

Come unto me, all ye B. He does very well inuyte and call all men unto him,
after that he has declared that all things are given unto him of his father,
and that it is he only that gives the knowledge of his father. C. By this
so gentle and loving a calling he witnesses and declares that he is ready
to entertain and receive all men, if so be, that they come to be his
Disciples. For although he be ready to show his father unto all men, yet
notwithstanding the greatest part neglecte to come, because they feel not
their own necessity. Hy^^^ not^ Chri^
Hypocrites regard not Christ, because they being drunk as it were with their
own righteousness, do neither honger nor thyrst after his grace. They which
are adicted and given to the world also, esteem the heavenly life as nothing.
Therefore Christ in vain should call those two sorts of men unto him: so that he
turns him rather about to those yt are miserable, and afflicted. That labor
and are laden C. He calls those laborers, and laden, Affli^^ ^tayn^ men^
Chri^
which feel the burden of their sins and sighe under the weight of the
same, and which travail for the quietinge of their conscience, and which
continue poor in spirit. God (truly) does humble his elect and chosen by
diverse means: but because there are many which being oppressed with
miseryes, do remain nevertheless obstinate and stubborn: Christ calls those
laborers and laden which have their consciences afflicted with the punishment
of eternal death, and are inwardly so urged with their sins, that they are
ready even to despair: the which sorrow and inward grief in deed makes us
most apt to retain ye grace of Christ. Wherefore let us suffer ye proud
iusticiaries, to seek for health, by their own merits: let us suffer also
the worldlings to flatter themselves with the felicity and prosperous estate of
this world: but let us suffer our selves by the sting of conscience to be
brought unto Christ. And because Christ will admit no other into the
fellowshippe and fruition of his rest and quyetnes, but such as faynte, and
begin to quayle under the burden of sin, let us understand that there can
be no poison more pestiferous and pernicious, then that negligence, which that
false and deceytfull opinion of earthly felicitye and our own righteousness
bredeth and ingendreth in us. Therefore let every man daily awake and stir up
him self, and first of all let him shake of from him the vain delights and
pleasures of this world: then let him put away clean and wholly, al perverse
trust and confidence in his own righteousenes.

But we must note that no man can aspire and come to this repentance, by his
own power, ^h not ^l to ^to (...).
because it is the gift of God, Neither does Christ here go about to teach
what man may do of him self, but only he declares with what affection they
ought to com unto him. A. For this saying of Christ is most true, (...) 6.
No man comes to me, except my heavenly father draw him. C. But they which go
about to restrayn this burden and labor to the legal ceremonies, do to much
stretch the meaning of Christ. We grant truly that the burden of the law,
is intolerable, and that it does discourage the minds of me^, but we must be
mindful of that which was said, yt Christ does reach out ye hand of his
mercy to al those that are afflicted, to the end he might make a dyfference
between his disciples, and the contemners of his gospel. ^offe^ scife ^m.
Also we must note, that he makes here a general calling, least that any
man should doubt that he had not fre access and coming unto Christ Bu. He
calls not therefore this man, or that, he calls not the Jews alone, he
calls not the learned, the noble, or rich only, but he calls all old and
young, Jew or gentle, learned or unlearned, rich or poor, ye, so general
is this his inuitatio^, that he refuses none, of what state or condition so
ever they be of.

C. And yet notwithstanding they whith come are few in number, because among a
great multitude that perish, there are few that feel their destruction.

And I will ease you. B. Or I will refreshe you. This refreshinge is not to
be referred to meat or drink, but to the remedy of werines. As if he should
have said, I will make you rest and breathe your selves. C. Notwithstanding
this refocillation or refreshynge, which he speaks of, and promyseth here,
consysteth in the remission and forgeuenes of our sins, which alone does
pacyfye and quiet our minds. B. For so soon as he has given us knowledge of
him self, that we shall not need to doubt, but that our sins are forgeuen us
of the father through him, and that we are made by him, sons and heirs of
everlasting life: what thing is there then can trouble us? yea, what greater
peace and tranquillity of the mind can there be then this? Saint Paul in his
epistels persisteth much in preachinge and setting forth of this peace.
Christ alone is our help in trouble.
A. Moreover this pronoune, I, has a great Emphasis and force in it, I (says
he) will refreshe you. As if he should say, Why do ye look for ease, where it
can not be found? Why do ye seek in vain: I am he alon which can help you.
Therefore (leauinge all other) come unto me alone, that ye may possess the
true peace.

29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your sowles,

Take my yoke. C. Because we se many abuse ye grace of Christ when they turn
the same to the liberty of the flesh. Christ therefore after he had promised
joyful rest to the^ that labored in their consciences miserably, he also
admonishes yt he is the deliverer upon this condition, that men should take his
yoke upon the^, as if he should say, I do not therefore ease you of the burden
of sin, and make God merciful unto you, to the end ye should take liberty to
sin: but yt ye being erected and lifted up by his grace, should also take the
yoke upon you, and according to the spirit, to restrain the lasciuiousenes of
the flesh. And hereby the definition of that rest, whereof Christ spoke, is
gathered: namely yt Christ here does not exempt, or exclude his disciples, from
the burden of the cross, that they might live plesantly, but rather he seeks
yt he might exercise the^ under the yoke of discipline, and keep them under the
banner of trouble, And learn. M. Some read this, as though it were spoken of
Christ, to the end his disciples should learn mekenes and humility: but
there is an other meaning of these words, as thus. Because through the
co^tumacte of the flesh, we shonne and cast of the yoke of Christ as sharp
and hard, he seeks to frame us after his ensaumple This therefore is the sense
and meaning of these words: Because Christ exhorted his discyples to bear his
yoke, least that the hardness of the same should make them afraid, by and by he
adds: Learn of me: signifyinge that the yoke should not be greuouse unto us,
when as we are accustomed by his ensample to mekenes and humility. Let us
consider that he says in an other place, the servant is not above his
master, If he therefore vouchsafed to bear the yoke of trouble, we must not
disdain to bear the same.

And ye shall find rest. C. For so long as the flesh kycth and resists, so
long we are troubled: and when they go about to please god otherwise, in
casting of the yoke of Christ, they weary them selves in vain. Even as men may
se the Papists, The Papists reject the yoke of Christ.
who miserably vex and trouble them selves, because they will not be under the
yoke of Christ. But this spiritual rest, which the lord promyseth to those
that com unto him, can not be gotten by the study and industry of man. He
says trewly ye shall find: but before he said, I will ease you that we
might understand that we find this ease, by his grace and power.

30 For my yoke is sweet, and my burden is light.

The yoke of Christ is sweet.
M. Now he shows an other reason, why they shall find rest by his yoke,
namely because it is sweet and light, not hard or sharp. C. He calls his
yoke sweet, when as notwithstanding there is nothing more hard then his
doctrine, and cross, which he lays upon us: neither is there any thing more
hard then the life of Christians, if thou have respect to the present
condition and state of the same. A. But if thou have respect to the spirit of
adoption, by the which the sons of god are led, and if thou consider the
discipline in it self, it will seem bitter and hard to the flesh, but to the
spirit sweet, easy, and light. As witnesses s. John saying. This is the love
of God, 1. Epist. 5.
that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not greuouse, for
all that is borne of God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that
overcomes the world: even our faith, C. Therefore they which are regenerate by
the spirit of God, are framed to the obedience of his will: And when they have
once tasted what Christ is, and what they owe unto him, there is nothing hard.
Bu. Last of al, by this sente^e of Christ there are two sorts of men confuted.
The one sort are they, by whose Epicurisme and fylthy pleasure. But the lord
requires that we being delivered from the hands of our ennemies should serve
him, submittyng our selves to the yoke: Luk^
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

The, xii. Chapter.
AT that time Jesus went on the sabbath days through the corn, and his
discyples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn and to eat.
At that time Jesus went. C. In this hystory The ti^^^^ ^both^
The observation trewely of the saboth was a holy thing, but yet not in such
wise as they immagined namely that a man might scarce stir his finger upon
the same, without grudge of conscience. Hypocrisy therefore was the cause why
they were so scrypulous in light matters, and regarded not the gross
superstitions, in the which they wallowed: even as Christ casts them in the
teethe, (...) 3.
that they tythed mynte and commyn, and regarded not the principal points of
the Law. ^es ^t a ^d ^r a (...)
And this is always the manner of hypocrites, to seek for liberty in great
matters, and to be very precyse in ceremonies and outward tryfelinge shows.
Hereupon it comes to pass that they so seriously contend to observe
external rytes: because they seek and endeavor them selves, to worship God
only with carnal worship. But malice and envy, rather then superstition
pricked the^ forward to this reprehension: because they were not so captiouse
and froward to others. But it is profitable for us to note how they were
affectioned, least that any man should be troubled and offended; because the
doctors of the law were such enemies against Christ and his disciples. E.
This history therefore will teach us, what we ought to think of all the
ceremonies of the law and how we ought to use external and outward things,
that is to say, according to the arbitreme^t of true love. Also it will show
us the obstinacy of the reprobate, and for what things specially hypocrites do
co^tende. On the Sabbath days. A. Luke says it came to pass on an after
principal Sabbath.

C. But there is no doubt but that this Sabbath pertayned to one of those
special feast days which the law commands to be celebrated every year:
Therefore some thought that every other two days, the Jews observed their
feasts or holy days: but because after the exyle into Babylon, the Jews did
so distribute their festival days, that always one day should come
between, therefore their opinion is refuted.

They speak more probabely which say that it was the last day of
solemnity, which was as holy as the first, in all points. But their opinion
seems more true, which understand it to be the second festival day of the
year: and the name agrees very well to have it called an after principal
Sabbath, which was the second of the chief and yearly festiuals. But the
feast of Easter was the first and chiefest, therefore, then was the time of
the first fruits as it might seem, B. namely as concerning harvest, when the
ears of corn were ripe.

M. But it came not to pass without the special counsel and dispensation of
God, that the disciples of Christ on this holy day, above all others should
be so hungry, and that they should go through the fields of corn, specially
the Phariseis being present. For it was necessary that the lord should have
occasion offered unto him, that he might teach, what they should think of the
holy and sacred religion of the Sabbath.

And his disciples were an hungered. M. Christ might sufficiently have fed his
Apostels, John. 6.
which fed five thousand men with a littell bread. But he did rather seek
that his disciples in suffering this, should be contented with mean and
simple fare. For it should come to pass (as it came in deed) that after his
departing, 2. Cor. 11.
they should feel hunger: therefore he thought good to let them have some
felinge of that (he being present) which they afterward should taste in his
absence.

And they plucked the ears of corn. Bu. The hunger of the disciples
reprehe^deth greatly the glottony and excess in eating and drynking, which we
use at this day.

2 But when the Phariseys saw it, they said: Behold, thy disciples do that
which is not lawefull to be done on the Sabbath day.

But when the Phariseis. M. The Phariseys as righteous and men godly disposed,
followed Christ among the rest of the multitude, not to learn of him, but to
the end they might mark his words and deeds, that they might have somewhat
to carye and cavil at, as though they had been studious kepers of the law,
and to have special charge committed unto the^, for the observing of the life
and religion of men. They are like unto these Phariseis which come only to ye
hearing of sermons, to the end they may carpe and cavil at the same. Behold,
thy disciples do that. C. The Phariseis do not reprehende the disciples of
Christ, because they pluck the ears of corn out of an other man's field,
but because they violate the Sabbath day. As though in deed it had been so
ordained that men being hungry, should rather starve and perish, then they
should remedy or preuente the same.

The use of the Sabbath.
But truly the Sabbath was ordained to this end, that the people sanctifying
the^ selves unto God, should exercise them selves in the true and spiritual
worship of him: And that they forsakynge all worldly busynes, should give the^
selves the more quietly to godly devotion. Wherefore the lawefull observation of
the Sabbath ought to be referred to the end: because the interpretation of the
law ought to be according to the mind of the lawemaker. But these Phariseis
as false interpretours, rather of malice then of ignorance construe the
doings of Christ to an evil end, and take the same being never so well mente,
in evil part.

Where as Matthewe and Mark say, that the Phariseis made this objection unto
Christ, and Luke says, that they made it to the disciples, there is no great
difference: For it is probable that the disciples were so vexed, that the
accusation was laid to the master him self. For it may be that after they
had begone with the disciples, they came unto Christ, imputinge that as a
fault in him, which his disciples had done. As if they should have said,
behold, what disciples thou have, se how well thou instructest them? Why
doste thou not rebuke them for breakyng the Sabbath day.

3 But he said unto them, have ye not read what David did when he was an
hu^gred, and they that were with him?

Bu. The lord strikes his adversaries with the testimony of scripture,
defending the deed of his disciples, and expou^ding the law of God, as
concerning the Sabbath. What David did. C. Christ refuteth the cauillation
that was objected David.

For David flyinge from the wrath of Saul, when that he required food of
Achimelech the priest, 1. King. 21.
he having no common meat to give him, obtained that the holy bread might be
given unto him. If necessity excused David, the like may excuse others.
Whereupon it follows, that the ceremonies of the law are not violated when
godlynes is not hurt.

Christ also takes this for a grant, that David was void of all blame,
because the priest is commended by the holy ghost, which suffered him to take
the show breades. M. But we must note that he alleges not the example of
David simplely, but says, have ye not read? As who should say, have ye no
knowledge of that which is so manifest and commen in the scriptures? If you
have read it, how comes it to pass that ye accuse not and condemn David,
having committed the like fact that my disciples have done.

4 How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the show breades which
were not lawefull for him to eat, neither for them that were with him, but
only for the pristes.

How he entered into the house. Exo^
M. That is into the Tabernacle. But for the priests only. Read the nine and
twenty of Exodus, Le^
and the four and twenty of Leuiticus. When as Christ says, that it is
lawefull for none to eat of those breades, but the priests only, we must
understand it by the common Law. For if David had done any thing contrary to
right, Christ should in vain have alleged his example: But necessity made
that lawefull which was forbodden to a certain end and purpose. According to
the proverb, Necessity has no law. N^ hath^
M. For always extreme hunger has a prerogative, As says the common
proverb, Hunger breaks through stone walls. The lord therefore here
answered the churlishe and full bellies, which will bear and consider
nothing of their neighbors necessity. For so it commonly comes to pass
that he which never feleth the violence and necessity of hunger, can not take
pity upon such as are hungery: the which we commonly see in many that are
rich. The rich man whereof Luke makes mention, Luk^
was altogether ignoraunte of the hunger that Lazarus suffered.

5 Or have ye not read in the Law, how that the priests in the Temple
break the Sabbath, and yet are blameless.

(...) 2.
Or have ye not read. C. This is the second argument, by the which Christ
proves the violation of the Sabbath (of the which the Jews so much
compain) to be without fault: because it was lawefull on the Sabbath days
to offer sacrifice, to circumcise infantes, and to do all other things which
pertain to the worship of God. Whereby it follows that the duties of
godliness are not contrary one to the other. Now if the Temple sanctify
handlabourers, in sacrifices, and external worship then must the holiness of
the true and spiritual Temple, purge the worshippers that pertayne to him,
from all vice, since they labor in the offices of godlynes. And in this work
of godliness, were the disciples greatly occupied, for they offered their souls
being consecrated through the Gospel unto God. This argument Matthewe only
touches. That the priests in the temple break the Sabbath. C. This is an
improper kind of speech, by the which Christ frames him self to the
hearers. For the law when it byddeth men to abstain from their works,
prohibiteth them not to do those things that are holy. So yt Christ counts
it sufficient, if the labors concerning the Temple offend not God.

6 But I say unto you that here is one in this place greater then the Temple.

M. They thought peradventure that the thing which the priests did work in
the temple on the Sabbath day, did pertayne to the worship of God (which was
fulfilled by sacrifice) and that they were excused by the Temple of God. To
these cogitations Christ answers, ^ent ^e to (...)
that if the holiness of the Temple did not only excuse, but also require the
work to be done by the priests on the Sabbath day, the same holiness ought
much more to excuse these my disciples, which are chose^ to the ministry. For
they offer not up carnal offeringes and oblations, with the external sword,
but with the spiritual sword of the Gospel, they consecrate and offer up
unto God the souls of the faithful. Whereas therefore he says here, that
there is a greater then the Temple in this place, it ought to be understood
of the health of men, the which seeing it is better in the sight of God, then
the Temple and sacrifices, it does better excuse a great deal the deed of the
Apostels, than the doings of the priests.

7 But if ye wiste what this were: (I will have mercy and not sacrifice) ye
would not have condemned innocents.

But if ye knevve. C. Matthewe only makes mention of this third argument
Osee rebukes and reproves the men in his time, Osee. 6.
because they being addicted to ceremonies, regarded not the duties of
charity. And truly God him self cries that he estemeth more of mercy then of
sacrifice: Signifying under this word, mercy, the duties of charity by a
figure called Synecdoche, even as the external worship of the law, is
comprehended under sacrifice. The same sentence Christ applies to his time,
and accuses the Phariseis, because they wreste the Law of God amiss into a
wrong sense, because also they reiectinge the second table, set their whole
affiance upon ceremonies. Bu. As if he should say, Where as you judge of the
Sabbath and all other things pertaining to religion amiss, it comes hereby
so to pass, because always ye cleave to much to external things, to the
which ye attribute more then true godlynes will bear: and in the mean time
ye pretermite, internal and true piety, that is to say, faith in God, the
fear of God, charity and mercy: than which things nothing can be more
necessary. One place of the Prophet Esaye (if that you were curable) might
reduce you into the way, and rightly inform your minds, whereby ye might more
rightly and more truly judge of religion, and the observation of the Sabbath.
Then should ye not so ignorauntly have condemned my disciples, which have
offended nothing, neither against God, neither against the faith, nor against
charity: Yea then you would have understood, that that law as concerning the
Sabbath had not been violated and broken for plucking up one ear of corn. C.
Notwithstanding, some man may demand here, why God says in this place of
the Prophet, that he regards not sacrifice, when he has commanded the same
in the law. It may be answered, Answer.
that external rytes of the^ selves have no force, neither are they required of
God, but only in respect of their end to the which they are made and
directed. Furthermore, the lord does not reiecte them, but comparing them to
the works of charity, he teaches that they are of less estimation in his
sight then these. A. As we have declared before in the nynthe chapter. C.
Neither does this let but that the worship of God may be placed in the hiest
degree in the perfection of righteousness: then, that the duties of me^, should
be set in the second place next unto the same. Ye would not have condemned.
C. By the testimony of the Prophet, Christ plainly concludes that his
Apostels were without blame: because God exercising his people in the
rudimentes of the law, would not have miserable M. In effect Christ blames
the Phariseis in two things: First of ignorance, which grieved the^ much,
they challenging to the^ selves the keys of knowledge: Secondly

8 For the son of man is lord, even over the Sabbath.

C. Some knitte this sentence with that which goes before, that there is one
present greater then the Temple: but it seems rather to differ from the same.

For at the first Christ alluding it to the temple, affirmed that whatsoever
was joined with his holiness, was not the trasgressio^ of the law. But here he
says that he has power to deliver his apostels from the necessity of the
observing of the Sabbath. The son of man (says he) by his power, may use the
Sabbath as other ceremonies of the law. And truly the obseruaunce of the law
without Christ is miserable, from the which he only does deliver, by indewing
us with the fre A. This therefore is the fourth argument, taken of the power of
Christ. Mark adds, Man
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. C. The effect of
the fifte argument is that he does amiss, which

9 And he departed thence and went into their Synagoge.

Bu. To the same effect, end and purpose, this story must be brought, to the
which the other going before was referred. C. Namely that the Scribes were
maliciously bente to calumniate and cavil at all the doings of Christ, and
therefore it was no marvel if his enemies were so diverse to please when their
minds were so infected with mischief. But we se that this is a custom among
hypocrites, only to follow the shadowed righteousness of the law, and to
stand rather upon the form, then in the substance of a thing. First of all,
therefore let us learn here to bring with us, pure minds, and void of al
evil affections, when we go to learn, or to judge of any matter. For if
hatred, if disdain, if ambition, or any such vice reign in our minds, we
shall not be only injurious unto men, but also co^tumelious against God
tourning his light into darkness.

No man void of malice, would have condemned the work of God, which these
doctors let not to do. Whereupon came this furor and madness, but only upon
this, that they bare a tyrannous hate against Christ? ^ght not ^rre ce^es be^
word (...).
Moreover we are admonished to beware, that we attribute not more unto
ceremonies then is mete and convenient, and pretermit to the chiefest points
of the law.

And went into their Synagoge. M. Into their Synagoge, which even now
condemned the disciples as breakers and defilers of the Sabbath. In the which
we may note the trust of a good conscience in Christ, and his exceadinge
goodness toward the people. For he neither feared to go into the Synagoge of
the wicked Phariseis, and there to show him self openly, neither did he
withdraw his benefits from the people for the malice of the Jews, neither
did he let to reprehende and reprove the blyndnes of the Phariseis. A. By the
which example al those ought to arm them selves, which are called of God to
the ministry of the word.

10 And behold, there was a man which had his hand dried up, and they asked
him saying: is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? because they might
accuse him.

And behold there was a man. B. When Christ had not sufficiently persuaded
the Jews as concerning the keeping of the Sabbath he took a miracle in hand,
or the testimony of his father, whereby he might make them believe that he
taught that which was godly and right. M. The Evangelist therefore shows,
that there was fit and convenient occasion offered to them both, namely to
Christ, and to his adversaries: as if he should have said, So sone as he was
entered into the Synagoge, there was fit and apt occasion offered, whereby
both the power of Christ and also the obstinate blyndnes of the Phariseis,
might be declared. B. Let us also note here that God does dispose all things,
^rou^
by the sure rules of his providence. And they asked him. C. Mark and Luke
say that they only marked him whether he would heal him on the Sabaothe
day: Matthewe doothe more playnelye express that he was asked a question by
word of mouth. But it is likely that there were healeed diverse others before
upon the Sabbath days.

Here therefore they taking occasion, demand whether he thought it lawefull
to do again or reiterate that which he had done before. But truly, it became
them to way and consider, whether it were a divine, or humane work to make a
hand wythered, and dried up to have his palpable sense and motion, only with a
word, or by touching the same. For God appointing the Sabbath, made not a
law for him self, neither did he thereby bind him self to any servitude or
bondage, but that he might exercise his will and pleasure, as well upon the
Sabbath days, as on other days. It was to much madness therefore, to move
this question, as though they might restrain the doings of God, and appointe
him an order for his works.

Because they might accuse him. B. Note here the Scribes and Phariseis, who
seemed to excel all men in wisdom and holiness of life, and yet
notwithstanding, they seek occasion to intrappe Christ, to the end they might
accuse and destroy him.

11 But he said unto them: which of you is it, if he has a sheep fallen into
a pit upon the Sabbath day, that would not take him, and lift him out.

C. Christ shows here again what is the true observation of the Sabbath:
and reproves the^ also for their captiousnes, in that they go about to cavil
at his doings. For if any man's sheep had fallen into a pit no man would
have been against the plucking of him out again: But look how much more a
man does excel a beast, so much the more lawful it is to help him. It is
manifest therefore, that if a man do help the necessity of his brother, he
does not break the rest commanded of the lord, though it be on the Sabbath
day. This similitude is not made mention of, neither in Mark nor in Luke
only, they say that Christ did demand, whether it were lawful to do good
or evil on the Sabbath day. For he which loses a man's life, is gilty of
evil, and he differs not from a murderer, which helps not his brother
being in peril of his life, We ought rather to break the Sabbath day than
the rule of charity.
if he may. Christ therefore reproves them which under the color of holy
rest, will constrayne men to do that which is evil: because they do not
only offend (as it was said before) which do any thing contrary to the
law, but also which neglecte their duty. Here also we see that Christ used
not always one manner of reasons to repel the calumniation of the Jews,
John. 5.
because here he disputes not of his deuinitie, as he does in another place as
may appear in the fifte chap of John.

12 And how much is a man better the^ a sheep? Therefore it is lawful to do
good on the Sabbath day.

A. Here he brings in (to confirm that which he said) an argument of the
less to the more. M. As if he should say, deny it if ye can: If you care for
those things that are your own, and that with labor and pain do seek to
save a sheep on the Sabbath day: how then will ye blame me which seek not
that which is mine own, but serve and help my neighbors through love,
sauinge souls, not sheep, and that with my word without any laborious and
troublesome business? If you offend not in sauinge a sheep on the Sabbath day,
how much less do I offend in saving souls on the Sabbath day? For how
much a man does excel a sheep, I leave it to your own judgment Therefore it
is lavvfull. This is the conclusion of the premises: It is lawefull to do good
unto a beast on the Sabbath day, therefore it is lawful to do good unto a
man on the Sabbath day.

13 Then said he to the man: stretche forth thy hand. And he stretched it
forth, and it was whole again like unto the other.

Then said he to the man. A. Before these words Luke says, Luke, 6.
But he knew their thoughts. C. If Matthewe say true, they did plainly
declare by their mouth, what they had in their hearts. Christ therefore does
not answer to their secret cogitation, but to their manifest words. But it
may stand both ways, that they spoke openly, and that Christ did judge of
their secret affection: Neither did they profess in what ye Scribes did
catch or intrappe him, as Matthewe expresses their captions interrogation and
cavil: Luke therefore means nothing else, but that their deceites and wyles
were known unto Christ, although by words they pretended another thing.

Mark adds that he looked round about upon them with wrath. Man
And not without cause, so great was their wicked obstinacy. For to the end we
may know that his wrath was just and holy, he says moreover that he was
sorry for the hardness of their hearts. First of all therefore, Christ is sorry,
because men exercised in the law of God, are so much blinded.

But because malice had blinded them, he myngeleth his sorrow with wrath. A
(...) zeal
This is the true moderation of zeal, that when we are careful with sorrow
for the destruction of wicked men, then also we are very angry against their
impiety. Christ therefore is angry, but with his anger, the grief and sorrow
for our blyndnes is myngeled: by the which he declares his loving kindness
toward us, namely that although we through our obstinate pertinacy, and
wilful blyndnes, do provoke him to wrath, yet notwithstanding. he of his
loving kyndnes toward us, does no less sorrow then a father for the
stobornes and blyndnes of his children. And as this place does testify that
Christ was not void and free from humane affections, even so hereby we gather,
that the passions by them selves were not vicious, because they were not
exceadinge and out of measure. But we, W^^ an^ om^
because of our corrupt nature, can not observe a mean and moderation, so
that we can not be angry and moved to wrath without sin. Therefore we must
pray unto God, so to direct our affections by his holy spirit, yt we in our
anger offend not. Stretche forth thy hand. B. When he had proved both by
reason and example, that it was not only lawful, but also always necessary to
do good upon the Sabbath day, specially unto men, he healed the man. In the
which healinge we must note, that he cured him with his word, only, not
mouinge his hand, or any external thing, as he was wont to do at other
times, to the end they might have the less cause to calumniate, or cauyll
against him. For how could he violate or break the Sabbath with his word.

Thereby he teaches us, that it is not sufficient to do well, but also we must
remove every stone or impedimente, that our doings may have favor with every
man. For so we see that Christ does in this place: he set the man with the
wythered hand in the myddest, to the end they beholding his misery, might
count it a good and charitable deed to heal him, though it were on the
Sabbath day. The^ by convenient interrogation, he admonishes that it shall be
unlawful at no time to do good, much less on the Sabaothe day. For to do
a holy thing according to charity on the holy day, is according to the
commandment of the lord. Last of all, by an example of them selves, he
proves the same: A. And at the length he restores health unto the man.

14 Then went the Phariseis out, and held a counsel against him, how they
might destroy him.

B. Hitherto the Evangelist has showed of the religion of the Sabbath, and of
the external worship, which is the exercise of that which is internal, which
is far more excellent, and of such waighte and importance, that the
external without the internal worship, is of no proffite: Now it follows,
how this doctrine of piety is received, whereby we learn again how it will
be received of ye world, to the end of the same. The Phariseis went out to
take counsel how they might destroy him. C. Behold now how the reprobate,
^^er ^o^
in their obstinate madness go about to resist the power of God. For they being
conuicte, confounded, and overcome in their malice, do more and more power out
their poison. This truly is a horrible and monstrous thing, that the chief
doctors of the law, which had the government of the church, should go
about like thieves to move sedition. But such is the malice of the reprobate and
wicked, that they desire to have all things yt are against their lust and will
to be extinguished though they proceade from God him self. ^de ^rde ^to (...).
Bu. The wickedness of ye world can in no wise bear and abide the purity and
simplicity of the Gospel, and therefore, it goes wonderfully about, by all
means to entrap and inta^gle the ministers of ye same, tra^sforming it self
into many shapes, and at the length takes counsel how it may suppress not
only the truth it self but also the ministers of the same and to destroy them
both together. C. Mark adds that the Phariseis took counsel with Herodes
servants or officers, (which were called Herodians) whom notwithstanding
they hated wonderfully. Whherby we may note their exceeding malice, in that they
could now at this time, for the hatred they bare unto Christ insinuate and
cloak with such, Tyrauntes that are enemies one to an other beco^ friends to
destroy Christ.
as before time they abhorred and detested. For although the tyrau^tes of this
world are at debate and strife one with another, yet notwithstanding to
destroy Christ and his power, with one consent they can link and unite the^
selves in friendship. A. Furthermore, Luke declares yt the Phariseis were
filled with madness. Was not this a wonderful madness to hate the lord for so
singular a benefit showed with so great modesty? Yes undoubtedly, but this is
the common practice of the wicked, that when they are tried by the goodness of
God, then chiefly does the power of Satan show it self in the^. Ephe. 2.
For as S. Paul says the wicked spirit is of great force in them.

15 But when Jesus knew thereof, he departed thence, and much people followed
him: and he healed them all.

But when Jesus knevve. C. In that Christ seeks to escape by flight, it is
not to be imputed to any fear that was in him. John. 7.
For as he did fly at this time, so did he diverse times afterward, because the
time in the which he should suffer was not yet com, but when the fulness of time
was expired he did not let to offer him self to the death yea, even to ye most
shameful death of the cross. Again it is evident that he was rather by his
heavenly power then by flight, Philip. 2.
preserved, for otherwise it had been no hard matter, if ye Jews would have
persecuted him, to have found him: neither did he hide him self in caves, but
had always a great multitude following him, and by the miracles that he
wroughte, had great fame also.

He fled therefore out of their sight only because he would not kyndell their
madness, which would have increased more and more by his presence.

There follovved him a great multitude. The Phariseis go about to kill
Christ, and the multitude follow him. John. 7.
M. Whereupon the Scribes and Phariseis said. Do any of the Rulers and
Phariseis believe on him? But the common people which know not the law, are
cursed. At this day we may hear the like sayings of the wicked: Say they,
These lewd fellows, (meaning the preachers of the word) seduce the rude
and ignoraunte people, but what wise man, or what is he of reputation that
regards them? But let us consider for what cause the Scribes and Phariseis
did not follow Christ. Did not they see what Christ did? Yes, undoubtedly
very well. Wherefore then do not they also with the multitude follow him?
Surely if the like affection had been in them that was in the multitude, they
had followed Christ also: But because the like was not in them, therefore they
did the contrary.

And he healed them all. C. Here he shows the promptnes and readiness of
Christ, in healing the infirmities and diseases of the people, to this end,
that we should rather consider his goodness, mercy, and loving kyndnes, then
the power of healing, with the which he was endowed.

16 And charged them that they should not make him known.

C. But Mark in stead of this, seems to place some other special matter,
namely, that he charged ye unclean spirits to hold their peace, which
proclaimed him to be the son of God. But we will show in an other place, why
he would not admit the testimony of these. Notwithstanding, there is no doubt,
but that God caused the deuels to make this confession: But after that Christ
had showed, that they were subject to his power, he did not without cause
reiecte their testimony. But that which Matthew says, is more large, namely
that Christ forbad them to publishe the fame of those signs and miracles that
he did: not that he would have them wholely suppressed, but that they having
now taken root, should bring forth their fruit in dew and convenient time,
which time as yet was not come. For we know that Christ did not dally, or
tryfell in his miracles, that is, he wroughte them not without some serious
effect to come, but he had this regard, to prove him self thereby to be the
son of God, and the redemer of the world. He came therefore by little and
littell to the light, and as it were by degrees or steps: neither was he any
other wise made manifest what he was, then the time which was ordained of his
father before would suffer. Their in se^ scure^ ^ry of (...) forth^
This now is worthy the notinge here, that while the wicked go about to
frustrate and obscure ye glory of God, they make the same ye more to appear,
and peruerte their own imaginations, by the secret counsel of God, who
works ye same, and confounds their devises as foolish. For although they
expulsed him from one place, his glory shyneth straightwaye in an other, yea,
more then it did before.

17 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, which
says.

B. The Euangeliste alleges this place, to commend the wonderful mekenes
and modesty of Christ, by the which he gave place to his adversaries, when as
he might have destroyed them, and also in a moment confounded them: but he
rather through patience wayghted when judgment should be cast forth to
victory: to declare also yt he would go to ye Gentiles, and that he would
teach the^ by his Apostels. C. Therefore Matthew understands not yt the
prophecy of Esaias is altogether fulfilled in this, ye Christ prohibited the
rumors of his divine power: but in this part also a trial of his mekenes was
declared, which is set forth by Esaias in the person of ye Messiah Matthew also
by this circu^staunce intended to show yt the glory of ye deuinitie of Christ
was not therefore the less to be esteemed, because he appeared under the show of
infirmity And truly to the same end and scope did the holy ghost direct ye
eyes of the Prophet. For because the flesh does always covet and desire an
external show and bewty, least that the faithful should seek for the like
in the Messiah, the spirit of God witnesses that he shall be altogether unlike
to earthly kings, who to the end they may get unto them selves admiration,
whethersoeuer they come, they styr up great shoutes and cries, and they fill
the cities and towns with tumultes. Now let us behold how aptly Matthewe
applies the prophecy of the Prophet to the present cause, or matter in hand.
For because it pleased God to put upon his son an humble and base estate,
^p. 2,
least that the rude and ignorant should conceive any offense by his
co^temptible, and obscure condition, both the Prophet, and Matthewe to
preuente this (I say) pronounce that it was so decreed before hand, not
rashely but by the will of God. Hereupon it follows that all they do amiss,
which despise Christ, because his external condition answers not, or is
not agreeable to the desires of the flesh. Neither is it mete that we imagine or
think of Christ according to our wit, reason, or understanding, but simpely it
is necessary that he be embraced as Christ, which is sent and offered unto
us of God the father. So that he is unworthy of salvation, which despyseth the
humility of Christ, with the which the almighty God witnesses that he is
pleased.

18 Behold my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul
delights. I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles.

Behold my servant. E. Some translations have, Behold my son, but the
Hebrew word Abdi, which is read in the prophecy of Esaias, (...). 2
does rather signify a servant then a son. The Greek word is ambiguous,
and may be taken for either of them. But as touching the matter. God, to the
end he might bind us, (as it were) to his will, does show, even as with his
finger, him, whom he will send, and to this end pertayneth this word of
demonstration, behold. The like reason is in the Epithetes or tytels
followyng, in the which he calls him his servant, and his chosen, in whom
his soul delights. For whereupon comes it to pass, that men dare presume
to measure Christ by their reason and sense, but only because they consider
not that their redemption depends upon the mere grace of God. But this is to
wicked, and gross a liberty: That when God offers unto us his incomparable
treasure, we esteem and make price of the same, according to our fleshely
skyll. Christ is become a servant for us.
Also he is called a servant by excellency, not as one among a common
multitude, or as common servants are, but as such a one to whom God has
committed the charge of his church or congregation, and the redemption of
mankind. And because no man, which usurps honor, to him self, is worthy of
honor, but he which is truly called to the same, God pronounces that his
son Christ is thereunto called and chosen by his heavenly and everlasting
decree and council.

Therefore he says. Whom I have chosen. Whereupon it follows, that it is
not mete for men to reiecte him, whom God has chose^. And truly it were to
absurd and void of all reason, that the holy and inviolable vocation of God
should be frustrate and of none effect, at our will and pleasure. M. He said
therefore to be the elect and chosen of God, not in respect that he is a
son, but a servant, sent into this world for our redemption.

Therefore the Prophets used to call Christ the elect and chosen of God. And
the high priests mocking him, said, if he be Christ the chosen of God,
Luke. 23.
let him save him self.

Also saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.
If so be that ye have tasted how gracious the lord is, to whom ye come as a
living stone, disalowed of men, but chosen of God.

My beloved. This is not read in the Hebrewe text.

In whom my soul delights. C. Where as God adds that the pleasure of his
soul rests in Christ, it co^tayneth more matter in it, then can well be
perceived at the first sight. For although the vocation and calling of us all
does spring from the free favor and grace of God, as from a lyuelye well:
Notwithstanding, this is synguler in Christ, because in his person God the
father comprehends the whole church with his love.

For in that we are al enemies unto God by nature, his love can never come unto
us, except it begin first at the head, as shall be declared in the seuententh
chapter followyng. There is no perfect love in any creature saving Christ alone.
M. There is no firm, sure, and perfect love to be found in no creature, no
not in the Angels in heaven, but in Christ him self alone.

I will put my spirit upon him. M. Christ in respect of his humanity,
Math. 3.
was appointed and consecrated with the grace of the holy ghost, before he
executed the office, for ye which he was sent. Bu. He being baptized, saw the
spirit of God descending and resting upon him, of the which John the Baptist
was warned before by these words. He which sent me to baptize with water,
said unto me, upon whom soever thou sest the spirit of God descending and
restinge, the same is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. So were Moses,
John. 1.
Samuel, and David, consecrated: So were Elias, and Elizeus, the Prophets,
consecrated also. There is all so yet another reason for ye which Christ is
said to be endewed with the holy ghost, as we will declare anon.

And he shall shevve judgment to the Gentyles. C. The Prophet here shows
briefly the office of Christ, which was to declare judgment to the Gentyles.
But by the name of judgment, is comprehended the state of the Jews, where
equity and right flourished. Therefore these words are in effect, as if the
Prophet should have said that he shall come which shall restore the
righteousness yt is decayed, and that he shall be the moderator and guide not of
one people only, but shall bring also the Gentiles under the rule and
government of God, among whom before there was nothing but vaste, rude, and
ignorant behavior. And this truly was ye office of Christ to spread the
kingdom of God, which was shut up in a corner of Jury, throughtout ye whole
world: Psalm. 110.
as it is said in another place, The lord shall send the rod of thy power
out of Syon. A. In this place therefore the calling of the Ge^tyles is
prophesied Also the manner how judgment shall be declared, is expressed,
because God has endewed Christ with his holy spirit, which spirit Christ
received of his father, to power upon all those that are his. For he teaches
us not by a voice or by wrytinge only, but by the grace of his holy spirit,
he frames the hearts of men inwardly to the observing and keeping the true and
perfect rule of righteousness. And without the operation of the same spirit in
our hearts we are not able to perform any thing that is good.

19 He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streates.

M. This is spoken of the mekenes and modesty of Christ, the which he kept
unto the end, and with the which he overcame all his enemies. C. For there
shall be no such manner of shouting, cries, and tumultes, about his kingdom, as
is in the world: Neither shall his kingdom consiste of pomp and violence,
but it shall be humble and base in the sight of the world. Yea, by this place
the Eua^geliste shows that Christ should not reign violently,
constrayninge men with force to be subject unto him, but rather mekely with
long sufferaunce, forbearing all men.

20 A broused Reed shall he not break, and smokynge Flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.

A broused Reed. M. By these two sayings the Evangelist declares that Christ
shall rather help our infirmity, then reiecte our weakness and imbecillitie.
The Prophet also by these words sets forth the wonderful clemency and
mekenes of the Lord, in that he brake not the afflycted, being as broused
quilles or Reeds, but rather comforted, erected, and strengthened them.

Also the smookynge Flax, which was almost extinguyshed, he put not out,
but kyndeled and gave more light unto the same, that it might clearly burn.
He despised not the Publicanes and sinners, but sought rather by all means to
save them: There was nothing so weak, so broused, and so much quenched, that
he strengthened not, that he made not whole, that he kyndeled not again
with his holy spirit.

M. All the which things tend to this end, that the mekenes and clemency of
Christ might be amiable unto us, which is despised in the world. And truly
the foolishenes of men is to be meruailed at, that they think the less honor
to be in Christ, because he bends him self according to their weakness
gentely, and of his own accord. If he should appear in his glory (as he shall
for certain, when the fulness of time is expyred) then we meruayled not so
much at his symplicitie before, as we shall then wonder at the excellency of
his glorious majesty: Yea, it shall so much excel that the bryghtnes of the
same, shall rauishe our senses. Therefore to the end, the clemency and
gentleness of Christ might be reverenced and hyghly esteemed of the faithful,
the Prophet Fsaye shows how proffitable and necessary it is.

Every man knows his own fragillitie and weakness, whereupon we may consider
and way how necessary this loving kyndnes, mekenes and clemency, is necessary
for all men: And how necessary it is for men to be spared and favored at the
hands of Christ.

We speak not here of the unfaithful, which are altogether void and
destitute of the sprite of grace, but of such as are called of the Lord
already, until he kyndle the light more clearly in them, and more strongly
confyrme them. ^e com^ brou^des.
Are not all men like unto broused Reeds, and smokynge Flax? In that Christ
therefore tempereth, and frames him self to our infirmity, fragillitie, and
weakness, let us attribute the same to his inspeakeable goodness, and embrace
the same. Notwithstanding, let no man here by flatter him self in his
wyckednes, but let every man endeavor him self to proffite, and go forward
in all virtue more and more. Let us not bend, being now confirmed by
Christ, like broken Reeds with every blast of wynd, but let us grow into
perfect strength and manhood, that we may stand stoutly against at the
assaults of Satan.

Let not our faith be obscure, smokyng and dark, and bring forth small
sparks only: But let it bring forth most clear and shynyng beams.

After these things there follows a little sentence in the Prophet which
Matthewe omitteth. The words are these, But faithfully and truly he shall
give judgment, and not be pensive nor careful. By the which words the
faythefull manner of teaching of the Lord is expounded.

C. Although (says he) he do comfort and strengthen the weak, yet
notwithstanding, he will correct vice righteously without flattery and
parciallitie: He will sharply reprove the obstinate and contemners, as may
appear by many examples of the Scribes and Phariseys.

Because therefore under the color and pretense of this place, as concerning
the clemency of Christ, some falsely pretend that all men without exception,
must be gentely delte with all: We must note the difference, that the Prophet
did put between the weak and the wicked. For it is mete and convenient, that
the obstinacy of the^ which are to strong and stout, should be assuaged and
beaten down as it were with an Iron maule. And that they which go about in
all places, either to bring in darkness or else are faggottes them selves to
set on fire, should have their dark and mysty clouds driven away, or else
their burning heat extynguyshed.

Therefore as it is the parts of faithful and true ministers, to endeavor
them selves, in sparinge and bearing with the weak, to cherishe and increase
the grace of God in them: So is it their duty all so wisely to beware and
take heed, least that they spare their obstinate malice, which have no
affinity with the fumynge flax or the raced Read.

Till he send forth judgment to victory. C. According to the Hebrewe text,
it is read otherwise, namely, until he bring forth judgment in truth.
Notwithstanding, the words of Matthewe have a great emphasis, to the end
we may know, that ryghteousnes was not set in the world without great
contention and war against Satan: as may appear by this word victory,
which is never obtained without fight.

Perseverance pertains to the ministers of Christ.
The Prophet therefore by these words testifies Christ to be so constaunt,
that he prosecuted his vocation to the vttermoste. By the which example also,
all the ministers of Christ must learn to perceiuer and continue with a
stout courage and strong mind.

21 And in his name shall the Ge^tils trust.

C. The words of the Prophet are otherwise, as thus. The Isles look for his
law. But although the Euangeliste Matthewe have altered the words, yet has
he not changed the sense, namely, that the grace of Christ shall be common and
pertayne to the Gentyles. For the promise pertayneth to all nations, to the
end all the parts of the world might taste of the fruit of the new
restitution, John. 110.
and renouation. Read the tenthe chapter of John.

22 Then was brought to him a blind and dumb man, that was vexed with a
deuell, and he healed him, in somuche that the blind and dumb, both spoke
and saw.

Then was brought to him. A. When was this done? Surely when he was come into
the house, and the multitude come unto him, Mark. 3.
as witnesses saint Mark. As touching the faith of the bryngers of these
blind men, there is no mention made: Notwithstanding, in that they brought
him, it appears that they persuaded them selves much of the goodness of
Christ.

A blind and dumb man. C. Luke speaking of the effect, Luke. 11.
says that the dumb man was possessed with a deuell. Notwithstanding,
Matthew says that he was punished with a double plage as to be both blind and
dumb. It is most certain and sure, that many were blind and dumb, with
natural vices: But it is apparaunt and evident, that this man was blind in
deed corporally, and wanted the use of his tongue, although in the powers
perspectiue, and in the natural instruments of his tongue, there was no
defection or want at all. Therefore it is no marueyle if so great liberty be
given unto Satan, to vitiate the senses of the body, when by the just
judgment of God he corrupts and peruerteth all the faculties of the mind.

And he healed him. R. Here appears both the clemency of Christ toward
such as are miserable, The and (...) God.
and also his power over Satan. It is a token of clemency in that he takes
compassion and pity upon this afflicted and most miserable creature: It is a
sign of his power also, in that he casts out Satan with his word, and so
restores this Demoniake being both dumb and blind, to perfect health.

In so much that the blind and dumb, both spoke and savve. R. Although
Satan out of measure, envy, and rage very furiously, yet notwithstanding.
Christ forces him to stoop and to give place. Wherefore let us believe in
Christ, and Satan shall do unto us no manner of harm.

23 And all the people were amassed, and said: Is not this that son of David?

And all the people were amassed. B. There are diverse sorts of men which do
judge of this miracle. Some wonder, and are amassed, other some do blaspheme. C.
But where as all the people were amassed, we may gather that it was the
manifest power of God, which did so rauishe their senses, that they were void
of malicious and evil affections, and held with a certain admiration. For
how could it come to pass that they should all be so amassed, except the
thing it self did so co^straine them? And truly there is none of us, but we
may behold the wonderful power of God in this history, as in a glass.

Whereby it may be gathered, that the minds of the Scribes and Phariseys were
infected with deuelyshe poison, saying they were not afraid to calumniate,
sclaunder, and blaspheme this so excellent and wounderfull a work of God.

Is not this that son of David Here is to be noted the fruit of ye miracle.
For the power of God being known to the people, they are led as it were by the
hand unto faith. Not that they did so suddenly profit so much as they ought:
(for they speak doubtingly) but here notwithstanding, is no small profit,
when that they stir up their minds so diligently to inquire and consider of
the glory of God. Some think that they make a plain affirmation, saying: This
is the sone of David. But the words sound to no such effectte, and the
matter it self declarethe, that they being by so strange a thing amassed,
judged not perfectely: but only they thought in their minds that it might be
that this was Christ. Neither did they gather this absurdely by the miracles
which Christ wroughte. For it was prophesied before that Christ should do
such miracles. And Christ him self says, (...). and 10.
The works that I do bear witness of me.

24 But when the Phariseis heard it, they said. This fellow drives the
devils no otherways out, but by the help of Beelzebub, the chief of the
devils.

C. Because the Scribes and Pharyseis had nothing to say in so plain and
euidente a thing, they blaspheme that which was done of Christ, by the power
of God: being not content only to obscure and to take away the deserved and
just praise of the miracle, but also opprobriousely to rail of the same, as
though he had wroughte it by magical exorcysme, and that which they could
not attribute unto men, they attribute unto the devil, as though he had been the
aucthour of the same. As concerning the word Beelzebub, we have spoken
before. And the pryncipallitie among the deuylles we have touched in the
ninth chapter.

25 But when Jesus knew their thoughts, he said unto them, Every kyngedome
divided against it self, shall be brought to naught. And every cyttie or house,
divided against it self shall not stand.

But when Jesus knevve their. Bu. Here the lord shows that he dyrecteth all
his doings and words not by the power of Satan, but by his own proper
power and strength, which is the power of God. And herevppon he gathers a
farther matter, (...) has ^d the (...) of (...).
namelye that the kyngedome of God is come, and that he him self is the king
of the kingdom of God, which expoulseth Satan, the prince of this world
Although he knew well enoughe, that the Scribes being full of malice, would
take in evil part what so ever he did, and had experience often times also of
the same: Yet notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that Mathewe and Luke,
mean that Christ was the sercher of the hearts. And truly there is no doubt
but that they spoke openly against Christ, to the end he might here their
opprobriouse blasphemy: but Christ knew well enoughe by his holy spirit,
with what mind they did thus cauyll. The sense therefore is this, that Christ
did the more vehemently inueye against them, because he knew the malice which
they had conceived inwardly in their hearts against him.

M. The Euangeliste therefore by these words declarethe that the Pharyseyes
made this reproach by their own deceit, and openly against their own
consciences did publishe the same.

Every kingedome divided. C. First of all, he refuses the reproach and
slander which they objected against him, by a prouerbiall sentence:
notwithstanding it seems but a slender refutation. We know with what
policies and subtilties Satan does often times delude, setting forth a show
of dissension, to snare men's minds with superstitions. Even so the exorcismes
in the Papacy, are nothing else but shadows and counterfaite shows, of the
conflict of Satan against him self. But there could be no such just
suspicion in Christ, because he so cast out the devils out of men, that he
restored them whole and sound unto God. The devil does often times feign him
self to be so overcome, that he nevertheless tryumpheth: But Christ with
open might encountered with the devil, that he might wholly overthrow and
beat him down. He did not beat him down in one part, to the end he might
the more stablishe him in an other, but he despoyled him in all parts, and
made his deuyces of no effect. Christ therefore very aptly does reason and
prove that he has no fellowshippe or agreement with him: because that Satan,
the father of deceit and lies, has always a care and is very circumspecte to
preserve his kingdom.

B. The reasons therefore, by the which the lord declarethe, that the
Phariseyes both think and speak that which is false, are these. No
kyngedome or house divided against it self can stand: if I therefore by the
power of deuilles expel and cast out deuilles, the deuyls should be divided,
and fight one against an other, and so their kyngedome could not stand or
continue: but you see that the kingedome of Satan does stand and abide in
great force, and invincible: therefore I cast them not out by their power.
Dissension and strife is a dedly thing.
By the way we are to be admonyshed here, how great a mischief cyuill, and
mortal dissension is. Namely such, that it destroys howses, cities, and
kyngedomes. Of this there are many examples both in the stories of the
Gentiles, and also in the sacred histories. The saying of Salust is not
unknown to us, By peace, and concord, small things grow, and increase, but
by discord and dissension, great things are wasted, consumed and brought to
confusion. Esaias. 3.
And the Prophet when he prophesied of the destruction of the kyngedome of the
Jews, said that there should be cyuill dissension among them. And before
that wonderful destruction of the city of Jerusalem, there was great
dissension and strife within the same. for it was divided into three
pernitiouse sects, the heads the chief whereof, Iosep. li. 6. cap. 13.
were Simon, John, and Eleazarouse. Read the sixth book of Josephus, the
thirtenth chapter. The kingdom of Rome also by this ciuyll dissension, was
brought to confusion, and by the same is like to come to destruction again. By
the dissension of the two Emperors of Constantinople, there was a way made
to the empire of the Turks, and to the destruction of the empire of Rome. To
conclude, the kyngedome of Hungary, felt the great inconvenience and hurt of
this mischief. But Christ did prophecy, that before the destruction of the
world nation should rise against nation, Math. 24.
and kingedome against kingdom,

26 And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against him self, How then
shall his kyngedome endure?

M. As the good spirits, and heavenly angels, can not degenerate from their
goodness, and be contrary to them selves, even so the evil spyrites can not
alter their malice, that now they should begin to do good unto mankind,
and disagree among them selves, and also degenerate from their own nature.

Wherefore it is necessary that the kingdom of Sathaan, only by the power of
God should come to destruction. For satan so much as in him lies, gothe
about to ratifye, confirm, and stablyshe his kingdom, and to make the same
invincible.

27 Also if I by the help of Beelzebub, cast out deuilles, by whose help do
your children cast them out. Therefore they shall be your judges.

And if I by the help of Beelzebub. M. By an other argument he proves that to
be false which the Phariseyes objected against him. C. For trewly they were
wicked and unjust judges, which would pronounce a diverse and contrary
sentence, of one matter, according as they were affectioned toward the
parties. But this inequality does plainly declare, that equity and right did
not prevail, but rather blind love and hatred: nay rather this was a sign of
wicked self love and envy, to condemn that in Christ which they judged
worthy of praise in their own company. Some take these words (your children)
in this place, for the children of the whole nation of the Jews.

Other some refer it to the ancient prophets. But truly there is no doubt,
but that Christ notes here such as were exorcistes, Act^
Of the which there were many at that time among the Jews, as plainly
apperethe in the ninetene chapter of the Acts of the Apostels. M. He goes
about therefore to show that the Phariseies, being hardened with hatred and
envy against him, maliciousely did spread this reproach abroad against their
own consciences. And trewly this dissease, or rather obstinate malice rayneth
very much in these our days, in so much, that we can be content to reprehende
a thing in one, and iustyfie the same in an other. And whereof proceeds this?
but of mere hatred: not that we hate the evil, (for then we would reprehende
justly without parcialitie) but because we hate the parson, or the man.

And hereupon it comes, that we note and straightly mark, and falsely
interpret the sayings and doings of him whom we hate, having no
consideration whether it be true or false, that we resist and gainesaie.

Therefore they shall be your. C. This is spoken improperly in this sense, Your
condempnation need not far to be sought for: The miracles that I do, you
refer to Beelzebub, and yet ye praise the same in your own children.
Therefore ye have that at home, which is sufficient to condemn you.
Notwithstanding this sentence may be taken otherwise, namely that the grace of
god is reproched, which often times was showed by exorsistes, as in workynge
of miracles. For although they were bastards, yet notwithstanding the lord
would, not depryue them, and leave them altogether destitute of his power to
the end he might beutifie the preesthode, and the worship of the church, with
some testimony and token. For it served much for the purpose, to have the grace
of god and the power thereof to be disceuered from the superstition of the
Gentiles, by plain and evident tokens and signs. Notwithstanding the
interpretation that we showed before, seems to be the true and proper sense
and meaning of this place.

28 But if I cast out deuyls by the spyrite of God, then is the kingdom of god
come unto you.

C. Luke wrytinge this Metaphorically says, If I by the finger of God, instead of the spirit of God: for, because God does work by his spirit, and
declares his power, this name of finger is aptely applied unto it. And this
phrase of speech also was common among the Jews, as euydently appears by the
testymony of the forcerers of Pharao, who said. This is the finger of God. ^s.
8.
But Christ by that which went before, gathers that the Scribes were
unthankful unto God, which would not have him to reign among them. For
hitherto he has confuted their cauil and reproach which they laid against
him: Now (as overcome and put to scilence) he denounces them, least that
wickedly they should set them selves against the kingedome of God.

Neither does he content him self with the miracle alone: but by occasion
thereof, he shows the cause of his coming, signifyinge that they must not
content them selves with one only deed as sufficient, but that they must have
a consideration of a further matter, namely, that God by reuealynge his
Messiah, would erecte and restore their salvation which was decayed, and
stablishe his kingdom also among them.

We see therefore here how Christ complains of their ingratitude: because
furiously they rejected and put from them the inspeakeable grace of god. For
there is a great Emphasis in this word (is come) because God the redemer
willingly appeared unto them: but they so much as in them lay, put the same from
them, yea, he being present and pressed to work their salvation, could obtain
no place among them. R. In this place that kingdom of God is not understood,
by the which God, by his inscrutable and wonderful majesty does raygne in
heaven, and in earth, but that which was promised to be revealed and
admynistred by the Messiah in earth, of the which both Moses and the
Prophets have written very much. For where it was said that the seed of the
womanne should tread down the head of the Serpente, it was there meant, that
the Messiah should tread down all the power of Satan, Gene. 3.
and that he should take away also al his maledictions and curses. For now
Jesus, that son of Mary is come, which expels Satan by manifest
miracles, and treads his power also under his feet:

What therefore now remains but that the same time should be come, of the
which the Prophets most plainly have prophesied before, in the which time the
Messiah is at hand, and his kyngedome already come? A. It can not be therefore,
but that these Jews are twice unthankful, which despised the fruit of so
excellent a benefit.

29 Or else how can a man enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his
Iewelles, except he first bind the strong man and then spoil his house.

Or else how can one. Bu. Those arguments which went before, (because they
did as it were after a sort grant to the adversary) might seem the more
infiirme and weak now therefore follow more strong arguments, and of greater
force which also ought to be referred to the same state, which the lord him
self even now appointed. For he shows by an infallible demonstration, that
he is so far from the fellowship of Satan that he is rather an ennemy unto
him then otherwise. C, And although the Evangelists do differ a lyttel in
words, notwithstanding as concerning the especial point, they agree in one:
for Christ prosecuteth that, which he touched eue^ now, as concerning the
kingedome of God: and shows also, that it is necessary that Satan be
violentely expelled, to the end God might stablishe his kingdom among men
Wherefore this sentence is nothing else but a confyrmation of that which
went before. But to the end we may the better remember the meaning of
Christ, Math. 8.
it shall be necessary to call to mind that Analogy which Matthew placed among
the visible and spiritual graces of Christ. What so ever Christ therefore did
unto the bodies, he would have the same referred to the souls: so, when he
delivered the corporal and bodily senses of men from the tyranny of the devil,
he declares that he was sent of the father to be a revenger, which should
abolyshe and put away the spirytuall tyranny, which he showed to men's
sowles. Now let us return to his words. He affirms that the rule and
power can not be taken away from a strong and valiant tyrant, until he be
despoyled of his armoure and weapons: because, unless he be constrained with
greatter force, he will never yield.

To what end is this spoken? First we know that the devil in many places is
called the prince of this world. And the tyranny which he uses, is guarded
and made strong, with aides of great force from all places. For there are
innumerable snares to entrap and entangle men. Yea, there are innumerable and
infynyte kinds of dangers and harms, with the which he keeps those
myserably that are oppressed, under his feet. To conclude, there is nothing
that sets him to raygne in the world like a tyrant, not that he can do any
thing against the will of the workman him self: but because Adam, when he
alienated him self from the impery and kyngedome of God, did bring all his
posterytie under the subjection and yoke of this foreign power.

But although the devil raineth supernaturally, and men by the just judgment
of God for sin, are subject to his tyranny, notwithstanding he has a
peaceable and quiet possession of the kingdom, in so much, that he may
tryumphe over us vnponished, until a stronger then he rise up against him. But
this stronger man could not be found here in earth, when that no abillitie
and strength was left unto men, to help them selves: therefore a redemer
was promised from heaven. Now Christ shows that this way and manner of
redemption is necessary, to wreste and take away that from the devil with
strong hand, which else he will never let go, and depart from. By the which
words he declares, The re^ wit^ dest^ S^
that men hope for their deliverance in vain until Satan be overcome and
vanquyshed, by violent conflicte. M. He says therefore, when ye se the
ieweles of Satan taken away, how then can it be but manifest, that a stronger
is present, which has overthrown Satan that strong prince of the world, and
bound him, otherwise he would not have suffered his Iewelles to be taken away?
C. But although Christ reproved the folishenesse of the Scribes, because they
were ignorante of the principles of the kingdom of God: yet notwithstanding
this obiurgation and reprehention, does belong generally to all such as are
of like foolyshenes. There is no man which will not boast in words, that he
desires the kyngedome of God, and yet he will not suffer Christ to fight
valiantly, (as need requires) that he may deliver us out of the hand of the
tyrante, and our mortal ennemie. Even as, if one being sick, should call for
the help of a physician, and yet does refuse all Physic, medycine, and
remedy. Now let us note, for what purpose Christ brought this parable,
namelye that he might show that the Scribes are adversaries to the kingdom
of God, the beginning whereof they maliciouslye withstoode. Notwithstanding,
let us learn, because we are all subject to Satan, that God does no
otherwise bestow his kingdom upon us, then to deliver us from that unhappy,
sorrowful and seruyle bondage, by the valiaunte and victoryous hand of Christ.

30. He that is not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with
me, scatters abroad.

He that is not with me, C. This place may be expounded two manner of ways.



M. To be with Christ, is, to gather with him to the kyngedome of God. (...). 3.
when with their doctrine theye reap the harvest, and congregate the same into
the barn of their father, to everlasting life. This is a Metaphore taken of
the time of the harvest, when every one makes all have that possiblely can be
made, to gather and bring in the harvest, least the same might take any harm,
by tempest and unseasonable weather.

Satan which is a very woulfe, John. 10.
deuoureth and disperseth from the shepefould, the flock of Christ, and when
any part of the Gospel is sown in their hearts, Luke, 8,
through preachinge, he takes the same away, least in believing they should
be saved. Therefore by this sentence it may plainly appear, how truly
Christ does now say, that whosoever gathers not with him, scatters,
because such is the promptnes of our nature unto evil, that the
righteousenesse of God has no abydinge in them, which apply them selves to
late, and seek when all time is spente to get the same. Also this doctrine is
more large, and does yet farther extend it self, namely, that they are
unworthy to be counted in the flock of Christ which do not bestow and refer
al their studies and labors unto him: because by their negligence and slouthe
it comes to pass, that the kingdom of God goes backewarde, and prospers
not, for the furtherance whereof we are all called.

Christ therefore leaves not the mean: for we must either gather with him, or
else we must disperse and scatter abroad with Satan. So that by these words
he seems to speak to certain Hypocrites which dissembled or fained him to be
the Messiah As if he should say, There are many of you which dissemble al
things, cleauinge to neither part, but holding of every side. But if ye were
my disciples in deed, if ye did trewely and unfeignedly believe in me, ye would
confess that I have cast out devils by the power of god, and ye would also
for so great a benefyte, be thanckefull to God. Now seeing you will not do
this, ye ought to join your selves to the other part, which does calumniate
and speak evil of that which I have done, ascribyng it to the devil.

But because ye dissemble, it is a sure and certain sign that ye are not,
neither yt ye gather not with me, but rather yt ye scatter abroad, for ye
cleave unto them that calumniate, howesoeuer ye dissemble. Let al our newters,
Neweters. Ambo dexters and; lukewarm men are here reprehended.
and Luke ware men, our Ambodexters I say, in these our days mark this
lesson of our Savior Christ. Let also all idell and slowebellied bishops, and
prelates, which gather not the kingdom of God, be admonished by this place:
they are not with Christ, therefore they are adversaries, dispersers, and
co^founders of the kingdom of God.

31 Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin. and blasphemy shall be
forgeuen unto men, but the blasphemy against the spirit, shall not be
forgeuen unto men,

Wherefore I say unto. Bu. Now Christ plainly shows, how greuousely they
offend, which blaspheme the works of the lord, and the doctrine of
treweth, and do obstinately and continually resist the same. C. But this is an
illation or bringinge in, which ought not to be restrained to the sentence
goinge before, because it depends upon the whole text. For after that Christ
had taught, that the Scribes could not disprove that he cast out deuylles,
but that they sought only to resyst the kingdom of God, he concludes at the
length, that it was no light or tolerable saying, but a wicked and detestable
crime, in that wyttingly and willingly they let not in reproachful wise, to
gainesay and resist the spyrite of God. For we declared before that Christ did
not utter these words, by occasion of words, but rather by the occasion of
their wicked thoughts.

All manner of sin and blasphemy. E. The latten word is (Conuitium) which
signyfieth reproach. For this word blasphemy, is as much to say, Blasphemye.
as slanderouse words and reproach, by the which the fame and good report of
a man is impaired.

C. But because our savior Christ says here, that blasphemy against the
spirit is greatter then any other sin, it shall be necessary to way and
consider what he means thereby. Blasphemye. is to die with out repentance
They which define this blasphemy to be impenitency, ought not in any point to
be refelled or disalowed: for then Christ should in vain have denied remission
of the same in this world. Furthermore the name of blasphemye can not
confusedly be extended to every kind of sin without exception. But by the
comparison which Christ brings we may easily gather ye definition. Au^
Christ? Truly there is a great dyffeerence. For saying the fulness of the
divinity reigns in Christ, whosoever is contumeliouse against him, or a
blasphemer of him, he does abbolyshe and overthrow so much as in him lies
all the glory of God. But now how can Christ be separated and divided from his
spirit, that he which blasphemethe the one, does not in like manner blaspheme
and impair the glory of the other? Now hereby we begin to gather that the
blasphemy against the spirit, is not greater then any other sin, because the
spirit is more excellent then Christ, but because the power of God being made
manifest and declared, they are not excusable by the pretenced cloak of
ignorance, which sporne and kycke against the same. Beside this we must note,
that that which is spoken here of blasphemy, is not simplely referred to the
essence of the spirit but to the grace, with the which we are indewed. For
they which are deprived of the light of the spirit, how much so ever they take
away of the glory of the same, yet notwithstanding they are not made gylty of
this crime and fault. Now let us note, that they do blaspheme the spyrite of
God, which with pretenced mallyce and spyghte, do resyst his grace and power:
and knowinge the same to be in them, go about by all means possible to
extinguishe the same. And this is the reason why they are rather said to
blaspheme the spyrite, then the father or the son, namely because in
detracting and slaundering the grace and power of God, we do plainly
blaspheme the spirit, from the which they proceed and come and appear unto us.
Every unbelieving person speaks evil of God, even as if a blind man should
run against a gate But no man blasphemeth or speaks evil of the spirit,
B^^^^ of the
but he which being illuminated of the same, wyllyngly rebelleth against it.
Neither is this distinction superfluous or vain, that all other blasphemies
shall be forgeuen, saving this alone, which is against the spirit. If any man
symplely utter blasphemy against god, ^phemye ^rocedeth ^orance ^misible.
he is not denied hope of pardon: but god is not said to be favorable to him,
which is co^tumeliouse against the spirit, that is, which speaks evil of
the gifts and graces of the spirit, contrary to his own conscience. E. They
therefore whose co^sceince bears the^ witness yt it is the word of God,
against the which they resist and strive and yet notwithstanding cease not to
impugn the same, are truly said to blaspheme the spirit of God, because they
strive against the light which is the work of the holy ghost. ^s. 7.
Of these sort of men there were many among the Jews, which when they could
not resist the spirit that spoke by Steven, yet notwithstanding they sought all that they might to resist. There is no doubt, but that many of the^ were forced
as it were to do it, through the zeal of the law: but it is evident that
there were others which with maliciouse impiety did frette and fume against
God him self. Such were the Phariseies, against whom the lord does inuey,
who, to the end they might obscure the power of the holy ghost, did infame
the same with the name of Beelzebub. ^riginal ^phemy
Hereup therefore arises blasphemy, when men, bouldely burst first into the
reproach of the name of God.

C. Notwithstanding here arises a question, ^ion.
Whether men are of such boulde madness, that wyttingly with good will they dare
presume to rushe so rashely (as it were) in raging wise against God. I answer
that this boldenes, ^were.
does proceed of a frenlike blindenes, in the which not withstanding, mallyce
and poisoned fury, ^o. 1.
bears the sway. Neither is it without cause, that S. Paul says, that when
he was a blasphemer, he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly in his
unbelief. for by this saying, he puts a difference between his sin, ^nes
ar ^auing ^th^ata^ce
and voluntary contumacy. In this place also their error is confuted, which
think that every voluntary kind of sin which is committed against the
conscience, is void of remission. For truly Paul does restrain that sin,
to the first table of the law. Shall not be forgeuen. This seems to some to
be a very hard and straighte saying, and therefore theye flee to this
chyldysshe and fond distinction and cauyll, saying that it was said to be
irremissible, or void of remyssion, because the pardon of the same is rare,
and hardly obtained. But Christ spoke more plainly, and in such sort, that
his words can not be so slenderly eluded. For they reason to folishely,
which say that God should be very cruel, if he should never remit sin: not
waying how beastly a wickedness it is, not only to profane the holy name of
God, but also to spit as it were in his face, I manifest sign of a reprobate.
when it most brightly shines What greater sin and more certain token of
the reprobate can there be, then to blaspheme, revile, reproach, and to slander
the spirit of God? into the which who so ever falls, it is a great
likelyhod that he is given over into a reprobate sense, and that god does so
indurate and harden his heart, that he shall never attain to true repentance.

But the blasphemy against the spirit. E. The Greek text has, the blasphemy
of the spirit, blasphemy being in the nominative case, and spirit in the
genitive. So do Hillary and Austen read it. Mark has, he that speaks
blasphemy against the holy ghost.

32 And who so ever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be
forgeuen him. But who so ever speaks against the holy ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the world to come.

And who so ever speeketh a word. S. To speak in this place is taken
generally, either to speak, to meditate, to thyncke, to determine, or to do,
for the Hebrewe word Dabar, has a large signification. As concerning this
matter, we have spoken sufficiently in our annotatio^s going before It shall
never be forgiven him. C. What these words mean Mark brefely shewethe,
saying, that they are in danger of everlasting judgment, Math. 3.
which speak any thing against the holy ghost, S. But to be displeased with
our selves for sin, to be sorry and repentaunte for the same, is not sin
against the holy ghost. For this grief and acknowledgynge of our faults
with a repentaunte heart proceeds from God, and is his gift.

If man be sorry for sin, then by faith he is sorry, but faith is the gift of
the hoghoste, therefore he that is sorry, can not sin against the holy ghost.
We do daily ask and crave remission of our sins at the hands of God, and he
does reconcile us unto him self, and at length in death our sins being
done away, he shows him self to be merciful and favorable unto us. the
fruits of this mercy will declare it self in the last day. The sense
therefore and meaning of this place is, that there is no hope for them to
obtain pardone in this life, or in the day of judgment, which blaspheme the
spirit of God. Purgatory pedlers.
B. Finally the marchantes or rather pedlers of purgatory seem to fetch their
gain out of this haven or place. Answer.
First they are very much abbused in wresting these words, (the world to come)
to a myddell time, when as it is manifest to every one that by the same is me^t
the very utmost extreme or last day after the which there is no other. Here
also they bewray their own wickedness, because their cauil here is contrary to
their own doctrine. Their blind destinction is known well enough that sins
are freely remytted in respect of the fault, notwithstanding a ponyshment and
satisfaction is required. By the which they confess that there is no hope of
salvation, unless the falte be remitted before death. There remains therefore
no remission, to the dead, but ye remission of ponishement. And truly they
dare not deny for the price of their purgatory, but ye mention is here made of
falte. Let him now that is a cold go blow the coal in purgatory, and let him
kindell his fire, if yse may be the matter of the same, and then shall he make
as good a fire as did the fox when he pist in ye snow. M. Also this place is
to be noted against those of Orrigens sect, Origen^ ^rour.
which taught that no man should be damned for ever, but that all men should
be saved at the length. For if the sin against the holy ghost shall never be
remitted in this world, nor in the world to come: and if there be some which
do commyt this fault, it does very consequently and aptely follow that all
shall not be saved, but sum shall be dampened for ever.

33 Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree
evil and his fruit evil also. For the tree is known by the fruit.

Either make the tree good and his. C. It might seem here to be a very absurd
thing that men should have free choice. to be either good or evil: but if we
consider what kind of men Christ does here speak of, we shall find in it no
absurdity at al. We know of how great estimation the Phariseyes were: for
the minds of the common people were so tied to them by their fained
sainctimony and holiness, that no man durst once be so bold as to judge of
their faults. Christ sekinge to take away this outward show, and colored
cloak of holiness commands them either to be good or evil: as if he should
have said there is nothing more contrary to honesty, then hypocrisy and
simulation, Hyp^
and in vain do they boast with the tytel of righteousenes, which are neither
perfect nor sincere. He does not therefore give unto the^ the bridel, and
grante them liberty, but only admonishes and declares unto thr^ yt their
painted pretense, and double dealyng will nothing at al profit the^, because it
is necessary yt either men be good or evil. Luk^
So he says in an other place, you ar they which justify your selves before
me^, but God knows your hearts. Where as he says, Either make the tree. some
very fondly thereby gather, that it is in every man's power to frame his manners
and life as him list. It is an improper kind of speech, by the which he does
reprove the hypocrisy of the Scribes, and reuoketh them to the purity and
synceritie of life.

And his fruit good. He shewethe here a way and mean by the which the trees
declare them selves to be good or evil, for if the tree bring forth either
good fruit or evil, then it is either simplely good or simplely evil. If any
man obiecte and say, that there is no man in the corruption of this life so
sound, ^ection.
perfect and pure, that he is clean and void of all sin: ^swere.
the answer is ready, ye Christ requires not an exact kind of perfection,
but only a simple and true affection, void of dissimulation, from the which
sincerity the Phariseis were far wide, to whom he spoke. For as the
scripture calls them evil and wicked, which are wholly sold unto Satan: so
he calls the sincere worshippers of god good, although they are compassed
about with the infirmity of the flesh and many vices.

34 O generation of vypers, how can ye speak good things, when ye your selves
are evil? For out of the abundaunce of the heart, the mouth speakethe.

O generation of vypers. Bu. Now he tourneth the accusation upon the
Pharyseis, showing unto them, and to all the followers of the Phariseis how
that whatsoever they said or did against the gospel, it was spoken and
done, by the impulsion and motion of satan. C. And therefore because of their
false slanders and opprobries, they bewrainge that, which in their whole life
was not so manifest, Christ does the more severely inuey against them. It is
no marvel says he, if ye spew out such venemouse words, when that your
heart is so replenished with poison. And truly their wyckednes well deserved
this sharp reprehention. Other sins and offenses are worthy of sharp
reprehentio^s: but when double tongued men do deprave ye which is right and
honest, or do seek to colloure those things that are wicked, this wyckednes
above al other deserves ye sharp and severe reprehe^tions of the lord. But it
was the purpose of Christ, (as occasyon served) to condemn the sophistical
subtyltie of the Scribes, by the which they turned light into darkness This
place therefore teaches how preciouse a thing the truth is unto the lord of
the which he is a sharp and severe mainteyner. Also I would to god that all
those that are light of credit, and ready to judge, with all the rabble of rash
raylers of the truth would more diligently way and examine them selves by this
place. But specially Christ was moved against them, who either by ambition,
or mallyce were compelled to rail and slander, namelye such, in whom they in
conscience could find nothing worthy of reprofe.

Christ also according to his manner was more sharp set against the
Phariryseyes, whom the false persuasion of ryghteousenes had so bewytched, that
a mean or slight admonition did littel profit. And trewely except those that
are hipocrytes be sharply pricked forward, they disdain and despise what so
ever is spoken. M. Neither does he only reprove the proper mallyce of the
Pharyseies, but also casts in their tethe, the mallyce of their fathers and
graundefathers, in that he calls them the generation of vypers. For as their
fathers like venemouse vipers killed the Prophets, so did their posterity and
ofsprynge the Phariseies, the like.

In the three and twenty chapter following, Math. 23.
he gives them the same tytell and appellation, where more largely he
reproves their wicked and pestilent nature. John the Baptist also called them
by the same name, saying. Math. 3.
O generation of vypers, who has taught you to fly from the vengeance to
come. By the which words their vaineglorye and boasting is quayled, with the
which they being puffed up, boasted them selves to be the sons of Abraham,
and so wonderfully pleased them selves.

How can ye speak good things. C. We have already showed the use of
prouerbial sentences, which only serve to teach what is wont commonly to
happen. It comes to pass truly often times that he which is cruel does
deceive with honey and flattering words him that is simple, Flatterye begileth
simplicity.
And the crafty person under the color of simplicity does fyle his tongue
with angelycall purity. Notwithstanding the common practyse does prove that to
be true, which is spoken here by our savior Christ.

Out of the abondau^ce of the heart the mouth speaks. The tongue bewrays ye
secrets of the heart.
According to the proverb, the tongue is the messe^ger of the mind. And truly
although the heart of man has secret and wynding ways, and every one with
marueilouse sleights dissembleth and cloketh his own wickedness, yet
notwithstanding the Lord, does extort and wrest a confession out of every man's
mouth, that by their tongue, they bewraye and disclose their nature and
internal affections. Furthermore we must note to what end Christ uses
these parables: for Christ casts the Pharisees in the teeth, that by their
words they declare their secret conceived malice. Surely he knowing yt they
were sworn and obstinate enemies of the truth, taking occasion at their wicked
calu^niatio^ declares and manifests their whole life, and does discredit
them among the people, they having to much credit before to hurt and deceive.
But although good words do not always proceed from ye bottom of the heart,
but only from the mouth: notwithstanding this is always true, ye evil words
are always a plain testemony and token of an evil heart.

A. That which he calls here the abo^daunce of ye heart, he calls by and
by, ye treasurye or storehouse of the heart. Furthermore he does as it were in
another place expound these words saying. Math. 15.
Those things which proceed out of the mouth, come from the heart and they
defyle the man, as evil thoughts, murder, breaking of wedlock and such like.

35. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things, and an evil man, out of the evil treasure brings forth evil
things.

A. He calls it the treasure of ye heart because there, both good and evil
things are kept. Bu. The Lord calls the heart ye treasure of good and evil
things: that is a place, or chest, from whence both good and evil do come, as
we declared by the testimonye of Scripture which we alleged a little before.

36. But I say unto you, of every ydell word, that men shall have spoken,
they shall give acomptes in the day of judgment.

C. This is an argument of the less to the more. For if every ydell word
shall be called to a reckening or count how shall god spare the open blasphemies
of those which never seace barkynge against his glory? Idell^
He calls those ydell and vain words, and of no profit, which neither edify
nor bring forth any fruit.

This seems to many to be very hard and preciselye spoken: but if we
consider to what end and use our tongues were framed and given unto us, we will
count them worthy sharp reprehension, which occupy their tongues about vain,
light, and tryfling matters. Neither is it a light or small offense, to abuse
the time about friuolouse or vain things, which time, S. Paul commands us
carefully to redeem. Colo^
But for as much as there is no man so much a nygard of his tongue, so tongtyde,
or so wise in framing of his talk, but at one time or other, he may burst
forth into idell co^municatio^, it is for certain yt if god should deal with
us according to justice and should execute the extremity of the law, then
should we be driven to forsake all hoope of remission, and to despair: but
because the trust of our salvation is grounded and built upon this, that god
will not enter into judgment with us, but will forget those sins that have
deserved a thousand deaths: let us not doubt but that he, abollishinge the
whole body and lump of sin, will also remit and forgive the sin and
offense of vain and ydell talk. Iud^ does ^thro^ ^sion^ ^nes.
For when soever the Scripture makes mention of ye judgment of god, it does
not overthrow the remission of sins. Notwithstanding let no man hereby take
any liberty to offend, but rather let every one be studious and circumspect to
brydel his tongue First that we always speak soberly and reverently of the
holy misteryes of God: then that we abstain from filthye co^municatio^. Last
of all ye we refrain from slau^derous and reproachful words against our
brethren, Ephe^
and use that which shall become saints. As exhorts the Apostel saying. Let
no evil communication proceed out of your mouths but yt which is good to
edifye withal.

37. For out of thy words thou shall be justified. And out of thy words thou
shall be condemned.

C. Here he applies the common proverb to the matter which he had in hand.
And there is no doubt, but that this saying was common among the people,
namely that every man was either saved or condemned, by his own confession.
But Christ does apply this somewhat a little to a contrary sense and
meaning, that perverse or froward spech, being a token of the mallyce which
lurketh in the heart, is sufficient to condemn a man. For he has respect to
that which he said, the tree is known by the fruit. Idell words are signs
of a filthy and light mind. Yea, men by their signs do declare them selves
what they are.

Papists ^er upon place in^ation by ^kes.
But whereas the Papystes do wrest this place, to shake the forte of our
ryghteousenes or justification by faith, it is in vain and to no purpose. For
a man is justified by his sayings, not that his sayings are the cause of his
righteousenes, (as we obtain by faith the grace of god. to the end he might
count us for ryghteouse:) but because our pure talk and speech does set us
free, and at liberty, least we should be found and judged by our tongues to
be wicked. Is not this place foolishely brought in, to prove that men may
deserve their righteousness before god? When as this place rather makes in all
points against them. For although Christ speaks not here of ye cause of our
righteousenes, notwithstanding the Antithesis between two words, declares
what this word (justify) signifies.

38 Then certain of the Scribes and Phariseis, asked him saying, Master we
will se a sign of thee.

Then certain of. (...). 16. ^e. 8.
C. Matthewe has the like of this in the syxtene chapter, and Marcke in the
eight chapter. Whereby it appears that Christ was demanded of this matter
oftentimes, which declared their wickedness to be without end, which were
full resolved and determined to resist the truth. For it is certain that they
require a sign, to the end they might color and cloak their unbelief,
namely that the calling of Christ was not lawefully sealed and confirmed. Their
docillite and aptnes to be taught was not such that they would be persuaded and
give place to three or four miracles: but as we said even now, under this
cloak they excuse them selves, that they believe not the gospel, because Christ
did show no confirmation of the same from heaven. He had showed already
miracles enough, playnelye before their eyes: but because they thought them not
sufficient to confyrmation, they would have somewhat to come from heaven, in
the which God after a sort might appere-visible unto them. As if they should
have said, If thou do these miracles by thine own power, and not by the power
of Satan, then show us sum sign from heaven, (if thou came from thence)
whereby we may know that these thy doings are done and fynished by the power
of God. They seem to have respect unto Moses, John. 6.
as in an other place, when they said. What sign therefore do thou, that we
may see and believe thee. Moses had testimony, by thonder, by fire, by smoke,
by voices, and by the sound of the heavenly troumpe in the mount of Synai.
They seem now to require some such sign of him, as if he should show some
such sign as Moses did, that then they would believe him. Master. C. They
salute him by the name of master, according to their manner, because then they
called all the Scribes and interpretoures of the law by ye name: but they do
not acknowledge him to be a prophet of God, until he show them a sign from
heaven. The sense therefore is this, Forasmuch as thou do profess thy self
to be a teacher and a master, if thou will have us to be thy disciples, cause
some sign to appear from heaven, that god may testify thereby that he has
given thee authority, and may confirm thy vocation and calling by a miracle.

39 But he answered and said unto them, the evil and aduoutrous generation,
seeks a sign, and there shall no sign be given unto the^, but the sign of
the prophet Jonas.

But he answered and. M. He reproves them very sharply again. For he
calls them not symplely evil, but a wicked an aduouterouse generation. C.
Therefore he does not only accuse them, but also their forefathers whose
generation they were. He calls them adulterous. because they were as
unclean, and bastardes, degeneratynge from the holy fathers: even as the
Prophets reproved the vnfaithefull in their age, saying that they were not the
seed of Abraham, but the cursed sons of Chanaan. M. And Steue^ also said
unto them, Acts. 7.
Ye stiffnecked people with uncircumcised hearts and ears, you have always
resisted the holy ghost, as did your fathers, even so do ye. C. Now it may be
demanded, Iud, 6.
Gedeon required a sign: God not angry with it, but granted his request, and
although he was importunate, Esaias. 38.
yet notwithstanding it pleased God to bear with his infirmytie.

Ezechias not askinge, had a sign offered unto him. Achaz, also was sharply
reproved of the Prophet because he refused to require a sign. Esaias. 7.
Therefore Christ does not symplely reprove the Scrybes, because they required
a sign, Answer.
but because they being vntha^ckefull unto God, and despising maliciousely all
his miracles, sought a starting place, and a cloak, that they might not
believe the Gospel, and obey his word. The same vice also does S. Paul
condemn in their posterytie, 1. Cor. 1.
when he says yt the Jews seek for signs.

And a sign shall not be given. M. They did not require a sign, with that
mind and desire to know the truethe, although they might thereby have been
brought to believe the Gospel, but as I said before for a subtle pretense.
C. Therefore trewly they were conuicte and forced to give place afterward, by
diverse miracles, neither did Christ let to show his signs and wonders among
them, to the end they might be void of al excuse: but he only means that
one sign was unto the^ as good as a hundred, because they were obstinate, and
therefore unworthy to have their wicked desire satisfied.

Let them be contented says he with this sign, that as Jonas being cast into
the deep sea, and there overwhelmed, did preach unto the Niniuytes: So let
them hear the voice of the lyuinge Prophet. This place of some is very
slenderly expounded, but for so much as the similitude holds not in all
points between Christ and Jonas, let us see wherefore Christ compares him
self to Jonas.

Surely he compared him self to Jonas, because he should be a Prophet likewise
unto them after he was risen from death As if he should have said, You despise
the son of God which came down from heaven unto you: it remains now
therefore that I suffer death, after the which I must rise out of the
sepulcher, and being revived again, I must speak unto you, even as Jonas
came out of the depth of the sea, and preached to the Niniuytes. Luke^
By the words of Luke he seems to speak somewhat otherwise saying, As
Jonas was a sign to the Niniuytes, so shall the son of man, be to this
nation. As if he should have said The like that happened to the Niniuytes
shall happen in these days, that as Jonas by reason of the tempeste, was cast
into the sea of the mariners, and was saved in the Whales belly three days and
three nyghtes, after the which time the fysshe cast Jonas a land. So shall
it come to pass of me among you. For I being so much hated among you, shall
at the length be delivered into your hands, and ye shall kill me, and till
the third day ye shall keep me in the sepulcher: but I will be saved, and will
rise from death.

40 For as Jonas was in the whales bellye three days, and three nights, So
shall the son of man be in the heart of the earth three days and three
nights.

For as Jonas was in the whales belly. M. What hapened to this Prophet,
Iona^ and (...)
read the first chapter of the prophecy of Jonas, and the second also.

In the heart of the earth. A. The heart of the earth, or the heart of the
sea, is an Hebrewe phrase, and is spoken for that which we call the inward
part or depthe of the earth, or as we say commonly the grave. As
concerning this matter, we have spoken sufficientely in our annotations of the
sentence goinge before.

41 The men of Niniuey shall rise in the judgment, and shall condemn it,
because they amended at the preching of Jonas. Behold here is one greatter
then Jonas.

The men of Niniuey shall rise. B. Because he had made mention of Jonas, he
remembered also the Ninevites, to whom Jonas was sent to preach, whom when
they had heard, they were moved to repentance: C. He shows that they were
far better then ye Scribes, and such as did reicte his doctrine. Profane
men (says he) which never heard of the true God, at the voice of a new and
unknown messenger, repent: But this region or nation, which is the place of
heavenly doctrine, refuses to hear the son of God, and promised redemer:
For this Antithesis, is contained in the comparison. (...).
They shall come forth therefore in the midst, as witnesses are commonly
wont to do, when they are brought forth to speak in judgment. B. He speaks
after the manner of men, as concerning the judgment of God. C. It is known
right well what the Ninevites were, a people that were not accustomed to
Prophets, and altogether ignorant of the doctrine of truth. Jonas was not
glorious unto them by any outward show or tytell, yea, he being a stranger
might have been derided and driven away. But the Jews were a people that were
always exercysed in the law and the Prophets, and yet notwithstanding, they
showed them selves more unthankful and blind toward the son of God, then
did the Ninevites to Jonas.

And shall condemn it. C. This kind of co^demnatio^ ought not to be referred
to the person, but to the thing, as if he should have said, by their
example, they shall condemn it. For the repentance of the Ninevites, shall
condemn the impenite^cy of the Jews, and they shall be as witnesses. For to
condemn in this place is taken otherwise then in that place where it is said,
(...) 19. (...) 22.
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

Because they amended. C. Here we omit to declare whether the men of Niniue
did truly repent and turn unto the lord or no, because it was sufficient
that they were moved by the doctrine of Jonas, to give their mind to
repentance.

Behold here is one greater then Jonas. C. As if he should say, the Ninevites
repented at the preachinge of Jonas, but I am greater then Jonas, and yet
behold, I proffite nothing at all. He without the showing of any sign with
his voice only moved the hearts of those men, but you by no signs or miracles
can be brought to repentance. He was a simple Prophet, but I am sent of God,
the Messiah and redeamer of the world. Are ye not therefore worthy of great
punishments? There is no doubt but that Christ did more at large speak unto
them. But Matthewe contenteth him self with the sum and effect of that
which was spoken, to the end he might show what horrible punishment did
remain to all those that do obstinatly withstand the Gospel. Also this place
does teach, that every one shall be punished according to the measure of those
gifts and graces which he has despised. 2. Cor. 6.
Let us therefore take heed that we receive not the grace of God in vain

42 The queen of the Southe shall rise in the judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: For she came from the utmost parts of the world, to
hear the wisdom of Solomon. And behold in this place is one greater then
Solomon.

The queen of the Southe. C. Because Aethiopia in respect of Jury, tends
toward the Southe, the opinion of Josephus and others is allowed, which
teach that this was the Queen of Aethiopia. For where as in the holy
scriptures it it said to be the Queen of Saba, the region or nation of Sabea,
ought not to be understood, because it is more Eastwarde, but rather the
city of Meroe, which was an I Will adioyninge to the floudde of Nilus, which
was the head of the kingdom. For there is a city in Meroe, which is called
aunciente or oulde Saba, which afterward Cambyses the king, named Meroen, for
a memorial of his sister, who was so named, as Josephus and Strabo have noted.
The desyer of wisdom with the which this Queen was inflamed, shall condemn
the contempt of the true heavenly wisdom, with the which these Scribes and
Pharyseis did disdain Christ and his doctrine.

For she came from the vtmoste part. C. Our Savior Christ uses a figure
called Antitheton, which is a ioynyng of contraries: The woman which was never
brought up in the schole of God, by the study of wisdom came from far to
Solomon, which was an earthly king: But the Jews being the pyllers of the
law of God, despise and reiecte their only teacher, and him which of all
Prophets was the chief. And behold in this place there is. A. That is,
greater, and wyser then Solomon, which do teach the true wisdom of God. Here
we may note that the first shall be last, Gods election.
and the last first. Let us therefore despise none, but rather cast down and
humble our selves beneathe every one. God is no respecter of persons.
Finally, we may here learn how that God has his people also among the
Gentyles because he is not only the God of the Jews, Roma. 3.
but also of ye Gentiles.

43 When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks throughout dry
places sekyng rest, and finds none.

When the unclean spirit is gone. B. By this last similitude, he terrifieth
the Jews, the Scribes, and such like kind of hypocrites, which bearing the^
selves bold of the grace of God, conspire with the deuell, and declares unto
them the punishment which their ingratitude deserves. Notwithstanding, to the
end the proffite of this doctrine, might more amplely be declared, he
shows generally what judgment they bring unto them selves, which
despysinge the grace of God offered unto them, open again the gate unto the
deuel. M. But how these words serve to the present matter, Verse. 39.
we may gather by the end of the five and forty verse followyng, where it is
said, Even so shall it happen to this perverse nation. Of the which nation he
spoke before, when he said, The evil and aduouterous generation seek for a
sign. These things therefore pertayne to the people of the Jews, which
shall be more manifest if you read it thus, It shall happen to this generation
no otherwise, then if an unclean spirit being gone out of a man, and walking
through dry places, and fynding no rest, says, I will return into my
house, and so forth. The similitude is taken, of a man that is subject to an
evil spirit or deuell, who after he is delivered, and come to his mind
again, by his slouthe and negligence, leaves open a gappe for the deuell to
enter again, and so he is in far worse case then he was before. He brings
in this similitude in very good order: For a littell before, he had driven the
deuell out of a Demoniake: and hitherto he has disputed, as concerning the
kingdom of Christ and of Satan. Whereupon the lord speaks this, I came
to drive out Satan from among you, that I my self might reign with you. But
you will not have me to reign in you or among you, and do despise the grace
which I offer unto you, it will come to pass that the evil spirits
retourning again, being more then they were before, and far worse; that ye
shall becomme the most wicked of al men, the most obstinate, the most blind,
and subject in the end, to horrible destruction. C. But because in every
particular word there is much matter contained, we will note certain things
orderly. M. First of all, (...)
the deuell is called here of our Savior Christ, an unclean spirit, because
through his own fault he has lost the divine cleanes, and blessed state in
the which he was first created, delightinge now in all uncleanness, and
envying and ouerwhelmyng al holiness. C. Furthermor, when Christ speaks of
the going forth of the deuell, he commends the force and effect of the
grace of God, so often as the same comes unto us: but specially when God
approaches nere unto us in the person of his son, that he might receive us
unto him self, being escaped from the tyranny of the deuell: The which thing
Christ plainly declared by the last miracle. For so much as therefore it is
his proper office to put the deuel to flight, and to foil him, that he reign
not in the hearts of men, the deuell is truly said to depart out of those
persons, to whom Christ does offer him self a redeamer. And although the
presence of Christ is not of force to all men, because the unbelieving do make
the same void and of none effect unto them, notwithstanding his purpose was
to note, to what end he does visit us and offer his grace, and of what force
his coming is, and last of al, what the evil spirits do feel. For he never
works in men by his grace, but the deuels are constrained by and by to give
place to the power of the same. We must therefore note that the deuell is cast
out of us, so often as Christ shyneth unto us, and declares his grace unto us
by some documente. ^sery
And hereby appears unto us the miserable condition of mankind.

For it follows that the deuell has his habitation in men, because he is
expulsed out of the same by the son of God. For truly mention is made here,
not of one or two, but of all the seed and posterity of Adam. This therefore
is the glory of our nature and flesh, that it is a mantio^ or dwelling place
of Satan, yt he might have dominion both over the body and the mind. So that
the great mercy of God, does appear in that of foul and filthy habitations,
he has made us a temple, and consecrated place for him self to dwell in by
his holy spirit. ^uer ^o do
Thyrdly, here is depainted unto us the nature of Satan, who never cease to
work mischief, but daily busieth him self, and wa^dereth hither and thither,
bending all his force to destroy us, but specially when he is overcome and put
to flighte of Christ: For then his madness is such, yt like a furious Lion
gredely he seeks to enhau^ce his pray. For until Christ does make us
partakers of his heavenly power and grace, this enemy does reign in us, as one
that makes pastime and sport, yea, he does dally as it were with us: but so
sone as he is driven out, he is grieved for the loss of his pray, and deuyseth
a new how he may assault us a fresh, and sets upon us with all might and
main. And therefore he is said metaphorically to walk through dry places,
because his exile is sorrowefull unto him, and like a barren deserte. Seking
rest. C. So long as he dwells not in me^, he is said to seek rest, because
then he is grieved and vexed, and never lets or leaves of seking until he
may quyte him self again, and wyn that again which before he had lost.
Wherefore let us learn, that so soon as Christ does call us, that then a
more sharp and cruel battle is prepared for us. And let us not be
discouraged hereby, but rather let us make ready our selves, and put upon us
the armoure of light, which S. Paul speaks of, in his Epistle to ye
Ephesians, Ephe 6.
with the which weapons we shall easily confound that enemy, and al his
ministers.

44 Then he says I will return into my house, from whence I came out. And
when he is come he finds it empty, and swepte and garnished.

A. Here the nature and practice of Satan is described, with the which he is
always ready to hurt. Into my house. The house is here taken for man,
allegorically. For in the verse going before, he said. When the unclean
spirit goes out of a man. He fyndeth it empty. He persisteth in the
similitude of the man, in who^ he says that the deuell found a place fornished
and prepared, after no worse manner, then if one should receive a geste.

C. Christ no doubt means that such men are apt and mete to receive the
deuell, which are altogether void of the spirit of God: For the faithful in
whom the fulness of Gods spirit abides, are so fortified and strengthened in
all points, that not one hole or gappe is open to the destruction, Satan
enters not into the faithful.
which Satan seeks to bring upon them. The sense therefore and meaning of
this place is, That Satan has never more convenient time and place, to enter
into us, then when we forsake Christ and bid him farewell. For the chiefest of
his delight is to find that voydenes or emptynes, which is left after the
swepinge away of the spirit of God. Let us therefore according to the
admonition of saint Paul, take heed that we quench not the spirit.

45 Then goes he and takes unto him seven other spirits, worse then him
self, and so enters he in and dwells there. And the end of that man is
worse then the beginning. Even so shall it be also, unto this froward
generation.

C. The deuell not seeking to have the commodity of the place to him self
only, brings in many other spirits worse then him self, and more hurtful.
For the number of seven, is here taken indefinitely, for an infinite number, as
in many other places also. 1. Sam. 2.
A. As in the book of Samuel, where it is said, Until the barren woman
bring forth seven, that is, many. Esaias. 4.
Also in the prophecy of Esaias, it is said, Seven women shall take unto the^
one man. C. By these words Christ does teach us, that if we fall from his
grace, we shall be two fold more in subjection to Satham then we were before.
Wherefore least we should think that the deuell is overcome by one battle,
because he departs from us, Christ here puts us in mind of his coming
again. Such a continual and mortal enemy is he, that he will not leave of
with the foil or repulse, but if he may have the least hole that may be to
put in his head, be ye well assured that he will wrynge and wreste in the hole
body. We must endeavor our selves therefore when Christ reigns in us, to
shut out this his enemy and ours.

And the end of that man. A. The apostell Peter seems to expound this place
saying. Of whom a man is overcome, unto the same he is brought in bondage.
For if they (after they have escaped from the fylthynes of the world, through
the knowledge of the lord, and the Savior Jesus Christ) are yet tangled
again therein, and ouercomme, the^ is the latter end worse with them then the
beginning. 2. Pet. 2.
For it had been better for them, not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment that was
given unto them.

So shall it be to. Look in the beginning of our annotations of the three and
forty verse.

46 While he yet talked with the people: behold his mother and his brethren
stood without, desyringe to speak w^^^ him.

While he yet spoke or talked. Bu. Matthewe here adioyneth a history which in
matter and all other points agrees with that which went before. For we are
taught by the example of the lord, constantly to go forward in the busynes of
the kingdom of God, and not to give place to our carnal affections, which
oftentimes do withdraw us from the kingdom of God. This lesson pertayneth to
all men, but special to the ministers of Gods word. The lord spoke these
things before the multitude, that thou might see that he gave not that which
was holy unto dogs: that is, that he did not in vain bestow these things
upon the Phariseis: but only in this respect, to convince their impiety, and
to make them void of all excuse. Behold his mother. Between Luke and the
other two Evangelists, Matthewe and Mark, there seems herein to be much
disagremente. For these two Matthewe and Mark, in the order of their hystory
say, that the mother and brethren of Christ, came as he was reasoning of the
unclean spirit. But Luke makes mention, Lu^
that they came at another time, and instead of their coming, puts in the
exclamation of a certain woman. A. And declares that which Matthewe notes
here in the eight chapter. C. But because me^ know well enough that the
Evangelists were not curious in noting the order of times, nor in prosecuting
all the sayings and deeds of our Savior Christ, these things (I say)
known well enough the solution and reconciliation is the more easy to be made.
For Luke expresses not at what time the mother of Christ came: But that which
Matthewe and Mark, do declare, before ye parable of the sower, that does he
place afterward. But where as he says that a woman of the multitude cried
out, it seems to have some affinity or agreement with this narration: for it
may be that upon a rash and an indiscreet zeal, she did extol that into
the highest degree, which (as she thought) was to much abased of Christ. In
this truly all do agree, that Christ talkyng among the myddest of the
multitude, his mother and brethren came unto him: no doubt, because they were
either careful for him, or else because they had a desire to learn somewhat at
his hands. For they sought not to come to him in vayn, neither is it lykely
that they which followed that holy mother, were unfaithful. A. But for so
much as there is mention made here, and in other places of the brethren of
Christ, we must note that they were called his brethren because they were of
the same kynne and line.

So Lot is said to be the brother of Abraham, when as he was Abraham's brothers
son. For Terah begat Abram, Nachor, and Aram, (...).
and Aram begat Lot. Laban also is said to be the brother of Jacob, who
notwithstanding was Jacobs uncle. So our Lord is said to be the brother of
James and Ioses, and of Judas and Simon, when as notwithstanding he was but
Cosyn germayne (as we term it) to James, and the son of Mary the virgyn,
which was sister to Mary Iacobi. These were said to be his brethren even as
Joseph was said to be his father. For it is written in the Gospel, I and thy
father sought thee sorrowyng.

Stood without. A. Luke seems to give a reason of this matter, saying, His
mother and brethern came unto him, but they could not come nigh him for the
prease.

Seking to speak. C. Where as Ambrose and Chrysostom have accused the virgin
Mary of ambition, that she should prease to her son, to the end the
multitude might thereby know that she was his mother, it is more then needs,
when as her synguler modesty and godlynes is commended by testimony of
scripture. We deny not, but that peradventure, the vehemence of carnal
affections, might make the^ to busy the^ selves more then they need:
notwithstanding we doubt not but that for some godly purpose they were moved
to join them selves unto him.

47 The one said unto him, behold thy mother, and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to speak with thee.

C. Where as our Evangelist Matthew, reports this message to be brought to
Christ by no more then one, Mark and Luke affirm that there were diverse of
them that spoke thus unto Christ. In the which there is no contrariety, for
the commandment which the mother gave for the calling of her son, being
heard of many, went from one to an other till it came to Christ.

48 But he answered and said unto him that had told him, who is my
mo-mother? And who are my brethren?

M. Christ here does not so deny his mother and his brethrem, as though by no
means he would know them according to the flesh, but he resists their
importunity, C. by yt which they sought preposterously to interrupte him in
his doctrine, and to make him cease. M. He was not therefore a littell offended
by their importunity as do his words declare, and the very manner it self of
speaking by interrogation, saying. Who is my mother? He was occupied in the
busynes of his father, of the Gospel, and in the busynes pertaining to the
kingdom of God, which was of so great waighte that they should not have
interupted him for the speaking with his mother and brethren. A. Therefore by
this his answer, he teaches that he must go forward in the same. After the
same manner he said unto them in an other place, Wherefore did ye seek me?
Luke, 2,
Wiste ye not yt I must go about my fathers business.

49 And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples and said, Behold my
mother and brethren.

And he stretched forth. Bu. Least any man should conster or interpret the
words that he spoke of any other then of the faithful hearers of the word,
of the Cittezens, and inhabiters of the kingdom of God, he manifestly declared
by the gesture of his body whom he mente and of whom he spoke. Faithful me^
are the brethren of Christ


Behold my mother and. C. Here Christ extenuating consanguinitie, or the
kyndred of flesh and blood, sets forth a very proffitable doctrine, saying
that he receives all his disciples and faithful people, into no less honor
and dignity, then if they were the chiefest of his kyndred by flesh and
blood. This sentence depends upon the office of Christ, for he declares
that he was not given for a certain or a few, but for all ye godly which by
faith were joined and knyt into one body. Furthermore, there is no bond more
holy then the spiritual bond: because he ought not to be comprehended
according to the flesh, but by the power of the spirit, with the which he was
endued of the father to regenerate me^: that they which were by nature the
unclean and curssed seed of Ada^, might by grace be made the holy and
celestial sons of God. 2. Cor. 5.
Therefore S. Paul says, that a man knows not Christ truly, according to
the flesh: because we must consider the redemption of the world, which far
surmounteth the capacity of men, or humane power, when he reformeth us by his
spirit, according to the image of God. Wherefore this is the sum, that we
learn to behold Christ with the eyes of faith: then, to know that every
one which is regenerate by the spirit, addicteth him self to true holiness
and ryghteousnes, and to be so united unto Christ, that he may be a true
member of his body. But although Christ do feme here to have no respect to
consanguinitie, yet notwithstanding, we know in deed that he did devoutly
reverence the order of mankind, and did fulfill such lawful duties as
pertained to parents: but only he admonysheth that spiritual consanguititie,
ought to be preferred before that which is carnal. We ought not to forsake
Christ for our parents.
Let us observe the rightes of nature, and yet let us not addicte our selves to
much to flesh and blood. And let us so love our pare^tes and kynsfolke that
we always and in all things prefer our spiritual and heavenly
consanguinitie before all other.

50 For whosoever does the will of my father which is in heaven, the same it
my brother, sister, and mother.

C. He understands those to do the will of the father, (not which exactely
fulfill all the righteousness of the law,) for so this name of brother which
he gives unto his disciples, should pertayne unto none: but specially, he
commends faith, which is the welsprynge and original of true obedience. The
sentence of Christ is known when he says. John. 6.
This is the will of my father, that every one which sees the son and
believes in him, shall not peryshe but have life everlasting. M. Also, Matthew.
17.
this is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Therefore
to believe in Christ the son of God, To believe in Christ, is the fulfilling
of Gods will.
and to hear the word of Christ, as the word of God, is to do the will of
the father which is in heaven: So that he which hears the word of God, and
does it, and believes in him, is the brother, sister, and mother of Christ.
And therefore, instead of this which is written here and in Mark, (He which
does the will of my father): is written in Luke, L^
He which hears the word of God and does the same. Io^
And in an other place he says, he that is of God hears Gods word. Now,
to be a kynne unto God is, to be of him: and to be of kynne, is to be of that
spiritual consanguiuitie with him As it is written, To them gave he power to
be the sons of God: even the^ that believed on his name, which were borne,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of
God. Now, what other thing did the disciples of Christ, whom here by the
stretchyng forth of his hand, he declares to be his brethren, systers, and
mother? Did not they believe that which be spoke, and forsook all and followed
him? C. When Christ therefore has aduau^ced his disciples with exceading
honor, in so much that he counts them for his brethren, how abominable and
horrible is our ingratitude, if we forsake not all the desires of the flesh,
and al our busynes, and intend and give our selves wholely unto him. (...) t^
o^ (...)
M. By this place all so we see how preposterous the veneration of the vyrgin
Mary is, with the which she is worshyped as a Goddess, and all because she
was the carnal mother of Christ: When as Christ here does extenuate that
consanguinitie, preferringe the spiritual kyndred only, which pertayneth to
all the sons of God, far before all other. So in Luke, L^
when the woman cried out and said, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and
the teates that gave thee suck, he answered. Nay, rather blessed are they
which hear the word of God and keep it. By the which words Christ means
the same that he meant in this place.

The xiii. Chapter.
THe same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the Sea side.
M. After that the fame of miracles began to increase and the concourse and
multitude of people began also to multiplye, in so much that they had no
leisure to eat (as appears in the third Chapter of Mark,) Jesus went out
of the house, (in the which he spoke those words before mentioned) to the end
he might have a more convenient place to seek the kingdom of God. For
willingly he would have framed himself to the zeal of the people, although
he knew the nature of man. In this Chapter there are certain parables by the
which the nature, force, fruit, and excellency of the word of God is declared.

2. And much people were gathered together unto him, so greatly that he went
and sat in a ship, and all the people stood on the shore.

C. It is not in vain that the Euangelystes spoke first of the great concourse
and multitude of people by the sight whereof Christ was moved to prepare ye
doctrine of the seed. This multitude came from diverse and sundry places: they
stood all amazed, every one of them being of like desyer to hear, but not of
like affection to profit. This was the occasion of the parable, to the end men
might know, that the seed of doctrine was not fruitful in every place, being
every where dispersed and scattered abroad: because it shall not always find,
fertyle, fruitful and well tylled ground: It follows therefore.

3. And he spoke many things to them by simylitudes saying. Behold the
sower went forth to sow.

And he spoke many B. He spoke unto the multitude by symilitudes and
parables, (...) use
no doubt to the end he might make them more attentyue, and also more curiouse
of those things which were spoken, that afterward inquyring of them, they
might more certaynlye be taught: Mark. 4.
and persuaded of all things. A. Mark has: he taught them many things by
parables, and said unto them in his doctrine, harke^ to. What those many
things were, this present Chapter sufficientlye declares, as there were many
hearers present, so they were of diverse natures and dispositions. And
therefore wyselye dispensinge and bestowing the treasure and riches of the
kingdom of God, he preaches the one only, and self same Doctrine of the
Gospel of the kingdom of God, by many and sundry symilitudes. Behoulde the
sour went B. The occasion of this parable seems to be (as we touched even
now) the great multitude of people which came from diverse places with a desyer
to learn, to whom Christ by this parable declared that it was not sufficient
to hear the word: and that not all that heard it, were thereby any thing
the better, unless they brought forth the fruits of the same. 1. Peter. 1.


The similitude is very apt and fit: for we are borne a new by the doctrine
of the Gospel which is the incorruptible seed. The Gospel is the frutfull
seed of life.
As the seed by his own proper nature is fruitful, so is the Gospel: if it
profit not the hearers we may not say therefore that it is unfruitful for
it is always fruteful in power, but not in act or deed. Where the earth is
wantinge, there does not the seed by it self bring forth fruit. Christ
therefore here professed himself to be as it were a husband man, which is come
forth to sow the seed: but many of his auditors to be like barren and
untilled land, other some to be like the thornye and bushye ground, in the
which both the labor and the seed perishes. But as concerning the sense of
the parrable it shall be omytted and let pass until such time as we come to
the exposition which our savior Christ himself makes: only the Readers are
presentlye to be admonyshed of this, that if they were compared to barren and
unfruitful land, which came from far as men that were hunger starued, unto
Christ, it is no marueyle if ye Gospel do not fructifye at this day in many,
of ye which some are slouthful, some slow, some negligent, and some such
drones, yt they can scante be drawn to hear the word of God

4. And when he had sown, some fell by the way side, and the fowls of the
air came and devoured it.

And he went forth to sovve. A. Namely his seed. The fifth sixth and seventh
verces are omytted and declared in the exposition that our savior Christ
himself makes.

8. But some fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an
hundredth fould, some sixty foulde, some thyrtie foulde.

E. For a hundereth foulde, sixty foulde, and thyrty fould, The Greek text
and ye old translation in lataine has only, a hu^dered, sixty, and thyrtie,
this word foulde being omytted. For the Greek tongue wants the names
distributive of numbers. He means yt out of every grain there proceeded
many, out of some an hu^dered, out of some sixtye, and out of other some
thyrtye.

9. He that has ears to hear let him hear.

B. This sentence our savior Christ was wo^t to add, when he would stir up
the minds of ye hearers to mark and note diligently that which he spoke unto
them. By these words he partly declares that all have not true intelligence,
to comprehend that which he spoke: and partly he styrreth up his disciples,
to consider diligently that his doctrine was not common and easy to every one.
And he makes this difference between his hearers, that some hear, and that
othersome are deaf. Now if it be demanded how they that hear come by their
hearing, the Scripture in another place answeareth saying, Psalm. 40.
sacrifyce and meat offeringe thou would not have, but mine ears have thou
opened.

10. And the Disciples came and said unto him: why speak thou to them by
parables?

C. By the words of this Euangeliste it appears that the Disciples had not
only a respect of themselves, but wished also profit to others.

They themselves not understanding the parable knew well enoughe that it was no
less obscure and hard to the people.

They complain therefore that Christ speaks words of the which there came
no profit to the hearers. M. Furthermore this kind of teachinge seemed unto
them to be rare and unwonted and very strange, because hitherto they had not
heard Christ use so often parables. For they thought that it should have been
his part to use manifest and plain words, to the end he might the more
easilye be understood C. And although that symilitudes do oftentimes manifest
the thing which is handled, those notwithstanding which do contain a
continual metaphor are very hard, dark, and obscure. Christ therefore
propoundinge this similitude, would comprehend that under an allegorye, which
without a figure, might more plainly and evidently have been spoken. But now
when the exposition is added and made, the figured speech has more perspecuity
and plainenes, then the simple, yt is, it is not only of more efficacy and
force to move the minds of men, but also more clear and euidente to be
perceived, so great a difference there is in the speaking and uttering of
things. Truly if Christ should have said simplely: the Gospel is preached to
many in vain. A. He had touched ye effect of all this matter, C.
Notwithstanding it would not have had so great force and weight as this
similitude.

Bu. The Disciples therefore say, why speak thou the mysteries of the
kingdom of God in such dark parables, rather then in plain and easy
sentences whereby thou may be understood.

11. He aunsweared and said unto them it is given unto you to know the
secrets of the kingdom of heaven: but to the^ it is not given.

Bu. The lord by his answer manifestly declares, to whom the doctrine of the
Gospel is obscure and to whom it is evident and plain, also who are mete
hearers of ye Gospel and who are not. C. By yt which answer of Christ we
gather that ye doctrine of salvation was propounded of God unto men for diverse
ends and purposes. For Christ testifyeth that he spoke therefore the more
obscurelye, because his word should be hard and difficile unto many, and might
stryke and sound in their ears with confused and ambiguous sound. If any man
obiecte ye saying of the Prophet, ^tion.
I have not spoken in the secret places of the earth, neither yet in darkness.
It is not for naught yt I said unto ye seed of Jacob: (...). 5. (...) 9. and
seek me. Also David acknowledges the words of the law to be a la^terne to
his feet, and to give wisdom unto babes. It may be answered that ye word
of God by his own nature is brighte and clear, ^were.
but ye brightness of the same by the darkness of men is suffocated and
obscured. For although the law had the veil hanging before it, yet
notwithstanding the truth of God was manifest enough in the same unless the
eyes of me^ were blinded. And as concerning the Gospel S. Paul says yt it is
not hid unless it be hidden to the reprobate, (...) 4.
and to such as are in darcknes, whose minds Satan has blinded. Furthermore
we must note yt the force of illuminating, whereof David speaks, and the
familiar manner of preaching whereof Esaias prophesyeth, is properlye referred to
the elect and chose^ people of God. This notwtstanding always abides
infallible yt the word of God is not obscure of it self, but as it is
obscured and darkened, with the blind mystes of the world: in the mean season,
the Lord does nevertheless contain and keep his mysteries, yt the sense and
understanding of ye same cannot come to the reprobate. And truly by two means
he does deprive them of the light of the Gospel. ^in^ wic^e
For sometimes he speaks yt in parables, which might be spoken much more
plainly: sometimes expressing his mind plainly without either tropes or
figures, he does so dull and amase their senses, yt even in the open and
manifest light they are blind. (...) 9.
To this effect pertayneth the saying of ye Prophet. Your Prophets and rulers
yt should see has he covered And the visions of all the prophets is become
unto you, as the words of a Book that is sealed up which me^ deliver to one
yt is learned saying: read thou in it. And he says I cannot for it is
sealed. Forsomuche as Christ has so dispensed his doctrine by his deuyne
counsel yt it shall profit only a few in whose minds it shall soundlye be
imprinted, and shall trouble and moleste ye rest it follows yt this doctrine
of salvation was not sent unto men for one end and purpose, but by ye wisdom
of God to be so moderatly tempered, that it should be no less a savor of death
unto death to the reprobate, then it is of life unto life to the elect and
chosen children of God. And least any man should contend, S. Paul adds to
these words, 2. Cor. 2.
that what soever the effect of the Gospel be, though it be a deadly savor,
yet is it sweet before God. But to the end we may have the true sense and
meaning of this place we must more nerely consider the purpose of Christ, for
what cause and to what end he speaks this. First undoubtedly the comparison
pertayneth to this end, that he might amplifye ye grace given to his
Disciples: because yt was given specially unto them, which was not given in
like manner to all men. To you says he it is given to know ye mysteries of
God. If any demand from whence the Apostels have this privilege of dignity,
truly there shall no cause of worthiness be found in the^: for Christ in
pronou^sing yt it is given unto them, excludes al deserte. Christ pronounces
that they be certain select, and chosen men, upon whom God specially bestows
this honor, to be partakers of the secret mysteries of God the other being
deprived of ye same. God calls ye elect by his Gospel.
There is no other cause of this difference found saving that it pleases God to
call unto him those whom he has chosen frelye in his mercy, before the
foundation of the world was laid. A. Whereupon he calls the rest forreners
or strangers, Mark. 4.
as may be gathered by the words of Mark when he says: but unto them that
are without, all things happen by parables. C. By the which words Christ
plainly declares yt these were not of the number of the elect, and therefore
that it was not given unto them.

12 For whosoever has, to him shall be given: and he shall have abundance:
but whosoever has not: from him shall be taken away even that which he has.

M. It is a common proverb, yt to the rych shall be given, but to the poor not
so: yea they shall have ye little taken from them and be made beggars. By the
which our savior Christ would signify, that it was also full filled in his
kingdom, yt the knowledge of life should be communicated and given to those
only which have the gift of election: and from those that want the same, shall be
taken away, that deuyne knowledge which they seem to have, by the preaching
of the word: because the reprobate by the contempt of the word, which they
cannot receive, are blinded more and more til at length thou may see them
depryued of their common sense.

The lord took the Disciples unto him, to the end they might more and more
profit in his schole: and they being chosen the lord did promote them as it
were by degrees: they were not made perfect the first day: but dailye they did
learn as it were new lessons: and so by increase they did abou^d. C. He
puts them in mind therefore how liberally God has dealt with the^ to the end
they might esteem the more of his grace, and to acknowledge themselves bound
unto him for so great a benefit.

He repeteth the self same words in the 25. Chapter following.
notwithstanding in another sense: for of the lawful use of gifts shall be
spoken there: but now he teaches simplely, that therefore more is given to
the Apostels the^ to other me^, because it is the will of the heavenly father
to heap upon them as it were, the riches of his grace even to the full. For
because he will not forsake the work of his hands, Psalm. 138.
(as says the Prophet David) those in whom he has begun his work) he will
finishe and beautifye every day more and more, until such time as he has
brought them to an excellent perfection. Hereupon there flow so manifold
graces unto us, from him, and such joyful success: because the consideration
of the benefits of God does stir him and procure his lyberallity to continue
still toward us, and as his riches are infinyte, so he is never weary in
enriching his children with the same. So often therefore as he does exalte us
let us remember that what benefit so ever happens unto us, that ye same
does spring from him, as from a most pure well, because he seeks to finish
and accomplish the work of our salvation. But on the contrary part Christ does
pronounce that the reprobate are worse and worse, until such time as they being
brought to naught, languishe and consume utterly in their need and scarsity.
At the first sight this saying seems very hard, that the things which the
wicked have not, shall be taken from them: Luk^
but Luke does myttigate the hardness, and takes away the ambiguity of this
place saying, yt those things which they seem to have shall be taken from them.
And truly often times it comes to pass ye the reprobate do excel in singular
gifts, and are outwardly at a blush like unto the children of god. But in deed
there is nothing sound in them, N^ re^ the^^
because their mind is void of all godlynes, and there remains nothing in
them, but an outward and vain show.

Matthew therefore very truly says that they have nothing, because they being
void of al perfection in mind, how much soever they seem to have before ye
world, in the presence of God they have nothing. And Luke very aptlye
signifies and means yt they have defiled and abused those good gifts with
the which god had endowed the^, because there remains nothing but an outward
show, pomp and vain glory in ye sight of me^. Here let us learn in all our
life to profit, and go forward, more and more, because God to ye end has
given us a taste of his heavenly Doctrine, ye we might plentifully feed of the
same, until such time as we were fully satisfied.

In Mark this sentence seems to be more confuse: harken to says the Lord
what is spoken unto you.

Furthermore if they profit aright, he puts them in hoope of more
fruitful grace. To you which hear (says he) it shall be given. At length
there follows a clause which agrees with the words of Matthew: but there is
put in a mydel sentence, which we expound being before in the seventh Chapter
of Matthew: because it is not likely that it was placed here in his right order.
For (as it has been said already) ye Eua^gelists were not curious in placing
the sermons of Christ, but heaped diverse of his se^tences together. But Luke
mingleth this sentence with diverse se^tences of our Savior Christ, which were
spoken some in one place, some in an other, and notes also that Christ spoke
this to an other end, namely that theye should be attentive to his doctrine,
least that the seed of life should be sown in vain, which seed, being
received into the mind, ought to take deep rote. as if he should have said,
Take heed least that be taken from you, which is given unto you, if it want
fruit.

13 Therefore speak I to them by parables, because in seeing they shall not se,
and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

C. The third cause why Christ used parables is, namely that they which should
perish, might more and more by the just judgment of God be blinded: it is
enough for them to here that they might be inexcusable. He says therefore that
he speaks obscurely to the multitude, because they should not be partakers of
the true light. Notwithstanding when he says that the blind are blinded
still, to the end they might abide and continu in their blindness, he does not
ascribe the falte of this matter unto them: but thereby commends the grace
showed to the Apostelles the more because no man had the like showed unto them.
He does not therefore declare that this was done without the determynate
counsel of God, whose purpose, although it be hidden from us, yet is it known
to him, as more ple^tifully we shall se anon. For although parables have an
other use, then to contain those things in a hard sense, which God would not
plainly manifest and declare, yet notwithsta^dinge we have showed, that this
parable was so propounded of Christ, that by reason of the allegorye, it was
more hard, doubtful, and obscure then a ryddell.

14 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esayas, which says, with the
ears ye shall here and not understand and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive.

And in them is fulfilled. M. To the end he might show that he did this by
the just judgment of God, as it was done in times paste, he brings in the
prophecy of Esayas, as concerning the excecation and blynding of the Jews,
by the which they being blinded and made obstinate in the time of the
prophets, were neither moved by them, nor yet by the plagues of the lord, to
turn from their wicked worshipping of Idols, and to repent of their
spiteful malice. C. Christ therefore confirms the prophecy of the
Prophet, declarynge it to be no new thing, that many received so small profit
by the word of God: because the people long before the^ were in as great
blindness With the ears ye shall hear. M. The place of the Prophet Esaias in
Hebrewe is red thus, Hear in hearing and understand not, Se in saying and
perceive not. Esaias. 6.
Harden the heart of this people, stop their cares, and shut their eyes, that
they se not with their eyes, here not with their ears and understand not with
their hearts, and convert and be healed. C. This place is diuersely sited in
the new testament. A. Paul preachinge Christ at Rome, casting the Jews in
the teth with their obstinate malice says, Acts. 28.
that they were therefore blinded in the light of the gospel, because they
were bitter and rebelliouse against Christ. Also in an other place he says,
Israel has not obtained that which he seeks: but the election has
obtained it. The remnaunt are blinded, according as it is written. Romans 11.
God has given them the spirit of unquietness, eyes that they should not se,
and ears that they should not hear, even unto this day. In this place of
Paul the Antithesis is to be noted. for if the only and free election of God,
has saved some remnant of people: it follows by the secret and just
judgment of god, that al ye rest shall perish. For who are the rest who^ Paul
in contrary wise sets against the elect, but only they whom God has
appointed to everlasting damnation. John. 12.
The like reason is in John. For he says that there were many unbelieving,
because no man believes, but they to who^ God reuealeth his arm and power. And
by and by he adds, that they could not believe, because it is written: harden
the hearts of this people. To the same thing has Christ respect, when he
refers it to the secret counsel of God, that the truth of the gospel is
not revealed to every one alyke, but is depely hidden in parables and dark
sentences, to the end he might power nothing but thycke darkness into the
minds of the people. We will always (truly) confess, that those whom God
does blind, are found worthy of this punishment: but because there appears
not a manifest reason or cause in the persons of men, this principal abides
sure, that they by a singular gift are ordained to salvation, and illuminated
by the spirit of God, whom God has freely chosen: and that, all the
reprobate, are deprived of the light of life, whether God give unto them his
word, or whether he blind their eyes and stop their ears, that they can
neither hear nor perceive the same. Now let us note how Christ does apply
the prophecy of the Prophet to the present cause. And seeing ye shall see and
not perceive. C. The words of the Prophet are not recited (as it was said
eue^ now) neither makes it any matter: because it was enough for Christ to
show that it was no new or unwonted example, if many were amassed and astonished
at the word of God. It was said unto the Prophet, Go and harde^ the heart
of this people. This Matthew attributes to the hearers, that they should bear
the blame of their blyndnes and obstinacy. Neither can the one be separated
from the other, for all they that are cast into a reprobate sense, do
wyllingly with an inward malice, blind, and obdurate them selves. For it can
come no other wise to pass where the spirit of God abides not, with the
which only the elect are governed. Wherefore we conclude thus, that they are
not of a sound and perfect mind, whom God does not illuminate with his
spirit of adoption and therefore are they blinded by ye word of God: and yet
notwithstanding, the fault remains in them, because they are willingly blind.

15 For the heart of this people is wexed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes have they closed, least at any time they should see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their
heart, and be converted, that I also might heal them.

For the heart of this people. S. That is, The heart is so enclosed and choked
with fat that it is not able to discharge his proper office. M. Therefore
when the heart is gross, it cannot be that the ears should hear, and that
the heart it self should understand and convert. Whereupon he says, the
heart of this people is wexed gross, And by and by he adds.

Their ears are dull. Therefore before all things the heart must be opened,
and made fit to hear the word of God. A. But who can bring this thing to
pass save only the spirit of God. Act^^
Of this matter we have an example of Lydia the seller of purple, of whom it
is written in the acts of the Apostels thus. And the lord opened her heart,
that she attended unto the things which Paul spoke.

And their eyes have they closed. C. Christ here attributes that to the people
which the Prophet Esaias attributes to God: It is true in either sense. The
people them selves are the cause of excecation and blindness, for they shut
their own eyes, The cau^ sec^^ caus^ elec^^
and stop their own ears. We shall always find the first or special cause
to be in me^: But the secundary or least cause to be in God, who blyndeth the
eyes of the reprobate, which he has predestinate to damnation. We call it not
the seco^dary or least cause, according to the Philosophers, but we call that
the secundary cause, which is hydden from the sense of men, and so secret
that we ought not curiously to search for the same: But to content our selves
with the first cause seeing the other is not apparaunt or manifest. We must also
note that the doctrine is not properly, neither of it self, neither by his
own nature the cause of blyndnes but by accide^s. For as the porblynde men
when they come forth to the Sun, have their eyesighte more obscure and dim
(which fault is not to be imputed to the Sun, but to their eyes (even so
where as the word of God does blind and obdurate the reprobate, (because it
is by their own wickedness) it is proper unto them, but accidental to ye
word. Least at any time they should see with. C. Here the lord might seem
to be unwilling to have the reprobate converted which is contrary to this
sentence, Ez^
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness
and live. A. Also Peter says, ^ri. 3
The lord is paciente to us ward, for so much as he would have no man lost,
but would receive all men to repentance. But Peter and Ezechiell dispute not
in those places, as concerning the secret purpose of God, but only they do
show how God shewethe him self toward us, calling us by the preachinge of
the Gospel, to everlasting life. So that it is not contrary to the place of
Esaias: for he calls all by his word, yea, even the reprobate: But the
reprobate are so destitute of grace, that they are nothing at all moved by
the gentle inuitation of God, no, they do not mollifye their hearts.

And be converted, that I also might heal him. C. By these words he shows
to what end seeing and understanding do profit namely that men being
converted unto God, may come into favor with him, and might have him a
gentle, louinge, and merciful God unto them. Therefore to this end properly he
would have his word preached, that he, renuynge the hearts and minds of men,
might reconcile them unto him. As concerning the reprobate, Esaias here
pronounces the contrary: namely least that they should obtain mercy, there
remains unto the^ a stony hardness and obstinacy, and that the effect of the
word toward them shall be taken away, least it should mollify their
hearts to repentance. By this word of healinge, Matthewe and the Prophet
comprehend a delyueraunce from all evil: for they do compare the people
afflycted by the hand of God, Metaphorically to a sick man: therefore they say,
that health is wrought when the lord releaseth the ponishement. But because
this health depends upon the remission of sins, Mark very aptly shows
the original and cause. For whereupon comes the mitigation of ponishementes,
but only because the lord being pleased with us, does bestow upon us his
benediction and peace? And although sometimes our offense and wickedness being
abbolished, ^nde of ^^s po^^ntes.
he ceasseth not to ponishe us (either because he would humble us, or else
because we should afterward be more ware) notwithstanding because he showing
signs of his favor, does quikken and renew us, and for the most part
ponishementes do cease with the fault: the healing is very well joined with
pardon and forgeuenes. Repentance is not the cause of remission of sins.
But thereby we ought not to gather that repentance is ye cause of forgeuenes,
as though God would receive them that convert into his favor through desert
(for the conversion it self is a sign and token of the free favor of God) but
only the order and consequence is noted: because God does not forgive sins,
but only those, for the which men are sorry and displeased with them selves.
Repentance is the ordinary way to salvation.
M. By this place (I say) we may easily understand, what the order, mean, or
way, is, by the which men are saved.

Before all things, the heart is to be opened and made apt to here the word

Hereupon it comes that the ears are so requisite to hear, that is
desirouse to hear. So says the Apostell, Roma 10.
faith comes by hearing, and hearing comes by the word of God Fourthly
health, and remission of sins follow couersion and repentance. But the
reprobate

16 But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears, because they
here.

But happy are your. M. The obstinacy, excecation, and dampnation of the wicked
and reprobate being declared, Christ our savior, is rapte (as it were) and
drawn, to the preaching and publyshing of their beatitude, to whom it is given
to have eyes of saying, and hearing ears: that he might therewith give a
reason, wherefore the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, which being hidden
from others were revealed by him to his Apostelles. Luke, 10
C. Luke seems to refer this saying to an other time. notwithstanding the
solution is easy, that the Evangelist there, heapeth many sentences together,
without any distyncte order of times: But Matthew in his text does more
plainly express and show whereupon he took occasion, so to speak. For as at
the first, the disciples were admonished and put in mind of the synguler grace
of God bestowed upon them, in that they were by the lord exempt from the
common sort of people, and admytted familiarly to the mysteries of the
kyngedome: so now the same grace, by an other comparison is extolled, in that
they do excel the old prophets, and the holy kings. For this is much more,
then to be preferred before the unbelieving multitude. But Christ here
understands not every kind of hearing, nor the simple aspecte or sight of
the flesh, but he pronounces their eyes to be blessed, because they behold
the excellent glory of the only begotten son of God, in so much that they
know, and acknowledge him to be the redemer: and because the lively Image of
God shined unto them, in the which they perceived saving health, and the
sound of perfect blessedness. Furthermore because the saying of the Prophets
might be fulfilled in them namely that they being fully and perfectly taught of
God, no man need be taught of his neighbor. And thus is the objection put
away, which might be brought of the other part of the sentence of Christ, when
he says, John. 20.
that they are blessed which have not seen, and yet believed. For there is noted
a contrary kind of seeing which Thomas grossly required. But the sight whereof
Christ speaks now in this place, is common to the faythefull of all ages
with the Apostels. For we not saying Christ, se him, and not hearing, do hear
him. because in the Gospel he appears unto us face to face (as says saint
Paul) that we might be tra^sformed into his Image, 2. Cor. 3.
or lykenes, and the perfection of wisdom of righteousness, and of life being
once offered unto us, in him does there continually shine.

17 Verily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men, have desired
to see those things which ye see: and have not seen them: and to hear those
things which ye hear, and have not hard them.

Verelye I say unto you. Z. Christ sheeweth that the fathers of old time,
were very desirouse, of his coming, whose corporal presence notwithstanding
they might not see. And righteous men. C. Luke has, many Prophtes and kings.
The condition of the present church, is very well said to be better, then the
state of the holy fathers, which lived under the law: to whom that was showed
under types and shadows, which now by the shynynge face of our savior Christ
most brightly shined, and appeared. For the veil of the temple being cut, we
enter by faith into the heavenly sainctuarye, and we have a familiar access
unto god. For although the fathers being contented with their condition and
state, did quiet and pacify their minds, yet notwithstanding this did not let
or hinder, but that they might have a farther desire. So Abraham saw a far
of the day of Christ and reioysed: yet notwithstanding he wished to behold it
more nere, and obtained not his desire. For Symeon spoke according to the
affection of all men, when he said, Lord, now let thy servant depart in
peace.

Nor truly could it come any otherwise to pass, Luke. ^
when as all men had an earnest desire and longing, for the promised
delyueraunce, being under the burden of malediction, with the which every
one is oppressed. Let us understand therefore, that they longed after Christ,
as men that are extreme hungery, and yet notwithstanding their faith was safe,
in so much that they murmured not against God, Abraham Christian faith.
but patiently suspended their minds, until the fulness of the time came, in
the which they should behold the revelation and manifesting of the son of
God. R. But if Abraham saw in the spirit that time to come, in the which the
Messiah should be revealed, and reioysed, how greatly and excedingly would
he have reiosed if he had seen that Messiah now present with his bodily
eyes? Christ therefore commends unto his Dis^iples that time, in the which
he was now reveled in the flesh, unto whom all the law and the Prophets had
respect.

18. Hear ye the parable of the sower.

Bu. This pronowne (ye) has a great emphasis and force in it. A. As if he
should say: you, to whom it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
God, here ye (I say) (to whom it is given, to see and here those things which
have been denied to many Prophets and kings) what this parable which I have
propounded of the sower sowinge his seed means. C. This our Euangelyste, and
Luke, makes mention that our savior Christ expounded the parable simplelye to
his Disciples, without any reprehension: (...). 4
but Mark declares that he reprehendeth their dulnes saying. Know ye not
this parable, how then will ye know all other parables? As if he should have
said, it is your part to expound, not only this parable, but also all other to
the ignorant people: the which thing how ca^ ye do? when ye are ignorant of
this?

19. When one hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it not,
then comes the evil man, and takes away that which was sown in his heart:
this is he which was sown by the way side.

When one hears A. Luke in the beginning of the explication of the parable,
declares what Christ mente by the seed, saying: the seed is the word of God.

M. And to the end we might know that he spoke of the preaching of the
Gospel, he calls this seed in this place, in the beginning of his
exposition, (the word of the kingdom, in the which the mysteries of the
kingdom of God are expressed.

C. But the sum of the whole parable is, that the doctrine of the Gospel,
when it is dispersed abroad like seed, is not in every place fruitful:
because it falls not always in fruitful and well tylled ground. He
reherseth here four kinds of hearers, of the which the first kind conceive no
seed: the second, seem to conceive, but so in deed, that they take Hears
the word of the kingdom and understands it not C. In this first place he
makes mention of those which are barren and untilled, which inwardly co^ceyue
not the seed: because there is no preparation in their hearts. B. They here the
word but with no affection of the mind, with no dilygent affection, their mind
being drawn of Satan another way: whereby it comes to pass, that they never
think upon the word which they heard, but as the Proverb is, it enters in
at one ear and goes out at the other. C. Such Christ compares to the hard,
and dry earth, which is in the common way, which being continually trodden
upon, waxes hard as stone. I would to God there were not so many to be found
of this kind, as there are, who when they offer them selves to hear, do stand
notwithstanding astonyed, neither do they receive any taste or feeling of the
same: to be short they differ very little from blocks and stones, that are
incensible. Wherefore it is no marueyle if they vanishe quyte away. Then comes
the evil man A.

Luke has Satan, and Mark puts down, this name devil.

And takes away that which was C. Hereby we gather that Satan is an
ennemy of our salvation. Satan is an ennemy to the seed of Gods word.
Even as do the hungary byrds in sowing time, so comes he forth so soon as
the doctrine of truth is sown, and takes it away before it has taken
moisture, and begins to spring. Bu. For that ancient enemy knows well
enough that the saving health of mortal men is wrought by faith in the word.

Which was sown in his heart. C. Whereas Christ says that the word was sown
in their hearts, although it be an improper kind of speaking, yet
notwithstanding it wa^teth not reason: because by the vice and wickedness of
men the nature of the word is not taken away, but that it may retain and
keep the virtue of seed.

For we may in no wise think that any thing of the graces of God is
deminished although the effect of them come not unto us. In respect of God,
the word is sown in the hearts, but the hearts of all men do not receive that
sown sede with meekenes and gentle affections, as exhorts the Apostell
saint James very well Therefore the Gospel is always in power, James. 1.
The Gospel has power to fructifye.
a fruitful seed, but not in deed. M. Wherefore although in it self the
seed, or thing sown is good, and apt to bring forth good fruit,
notwithstanding it makes a great matter, into what ground it be cast. In
like manner, the word of God, although it be good, and apt to work pyetye
and godlynes, yet nevertheless it makes much, what manner of person the hearer
be. A. Luke adds saying, least in believing they should be saved. C. By the
which we may note no small praise of faith, when that it is called the only
cause of salvation.

This is he which was sovvne by the C. Some translate it thus. This is that
which was sown by the ways side.

20. But he that received the seed, which was cast into stonye places, the
same is he, that hears the word, and anon with joy receives it.

A. It were better if it were translated thus. But that which was sown in the
stony ground signifies him which etc. Vnt^ hearer^
Bu. This is another sort of the hearers: the rockye or stonye ground
signifies vntimelye hearers, I say the minds of such men as are ripe to
soon, which receive the word of God so soon as it is preached, and rejoice
with great gladness for the reuelinge of the truth, For they have some earth,
although not very deep, or sufficient enoughe: they have some goodness, and
integrity, and hither to the seed begins to spyre and shote, that is, they
do declare by a certain token yt they have a credit to the Gospel, and that
they like very well of the Eua^gelical religion: but when they have not a right
faith, and of a true proporcion, ye root of charity also, and vital moisture,
and the watering of the spirit of God in due time, their faith is but
momentany, and their religion is of short continuance, that is it dureth not to
the end, but for a short time only. M. So that ye proverb is verefyed in the^,
soon come, soon gone. Of these kind of hearers we see to many at this day,
which at the first greedely receive the Gospel, and embrace the same: but in a
short time after, they depart from it, and despise it, even as the children of
Israel lothed their Manna, Car^ pell^^
for the which at the first they longed so sore. There is wanting in them a
lively affection, which should confyrme them in constancye.

Wherefore let every one thoroughly examyn themselves, and take heed that the
ready promptnes that is in them at ye first vanishe not away like a quenched
flame. For vnlest the word, do thoroughly pearce the whole heart, and take deep
root, there will not be moisture enoughe, for faith to continue. This
promptnes truly is commendable, that so soon as the word of god is preached
it shall be received joyfully without delay: but notwithstanding we must know
that there is nothing done until faith has gotten his perfect strength, and
wythereth not at the first. For example sake, Christ says that such are
troubled and fall at the stomblinge block of the cross. And truly, as by the
heat of the same, the barrennes of the earth is tried: even so persecution
and the cross does bewraye their vanytie, which are lightly moved. (I know
not with what desire) to receive the word, but have no earnest affection of
godliness at all.

21 Yet has he no rote in him self, but dureth for a season: for when
tribulation or persecution happens, because of the word, by and by he
falls.

Yet has he no root A. That is, there is no depenes of earth in such hearers,
that might conteyne the word which they have received in them selves But
dureth for a season. C. They which sodeinely at the first receive the word
of god, ^anye
and yet persevere not in affliction, are called of Matthew and Mark momentany
fruit, or such as endure for a short time, not only, because they for a
time profess them selves to be the disciples of Christ, and afterward in
the time of temptation decline: but also because they seem to them selves, to
have the true faith. (...) 1.
Therefore Christ says (as appears in Luke) that they believe for a time.
Furthermore we must understand that they are not truly regenerated by the
immortal seed, (...).
which never decays as says S. Peter. For he says that this saying of the
Prophet, (The word of the lord endures for ever) is fulfilled, in the
hearts of the faithful, in whom the word of God, being once fyxed, never
decays, but florisheth to the end. Notwithstanding they believe after a
sort, to whom the word of God is amyable, and with whom it obteyneth some
reverence and estimation: because they differ not from the unfaithful, which
in no point believe the word of God, but do altogether reiecte the same.
Only let us note this, that none have the true faith, but those only which
are sealed with the spirit of adoption, and do call upon God the father, with all their hearts. Finally, as ye spirit is never extinguished, even so it is
impossible that the faith should quail or perish, which the same spirit
has once engraven and prynted in the hearts of the faithful

By and by he falls. A. Or as the latten translation has, he is offended.
To be offended, here, is by fear of affliction to decline, depart, or fall
from Christ, Affliction is a stomblinge block.
So that affliction is as it were a stomblynge block in his way, that he can
not go forward in the Gospel: which Luke sufficiently expounds, when for
this word (offended) he says, In the time of temptation go away. M. Whosoever
therefore can not bear all kind of trouble pacyently, yea, all manner of
persecution and affliction, he shall never be apt, mete, and feate, for the
most pure and uncorrupted seed of the Gospel.

22 He also that received seed into the thorns. is he that hears the word,
and the care of this world, and the deceitfulnes of richesse, choke up the
word, and so is he made unfruitful.

A. Here you may alter it better and say, But the seed was sown among
thorns, signifies him which, and so forth, In the third number he reherseth
those which inwardly would be made apt to nourishe the seed, were it not
that they suffered the same to be corrupted otherwise. M. For some here,
Worldely cares are a let to fructify.
understand and receive the word, but they are let from fructifying by the
cares of this world, by the deceitfulnes of richesse, by the plesures of this
life, and such like, by the which, Luke, 14.
as by certain thorns the seed of the Gospel is choked. Such are they
which said, I have boughte five yoke of oxen, I have boughte a ferme, I have
married a wife, and therefore I can not come. Christ therefore compares the
pleasures of the world, or the evil desires of the flesh, couetousenes, and
other worldly cares, unto thorns. Although Matthew puts the cares of the
world with covetousness, but in the same sense, because under this word, the
intanglinge entisementes of pleasures, (of the which Luke makes mention) and
all kind of desire is comprehended. Because as the thorns, and other hurtful
impedimentes do choke the pleasante and fruiteful corn, when it shoots and
comes an ear: even so the viciouse and wicked affections of the flesh
prevail in the hearts of men, and are hyer grown then faith, that they might
overthrow and press down the force of heavenly doctrine, being as yet
imperfect and not ripe. For although evil desires spring up and arise and
possess the heart, before the word of the lord be yet grene and appear, yet
notwithstanding they seem not to bear rule in the first beginning, but do
overcome by littell and littell, after the corn is spronge up, and an ear.
Every man therefore must endeavor him self to pluck these thorns out of
their hearts, except they will have the word of god choked: because there is
no man that is not replenished with these thorns, and has not as it were a
thick wood of the same in him. And truly we se how few come unto perfection
and ripenes because scante the tenthe person occupies him self, (I say not
to pluck up these thorns by the roots) but to cut and brushe them down.
And the deceitfulness of richesse. C. Christ here put in the deceitfulness of
richesse for couetousenes. He calls riches deceytful, to the end men might
take heed to avoid the snares thereof.

As concerning rich men and richesse, how great a stomblinge block and let
they be to a Christian man, read the.vi. of Luke, Luke. 6.12. and.16. 1. Timo.
6. James. 5. Math. 19.
the.xii. and xvi. the.vi. chapter of the first of Timothy, the fifth chapter
of S. James, and the.xix. chapter also of S. Matthewe followinge.

And so is he made unfruitful. A. Luke has, And brings forth no fruit. C.
By this we learn that the affections of our flesh which are innumerable, are
altogether hurtefull to the corruptinge of the seed of life.

23 But he that received the seed into the good ground, is he that hears
the word, and understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth
some an hundred fold, some syxtie foulde, some thirty fold.

But he that received the seed into the A. That is to say, that which was
sown in the good and fruitful ground, signifies him which here the word,
and so forth.

Bu. Christ has rehearsed three kinds of hearers, which hear the word of
god without fruit, and therefore they greatly displease. Now follows the
fourth kind of hearers, of those I say which receive the seed of gods
word, which understand, keep, and bring forth fruit of the same. C. They
only therefore are compared to good and fruitful ground, in whom the word of
God does not only take deep rote, but also overcomes all lettes and
impedimentes, which might hinder, choke, and ouergrowe the same. If any man
obiecte, Ob^
that no man can be found without briers and thorns, we may answer, An^
that Christ does not speak of the parfection of faith but only shows in
whom the word does fructify. Whosoever therefore he be that does not degenerate
or swerve from the sincere worshippinge of God, although he profit but
meanly, he is counted good ground and fruitful. M^^ ot^ na^
It is our duty (truly) to endeavor our selves to pluck up thorns: but
because we shall never bring our purpose to such effect by our daily labor,
but that some part of these thorns will remain: let us not cease, but
continually seek to mortify the same that the fruit of the word thereby be
not hyndered. Is he that hears, and understands. M. Mark adds, (And does
receive it) that these three might be joined together, hear, receive, and
understand. Luke instead of this has. That which fell into the good ground
are they, which with a pure and good heart, hear the word, and keep it,
That is as much to say, which is heard, received, and understood. That is,
They have the sense and meaning of the word of God, so fixed and engraven in
their heart, yt by the grace of God, it becomes as it were natural, the lively
rotes being so grounded in ye heart, that it cannot be plucked up by any
temtation. B. Luke calls that a pure and good heart, which is changed and
drawn unto god by the holy ghost. A. There is never a one of us (truly)
that is prepared to receive the seed of the gospel, or apt of our selves,
therefore we should hear in vain, if God did not kill our hearts with his
holy and graciouse spirit for otherwise there would spring up many naughty
weeds, which would choke the sede. This comes to pass, not by the nature of
men, but by the housebandrye and woorkemanshippe of God.

Which also bears fruit. Wheat sede will bring forth nor bear no other
grain or corn, (...) seed (...) forth ^urall
then ye which is of the same nature and kind, as wheat. It is contrary to
nature, for wheat to bring forth rye, barlie, or pease. Even so, the Gospel
being preached, what other thing does it bring forth of a good heart, then that
which it contains in it self, teaches, and appoints? Faith in Christ is
preched and sown, the repentance of ye life past, ye knowledge of god, Love
also toward God and our neibour, and such like, which never bring forth the
contrary fruits. Luke adds saying, in Patience. B. The chiefest fruit which
the known word of God brings forth, is the participatynge of the same to
others also, that men being taken from the tyranny of Satan, may be citezens
of the kingdom of Christ. This thing can not be brought to pass, without
the cross, persecution, and trouble in this world. (...).
Wherefore Patience is truly said to be a work: neither can this excellent
fruit be brought forth, without the pacient sufferinge of many euilles. for S.
Paul says. Al they that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution. ^o. 3
So Christ brought forth his excellent fruit unto us, namely with singular
patience. Some an hundred foulde. C. This confirms the sentence goinge
before of the mean and small proffite and fruit of the Gospel. For Christ
teaches here that every one brings not forth fruit in measure and
quantity alike. For although the fertility and increase of that ground
which brings forth fruit thirty fold, ^^nde (...) true ^ccep^ God.
is very small in respect of that which brings forth an hundred fould: yet
notwithstanding we se that Christ joins all those grounds together which
do not whollye frustrate the hope and expectation of the husband man. M.
Therefore according to our disposition, we bring forth fruit, some more, some
less And hereby we are taught that they are not to be despised, which excel
not as others do, because yt although the husba^deman him self do prefer
every one according to his abounda^t increase, yet it pleases him to give
and ascribe the title of goodness and fertillitie to those of inferior sort, as
well as to the other. The servant which gained but two talentes, Math. 25.
had no less commendation and praise, the^ had the other which gained five for
it was said unto the^ both alike: Well thou good and faithful servant. Some
very ignorantly do write and wrest this place, to virgins, widows, and married
persons: as though the proffit which the lord required at our hands, did only
pertain to a single life, and that the piety and godlynes of married persons,
were not more ple^tiful in bringing forth all the fruit of virtues. This also
is to be noted by the way, yt Christ does not seek here Hiperbolically, of
this fruit which was an hundred fould, according to the fertility of certain
regions there in those days: as is well approved by diverse hystories, and
witnesses. yt saw the same. M. By this parable the lord does forewarne us
that we be not offended at those things, which should be in the kingdom of
heaven, and in the preaching of the gospel, at such things (I say) which might
give an occasion of falling to the ignorant, and a cause of calumniating to the
maliciouse, namely when they should se so many hearers, and so few bringers
forth fruit of the Gospel.

24 An other similitude put he forth unto the^, saying. The kingdom of heaven
is like unto a man, which sowed good sede in his field, An other simili. M. As
in the parable going before our savior Christ declared yt we must not look
that all the hearers of ye gospel should be bringers forth fruit of the same,
because the greater part should here the same in vain, and that those which
bring forth fruit should not be alike in fertillitie, eue^ so in this parable
all are admonished, lest that the minds of the godly, by tediouse ircksomnes,
should quail and fainte, when they behold a co^fused mixture with the good
and the evil. Ephe. 5.
For although Christ purifyed and made clean his church with his blud so
preciouse, yt it might be without spot or wrincle, yet notwithstanding he
suffers it to have many vices. We speak not here of the infirmities which
remain in the flesh, to the which every one of the faythefull are subject,
after that they be regenerate by the spyrite of God: but so soon as Christ
has congregated and gathered to him self, his small flock, many Hypocrites
insinuate them selves, many perverse men crepe in, and many wicked persons
intrude them selves: and so it comes to pass, that this holy company, and
flock of Christ, which he has segregated to him self, The church of
Christ in earth, is defiled with many hipocrites
is defiled and stained with many spotts. But this seems absurd to many,
that ungodly, profane, and wicked men should be nourysshed as it were in the
bosom of the Church. There are some which under the coullour of zeal, being
more waywarde, curiouse, and froward then needs, except all things be
framed according to their mind, which (because absolute and perfect purity
appears no wheare) either troublelousy depart from the Church, orelles do
overthrow and destroy the same, with importunate rygoure.

Wherefore this is the simple scope and meaning of the parable, that look how
long the church of God has his abode and contynuaunce in earth, so long
shall good and sincere men, be myngled with wicked ones, and hypocrytes, to the
end the children of God might arm them selves with patience, and might hold
fast the constancy of faith, among so many stombling blocks, and offenses,
with the which they might be troubled.

The kingedome of heaven is like unto a man. A. That is to say, The heavenly
king and Messiah, is like unto him which sowed good seed in his fyelde. Or
thus. The like happened to the Messiah, which some times happens to the
husebande man when he sows his seed. Some think it a great deal better,
that the Gospel be called the kingedome of heaven, as if he should say, The
like happens to the preacher of the Gospel, which some times happened to
him that sowed good seed.

25 But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and
went his way.

But while men slepte. B. Christ in this parable has rehearsed certain
things, which in his exposition, in the.37. verse, and in the other
folowinge, he has not repeated at all: as this, while men slepte, the
servants asked the master of the house, Did thou not sow good seed in
thy field? will thou that we go and wede them up? and such like: that herby
they might be taught and exhorted which preach and publyshe the words of
Christ unto others, that they would not be more subtle and curiouse then
Christ, both in other places of Scripture and specially in parables: but to
count it sufficient for them to bestow and commit that to their herers, which
they se, Christ would have committed: and let such so handell parables, that
they only take that thing, for the which they are brought.

The which thing Chrysostom also more understood then he showed, and in deed
declared. Such truly are all the parables of Christ, that if thou will give to
every part his exposition, thou shall do nothing else, (by that thy subtle
curiosity) but omyt, and let pass both that which Christ specially would
have observed, and also bring thy self to mere triffels, and curiosity
confoundinge it self: As shall in the xx. and.xxv. chapters herafter following,
more plainly apere, but specially in certain parables of Luke. But because
the fathers have handled those things which were not expressed of Christ, and
the adversaries of the truth also have usurped those things to defend their
errors, as expressing the sentences of Christ, somthinge shall be spoken here
not without cause for to profit the business and work of the truth. His
ennemy came. C. The devil is said to sow, when we be a sleep, to the end he
might craftily corrupt and spoil our labors: that if any com in the night,
he might not be seen, but may depart, no man knowing what he has done. 1. G^
The devil also is not known, when as he does transform him self into an
angel of light. M. By this kind of speaking therefore, the crafts and deceites
of satan are signified, with the which, by a color of Hypocrisy he does
so obscure and hyde the sowing of his tares, that ye cannot perceive any one
print of his footsteps, so warely does he work his deceit. C. Notwithstanding
we must here se what Christ understands by the wheat, and what he means by
the tares.

This can not be expounded of the doctrine, as if he should have said, when the
Gospel is sown, it is straight way corrupted by wicked inventions and
imaginatio^s: for Christ would never have forbidden, to be diligent in purging
such corruption. For we may not suffer those wicked errors which do infect
the purity of faith so, or in such wise, as those vices (which concern and
pertayne to the manners of men) and can not be corrected, are to be borne
withal. Furthermore Christ saying by name, that the children of the wicked are
tares, takes away all doubt.

Notwithstanding we must note farther, that this can not simplely be
understood of the persons of men, as though God in his creation did sow good
men, and the devil evil men. The which thing we therefore admonish you of,
because by this place the Maniches were abused. But truly we know, that what
fault so ever it be, that is as well in the devil as in men, it is the
corruption of nature, and nothing else. As God therefore makes not his elect,
which are infected with original sin, good seed, by creation, but
regenerateth the^ by the grace of his spirit: So the devil does not create
evil men, but being created of God he depraueth them, and sows them in the
field of the lord, to corrupt, vitiate, and defile the pure seed.

26 But when the blade was spronge up, and had brought forth fruit, there
appeared the tares also.

M. Here we are taught yt in the beginnynge of the sowing of the Gospel, and
the tares, that is of the elect and the reprobate, the purity and goodness of
the field, is not by and by known, because the difference between the children
of God and the wicked is not known, until they be somewhat sprung up and grown.
^pro^ the ^e min^ ^ther.
For the reprobate (according to the manner of tares) are not much unlike in the
beginning to the elect at ye first sight. Yea, and the field of the lord, which
is his church, is so replenished with them, and so diuersely collored, that a man
may hardly discern ye wheat from the tares.

27 So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir diddeste
thou not sow good sede in thy field? from whence then has it tares?

M. So we may rightly marvel, when that the lord does bestow so great labor
and travail, in tillinge of his field, and yet notwithstanding, how cockel,
darnel and tares, grow in the same: the houseband man is good, but the sede is
naught

28 He said unto them, the enuiouse man has done this. The servants said
unto him: will thou then that we go and weed them up? M. Christ says here
yt this wickedness is wroughte by the Devil, which is a continual and deadly
ennemy, to the salvation of mankind. A. The rest shall be expounded in yt
exposition which Christ makes himself. Namely the 39 and 40. verces following
in the text.

31. He put another parable unto them saying. The kingdom of heaven is like
unto a grain of mustarde seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field.

B. By this parable the Lord does declare with what virtue and with what
success his Gospel should pass through the whole world. For the kingdom of
heaven, at the first being brought to the world by the Gospel, was very
small, in the which was the king Christ only with a few contemned persons (in
the sight of all men) stickinge to him. C. Therefore he does encourage his
Disciples, least they being offended at ye base and simple beginning of the
Gospel, should draw back and despair of ye good success of the same.
Worldlinges.
We see how proudly profane me^ despise and deryde the Gospel, because it is
brought unto them by poor Ministers, and rude in comparison of those which are
of noble birth and parentage, and because all men do not by and by receive the
fame, but has only a few Disciples even the baseste among the common people:
whereby it comes to pass, that the weak do despair of ye good success of
ye Gospel which they look for in the beginning. But truly the lord does by his
secret counsel begin his kyngedome, with bace and contemned beginninges, to
the end a wonderful success, of the same coming at a sudden vnlokedfor,
might declare his power to be the greater. For the kingdom of Heaven is
compared to a grain of Mustard seed.

32 Which is the least of all seeds. But when it is grown, it is the
greatest of all herbs, and is a tree, so that the birds of the air come and
make their nestes in the branches thereof

Which is the least. B. As if he should say, As the grain of mustardsede,
being but small, and the least among seeds, grows into a greatter stalk and
branche, then all other herbs, and in short time also waxes a tree: eue^ so
the flock of Christ, in short time was spread to the utmost parts of the earth,
and excelled all the kingdoms of the world. C. Let us learn therefore, (if the
show of the kingdom of Christ be conte^ptible and base to our fleshely eyes)
to lift up our minds to the inestimable and exceading power of God, the
which as he created all things once of nothing, so daily he stirs up those
things which are not above human reason or understanding. As for the proud,
let us suffer them to grynne like dogs, until such time as the lord
astonishe and amase them with that which they looked not for. In the mean
time let us not despair, or be without hope, but let us rise against the
disdain of the world, with a sure and undoubted faith, until such time as
the lord shows forth some wonderful token of his power, of the which the
lord speaks here.

33 An other similitude spoke he unto the^: The kingdom of heauem is like
unto leven, which a woman takes and hides in three peckes of meal, till all
be leauened.

An other symilitude. M. This parable of the leaven, has the same
signification that the other had goinge before. This name of leaven some times
signifies that which is evil, Math. 16.
as when Christ admonished his disciples to beware of the leaven of the
Phariseyes, and Saduceyes. 1. Cor. 5.
Also when Paul teaches, that a little leaven sowrethe the whole lompe of
dough. But here the application must be taken symplely, to the present cause.
The apostels are compared to leaven.
M. The Apostelles were a littell leaven, who being taken out of Galile, by
the wisdom of God, were made apt and of strong force to sower and season,
and were sent out into the whole world for the same purpose, until the
same in all points were leauened. And hydeth in three peckes of meal. Bu.
Chrysostom says, that he names not three peckes for many in vain. For the
lord declares that a little quantity of leven is of strength and virtue to
leaven and sower a great deal of meal. The latten word Satum, a pecke (as
it is translated) is taken from the Hebrewe word, Seah, which is a measure
containing one Italyan busshell and a half, Iose^ de a^ cap. (...)
of dry things, as says Josephus, in his ninthe book, and fourth chapter de
antiquitatibus. Some affirm that this measure contained.320. ounces of water.
And some say, that it would hold no more then.144. hens eggs.

34 Al these things spoke Jesus unto the people by similitudes, and without a
parable spoke he nothing unto them.

C. Although Mark plainly says that Christ spoke so that they might hear,
yet notwithstanding it seems probable that he used not continual parables, so
much to teach, as he did to make ye auditory more apt to here against a more
convenient time For why did he expound the^ to his disciples in secret
familiarly? did he it because they were more rude and ignorant then ye common
people? No surely, that was not the cause, but he rather did so, to the end he
might familiarly set the meaning of his mind before them, and leave the minds
of other suspended, until he might find a more convenient time and better
opportunity. For these were (as one might term the^) the enterances and
begynnings of the Gospel, the more plain and manifest declaration whereof, was
differred until the time came of the same. But the show of repugna^cie, and
contrariety which seems to be between the saying of our Evangelist Matthew,
and the prophecy of Esaias spoken of before, is easily put away. For although he
obscured and took away ye light of his doctrine from the reprobate, yet
notwithstanding this does not let, but that he might apply him self to their
capacytie, so that they might be inexcusable. He followed therefore a kind of
teaching apt and mete for those herers, who^ he knew not to be ready, as yet
to learn.

35 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, that says, I
will open my mouth in parables: I will speak forth things, which have been
kept secret from the beginning of the world.

That it might be fulfilled. M. Again, the Euangeliste shows a reason why
Christ would speak unto the multitude by parables, namely that he might not
seem insolent or presumptuouse. I will open my mouth. C. The Evangelist
Matthew means not that this Psalm, which he recites here, was a special
prophecy of Christ: but as the majesty of the spirit of God shyneth in the
words of the Prophet, after the same manner, the force and power of the holy
ghost also was expressed in the words of Christ. In that Psalm the prophet
(speaking of the covenant of God, by the which he adopted the sede of Abraham,
of the contynuall benefytes bestowed on that people, and also of the
government of the Church) prophesies myghtely. I will open my mouth in
parables. That is, I will not entreat of light toys or triffles, but I will
speak earnestly of grave, seriouse, and weightye matters. The same is mente
also by darcke sentences. For it is a common repetition in the Psalms. For the
Hebrews call comparisons, Mesalim.

Furthermore this name is translated to grave sentences, because that
similytudes, do often times beautifye the oration, or talk, and make it seem
pleasant and delectable. Also they call Hidoth somwhile darcke sentences, and
some time short sentences. For although Matthew does seem to allude it to
the name of Parable, yet notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that Christ
(as he knew right well) spoke figuratively, that the form it self of the
word might bring with it some dignity and weight. He says that that which
is written in the Psalm is fulfilled, because by allegories and fygures, he
admonished and declared, that he entreated of ye secret mysteries of God, lest
the doctrine should be contempned. C. Whereby we gather that it was no
absurdity at all, in that he spoke obscurelye to the people for diverse ends
and consyderations. For although he would hyde from the reprobate that which
he spoke, yet notwithstanding he sought by all means, that they being
astonished by his words, might feel and perceive that there was some celestial
and divine matter contained in the same.

36 When the people were sent away, then came Jesus into the house. And his
disciples came unto him, saying: Declare unto us the parable of the tares of
the field.

When the people were sent A. Now follows the exposition of the parable
going before of the wheat, and of the tares, which the lord declared to his
disciples, when they were alone. Declare unto us the parable. Bu. The occasion
of the interpretation of the parable is here set before us, namely because the
disciples prayed the lord, who declared the same unto them. They seem not to
doubt as concerning the grain of mustardsede, or of the leue^, any thing at
all: for they might plainelye understand and perceive thereby that they were
admonished, not to fainte, quail, or despair, at the base, simple. and rude
beginning of the Gospel. In the parable of the tares there were certain
things, which they did not so well understand: they request the lord
therefore, yt it would please him to be their interpretoure. The lord is easy
to be entreated.
Let us also pray, being taught by the example of the disciples, that ye lord
in mercy will open and reveal unto us the hidden and secret mysteries
contained in his word. For he is ready and easy to be entreated, so yt we not
in any point to doubt of his diligence.

37 He answered and said unto them. He that sows the good sede, is the son of
man. C. First he said yt the kingdom of heaven was like unto a man, that did
sow, but improperly. Notwithstanding the sense and meaning is evident, that
the like happens to the gospel being preached, that commonly comes to
pass in the sowing of fields, where the tares and cockell growethe with the
wheat: sauinge that he expresses one special thing, saying, that the
field is myngled and strewed with tares, by the deceyte of the enemy: to the
end we might know, that it is not done by chance, or naturallye, that so
many wicked are myngled with the elect and chosen of God, even as if they
were good corn: but rather by the envy and malice of Satan: not that men
should be justified by his damnation, but chiefelye that God might not be
sprynckeled with any blott for this sin and vice, which comes without his
defaulte: furthermore that we should not marvel that tares do spring and
grow in the fyelde of the lord, when as Satan always watches to do harm.

He which sows good sede, is the son of man. C. Where as Christ says
not that the mynisters of the word do sow but him self alone, it wants not
good reason: for although it be not meet and conuenyent, that this be
restrained to his person, notwithstanding because he so uses our labor and
diligence, as only means and instruments, to the tillynge of his field, he
does rightly take that unto him self, which after a sort is common to his
ministers. Let us remember therefore that the Gospel is not only preached by
the commandment of Christ, but also is defended and co^ducted by his power,
that we might be as it were his hands, but he the only aucthour of the work.

38 The fylde, is the world. And the children of the kingedome, they are the
good seed: the tares are the children of the wicked.

The fyelde is the world. C. Although he says that the world is the field,
notwithstanding there is no doubt but that he applied the same properly to
his church, of the which all this communication arose. But because he would
bring his plough by littel and littell, throughout all the parts of the world,
to the end he might till fields unto him self in all the world, and might
sprinkel the seed of life also, he attributed that to the whole world, by a
figure called Synecdoche, which agreed a great deal better to ye part only.
And the children of the kingdom. M. The children of the kingdom, that is the
elect and chosen of God, the believing in Christ, those which pertain to ye
kingdom of heaven, which also are called the sons of God, citteze^s with the
saints, and the household of God. Ephe. 2.
Bu. The sede here properly signifies the word of God, which the son of god
has sown in the fields, I mean in the breasts of mortal men, showing forth
repentance to the world, and remission of sins. Thereof truly were the
sons of the kingdom borne, 1. Petri^
namely of the word of the kingdom, that is of the word of God, which
lives and lasts for ever. A For he of his own free will begat us, James ^
by the word of truth. M. He says simplely of the kingdom, for only the
kingdom of heaven is the true kingedome, the other are but vain shows in
comparison of that. Bu. In the hearts of the faithful Christ reigns by
faith, by love, by cleannes, and by all righteousenes and virtue, in the which,
all the saints of God florishe, being a plentiful field of sweet and pleasant
fruits, smellinge preciousely with a most acceptable odor before god and men.
The tares are the chil. M. Here we se to who^ the wicked ones in the church
were ascribed. But he speaks not here of thieves murderers and such like,
but of those specially which have not a sincere faith in Christ, but are
rather hypocrites fayning an outward show of holiness.

Bu. We see therefore what the state of Christ his church is here in this
world. It was never without hypocrites. Until the time of judgment therefore
there shall be traitors, destroiers, corrupters, and thieves, even in the
midst of the church. Of the wicked M. He calls the devil wicked, not by
nature, but for his malliciouse practice. John ^
He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the way of truth,
because there is no truth in him. When he speaks of a lie, he speaks of
his own, because he is a liar, and the father of the same thing.

39 The ennemy that sows them, is the devil: The harvest is the end of the
world: the reapers be the Angels.

The ennemie that sows. M. Whom before he called wicked, he calls now the
ennemie. All we therefore which are the children of the kingdom, and sown
of Christ, and cleave unto him, have the devil a continual ennemie unto us.

A. But how the rebrobate are sown in the field of the lord by the devil, Ve^^
we have showed before in the five and twenty verse. The harvest is the end of
the world. C. This truly is a troublesome state, and a grievous burden, yea
almost intolerable, yt the Church shall be burdened with the reprobate to the
end of the world: notwtstanding, Christ therefore prescribes unto us this time
to patience, least we should nourishe and flatter our selves with vain hope,
whereas now the certain time of a purgation is prefixed. It behooves the
pastors therefore, to endeavor them selves with all diligence to purge the
Church, and in this part all ye godly ought to set to their helping hands so
far as their vocation will bear the same: but when all ye godly with hartye
consent do their good will and true intent, ^urch ^e in ^lde ^er be (...)
yet shall they never bring it about to purge the Church from every spot.
Wherefore let us consider that our savior Christ me^t nothing less then to
nourishe such filthy spots in his Church by to much sufferaunce: only his
meaning and purpose was to comfort and exhort his faithful servants not to
be dismayed or drawn back, because they are constrained to suffer wicked
ones in their felloship and fraternity: and also to brydel and moderate their
zeal which think it not meet to have any felloship but with such as are
pure and the saints of God. The Anabaptists therefore are greatly abused,
^tistes
in seekinge by this place to drive and put away the use of the sword from the
church. And they are easily aunsweared. For sythens they do admit
excommunication which does root out and expoulse ye wicked and reprobate, at
the least for a time, why should not the godly Magistrates use the sword
against the wicked and ungodly ones, so often as need requires?

They affirm that there is place given to repentance, where there is no
deadly punishment. As though truly, the thief upon the cross found no
salvation*

(...). 23.
But let this aunsweare suffyce, that it is not here taught what our office, or
the Magistrates, or the pastors office is. A. But only Christ shows what ye
state and condition of the Church shall be til the end of the world: that the
world can never be so purged, purifyed and cle^sed, but that the wicked will be
always myngled with the good: C. to the end the stombling block of offense,
(whereat the weak stumble, and are troubled when they see the Church thus
confounded as it were) might be taken away.

The reapers be the Angels. C. This name must be applied to the present cause.

In another place the Apostels are called reapers in respect of the Prophets:
John. 4.
because they entered into their labors.

Also there is a commandment given to all the ministers of the word, John.
15.
that they bring forth fruit that may ever abide: to the which effect this
saying of Christ perteyneth. John. 4.
The Corn is white and ready unto the harvest. Moreover, the Harvest is
great, but the laborers are few. John. 9.
But here is another consideration to be had of the comparison: because they
are said to be planted in the field of the Lord, which have room and place in
the Church: Neither is that contrary to this, Math. 3.
which John says in another place, that so soon as Christ comes forth with
his Gospel, he has his fan in his hand, whereby he may purge his floorth.
For there is described the beginning of the purgation of the Church, which
purgation be denies to be made in this place before ye end of the world A.
For then shall appear that most excellent king in his Majesty, and shall sit
upon the seat of his glory, and all nations shall be gathered together before
him, and he shall separate the^ one from another, Math. 25.
eue^ as the sheepeherde deuydeth the sheep from the Goats, and he shall set
the sheep on his right hand, but the Goats on the left. C. Moreover although
then he will set to his strong hand by his Angels to purge his Church, the
same notwithstanding he does begin to do now by his godly teachers, A.
who for all that, shall never bring to pass that ye Church shall be pure and
clean in all points, before the coming of Christ, at whose coming a
perfect purgation is looked for with the full redemption of the sons of God.

40. Even as the tares therefore are gathered, and brent in the fire: so shall
it be in the end of this world.

A. When he did barely propound unto them the parable without any exposition
he said, suffer them to grow together until the Harvest, and in the time of
the Harvest, Verse. 3^.
I will say unto the reapers, gather ye first the tares, and bynd them up in
bondels to borne. Expounding ye same now he says, even as the tares are
gathered, and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world. By
the which words he declares sufficiently, that we must look and wait for
the last day, of the which there is such often mention made in the
scriptures, that we should be styrred up to pray diligently.

41. The son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out
of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquitye.

The son of man C. He attributes these parts of ye pourging of his Church
to his Angels in the last day: because they shall not stand ydell or unoccupied
before the trybunall seat of Christ, but shall be ready and at hand to fulfill
his commandments. They therefore which preposterously make have to root out
and abolishe whatsoever likes not or displeases the^, do prevent, so much as
in them lies the judgment of Christ, and do rashlye usurp unto them selves
the power of Angels, and the office perteyning unto them.

And they shall gather A. By and by these reapers shall obey the most
excellent Judge Christ, for they shall purge and take away all occasions of
offense out of his kingdom.

And them which do iniquitye. C. This is an exposition: for he declares that
those are offenses and stomblinge blocks which commit iniquity. So that his
words are in effect as if he should have said, then it is a meet and
conueniente time to restore all things into a lawful order: because by that
means the wicked are taken away, which now are great offenses. The wicked are
called offenses because they do not only live wickedly to themselves, Ungodly
me^ are stumbling blocks.
but also because they do destroy the faith of many men, they hinder some in
the right race, some they seduce and turn away, and some they throw down
hedlonge to al kind of wickedness. And hereby we may gather a most profitable
admonition, namely least we (being compassed about and beset with so many
dangers) go forward heauely, and careleslye, whereas in deed we ought to be
very dilygent in taking heed, least we throw our selves cashlye into any
offense. For look how many reprobate there be, so many offenses there are:
More over their nycenes is here corrected, which are so dellicate and fine,
that they will break their race and turn back again, at every small
offense. It is a very hard thing truly some times not to stumble, and
oftentimes not to fall, so many stumbling blocks lyinge in the way, but we
must fortifye our minds with a sure and certain trust: because there is no
doubt but that the Son of God, which commands his to pass through the
myddest of offenses, will give power and strength to overcome them all. Also
he denounces horrible judgment against hypocrytes, and all reprobates, which
seem now to be the chief Citizens of the Church, least they should trust to
much to their vain boasting.

42. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be waylinge and
gnasshinge of teeth.

A. The interpretor retained the Greek word. In the lataine translation it is
written, into a furnace of fire. And the Hebrew word is a furnace of fire, for
a furnace, the fire whereof cannot be quenched: Man
a furnace of fire and hell fire signifies all one thing. In the eyghtene of
Mathewe it is called hell fire: and in the ix. Man Man Luk^
of Mark likewise: also in the third and five and twentye of Mathewe eternal
fire: in ye third of Luke, it is named fire that can never be quenched. C. As
touching therefore the furnace of fire, there is no doubt, but that it is so
called by a Metaphor. For as the endelesnes of the glory which is laid up
for the sons of God, does so far surmount our senses and capacitye, Cor^
may^ repr^
that we cannot with tongue express the same: so the punishment, pain and
torment, which remains for the reprobate, because it cannot be comprehended
in our minds it is set forth according to our capascitye in the name of a
furnace.

43. Then shall the righteous shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their
father. Whosoever has ears to hear let him hear.

M. This sentence makes much to the consolation of the godly which are
oppressed in this world, despised, persecuted, reuyled and disdayned, the
wicked reigning, and flourishing in the Church.

^repa^ ^he ^s.
A. Christ therefore affirms C. that ye sons of God which are now compassed
about with fylthines, and abased with the fellowship of the reprobate, shall then
shine as the sun in the Element the clouds being carried away. And this word
(then) being an Aduerbe of time has a great Emphasis and force in it, for it
co^teyneth a secret Antithesis of the present state, and last instauration
and reedifyinge of the Church, with the hope whereof Christ does comfort all
the faithful. The sense therefore of this place is, that although many
reprobates do now prosper and florishe in the Church, notwithstanding we
must hope for a happy day, in the which God will exalte all those that are
his, and wype away all fylthines with ye which their shyning innocence is
obscured and covered. It is true certainly, that the glory to come is promised
to none, but to such in whom the Image of God shines, and which are
transformed by continual degrees of glory into the same: but because the life
of the Godly is now hyd and not manifested: and their salvation, because it
consists in hoope, is invisible: Christ does worthily call ye faithful into
heaven, that they may enjoy the glory promised unto them. (...) 8. (...) 15.
(...) and (...) 3
A. But as concerning the very glory of the sons of God, there is much in ye
scriptures. The Lord seems to allude this place to the Prophesye of Daniell
when he says. Many of them that sleep in the dust of ye earth, shall awake:
some to the everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reprofe. (...) 12.
The wise, (such as have taught other) shall shine as the glistering of heaven.
And those that have instructed the multitude shall be as the stars world
without end. C. To the which place Christ had respect, to the end he might
the better animate and encourage his auditory: as if he had said ye the
Prophet, when he speaks of the glory to come, does also note the temporal
darkness, and therefore according to the Prophesy, he declares that the elect
must suffer ye mixsture in the which they are mingled, with the reprobate for a
time: A. And as the wicked are offenses, which are not only unrighteous and
deceytfull to themselves, but do go about also to draw other into error and
iniquity: even so the children of the kingdom, the elect, and true beleuinge,
do not count it sufficient that they themselves do know the truth, and embrace
righteousness, but also they endeavor themselves to bring forth fruit, and
study how they may draw other to the sauinge health, and make them partakers
of ye true righteousness, whereupon the Prophet calls them teachers and
instructers of others. As the sun C. He comparing the glory of the faithful
to the light of the Sun, makes them not equal to ye same. For as Christ
does now distribute his gifts diversely among the faithful, so he in the
last day will crown them. Worldly pleasure is obscure and dark, in respect of
ye glory to com.
But we must remember that which we have spoken before, ye only ye
reedifying of the Church, which is differred till the last coming of Christ
is compared with the cloudye and dark state of the world.

In the kingedome of his father. C. The kingdom of the father, as it were the
heritage of the godly, is set against the earth, that they may remember
themselves to be Pilgrims in this life, to the end they may aspyre and come
to the heavenly life.

For although the kingdom of God is said to be in us, Luke. 17. 1. Cor. 15.
notwithstanding we shall not have the fruition of the same, until God be
all in all.

He that has ears to hear Bu. By this addition he does admonish the
hearers to way and consider diligently of those things which he spoke,
namelye that they rather ought to chose the study of righteousness, the
reward whereof is salvation and everlasting glory, then the study of impiety,
and hypocrisy, the end whereof is destruction and perpetual shame.

44. Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hyd in the field, the
which a man has found and hid and for joy thereof he goes and sells all
that he has and byeth the field.

Again the kingdom Bu. The other two parables following tend to the same
effect and purpose that this does. Hitherto Christ has spoken of the Gospel
of the kingdom of God, and of the word of life comparing the same to things
of small value, but now he compares it to things of great price. C. To this
end specially that the faithful might learn to prefer the kingdom of God
before the whole world, and therefore to renounce and forsake them selves, and
all the desires of the flesh least they should be let or hindered to obtain
and enjoy so singular a benefyte. Worldly sightes do bewitche our senses.
For this admonition is very necessary for us, both because the inticementes
and prouocations of the world do so bewitch us, that everlasting life does
vanishe away from us, and also because we are carnal, the spiritual and
heavenly graces of God are little esteemed of us. Christ therefore very
worthily does so far extol the excellency of the grace, yt it ought not to
be grievous unto us for ye desire of ye same, to leave and forsake what soever
is precious and dear unto us. To treasure hyd in the fyelde C. First he says
that the kingdom of God is like unto treasure hid in the field. Present
things are esteemed more the^ the things yt are invisible.
For we do magnify and extol very much those things which do appear and
are manifest before our eyes, and therefore ye new and spiritual life which is
set forth in the Gospel is vile and contemptible unto us, because it lies
secretly included under hope. Therefore the comparison of the treasure here is
very apt, whose price and estimation nothing decays although it appears
not to the eyes of men being buried and laid up in the earth. By the which
words we are taught that the spiritual riches of the grace of God are not to be
esteemed and valued according to our carnal eye, or after ye external show
and appearaunce: but we must esteem and judge of it, as of treasure, which
although it be hyd, yet notwithstanding it is preferred before special riches.

The which a man has found, C. All things in parables, are not always to be
considered by them selves as it is sheewed already before in the 44 verse. For
if any man will be very curious here in the hyding of the treasure, we ought
not to hyde the Gospelll, but to call others into the society and fellowshippe
of the same, Bu. Unless paraduenture we may say that, that is of so great
force, as if thou should say he dissembled, he did not make the seller
priuye unto it, because ye treasure which was buried in the field lay hid,
and was not known to ye seller. And sells all that he has C. By these
words he teaches, that they are apt and meet to receive and understand ye
grace of the Gospel which (all other desyers set apart) endeavor them selves
wholly and study by all means to enjoy the same.

Notwithstanding some man will demand whether all our goods must be
forsaken to the end we may obtain everlasting life. But he may brieflye be
answered that this is the simple and true meaning of the words of Christ, A^^
namely that we do not honor the Gospel aright, except we make more
accoumpte of the same, and more highly esteem it, than all the pleasures,
honors and delights in ye world, for they must be free from al impediments
which will aspyre to the joyful bliss of heaven Therefore to sell all things
for the gospel, Alt^^ vile^ of ye (...)
is to be Pressed and ready to relinquishe and forsake all that may let,
hinder, or stay us from our purpose, so that the whole world should be
nothing unto us, in comparison of this precious Jewel and treasure. For we
must always destinguishe and put a difference between the helping means, and
the staying lets. Rich^ co^m^
Riches are some times aids and helps, and sometimes letts and impedimentes:
so are all those things which are of great price by the judgment of men. In
one respect Abraham possessed riches, being ready to forsake all that ever he
had if the Lord had commanded: In another respect Moses refused the riches
of the Egiptians, which could not be both the daughters son of Pharao, and
the servant of the Lord. S. Paul speaks of him self thus, the things yt
were vauntage unto me, those I counted loss so: Christ's sake. Yea I think al
things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
(...). 3.


For whom I have counted al thing loss, and do judge them but vile, that I
may win Christ. And byeth the field. C. No man can dye the kingdom of God,
wherefore we may not argue here in this point of the parable of bying and
selling. For Christ does not mean by the word of bying that any man can bye
for any price eternal life: ^ll life (...) be (...). (...) 55.
for we do know upon what condition God calls his faithful unto him by the
Prophet saying. Come unto the waters all ye that be thyrsty, and ye that have
no money: come bye that ye may have to eat: come bye wine and milk without
any money or money worth. But although the heavenly and everlasting life,
and whatsoever pertayneth thereto is the free gift of God: notwtstanding we are
said to redeem ye same, when willinglye we deprive our selves and clean put
away from us all the desires of the flesh least that any thing should hinder
us in obtaining the same. This treasure is not manifest to every one, but is
hyd in the field, to the end we might with great care and diligence seek for
the same.

45. Again the kingdom of Heaven is like unto a marchante man, seekinge
goodly Pearls.

A. This parable and the other goinge before pertain to one effect.

Sekinge goodlye Pearls M. The Greek word signifies good Pearls. In these
precious stones the beautye and excelencye of them is the cause of the price
and value. He seems here to put a particular thing, for that which is more
general as the Pearl for all other kind of precious stoones as the Emerande,
the Saphyre, and the Diamonde. Plynie writes of precious stoones at large in
his 9. Book and third Chapter.

46. Which when he had found one precious Pearl, went and soulde all that
he had and bought it.

Bu. The sense and meaning of this place is this. As merchant men seek
carefullye with great labor and peril for precious stoones: so it behooves
every one to be desirous of the word of God, and to seek with great care and
dilygence for ye precious stoone of the Gospel of the lord, and having found
it to embrace ye same, and to prefer it before all the Jewels in the world,
and to sell all that ever we have to get the same. This comes to pass, when
we having denied our selves, and trode^ the world under our feet, withal
our heart, and a true faith receive Christ and his truth, and cleave to the
same as to the chief felicity, leaving and forsakinge all that might withdraw
us from the evangelical pietye and cleaving only to Christ our reedemer. David
of the most excellent and pure mysteries of Gods word speaks thus: Psalm. 19.
they are more to be desired the^ gold, yea then much fine gold, they are
sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. Again he says, Psalm. 109.
I have loved the commandments, above gold and precious stoones.

47. Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast into the
sea, and gathered of all kind of fishes.

Again the kingdom of C. Christ here teaches no new thing, but confirms
yt whereof he spoke before, with another similitude, namelye that the Church
of God, so long as it is in the earth, must have the good among the evil, and
the evil among the good: and that it shall never be pure from blots and spots
until ye end of the world, when as there shall be made a full and perfect
separation. A time of separation will come.
Notwithstanding peradventure the end of this parable is otherwise: namelye
that Christ might not only take away ye offense, which troubles many of ye
weak, because such purity as ought to be, is not found in ye world: but also
that he might keep his Disciples in fear and modesty, least they should
flatter and please themselves, with a vain title and bare profession of faith.
We receive therefore both of them willinglye, first in ye Christ which effect
pertayneth the words of S. Paul when he says, the Lord knows those that
are his, 2. Timo. 2.
let all those therefore depart from iniquity which call upon the name of the
Lord. Is like unto a net, C. Our savior Christ does very well compare the
preaching of the Gospel to a net drowned under the water, to the end we might
know the present state and condition of the Church to be confuse.

For although our God, as he is the God of order and not of dissipation,
co^me^deth and delyuereth unto us his disciplyne: notwithstanding for a time
he suffers hypocrites to have their being among the faithful, until ye
reforming of his kingdom in the last day. Let us therefore endeavor our selves
so much as we may to correct all manner of vice, and let us be severe in
purginge away all filthye spots: yet notwithstanding the Church shall not be
free from al spots and blemisshes, Math. 25.
before that Christ come to separate the sheep from the Goats.

48. Which when it was full, men drew it to land, and sat down and gathered
the good into Vessels, but cast away the bad.

C. The effect and sum of this sentence is, that the Church can never be
purged from hypocrites until we be brought to land or shore, yt is until we
be brought to the day of judgment.

49. So shall it be in the end of the world. The Angels shall come and sever
the bad from among the good.

A. For this sentence, read the exposition of the forty verce going before.

50. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire there shall be waylinge, and
gnas- 51. shing of teeth. Jesus says unto the^ have ye understand all these
things? they said unto him, yea Lord.

C. He calls the punishment which the wicked shall suffer after the
Judgment, Esaye 66.
a furnace of fire. Esaye the Prophet calls it a worm which never dies.
Read the two and forty verce of this Chapter. Punishmente prepared for ye
wicked.
There shall be vvaylinge C. The scripture cannot sufficiently express ye
punishment which remains for the wicked: Here he goes about to express
the horror and pain of the effect for as we cannot express the glory and
happy estate of the godly and blessed, so we are not able to utter the
punishment of the wicked.

Jesus says unto them M. The Lord sought by all means to instruct and bring
his Disciples to the knowledge of the kingdom of God. And therefore being not
contented that he had alleged so many parables of the kingdom of heaven, he
demands of them whether they understand all these things or no. But we
must remember that which we saw before, how that all parables were priuatelye
expounded to the Disciples. After ye therefore the Lord had so gentlye and
familiarlye instructed them, he does also admonish and declare that he did
not bestow so great diligence in teachinge of them, that they should be
only wise to them selves, but also that they should bestow and participate
that to others publicly which they themselves priuatelye had received.

52. Then said he unto them: therefore every scribe, which is taught unto
the kingdom of Heaven, is like, unto a man that is a househoulder which
brings forth out of his treasury things new and old.

A. We must presuppose that some other saying of our savior Christ went
before, as this, I asked you because a minister of ye word of God must be like
unto a husband man. And after this sort he doothe the more encourage and
stir them up to learn Therefore every scribe that is taught

C. A Scribe by ye Hebrews, is not called a Scriueuer or writer, 1. Es^
but they call him a Scribe which is expert in the scriptures and the Law,
such a one was Esdras. Luk^
And he whom Mathewe calls a Scribe, Luke calls a doctor of the Law. But
here a Scribe signifies a teacher, and one sufficientlye learned to set forth
the kingdom of God, and to preach the Gospel of salvation.

Is like unto a man that is an househoulder C. A wise and provident
househoulder in governing his house does not provide for a day only, but has
store laid up, to the end he may fetch forth from his storehouse both old
and new things abundantly. By this man he sheeweth that he which is
sufficiently learned and instructed by the spirit of the Lord to Preach, ^hers
^bounde ^wledge
must teach copiouslye, and plentifully whatsoever pertayneth to the purpose,
and is necessary to bring the knowledge of salvation even as if a lyberall
househoulder should fetch out of his storehouse all manner of daynty and
dellicate dishes, as well old as new, so that nothing should be wa^tinge to the
feast. This lyberality truly Christ both here and in many other places also
most plentifully showed, in bringinge forth abundantly and lyberally the meat
of life, namelye the doctrine of salvation, and in such wise that they might
taste and understand all things. The Apostell Paul thus dealt, (...) 20.
as appears by his words when he says I have spared no labor, but have
showed you all the counsel of God. Hereupon therefore we may gather that it
is the part of a Preacher of ye Gospel to teach all those things which serve
to the matter plentifullye and plainly, and not to hyde any that is meet and
convenient for to be taught. C. He truly to whose charge the people are
committed ought to have all things laid up in store, yt he may bring it
forth to serve at need and that in due time. ^unce (...) not to ^a^
But he (which if he be demanded a question, cannot answer out of hand
without his book but stands still like an incensible block) is not the right
ouerseer of ye househould. The meaning therefore of this place is yt it is the
duty of all those that be teachers in the Church, to Preach plentifullye to
the people and to feed them with the bread of life in time, and out of time.
Alas the lamentable state and condition of our time is to be lamented greatly,
in the which there is so great want of such prouiders and dispensators of the
secret mysteries of gods word, that the people are ready to starve for
want of their daily and ordinarye food. And again there are so many
negligente stewards, and ignorant in the practice of providing, that in so
great abundance and plenty, theris nothing but mere dearth and scarscitye.

How this comes to pass I will not now dilate. ^ence ^ardes (...) house


Out of his treasurye A. By the treasury he means the stoorehouse and
buttery of the mind.

Things nevve and old Many of the auncyente expositours, by things new and
old, understood the Law and the Gospel that is to say the old Testamente
and the new, which exposition seems to strict. So that it may more simplelye
be taken for the diverse and manifould dispensation which they very aptlye and
wisely apply according to every man's capacitye. Of ye which matter we will
speak more at large in the four and twenty Chapter followinge. Math. 24.


53. And it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these similitudes, he
departed thence.

C. The Euangelyste Mathewe means not that our savior Christ (so sone and
immediately after he had made an end of these sayings) went into his own
countreye. Mark. 6.
For by the sixth Chapter of Mark it appears that there was some distance of
time between. But the sense and meaning of this place is yt when he had
taught the people a certain time in Iewrye, he returned again into Gallilae,
whose inhabitauntes notwithstanding received him very ingratefullye. Luke. 4.
Luke in his fourth Chapter makes mention of an Historye, almost like unto
this, but not ye same. Neither is it any maruayle if now in the beginning the
countryemen of our savior Christ were offended, calling to mind the baseness
of his birth, and the obscure manner of his education, to the end they might
hinder, and discredit (so much as they might) his Doctrine, so often as he
would take upon him the office of a Prophet. Therefore this second
reiection of Christ, teaches us that the Citizens of Nazarethe were not
amended against his coming again, but were always so obstinate and
contemptuous that they utterly refused to hear Christ.

54. And when he came into his own countreye, he taught them in their
Synagoges, in so much that they were astonyed and said, whence comes this
VVysedome and power unto him. And when he came. M.

The place where Christ was borne was Nazareth: in the which Joseph and Marye
did dwell not only before Christ was conceived (as appears in the first
Chapter of Luke, Luke 1. Matthew. 2. Luke 2.
but also after, as appears in the second Chapter going before, and in the
second of Luke also. Furthermore Christ was norished and brought up there as
we may read in the fourth of Luke. In this City dwelt the Cosyne of Mary,
as appears by that which follows. Math. 2.
Hereupon it came to pass yt he was called a Nazarite as it is written he
shall be called a Nazarite.

He taught them in their Synagoges A. Mark notes the circumstau^ce of the
time saying. Mark. 6
And when the saboth day was come, he began to teach in the Synagoges.

M. Whereby we may consider what the use of the Sabbath was among the Jews,
the which use Christ observed diligently, as we may plainlye see in Luke,
where it is red, that he according to his custom went into the Synagoge every
sabbath day. Luke. 4.
Wherefore if the Jews exercised the reading of Moses with so great dyligence
on the Sabbath days, what ought we to do in these days, Diligence ought to
be used in hearing Gods word.
when not Moses, but one far exceadinge Moses: speaks, when certain
ceremonies and external observations are not used, but only the kingdom of
God, and the Mysteries of the same are used and Preached? If Christ after this
sort observed the Sabbath day, and entered into the Synagoge, when as he had
no need of the reading of Moses, what excuse will they allege for themselves
at this day, which either by contempt or disdain, neglect and utterly refuse
the coming to Church on the Sabbothe days, in the which not the obseruances
of the Law, but the doctrine of life is set forth. Who sees not here that
Christ obeyed this custom by his presence?

In so much that thy were astonished C. They were astonyed being amassed at the
newnes of ye thing, that Christ which never went to schole, but was
conuersaunte from his Chyldehoode, in the handy craft of Carpentrye, should be
so great a Doctor, and such a Preacher of Heavenly wisdom. In this miracle,
when they should have received the power of God, their ingratitude brought to
pass that they blinded themselves: whether they will or no, they are
constrained to maruayle, but they contend and despise yt whereat they wonder.
What other thing is this then to reiecte a Prophet sent from god, because he
proceeds not out of the schools of men? and yet they condemn and overthrow
themselves by their own confession, when as they give so excellent a
testimonye to the Doctrine of Christ which notwithstanding was not credited
of them, because it had not the usual and common original or ofsprynge of the
earth. They say Whence comes this vvysedome If the wisdom of this teacher
were so profounde, why do they not lift up their eyes unto Heaven, and consider
that he passing all humayne reason came from God.

And powers unto him M. These two things shyned in Christ, Ti^ to^ diu^ Chri^
a certain incomprehensible wisdom in his words, and a deuyne and
wonderful power in his works, by the which power he healed all manner of
disseases.

C. Therefore these powers being annexed to his Doctrine, yt Nazarites ought
the more vehementlye to have been touched by the same to receive the glory of
God, and to attribute al glory unto him. For truly when God does work by such
wonderful and straung means, he does the more evidently declare his power.

We se therefore that simple ignorance is not so hurtful unto me^, Ob^^ blind^
as is obstinate wilfulnes, when they willinglye blind themselves, least they
should obey the will of God.

55. Is not this the Carpenters son? Is not his mother called Marye? And his
brethren James, and Ioses, and Simon and Judas?

Is not this the Carpenters son A. Mark says is not this that Carpenter
that son of Marye. Chap^
C. We know that it was done by the wonderful Counsel of God, that Christ
should live priuatelye till he was thyrtye year old. A. insomuche that he
might seem to dyffer very little from other men.

C. Hereupon therefore the Nazarites do amysse and injuriously, to conceive
any offense against him, when as they should rather have rceyued and embraced
him gentlye and reuerentlye as one that were suddenly come down from heaven.
They behoulde the power of God, yea God himself in Christ: and thereupon they
convert their eyes and have regard to Iosephe, and Mary and to all his
kinsfolk, which were but of base estate, to ye end they might obscure and
cover the manifest truth.

A. The Nazarites therefore seem to be offended at Christ for two causes.
First because he was known unto them, and brought up among them: secondlye
because he seemed unto them to be of a poor base and mean condition, namelye
the son of a Carpenter, and he also himself a Carpe^ter. M. Therefore if
he had not been known to be the son of a Carpenter, they would have
believed without offense. How comes it to pass then that John coming of
the excellent stock of Priesthood was not believed of them? for he was not
the son of a Carpenter but of a Priest, which kind of ofspringe was famous
and of great reputacion among the Jews. They were offended also at him,
because he was known unto them. Is not his mother called Marye Therefore if
this offended because he was known unto them would they have believed (think
you) if he had not been known? no surely. For we read of other not unlike
unto these which said, we know that God spoke unto Moses, but as for this man
we know not whence he is. (...) 9.
We see therefore the inclination and disposition of the reprobate, who by no
means will bend to the truth, but has somewhat always to be offended at,
or one cloak or other to couller their infidelitye withal. At this day also
there are many which mark not what it is yt is preached or taught, but
rather what they are that do preach and teach: more regardinge the teacher
then the doctrine taught. (...). 12.
And his brethren C. We have sheewed before that the Euangeliste calls
those that were but kynsme^ the brethren of Christ according to the manner of
the Hebrews. Wherefore Heluidius does very fondlye ymagyn that Christ was not
the only son of Marye, because there is oftentimes mention made in the
Scriptures of the brethren of Christ.

56. And are not all his sisters with us? whence has he then all these
things. And are not all his sisters A. As concerning the sisters of Christ,
read ye twelfth Chapter going before.

Whence has he then all these M. In the word (he) (which is a pronowne)
there is a great Emphasis. For as it should seem they would not have so
greatly maruayled, neither would they have been so much offended if they had
seen and hard such things of a stranger or unknown person that had been of
more noble birth. For humayne reason in them judged it a thing incredible and
strange, yt so great wisdom and power should be given from Heaven to a man
of so base lynage and rude bringinge up, and void of all nobilitye: when as
they should rather have wayed and considered that he was taught from above
hearing him speak with such wisdom, and seeing him show such wonderful
miracles.

57. And they were offended at him. But Jesus said unto them: a Prophet is
not without honor save in his own countreye.

And they were offended S. These words (At him) do note unto us that they
were offended at the person not at ye Doctrine, the which notwithstanding can
not belong free from suspicion, when the person is contemned and despised: E.
As if the Evangelist should have said, the lowlynes of his stock and small
quantity of wealth was an offense unto them, imagining nothing as yet to be in
him, but that which was human and common to other men, and that therefore
they enuyed his new and unwonted excellencye because of his former state. B.
his excellent Doctrine therefore and miracles, which he sheewed forth with
so great auctoritye, did nothing at all move them. For they being void of
the spyrite of God did not regard the works of ye spirit but rather curiouslye
they sought after small tryfles to the end they might thereby have occasion to
calumniate and speak evil of Christ. That occasion therefore by the just
judgment of God was given unto them, to the end they might dye in their
sinnnes.

A Prophet is not without honor save in E. Jesus reprouinge their gross and
vulgar judgment, which judged and esteemed of a man not according to his
virtues, but according to the nobility of his stock and birth answers them
with a common sentence or Proverb taken of the nature of men, in that always
we have the sayings of Pilgrims and strangers in more estimacion, New
things please men be they never so badde.
regard and credyt then the sayings of our neighbors and househould, though
these oftentimes be more learned and wise then the other. C. Some
notwithstanding expound this sentence thus, that Christ wanted honor
among his Countryemen, because he profited more among the Samaritanes in two
days only, then he did a long time among the Nazarites: and because he
gatte more Disciples in Samaria without any miracles, then he gained in
Gallilae with many miracles: but this is to sclender an exposition and not so
well to be allowed. Furthermore it likes me not that other some will have
Capernaum to be the country of Christ, because he was more often there then
in any other place. We must rather therefore subscribe and agree to Cyrrill
which expounds this to be understood of Nazareth which our savior Christ
here calls his own countreye. For there is no doubt but that this is a
Prouerbial sentence. And we know that there is no such force in Prouerbiall
sentences, yt a continual truth should always exactly be looked for in them,
as though it were necessary that it should be always true yt is spoken in
them. It is most certain truly that Prophets are more honored in other
places then in their own country. And yet notwithstanding sometime it may
chance, and it falls out so indeed yt a Prophet has no less estimacion
and credit of his own Countrymen then of strangers. But the proverb only
teaches what comonlye comes to pass, namely that Prophets are more often
better entertained of strangers then of their own Countryemen. But there may
be two causes of this Proverb, for Galilaeans, who when they should have been
ye first that should have received the grace offered unto them, they were the
most despysers of the same.

58. And he did not many miracles there, because of their unbelief.

C. Mark speaks with a greater Emphasis saying. Cha^
And he could there show no miracle, but laid his hands upon a few sick
folk, and healed them, and maruayled because of their unbelief.
Notwithstanding in effect they very well agree, that the way was shut against
Christ by the wickedness of his Citizens, that he wrought not many miracles
there. He gave the^ now some taste: but they willinglye pluck back and
refuse to have any more of the same. Faith^ fideli^ parc^^ the^.
Therefore Austen very aptelye compares faith to certain Vessels with
open mouth: but he says infidelitye is like to a cover with the which the
Vessel is covered that it cannot receive the lyquor or moisture powered in by
the spyrite of God. And truly it is so in deed. For the Lord saying that his
power is not received of us does at the length take away the same, and yet
notwithsta^dinge afterward we complain yt we want his help, which our
incredulity and hardness of heart has repelled and driven away. Mark in denying
that Christ could do any miracle amplifyeth their fault by the which his
goodness was let. For certainly the unbelievers by their co^tumacy and hardness of
heart, do restrain so much as in them lies the hand of God: not that there is
any abillitye wanting in God, but because they will not permit his power to be
fulfilled and executed. M. The virtue and power of Christ truly, was prepared
to heal them: but by the Ingratitude and infidelity of mortal me^, it was let
and hyndered after a certain manner, and by the unworthiness of these infydels,
it came to pass that the plentiful and flowing ryuers of the goodness of God
did not power out their streams. C. Notwithstanding we must note what Mark
adds that certain weak persons were nevertheless healed. For hereby we
gather that the goodness of Christ did strive as it were with their mallyce, and
did ouerflow the same. And we have daily experience of the like in God. For
although he do justly and necessarilye restrain and keep back his power
because it has not free access unto us, yet notwtstanding we see that he
making away to himself where no way is, lets not to do good unto us. And
herein his mercy ouerfloweth the stop of our wickedness, and has his force
mangre our heads and in spyte of the Devil. Bu. When the Lord therefore has
promised help every where to the fayfull he will leave the unbelieving
Nazarites to their error, and will multiplye his miracles and graces among his
servants.

The xiiii. Chapter.
AT that time, Herod the Tetrarcha heard of the fame of Jesus.
M. In this Chapter (the crueltye of Herod, ye death of John the Baptiste, the
myraculous feedinge of five thousand men, the wonderful calminge of the
tempest of the Sea, and the appearinge of Christ walking on the sea, is
declared. And last of all is showed how he came to Genesareth, and healed all
the sick folks that were brought unto him. Herod Bu. This Herod was the
son of that Herod, of the great Antipater, syrnamed of some, Ascalon, which
flewe the infantes of Bethlehe^, being a most pernicious Raven, hatched of so
wicked an egg. Some call this Herod Antipas, for his surname. He is the very
same which arrayed our savior with a white vesture, Luke 23.
and deryded his divine wisdom, making an open jest and laughinge stock of
him. Of this man Josephus makes mention in his 18. Book of the Antiquities of
the Jews.

The Tetrarcha Bu. Tetrarchia, and Tetrarcha are words usurped of the Romain
writers, but taken from the Greeks.

Tetrarchae, were Princes, having the fourth part or some portion of the
kingedome. Such are they which we call Deputies or Presidentes. The Romans
deuidinge their kingdoms to suppress rebellion, lymitted the same to diverse
Presidents, or governors, which they called Tetrarchae, or Toporchae, and the
regions themselves Toporchas, or Tetrarchas. Lib. 5. Chap. 18.
The which thing we may read in Plynie. This Herod was Tetrarcha of
Gallilae, and no king. Heard the fame of Jesus, A That is al things yt were
done by Jesus, as says the Euangeliste Luke. chap. 9. chap. 6.
For Marcke says that his name was sprede abroad. C. The which thing the
Evangelists do declare, to the end we may know that the name of Christ was
in many places famous, whereby the Jews might be void of excuse, and could
not plead ignorance. for otherwise this doubt might crepe into the hearts of
many men, and cause them to say thus. How chanced it that the Jews were so
secure and careless, Christ being in the earth? was his divinity so shut up
in a corner that he revealed the same to none? This doubt (I say) the
Evangelists take away, and testify that his name was famous and spread
abroad, yea, in such public sort, that it entered even into Herodes court.

2 And said unto his servants: this is John the Baptist. He is risen from the
dead, and therefore are miracles done by him.

And said to his servants. E, The Greek word for servants is so
general, that it comprehends the whole household.

This is John. C. By the words of Luke, it may be gathered, that this offered
not it self, or came into the mind of Herod willyngly, but rather that he had
a suspicion by the common rumor of the people For thus Luke writes, And
Herod the Tetrarche heard of all that was done by him, chap. 9.
and doubted because it was said of some that John was risen again from
death. Neither need we to doubt, but that the hate of the tyrant, and the
detestation of the cruel and wicked act, gave occasion to talk and rumoure,
as often times it comes to pass. For this superstition remained in the
minds of many men, that the deadde, under an other person came to life again.
Now they take that which is next, namely that Herod in kyllinge so cruelly
the holy man, missed of his purpose: because by the wonderful power of God
sodaynely, he rose again from the dead, to be a more sharp ennemy and revenger
of his wickedness. Bu. And by the way here we may note, Tyrants ever fear.
that tyrauntes are not free from fear, tremblinge, and rebuke, although by
all means they seek to be delivered from the same by fire and sword. This
wicked tyrante Herod, 2. Tim^
had slain John the Baptist, least any man should reprove his incestiouse
marriage: but John being slain, the lord him self comes with his twelve
Apostels, who, with one consent teach the purity of life to be observed, and
condemn the uncleanness of the same. Therefore truly says the Apostel, that the
word of God can not be bound. The mynisters of the word may be taken,
scourged, and killed, but the word and the mynistery of the same is
everlasting and invincible: for so sone as one by death or imprisonmente is
put to silence, an other by and by arysethe in his place. Wherefore tyrauntes
shall never be delivered from fear, until they forsake their tyranny, and
obey the word of God, C. Mark and Luke teach, that men spoke diversely of
Christ: namelye that some thought him to be Elias, some one of the prophets,
or a Prophet. cha^
For because the lord had promised by the prophet Malachy, that Helias should
come, which should congregate and gather together the dispersed church, they
wrested this prophecy amiss to his person, when as it was a simple
comparison, in this sense as follows, Least the coming of the Messiah
should be obscure, and least the people should not see, perceive, and
understand and their gracious redemption, there shall such a one go before
them, as was in time paste, which shall restore al those things that are
decayed, and the true worship of God, which was quite overthrown. He shall
go before them therefore with a singular power of the spirit, to set forth unto
the^ that great and excellent day. The Jews according to their gross dulnes
in interpreting, restrain this to Helias the Thesbite, as though he should
come again, to take upon him the office of a prophet Notwithstanding other
some coniectured that he was either some one of the old Prophets, which was
risen, or else that he was some great man, which was as excellent, and of as
great power as they were. But it is marvel, that none of them being drawn
into so many and sundry opinions could remember that which was true:
specially when as the time and the consideration of the same might have
directed them unto Christ. God had promised unto them a redemer, which should
help the miserable, and shine unto such as were in darkness, and in the
shaddowe of death. The extreme necessity, in the which they were thrown, did
then greatly require the help of God.

A redemer is come, both celebrated by the office and proclamation of John, and
also by the testimonye that he bare of his office: they are constrained to
acknowledge some what that is divine and heavenly in him: but being fallen,
notwithstanding to their own immaginations, they transpose and change him to
other men's persons. And thus truly, by most wicked ingratitude, the world
oftentimes extinguisheth the graces of God offered unto them. As towchinge
Herod him self, he took not this opinion willyngly of the rysynge of John
again: ^^iences ^^e gylty ^es ac^m (...).
(as we towched a lyttel before) but (as evil and gylty consciences are
always wavering and afearde) he easily conceived yt which he feared And God
does oftentimes vex and stir up the wicked by these blind terrors, by the
which they are greatly disquieted. And therefore are miracles done by. C. A
man may much marvel what reason led them thus to say: for John all the time of
his preachinge showed no miracle or sign, A. as witnessed the multitude.
(...). 1^.
C. They seem therefore to want their colloure or clock, because they saying
him to be famous by doing of miracles conjecture him to be John: but they
thought that miracles were done now by him at the first, to prove his
resurrection, and to testify, that he being the holy Prophet of God, was
wickedlye put to death of Herod: and that now he came again, as a holy and
undefiled man, to the end no man might hereafter presume to hurt or vyolate
his personage. B. We se therefore hereby, ^nes be^ ^nished (...) is in^d.
how men are wrapped and tangled in childishe errors, when godliness falls
and decays as in that age it came to pass. And the like has often times
since hapened, and we our selves in these days (with to much grief) have
experience of the same. This is the blyndenes and madness, with the which God
does strike the wicked, when they hoyse up the sail to all wyckednes, and bid
God farewell, Exodus 28.
of the which Moses in the eighte and twentye chapter of Exodus speaks.

3 For Herod had taken John and bound him, and put him in prison because of
Herodias, his brother Phillips wife.

B. The Greek text uses the preterperfecte tence, has taken, has bound,
has put, for the preterpluperfecte tence, according to the manner of the
Hebrews. M. Because the Euangeliste had made mention of John, by occasion he
joins to, the history of his death, and that by the way. For it is not a
proper work of the Euangeliste to describe the death of any beside the acts
and deeds of Christ Because of Herodias. B. This seems to be a name
diminutiue, taken of Herod.

His brother Phillips wife. C. The Evangelists affirm that John was taken,
because he openly condemned the incestiouse matrimony of Herod with Herodias,
which was his brother Philips wife

4 For John said unto him. It is not laufull for thee to have her.

C. Josephus alleges an other cause why he was put in prison, Iosep. li. 18.
de antiqui. cap. 10.
namely because by his doctrine (to the which the people wonderfully resorted)
be brought him self in suspicion with Herod, of the mouinge of some new
attempt, or unwonted matter. But it might be, that the wicked tyrant took this
as a cloak to cover his cruel murtherynge of John. Or it might be that this
wicked rumor was spredde abroad of him. for unjust vyolence and cruelty is
never without diverse accusatio^s. But the Evangelists show the very cause in
deed, namely that Herod was an ennemy to the holy man because he was sharply
reprehended of him. For Josephus is deceived which thought that Herodias was
not taken from Phillip the brother of Herod, but from Herod the king of
Chalcis his fathers brother. For at what time the Evangelists wryt, the
remembrance of this wicked deed was not only new, but also common in the eyes
of all men. And whereas Josephus in an other place says that Phillip was of a
soft wit, in consideration and hope whereof there is no doubt but that Herod
was the more boulde to accomplish his will, and to abuse the modesty of
Phillip, not fearing any ponishment. Here is also an other probable conjecture
that Herodias was rather given in matrimony to Phillip her fathers brother,
than to her great uncle the brother of her grandfather, which for age was
even crooked. But Herod Antipas here mentioned, and Phillippe, were not
brethren by the mother side, but Herod was the son of Marthaca, the third
wife of great Herod, and Phillip was borne of Cleopatra. Now to return to
our Evangelists) they say that John was cast into prison, because he
reprehended the wicked act of Herod more freely then the madness and cruelty
of the tyrante would bear. Now the horriblenes of the deed, was odious and
excecrable enough of it self, because he did not only foster and keep in his
house an other man's wife, being forsed from her laufull husband: but also
because this injury was done contumelyousely against his own brother. But for
so much as the reprehension of John was so sharp and free, Herod feared not
in vain least sedition should spring and that suddenly His filthy lust
suffered him not to amend his heinous fault and detestable crime, but the
Prophet of God being bound and cast in prison, he promyseth unto him self
quiet rest and liberty. By ignorance of this history it came to pass, that
many entered into vain disputacion, whether it were laufull for any man to
marrye a wife, which had been first married to his brother. For although the
honest shame of nature does loathe and abhor such wedlock, yet
notwithstanding Ihon does more condemn the forcinge and raueshing of a woman,
the^ incest, because that Herod by force and deceyte spoiled his brother
Phillip of his laufull wife.

And otherwise, it had been less lawefull for him to marry his sons daughter,
then to take his brothers wife being ded, out of her widdowhed. Well John with
constant bouldnes preaches against this beastly and cruel deed, to se if he
by any means might be brought to repentance. Whereby we learn of what
constante, Bo^^^ ough^ a pr^^ God^
and inflexible courage the preachers and servants of God ought to be when
that they have to do with princes: for in every court almost reigns
Hypocrisy, and servile flattery, which for advantage is a bondslaue, so
feeding the ears of princes with pleasant and delectable words, that they will
in no wise receive the sharp and sower reprehe^tions of their wickedness. But
because so wiccked a deed ought not to be cloked, dissembled, hydden, or
conceled of the Prophet of God, John comes forth even in the midst
(although about an unthankful imbassage and work): and least he should
declyne or swerve from his office, he fears not to incur the displeasure of
a tyrante.

M. In this reprehension therefore of Herod we have an example what liberty
to use in reprehendinge, Tw^ to be^ in re^tion.
and open reproving of wicked persons, namely such

5 And when he would have put him to death, he feared the people, because they
counted him as a Prophet.

C. There seems in the words of Matthew and Marcke, to be no small
discrepance or disagrement, for Matthew says, that Herod was desirouse of this
cruel and wicked murder, but was stayed by fear of the people: but Mark
only lays this cruelty to the charge of Herodias. but the reconciliation is
easy to be made, namely that Herod in the beginning, (except that because
greater necessity constrained him thereto) would not have killed the holy man:
because he feared him, and trewely conscience did somewhat prick and stay him
from dealyng so cruelly with the prophet of god: but Herodias daily egginge
and prouokinge him forward, at the length drove the fear of god wholly out of
his mind. But when he was led and subdued by that furiouse madness, he wholly
desired and sought by all means to have the holy man put to death and
extinguysshed: notwithstanding he was now stayed by a new let, that is to
say, he feared the people. And hear the words of Mark, are to be noted, for
(says he) Herodias laid wait for him: namely because that Herod of him
self was not inclined or prone to kill John: and therefore Herodias either by
subtle means went about to circumue^t him, or else privily to work the death
of the holy man.

But it is more probable and likely, that by subtlety and deceyte, she went
about to subdue and win the mind of her husebande, but in vain, so long as
the conscience of Herod was pricked, not to work the end or destruction of
the saint of God. Furthermore there succeeded an other fear, least any tumulte
should arise among the people, because of his death, For all the multitude
accounted John a Prophet. But Mark only touches the cause why Herod was
stayed from fulfillinge the mind of the strompet and harlot his usurped wife.
for Herodias sought so sone as John was put in prison to have his death, and
that pryuylie. But truly Herod reverenced the holy man. and would willingely
have obeyed his counsel and admonition. For the fear which is here mentioned
was not conceived of a contrary opinion, (...) fered ^ohn ^e.
(as commonly we fear those which are in authority, although we count
them unworthy of honor) but this fear was a voluntary obseruaunce or
reverence: because that Herod being persuaded that John was a holy man, and a
faithful mynister of God, durst not for this cause despise him. And this is
worthy to be noted: for although John knew by experience, that it was
profitable for him many ways, to be of price and estimation with the
Tetrarche, yet notwithstanding he was not afearde to alyenate his mind or to
displease him, when as otherwise he could not obtain his favor, then by
winkynge at a horrible and known fact. He rather seeks to make his friend a
foe, then by flattering silence to meintaine and nussell a wicked person in his
ungodliness. John therefore by his example has prescribed a certain rule to all
godly teachers, Preachers of Gods word must avoid flattery.
that theye dyssemble not the wickedness of princes, thereby to win their favor
and estimation. It is a very hard and daungerouse thing truly, for the
servants of the lord to excecute their office, because they can not do it
without reprouinge and sharp reprehension: in excecutinge the which, we may
se the mind of John stout and constant, which would not dissemble neither for
fear of present death, nor for hope of reward and favor. A great exaumple
truly (I say) to all mynisters, that they decline or swerue not from their
office. A very hard matter truly it is: but let them not take that office
upon them, unless they determine to show forth that which perteyneth to
their function and calling. But in Herod as in a glass, the spirit of God
sets forth unto us, that those which do not syncerely worship God, but are
somewhat prepared to obey his will, are oftentimes given over to al kind of
wickedness. There is no cause therefore why they should please them selves,
which obey many wholesome and godly admonitions, until such time as they
have learned to addict and give them selves wholly unto God. Fear alwais
comes to the wicked.
M. Furthermore by this place it appears how miserable and foolish the
condition and state of the wicked is: they fear where no fear is, and fear
not that which ought to be feared. Herod feared (as God would have it) the
multitude, which had John in great veneration: for he feared least he should
stir them up against him, if he should decree to execute any cruelty upon
John, And this certainly is spoken to the consolation of al those that are
mynisters of the word. For we do se that God cares for those that are his
servants, and suffers not tyrants at their pleasure to take away their
lives. Furthermore we see that kings and tyrants whom all men fear, stand
in fear them selves oftentimes. The wicked hye priests, Math. 21.
and seniours of the people, feared the multitude, in so much that they durst
not do or speak any thing against John the Baptist: because the people held
John as a prophet of God. A. Therefore Herod feared the multitude, but he
carelessly contempned the judgment of God which for his wicked and horyble
act, was even at hand. Because they counted him. A. John was of great price,
estimation, and favor among the people, because he baptized many, had many
dysciples, and was thought of some to be the promised Messiah. There was no
man but counted him a Prophet sense from God, and therefore they had him in
great estimation.

6 But when Herodes birth day was kept, the daughter of Herodias daunsed
before them and pleased Herod.

But when Herodes. C. Now the Evangelist begins to show, by what fraud and
deceyt Herodias at the length wrought the destruction of John the Baptist,
which she a long time sought to bring to pass: for occasion was offered
unto her by the solemn feast, which Herod made at the solemnisation of his
birth day. For it can not well be, Feastynge is not without many euilles.
that such magnifical and sumptuouse feasting should be void of evil, but
that it should bring with it many perniciouse snares, beside luxury, disdain,
immoderate mirthe and other wickednesses, which are abhomynable in the sight
of God, not that the lyberall making of a feast is evil of it self: but
because mankind is so prone to lassiuyousenesse, that the raynes of moderate
measure being loused, he will easelye pass his bounds and excede. Mark. 6
Mark writes thus, And when a conueniente day was come, that Herod on his
birth day made a supper to the lords high capitaynes, and chief estates of
all Galile. That ancient custom of it self cannot be improude or dysalowed,
to cellebrate every year with joy, the birth day, for that day, so often as
it comes, admonishes every one of us to be thankful unto the lord, of who^
we being brought into this life, continue in the same by his goodness from year
to year. Thereby also we are put in mind of the evil and unprofitable
bestowing of our time, sekinge to amend the rest which followethe. But there
is nothing so pure and good which the woorld seeks not to corrupt and defile
with his vices. for the gretter part with their filthy and leude behavior, do
prophanate the day of their Nativity, which ought to be most holy. For on
that day they be drunk, they use filthy and lewd talk, they ingurge them
selves with to much meat, they surfeit, they blaspheme the name of God, to be
short, they use no temperance, but give them selves to al kind of fylthy
pleasure. This was the cause why the holy man Job, Job. ^
after banketyng offered always sacrifice: He knew that in banketyng and
feastinge, there were many occasions to offend. So it came to pass that
Herod seking to welcome and chere his gestes, suffered and daughter of his
wife to dance before them. She daunced not rudely as do the common sort with
leaping, but she daunced with a comely gesture with measure, as they do in
dance, and so does the Greek word properly sound.

And it pleased Herod. A. Marcke adds, and all those that satt at meat with
him. E. Behold the disposition of the wicked, they glory and rejoice in that
which should make the^ blushe for shame. C. But the world can not but allow
that which is his own. For there is no man that has any care or respect of
honest grauytie, that will commend or allow daunsing, D^^ not^ dabi^
specially in a maid. But the unchaste Herodias had so framed her daughter
Solomen to her manners, that she counted it no shame at all. But what followed
at the length.

7 Wherefore he promised with an oath that he would give her what so ever
she would ask.

C. The heat of the wine did so boil in the brain of Herod that he
forgate all gravity and wisdom, promysinge (as witnesses Mark) to a
dansyng puppet to give unto her, even the one half of his kingdom A shameful
and wicked example truly, that the king in his drunkenness, does not only
show an evil spectacle and pattern to those of his family, but also
promises so great a reward. Wherefore let us learn to be sober and
circumspect, when we encounter with Satan, least by such snares he entangle
and overthrow us.

8 And she being instructed of her mother before said: give me here John
Baptistes head in a platter.

A. This is more plentifully described of Marcke, (...). 6.
for he says, but she going forth saw, unto her mother, what shall I ask: she
said, the head of John the Baptiste. C. It is no marvel if she so much
esteemed the death of John. Where as some conjecture that she was inflamed with
revenge, they seem to want reason: for the fear of diuorsement seemed rather
to tourmente, vex, and disquiet her: even as often times, when harlots or
whoremongers are sylled with disdain, they are ashamed of their fylthy lust.
For she hoped that Herod should be much bound unto her, if the league or bond
of adulterouse wedlock might be beaten down by the blood of the Prophet.
Therefore to the end she might live and reign securely and void of fear
ever after, she would have him extinguished by death, whom she counted as her
mortal foe.

(...) con^ ever (...)
Whereby also we are taught how much tormoylinge, care, and grief, troubles
an evil conscience. John was kept in prison: the ambiciouse and cruel woman
might have held her self with that contented, forbiddynge all men to have
access unto him: notwithstanding she is not quiet, but is grieved with care
and fear, until the prophet was dispatched of his life. This also serves
greatly to set forth unto us the mighty force and efficacy of the word of
God, namelye that the voice of the holy man, although it were included and
shutt up in the prison, yet notwithstanding it rent and tare the mind of the
kings wife, no less then a greuouse torment. M. Furthermore in this Herodias
we see the nature, and cruel practyse of an adoulterouse woman. (...) are ^ous
that (...) them
For this is the property of all whores and strompettes, to desire to have al
those dispatched out of the way whom they think to be witnesses and
adversaries to their fylthy pleasure.

Here also we have an example of those, which seek to blot and put out one
syn with an other. But they do no less then he which goinge about to quench
a fire blows to the same. That incestiouse and fylthy pleasure of Herod and
Herodias, in the end was known throughout the whole world, the which (if
they had not killed the holy and just man) had peradventure in continuance of
time ben forgotten. Even so the ungodly rushe out of one sin into an other,
and ouerwhelm them selves in the deep, provoking the wrath of God against
them: but the godly by faith and true repentance obtain pardon and
remission of their sins, at the hands of God.

Give me here John Baptist headde. Mark more expressly says. And she
coming in straightway with haste unto the king, asked saying: I will that
thou give me by and by. the head of John Baptist in a charger. M. In this
daunsing damsel, we have an example of the evil instructinge and bringing up
of youth, and how great a matter the good or evil behauioure of the
parents is. The wicked, The evil manners of parents do often times corrupt
their children
lasciuiouse, adulterouse, and cruel mother, is not contented with her own
rashenesse and ungodly behavior, but she seekethe also to frame the child or
young impe after her own bente and disposition: that by the daughter a man
may know what the mother is.

And truly the damsel shows her self to apt and ready to be taught in
followinge and fulfillinge, the fond mind of her frantike mother.

9 And the king was sorry. Nevertheless, for the oaths sake, and them which
sat also at the table, he commanded it to be given her.

And the king was sorry. C. Religion, godlynes, and conscience is quite
vanyshed away from him (as we said before): but because he forseeth how
odiouse a crime he should commit, he fears infamy and loss: hereupon it
came to pass that he repented him of his rash lyghtnesse. Yet
notwithstanding he dare not deny the daunsynge maid her petition, least he
should sustain the ignominy and reproach of inconstancy, as though it were
more fylthy to retracte that which he had rashely and foolishely promised, then
to persist and abide in the finishing of a horrible and monstruouse crime. But
because (according to the wonted vanytie of kings) he would not have it
void and frustrate which he had once spoken and promised, he commands the
prophet to be slain out of hand.

Nevertheless for the oaths. M. In the right and manner of swearing or making
vows, Two things ought to be observed in swearynge.
there are two things to be considered: the one is, that it be rightely done,
and Herod offended: for without necessity or co^straint in a thing very
foolish and ridiculouse, he uses an oath, and that daungerously, promysing to
the one half of his kingdom. For he ought to have feared least the damsel
should have asked any thing contrary to the will of God. Rash vows
Then he offended in the other point also, that being not content that he had
sworn folishely, fulfilleth that wickedly which wickedly he had promised,
and was demanded.

A. We must also note that which the Euangeliste adds, saying, that the
king was sorry, not only for his oaths sake, but also for Their sakes which
sat at. Whereby we may gather that if he had sworn an hundred times without
any witness, he would not notwithstanding have fulfilled his oath and promise.
For he might easily have rejected and denied the unreasonable and unlawful
request of the impudent daunsing damsel, when he perceived whereunto it
tended: but he was ashamed to refracte, and recante that which before so many
witnesses he had promised. Therefore an inward zeal or pure conscience bound
not Herod to perform his vow, but mere ambition: because he counted if a
great point of dishonestie not to stand to his promise But although the
right of an oath only, and not manly shame was before the eyes of Herod, yet
notwithstanding he more greuouslye offended in executynge that which he
foolishely promised, then if he had broken the right of swearinge: for what is
more wicked in the sight of God, then to sheade the blood of his saints.
Vows monastical.
Hereby we have just occasion to reprehende the monastical vows, to the
which there is open and manifest impiety conjoined: the which vows also do
no more bind the conscience, then magical exorcismes: because that God will
not have his holy name used to the confirmation of sin and wickedness. This
place notwithstanding teaches every man to take heed least that he promise
any thing rashelye or unadvisedly: then that he join not contumacie with
light rashenesse. Also here we do see to what end they rushe hedlonge into
rashenes, which being vaynegloriouse and desyrouse of praise, seek rather to
get fame and name among men, then to keep a pure conscience before God. In the
banquet of Herod also is depaynted and set forth unto us the manner and nature
of courtiers. For among all the ghestes, there is not one found which went
about to stay the king from his wicked deed. It is a true proverb therefore,
such lyppes such lettice.

10 And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.

E. The Greek text has, And he sendinge cut of the headde of John. Some
translations have, And he sent tormentours and beheaded John. Marcke has, And
immediately the king sent the hangman, and commanded his head to be brought
in. The which sayings are in effect all one. By this exaumple let us learn
to be paciente in affliction, if at any time it come to pass, that we are
ponished unworthily of perverse and froward men. God sometimes sufferethe his
servants to be a laughing stock to the wicked, but let us for all that
wholly depend upon this consolation, Psa^
that before the lord right dear and preciouse is ye death of his saints In
prison. It had been less grief to have been put to death openly, and to have
had a little liberty to make a declaration of his conscience and innocence,
and to set forth the impiety of the Tyrant. But all these things are denied
to so holy a man, he is murdered in the prison, without public sentence or
judgment, no man being present, no man comforting him, no man bewailynge his
case. C. We gather by this place, that Herod did then suppe in the castle of
Macheron, in the which Josephus says that John was bound.

11 And his head was brought in a platter, and given to the damsel and she
brought it to her mother.

C. This also is a part of the haynouse and cruel deed, that the head of the
holy man after his death should be made a mockinge and iestinge stock. But the
lord sometimes does make his servants subject to the pride of the wicked,
until he may at the length declare, that right preciouse is the blood of his
saints in his sight. And she brough it to her. C. Herodias reioyseth that
she has obtained her purpose, and cruelly tryu^pheth over her judge and
controller: but afterward she being deprived of all her richesse and not only
banished from the honor of the kingdom, but also from her native land and
country and all other helps, she (I say) at the length, leadynge a miserable
life in exile and banishment, was an excellent spectacle to aungelles, saints,
and to al good men, (...) pati^ ^^rder
to behold. Bu. God truly is long sufferynge, merciful, and of great
goodness, grauntinge even to those that are most wicked a long time of
repentance. But and if they go forward and co^tynue in their wickedness
still, he lettethe not to ponnishe and plague them. Even as the hystoryes make
mention and testyfie of the adulterouse king and adultresse. But for as much as
men are constrained to pollute and defyle their eyes by the beholding of ye
abhomynable pomp and ghestes, and such as are bydden to feasts, we may
gather that such as sit at the tables of princes, are oftentimes entangled
with diverse and sundry myschieues. For although no blouddy or cruel deed,
does vyolate or defyle the table, yet notwithstanding all things are so
replenished with all kind of wyckednes, that at the least wise such as come
thither must be adicted and given to wantonness.

12 And his disciples came and took up his body, and buried it: and went and
told Jesus.

M. How it was laufull forth disciples of John to take away his body which was
slain, ^on.
it may well be demanded, because Josephus says that he was beheaded in the
castle of Macheron. Some answer, ^were,
that the disciples had access, or liberty to come to the castle, as apereth
in the.xi. chapter before, when John as yet lay bound in prison: whereby it may
be gathered that they were not prohibyted. But for so much as this did pertain
to the cruelty of the woman, yt the body of the holy man should lie unburied,
it is probable for so much as the disciples took upon the^ to bury it, that it
was cast out by soldiers of the tyrant. And although the honor or pomp of
burial profits nothing those that are dead, Burial is to be reverenced
yet notwithstanding it is the lords will to have the same reverenced of us.
M. And truly it were far from humanity to suffer the deadde to lie unburied
like the carcaces of bruit beasts. For what sight can be more sorrowful,
ougly, or horrible, then to se a dead man's body unburied? Furthermore buryall
is a figure of the resurrection to come. Wherefore this diligence of the
disciples of John in coming to bury ye body of their master, was acceptable
unto God. Moreover this serves much to confirm their godly minds and ernest
love which they bare to their master when he was alive: for by this menes they
professed yt the doctrine of the holy man John, remained yet in their hearts
This confession therefore was laudable and deserved no small co^me^dation, seeing
it was done with danger and great adventure of peril: because they could do no
honor to their master being put to death, without provoking great displeasure
and outragyouse revenge of the tirant against them. Bu. Here we are taught,
what we owe to ye dead bodies of saints, Burial pertains to saints.
namely burial, not Papisticall canonization, or false worship, which has been
used, with great abuse. And went and. C. John had so instructed some of his
disciples yt afterward they went to ye schole of Christ, John. 1.
as apereth by Andrew the brother of Simon Peter.

13 When Jesus heard of that, he departed thence in a ship unto a desert
place, out of the way: And when the people had heard thereof, they followed him
on foot and left the Cities.

When Jesus heard of that, C. The Euangeliste John, making mention of the
same historye, shows not for what purpose Jesus went on the other side of
the water. Mark and Luke also differ very much from Matthewe. For they say
that he took upon him this journey, because he would give rest unto his
disciples, after that they were returned again from their imbassage. But in
that, there is no discord, or disagrement, because it may be that Christ
would segregate his Apostels into a desert place, to the end he might the
better frame them to greater things, and under the same time a new occasion
by the death of John offered it self: for the death of John might easly have
terrefyed weak minds, because that lamentable chance of the man of God John,
did declare unto them, that they were in like state and condition, and subject
to the like peril and adventure. And as it is written, John being taken
Christ went out of the domynion, or jurisdiction of Herod, to the end he
might escape the present furor and madness: even so we may now gather,
that Christ, to the end he myht deliver his Apostelles: being as yet but
fearful, from inflammation and burning thoughts, went into a deserte place.

But as concerning the time which the Apostelles spente in their imbassage,
when they were first sent forth for to preach the Gospel, we can say
nothing, because it is not certainly known. For the order of the times was
either neglected of the Evangelists, or else not curiouslye observed: but it
is more probable and lykely, that they were not only sent once, to publishe
and proclaim the kyngedome of Christ, but also, as occasion served, they did
either iterate the same, in certain places, or else after a little while,
they went into diverse places. Now therefore we gather, that theye were come
together, to wait ever afterward daily and hourly upon Christ, which
before sent them forth: as if it had been said, that they went not so,
from their master, that every one of them might take upon him self the
ordynary office of teaching, but that they, having fulfilled and ended their
temporal imbassage, should return again to the schole, to the end they
might grow to a more rypenesse and perfection.

And when the people had heard thereof. A. Now Christ when he had declared
and proved him self, by certain signs, and his wonderful doctrine, to be a
teacher sent from God, the people followed him into a deserte place. C. And
although Christ (which by his divine knoweledge, foresawe all things) was
not ignorant what should come to pass, yet notwithstanding he would have
regard to his disciples, as he was man, to the end he might declare that in
very deed he had a special care over them.

Bu. And that also he might give unto us an exaumple to eschew and avoid
rash delyuerynge over our selves, into the ennemies hand, or into any kind
of danger: because all men persevere not in the same constancy, in the which
at the first they offer them selves to be tried. For this cause in an other
place also he commands saying, Man
When they persecute you in one city, fly into another. C. But by so great
a multitude of people coming together, it is euydente how famous the name
of Christ was every where, by ye which the Jews were inexcusable, who by their
own negligence were depryued of the benefyte of salvation. For of this great
multitude which by a sudden motion, and pange were moved to follow Christ,
a very small number aboade and persysted truly and constantly in his doctrine,
as plainly apereth by the Evangelist John.

They follovved him on foot. E. This also declares the feruente zeal of the
people toward Christ, which were not discouraged, by the paynfulnesse of
the iorneye to follow him, leaving the cytties, where they should have
provided such vittayles as had been necessary for their life. They were
brought to this feruente zeal, by seeing the signs, which he wrought upon
those that were disseased, Chap^
as says saint John.

14 And Jesus went forth, and saw much people, and was moved with mercy
toward them, and he healed of them, those that were sick.

And Jesus went forth. M. Namelye, to mete them. For Luke says, that he
received them.

He savve much people. M. For they were about the number of five thousand,
beside women and children as shall be declared in the.21. verse following. And
was moved with C. The other two Evangelists do more plainly express. but
specially Mark, whereupon Christ was thus moved: namely because he saw hungery
sowles to be drawn and led by fervent love, and desire, from their mansion
houses, into a desert place. For ye scarcity and want of doctrine, was a sign
of miserable dissipatio^ and scatering abroad of the people: therefore Mark
says that Christ had compassion on ye people, because he saw them as sheep
not having a shepherde: not that he according to the spirit of the deity,
acknowledged all for sheep, but as he was man, he made a show by the beholding
of the present matter. For this was no small sign of piety and zeal, to
leave their own houses, and to run by heaps to the prophet of God,
notwithstanding that he sought to escape out of their sight. Also here is to
be noted that Christ was mindeful of that person which he represented. The
office of a teacher was committed unto him: He ought therefore for a time to
leuy and chose out of the flock and church of God al Jews: until such time as
they did alienate the^ selves. Moreover here, the affection of mercy and
compassion prevailed in Christ, that being weary with his disciples, and being
almost oppressed with continual molestation and trouble, spared him self,
notwithstanding nothing at all. He sought for some release and ease, not so
much for him self, as for his discyples: notwithstanding because the
necessity of his office called him to a new labor, he neglecting the private
regard, wyllinglyngly busieth him self in teachinge the people. And although
now, he has put of those affections which pertayne to a mortal man, yet
notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that he behold the even from heaven
those miserable sheep which are destitute of a shepehered if so be yt they seek
for the remedy of his sheep.

(...) 6
And he healed of them, those that. C. Marcke says, that he taught many
things, meaning that he preached a great while, to the end they might reap
the more profit of his words. Luke 9.
Luke says that he spoke of the kingdom of God, which agrees with the
words of Mark Our Evangelist Matthewe makes mention of nothing, saving of
his miracles only, because theye were of more force to bring name and fame unto
Christ. But it is easy to be gathered, that he omytted not the doctrine,
whereof he ought to have had (as he had in deed) most special regard.

15 And when the even drew on, his disciples came to him, saying: This is a
deserte place, and the hour is now past, let the people depart, that they
may go into the towns, and bie them vittayles,

And when the even drew on. M. Before, Christ seemed to have a care of the
soul? and here he cares for the body also. Christ cares both for soul and
body.


The excelency of this History, appears in this, that all the Euangelystes
have written the same: but specially in that John has not omitted it, because
thereby the Deuinitye of Christ might be noted, in the setting forth whereof
he was wholly conversant.

His Disciples came to him C. Now the Dysciples were frustrate of their hope
now that they see Christ altogether occupied in teaching, and the multitude
also for very desyer of learning to have no mind of returning: they put Christ
in mind therefore as concerning a bodily care, requiring him to se^d the people
to the towns there about to bye them vittayles. B. The which request made by
ye Disciples, proceeded not so much of charity, as it did of sloth, for ye
Christ seemed tedious unto them But there was such earnest affection and
fervent desyer on both sides, namelye, in Christ to teach and in the people to
here, yt it seemed necessary to ye Disciples to move Christ to send away the
people, when they saw that neither time, nor place, was regarded. C. But
Christ did not without good purpose even to the last hour differ the
miracle which before in his mind he determined to show: for he meant thereby.
First to make his Disciples have a consideration of the miracle by little and
little, to the end they might reap the greater profit.

Secondely that the circumstaunce of the time it self, might teach, that
although he did not prevent the necessity of those that are his, and
presentely help them: yet notwithstanding that he never forsakes them, but
has always help in store, which he plainly declares, even at the last
pinche, when all help seems to be gone.

16 But Jesus said unto them. They have no need to go away. Give ye them to
eat.

Jesus said unto them A. Our savior Christ knew (as says saint John) what
he would do, but he revealed not his intent and purpose by and by to his
disciples, John. 6.
to the end he might make a way by little and little, and prepare their
minds to the miracle which he determined to do. Give ye them to eat. A. He
commands that to be done by his disciples, which he him self determined to
do, and which (by them) was impossible to be done: But he gives them this
commandment, to the end they knowing the impossibillite of the thing
(namely, to feed so many people with so littel meat) the miracle might be the
more wonderful unto them. He knew that his disciples, as yet, were but of a
weak and imperfecte faith, and that they did not as yet sufficiently consider
the power of god: therefore he seeks diligentely that the miracle which he
was about to show, might be made evident unto them, to the end the power of
God being noted in the same, they might be the more confirmed, and
strengthened in faith, and so more apt and mete to every work pertayninge to
the kingedome of God.

chap. 6.
Our savior Christ therefore spoke these things to his disciples to try them,
as more plainly appears by the words of S. John. A. But Mark says that the
disciples made answer to this commandment of Christ saying, chap. 6.
Shall we go and bie two hundred penyworth of bred, and geeue them to eat? To
the which saying agrees the answer of Phillip: two hundred peniworth of
bread are not sufficient, that every man might take a little. As if he
should have said, If we should bestow all the money that we have, which is
but two hundred pence, yet would it not be sufficient for so great a multitude.
Two hundred pence were worth twenty of our french crowns, as affyrmeth
Budeus. And in the time of Budeus, a French crown was worth five and thirty of
our french shyllinges which we call twopeny pieces. Here is to be noted the
redines of the Apostelles, which were ready and willing to bestow so great a
sum of money, being (as it is lykely) all that they had, for the use of the
people.

17 They said unto him: we have here but five loaves and two fysshes.

A. The lyk words has the Evangelist Luke. But Mark has these words: He
said unto them, How many loves have ye? go and look. And when they had
searched, they said five, and two fishes. They seem thus to answer, because
a boy which was among them had those loves the which boy, whether he
pertayned to any of the disciples, or whether he brought those loaves to sell
(as commonly, where multitudes are they do) it is uncertain. The words of
the Evangelist John, ar these. One of his disciples Andrew, Cha^
Simon Peter's brother says unto him, Here is a lad which has five barley
loaves and two fisshes: but what are these among so many.

28 He said, bring them hither to me.

Our savior Christ here presently goes about to confyrme that which he
had said before, namely, that to the sekers of the kyngedome of God and the
righteousness thereof, Matt^
all things necessary should be at hand. C. But we must not look, that
Christ should always after this manner feed the hungerye, and those that
fast: God (...) the ha^
Notwithstanding it is most certain and sure that he will never suffer
those that are his to want the necessary food of life, but will reach out
his hand from heaven, to help their necessity, at such time as it shall
seem unto him profitable. But they which desire to have Christ their
nourisher, must here learn not to seek for exquisyte and dayntie delycates,
but must hold them selves contented with the barley loaf.

Moreover Christ did not feed this people miraculously, but in the time of
great necessity: neither did he feed them by and by so sone as they hungered.
Therefore we learn here not to appoint him the time and hour to feed us, when
we are hungery, but to wait his leisure, till such time as he shall think it
conueniente, to help our need.

19 And he commanded the people to sit down on the grass, and he took the
five loves and the two fysshes, and lift up his eyes toward heaven, and
blessed. And when he had broken the^, he gave the loves to his disciples, and
his disciples gave them to the people.

And he commanded the people to sit. M. The Evangelist Luke says that Christ
commanded the disciples to cause the people to sit down by fifties in a
company. C. The On the grass. A. There was (says S. John) much grass in the
place.

M. Let us therefore note how great, and wonderful things, God works and
brings to pass in gross matter, ^wer ^iste.
and in things (to our judgment) very base: this barley bread feast which
was made upon the grass, had a greater show of the dyuine majesty and power
of God, then all the kings tables and feasts in the world.

And lift up his eyes toward heaven B. The custom of Christ, in praying, was
to lift up his eyes as apereth in the xi. and xvii. chapters of John. ^es ge^
unto
By the which external gesture he declared that he received all things of
the father, and that thanckes for all things, ought to be rendered unto him:
And blessed. C. Blessing, in this place, as in other places, is oftentimes
taken for giving of thanckes, A. as appears by the words of John, who,
instede of that which the other three Evangelists say, he blessed, has, When
he had given thanckes. But Luke addethe the pronoune saying, he blessed them,
insteede of he gave thanks to God for the loves and fisshes, which he gave
unto him in a moment to feed the multitude.

C. By the which exaumple Christ teaches us that we can not in a pure, holy,
and Godly manner eat our meat, unless we give thanckes unto God, at whose
hands we receive the same. Therefore sayncte Paul says, 1. These. 4.
that what so ever meats are given unto us, are sanctified by the word, and
by prayer. By the which he declares that brutishe beastelye men, which
neither by faith bless God, nor celebrate the same by geuynge thanks, do by
their infidelity pollute and defyle that which by nature is pure and clean:
and moreover that they them selves, by the meat which they stuff and
thruste into their bellies are defiled and corrupted, because nothing to the
unfaithful is holy or clean. Christ therefore prescrybed unto those that
are his, a true and godly manner of eating, Titus. 1.
least they should by wicked sacrilege profane them selves, and the
benefytes of God also. And trewely this admonition is so much the more to be
noted, because we se at this day the greatest part of men to feed them selves
after the manner of brute beasts. Luke. 24.


And when he had broken them. M. The breaking of bread, was so common and
usual with Christ, that by the same he was known to the two disciples as
they were goinge to Emaus. This manner of breaking of bread, was very
fatherlyke and commendable among the elders of old time, as it is hitherto in
many places, and after the same sort, best beseminge and belonginge unto
Christ, by whom we are all fed. Furthermore this breaking of bread has in
it self a sign or token of communication, or participation, so that the
word (breaking) does often sygnifye to deuyde, as appears by this place of
the Prophet, Esaias. 58.
Break thye loaf to the hungerye.

For a loaf can not refreshe many without it be broken and divided. And by
this means it answers and is agreeable to the mystery of communicatyng the
body of the lord, 1. Cor. 10
the Apostell saying, The bread which we break, is it not the
participation of the body of the lord? Not that she body of Christ is therefore
said to be broken, because it has in it self some cut, but because it is
made communicabile, that is, apt and mete to be participated and received of
many. The Apostel Paul says in an other place in ye person of Christ, 1. Cor.
11.
This is my body, which is broken for you. Chap. 29.
Instead of the which S. Luke has, which is given for you.

He gave the loaves to his disciples. C. This our savior Christ did to the
end the wonderful increase and abundance might grow in the hands of his
disciples, as they were distrybutinge the same, that they thereby might be the
ministers of the divine power of Christ For, lest it should seem a small matter
to be only eye witnesses of the miracle, he made them to feel (as it were)
his divine power with their hands. He could have showed a great heap of
bread, in so much that all men might have seen in a moment the great
increase: the which thing he did not, yet notwithstanding he would not have
the miracle hyd. The lord does not any thing in vain. for he will have his
miracles known, but so notwythstandinge that the wicked may remain blind:
furthermore, that there may be some place left unto faith, which should be
none at all, if that faith should be adjoined to sense and corporal felyng,
when as the eyes should be occupied in beholdinge the power of God which is
perceived, and received chiefly by faith. And as he increased the loaves in
the hands of the disciples, so he increases his blessinge by the ministry of
his servants: he gives plenty of sede to the sower, 2. cor, 9.
and increases his gifts in our hands.

Whenever therefore we seek to help one an other, God blesses the labors
of his servants
let us be well assured that God does bless our labor.

And his disciples. C. The disciples without delay, obeyed the commandment
of Christ, although the thing which he commanded might seem ridiculouse
They might have thought in their minds, What shall it profit to bring five
loaves to so many thousand men? specially when Phillip had said before, Two
hundred peniworth of bread is not sufficient for every man to take a lyttel.
And an other of the disciples said, But what are these among so many?
Notwithstanding they obey and distrybute the loaves at the commandment of
Christ to the multitude being set down. By this exaumple let us learn to
obey the lord, (...) g^^^ (...)
although there be no hope of good success in those things that we take in
hand, let us show our obedience, let us leave the success unto the lord,
and not take upon us more wisdom then becomes us.

20 And they did all eat, and were sufficed. And they gathered up of the
fragmentes that remained, twelve baskettes full.

And they did all eat. M. These things are spoken to commend the power of
christ and to set forth the miracle, least any man should think, that all
did not eat of these loaves, or that all which did eat were not satisfied.
And they gathered up of. The Evangelist John says, When they had eaten enough,
chap^
he says unto his disciples, Gather up the broken meat which remains: that
nothing be lost. And they gathered it together, and filled.xii. basketsful with
the broken meat of the five barley loves, which broken meat remained unto them
that had eaten. Ple^^ rich^ bles^ lord.
In the which we se the richesse of the glory of God, by the which he so
fedeth those that are his, that they are not only satisfied therewith, but also
have a great overplus remaining unto them. We are also here taught to beware
that we lose not the re^naunte of those good things, with the which we are
fed. C. When as therefore the fragmentes after the satisfying of so great a
multitude were more by twenty foulde, then that which was set before them at
the first, the miracle must needs seem excellent and wonderful. for all men
understood and well perceived, that the fode which they had, was not only made
of nothing by ye power of Christ, for ye present use: but also that he would
provide it need should require for the time to come.

Now let us gather the sum of the whole miracle. In this it differs not from
other miracles, namely that in it, Christ declared his deuyne power to be
joined with his beneficence or liberalitye. We have also by this miracle a
confyrmacion of that sentence (as we should even now) by the which our
savior Christ exhorts us to seek first the kingdom of God, (...) 6.
promisinge that all other things whereof we have need shall be given unto us.

For if he have a care of those, which but at a sudden motion only come unto
him, how should he not have a great care to help us, if we seek him with
a constant mind. He suffers truly (as we said before) those that are his,
sometimes to hunger, notwithstanding he never leaves them destitute of his
help. In the mean time, he has good cause why he should not help us, but
in matters of extremity. Admyt that Christ came, to bring not only spiritual
life unto the world, but also that he was sent of the father to nourishe and
feed men's bodies, for the abundance of all good things are committed unto him,
so that he is the lyuelye well springinge from the father of life. Therefore
saint Paul gives thanckes unto God for his grace, (...) 1
which is given by Jesus Christ.

And again he teaches us in all things to give thanckes unto God by Jesus
Christ. (...) 5.
Neither is this quallity only proper to his eternal Diuinitye, but the
father also has appointed unto us a steward or dispensator, by whose hand
he voutchsafeth to feed us. For although we do not see daily miracles with
our eyes, yet notwithstanding Christ does no less declare his power now in
feedinge us, than he did then by miracles. And truly we do not read that he
used new means so often as he went about to make any feast. Wherefore it
shall be a preposterous desyer for any man importunatelye to seek to have meat
brought unto him by any unlawful and extraordinarye mean. For although God
does not now at this day feed five thousand men with five loaves, yet
notwithstanding he cease not most myraculouslye to feed all the world in
the which there are an infinite number of thousands contained. This truly is a
Paradox or sentence contrary to the opinion and expectacion of diverse, namely
that man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceadeth out of
the mouth of God. Deuteronomy. 6.
For we are so tied to external means, that nothing is more hard unto us,
then to depend upon the providence of God.

Hereuppon comes such care, fear, and distrust, when we have not food in
a redynes. But if a man way all things indifferently, he shall be constrained
to behoulde the blessing of God in all meats and drinckes. But those things
which are myraculouse and wonderful, Miracles are not wonderful unto us
because we see them daily.
by reason of daily use and custom, are of no reputacion. For what is he, so
dull, that behouldeth not the yearelye increase of Corn, when as of every
grain that is sown of wheat, there proceadeth twentye, yea fortye? how
unthankful is he which considers not, how that by the blessing of God it
comes to pass, that we have from year to year plentye of bread and
drink, and yet notwithstanding at every years end there remains
sufficient for seed, and our garners still replenished with store?

21. And they that did eat were about five thousand men, beside women and
children.

M. To make the miracle more euidente and plain, the Euangelyste says not
they which were present: but they which did eat were about five thousand me^,
beside women and children. The which number of women and children is thought
to be no less, then the men, unless women were as curious and nyse then as
they be now a days.

22. And straighte way Jesus made his Disciples to get up into a ship, and to
goo before him unto the other side while he sent the people away.

And straight way Jesus made C. Here we have a preparatiue as it were to ye
other miracle: now the time of sailing is appointed, that afterward occasion
to work the miracle might be offered. It was necessary that the Dysciples
should be compelled or forced to goo, because they would never forsake him, and
go any whyther but against their wills.

By ye which they declare how great credit they have in him when against
their wills they harken to his will, and obey his commandment. And truly at
the first it might seem very absurd unto them, that their Master should
tarrye alone in a deserte place, and specially the night drawing on. Therefore
the Dysciples by this their redines in obeying their heavenly Master,
(notwithstanding other probable lets) deserve great praise.

For we do not exactelye and truly obey God, unless we simplely follow
whatsoever he commands though it be never so much contrary to our mind
and sense. God truly has ever some excellent end of reason of his doyngs, but
he hides it very often from us for a time, to the end we might wholly depend
upon his will and pleasure. After this manner Christ constrained his Dysciples
to get up into a ship, to frame them to a rule of diligence and obedience:
and also to make a way thereby and to take occasion to work the miracle
following.

While he sent the people away B. Christ knowinge that they would take him
and make him a king, to take away all suspicion and occasion of such matter,
he sends them away from him and refrayneth their company, for they were a
sufficient multitude to begin a rebellion. Here we are admonished to beware
not only of the evil it self, Occasions of evil ought to be avoided.
but also of all occasions and coollers of evil, least we give occasion to
be suspected of evil: specially of rebellion and sedition: ye which
suspicion, neither the Prophets, neither Christ, nor the Apostells could
avoyde: wherefore we have great cause to be circumspecte.

23. And when the people were sent away, he went up into a mountain to
pray alone. And when night was come, he was there himself alone.

And when the people were sent away C. It is very lykely that the Son of
GOD who was not ignoraunte of the tempest to come, did not neglecte or forget
in his prayers the safegarde of his Dysciples: notwithstanding it is maruayle
why he does not rather seek to preuente the danger, then to give himself
to prayer. But to the end he might fulfill all the parts of a mediator,
Chri^ and (...)
he declares himself truly to be God and Man, and sheeweth forth
documentes of both natures so far as time, place, and occasion suffered. When
he had all things at his will and pleasure, he declared himself to be a man
by prayer: neither did he pray cool leredly or faynedly, but faithfully, to
set forth the sincere affection of his human love toward us. In this part,
his deuyne majesty after a sort rested, the which not withstanding at ye
length in his due order declared it self. To pray alone M. In that he
gets him to prayer, we are taught whether we ought to flee if we fear
yt any thing shall not come to good success. The of p^^
Whereas it is said yt he went alone and into the mountain, we have an
example, by the which the nature of prayer is expressed, and what place it
loves. C. Therefore in assendinge up to the mountain he sought a commodity,
namely that he might pray free from all disturbance and noise. We are not
ignoraunte how soon the ardente heat of prayer is assuaged by every small
disturbance and let. And although our savior Christ had not this vice, yet
notwithstanding by his example he mente to admonish us, to use diligently all
helps, which might lose our minds from all the snares of this world yt we
being vntangeled, might eleuate our selves to the heaven. And to this use, the
desarte place serves very much, Sc^^ praye^
that they which prepare them selves unto prayer, having God only to be their
witness with them, may the better attend and weight upon him, may the more
deeply pour out their hearts before him, and the more diligently examine them
selves. Notwithstanding we must note that there was no Law prefixed and
appointed by him as though it were not lawful to pray but in a solitarye
place, for saint Paul commands us to lift up pure hands every where. 1. T^^
And Christ himself sometimes prayed before men: yea he appointed his
Dysciples to pray when they came together. But that lybertye of prayer in all
places, lets not us also to have our secret prayers in desarte places at
due and convenient time. (...) may ^d in all (...) ^^on.
Some man may here demand whether Christ had need of this prayer which he
uses, which being ye son of God knows all things. ^were.
Surely if a man esteem and judge carnally of this thing he will laugh: but let
us more religiouslye, and reuere^tly consider of Christ, namely that he
suffered willingly all the pains of human nature. For as he was man he shut
his eyes, that he might give place to humane sense. If we have respect to his
dyuine nature, he could by no means be tempted. For how could he have been
tempted of Satan unless he had after a certain manner hidden the force of his
deuyne nature? Therefore he did so hyde the same, that by his human nature
he might feel himself pressed, and that he could have no other refuge the^
unto god. And although we confess two natures so to be conjoined in him and
that he is but one person, yet notwithstanding they must be distinguished
that we may perceive the human nature to be secret from the Godheade. He
prayed therefore earnestly, he prayed (I say) being constrained by necessity.
Let us learn therefore by this example that the chief exercise of our faith is
to pray unto God, and to remove all impedimentes that might hinder the same.

And when night was come he was. M. Before in the fiftene verce, the
Euangeliste said, and when the even drew on, his disciples came to him saying.
etc. These words were spoken before Christ had fed ye people: and now the
Evangelist seems to repete the same again. But by evening in that place we
must not understand one hour of the day, but all that part which is from
three of the clock in ye after noone, until it be dark night: for ye evening
has his beginning and his end, so that we may well call that the Evening
which falls either in the end or in the beginning of the same.

24. But the ship was now in the myddest of the Sea, and was tossed with waves:
for it was a contrary wind.

B. The Lord tarried til the tempest arose, and tlil it was very fearful. C.
that the Disciples being tossed with danger in ye same for a time, might at
the last receive the help brought unto them with more joyful minds. For
about mydnight or about the dark time in the night, there arose a contrary
wynd.

25. And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them walking on the
Sea.

And in the fourth vvatch C. That is Christ appeared three hours before the
Sun rising. The arms of the Dysciples were not more weryed with rowinge, then
their faith was assaulted with terrors. B The night was divided into four
parts which were called watches, because so often, the night watches were
changed. Exodus 14.
The fourth watch was the morning watch, of the which there is mention made in
the fourtenthe of Exodus. God oftentimes tyreth his servants to the utmost.
This is a singular and comfortable example, by the which Christ declares
that although he brings not present help to those that are his, yet
notwithstanding he will not forsake them, but will help in due time.
Howsoever these Dyscyples of Christ labored in danger, they perish not but
are preserved. Let us leave therefore that years, months, days, hours, and
moments are in his power, and let us not prescribe unto him any time, but
rather let us (as the Apostell says) tarrye the Lords leisure. VValking on the
Sea M. In that Christ walked upon the rough, boisterous, and raging sea, it
was then an argument, that he was Lord of the swelling sea: the which sea was
so unable, to destroy his Dysciples, that it was constrained for all the
raging, to give way unto Christ to come unto them.

We have therefore such and so excellent a Lord, even the Lord our God,
which notwithstanding all the seas and swelling floods of this world will
deliver us. So great is his power.

26. And when the Dysciples savve him vvalking on the Sea, they were troubled
saying, it is some spyrite, and they cried out for fear.

And when the Dysciples savve A. Here it follows how the Dyscyples were
afraid and amazed at the sight of Christ.

Saying it is some Spirit S. The Greek translator, has translated the
Greek word Phantasma into the Latin word Spectrum, which betokens an
Image or figure in a man's imagination. Whereupon in the English translation
we find this word spirit. C. But when as necessitye did greatly urge the
Disciples to look and long for their masters presence, it was a token of to
much lumpishe dullness to be troubled with the sight of him, as with the sight
of a spyrite. For this cause the Euangelyst Mark says, that their hearts were
blinded, and that they remembered not the five loaves For by that miracle they
were sufficiently taught yt Christ was not destitute of Divine power to help
those that are his: and that he carefullye sought to help, whereas necessitye
required.

Therefore now they well deserved to have their gross dulnes reprehended, saying
they called not to mind that heavenly power which being sheewed but the day
before, should have remained fresh before their eyes. It is most certain and
true that they were amazed by reason of their forgetfulness, not consideringe as
they ought the miracles that were so latelye done before by the which they
should have greatly profited. But their blyndnes is chieflye reproved, because
they applied not their minds to consider the deity of Christ of the which, the
multiplying of ye five loaves, was a sufficient confirmation and proof.
Notwithstanding the words of the Euangelyste Mark, express Man's mind is
blind.
The which thing was not only noted of the Euangelyst to the setting forth of
the greatness of the fault, but also to ye end we being admonished of ye
blindness of our minds, should crave new eyes at the hand of God. It was
truly (as we said even now) to brutishe a kind of ignorance, not to feel ye
palpable power (as it were) of God. Notwithstanding because all mankind is
infected with the same disease, the Euangelyst Mark endeavors himself to
make mention of this blyndnes, to the end we might know yt it is no new thing
to see men blind in the manifest light of Gods works, until they be
illuminated from above, as says Moses: De^
Hitherto the Lord has not given thee a heart to understand. And although by
the name of heart, the will or affection of man is oftentimes noted, yet
notwithstanding in that place of Mark and in this sentence of Moses, it is
taken for the mind of man. Bu. Furthermore, that spirits are oftentimes set
before the eyes of men, it is no vain opinion. Man truly, S^ an^
oftentimes imagines through the corrupt humors of his brain, that he sees
those things, which in deed he sees not, and which are not at all: but
sometimes, and not sildome, certain spirits appear unto men, not without the
just judgment of God, by the mynistery both of good and evil spirits,
instructing and admonishinge men, or else accusing, and laying violence on the
unbelieving, and lovers of darkness: It is commonly said that spirits do
appear unto men: and because they do oftentimes hurt those to whom they do
appear, and yt for the imbecillitye of their faith, therefore many are afraid
of spirits. This trouble therefore which came through the opinion and
persuation of the sight of a spirit did greatly batter and shake the mynds
of the Disciples. For so it happens unto us oftentimes: that we are vexed
and disquieted with vain fear, when we dread the befall of some evil which
is far from us: or could not hurt us if it were present before our face.

The self same Apostels that we read of here, Luk^
when they saw Christ to be risen again from death, thinking that they saw a
spirit, were wonderfully troubled and afraid. F^^ tim^ aw^ ^ces (...)
Fear oftentimes bereueth and spoyleth men of their senses, it blinds or
obscureth the eye sight, it dulleth the ear and it drowneth memory. The
darkness of the night might help to excuse the Apostels: notwithstanding in yt
they thought Christ to be a spirit, it is to be attributed to their
ingratitude and unbelief, as it is said before. C. So oftentimes it happens
unto us. A For how comes it to pass that we know not God to be nere unto
us? surely because we know not, ^itude (...) us to (...) God.
but forget the benefits yt he bestows upon us. Who feels not the power
of GOD which by so many ways and means he has revealed? If we were so
thanckefull as we ought to be, we should have a thousand buckelers against
the temptacions of Satan. But because we remember not the mercy of God, this
thing that Matthew speaks of hapeneth unto us, that is to say, we persuade
our selves we see spirits, whereas God goes about to bless us with his
benefits. We should never be quayled or overthrown by any temptacion, if we
would remember every hour the benefyts which God bestows upon us. But we in
the manifest light refuse to see.

And they cried out for fear A. By this outcrye they manifestly declare and
testifye that they are beset with vehement terror and grievous fear.

27. But strayghte way Jesus spoke unto them saying: be of good cheer, it is
I, be not a frayde.

But straight way Jesus spoke C. Because Christ is not acknowledged to be a
delyuerer, when in deed he offers himself, he calls unto his Dysciples
by word of mouth to the end they might know him, whose ingratitude and
unbelief he forgeueth: for he comfort them saying, Be of good cheer A.
That is to say doubt not, but believe that I your Lord and Master speak
unto you.

Be not a frayde, C. As if he should have said, after that they knew him to be
present with them, they had good occasion to hope well: but because terror had
now possessed their minds, he reproves the same least it should hinder, and
stay their trust, not that they could be quight void of fear, and have
nothing but mere joy and gladness: but because it was necessary to mittigate
and assuage the fear, ^t^ ^e
least yt thereby their trust should quight be overwhelmed. And although ye
voice of the Son of God is a deadly voice, and his presence terrible to the
reprobate, yet notwithstanding to the Godly it works another manner of
effect. For in them it works peace of conscience, and a sure trust and
confidence, by the which we overcome fleshly terrors and fears. But hereby it
comes to pass that blind tumults, and hurlye burlyes, do molest and trouble
us: because we being unthankful and ungodly, do not set before us the
buckeler of the infinite benefits of God bestowed upon us, the which being
well wayed and considered are sufficient to guard, and defend us. This voice of
Christ was familiar and known to his Dysciples because they were daily
co^uersant with him. Luke 24.
The like words he spoke unto them after his resurrection saying, it is I, be
not afraid. And now although it were hye time to help when Christ appeared,
yet notwithstanding the tempest ceased not by and by, until ye Dysciples
were better come unto themselves both to desyer help, and also to hope for
his grace and sauoure.

And here we must note, that the Lord does oftentimes upon good
consideration, differ the healthful help which he has always in his hand.

28. Peter answered him and said: Lord if it be thou, bid me come unto thee
on the water.

Peter ansvvered him A. Such was ye rash zeal always of Peter. He desires
to be with Christ, nothing regarding ye imbecility of his faith.

Lord if it be thou C. The condition which Peter adds here plainly declares
that his faith is not yet ripe. Lord if it be thou (says he) bid me come
unto thee on the water. Why does Peter speak so doubtfullye when he hard the
voice of Christ, and knew by his voice that it was he?

Surely in so small and weak a faith the fervent desyer of a rash mind
bursteth forth. For he should have measured himself according to his measure,
and should rather have desyered of Christ ye increase of his faith the which
being granted he might at the length have gone over sea and mountains: but
now without the wings of faith he rashly desires to flee, and having small
credit to the voice of Christ, he desyereth to walk upon the water as upon
the hard ground. Notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that this affection
sprange of a good beginning: but because it slyded into a vicious excess, and
wicked extremity, it has lost the praise of goodness. And herevppon it came to
pass that Peter received the just recompense of his rashness. Rash zeal.
Wherefore the faithful are taught by this example to beware of to much have.
If the Lord call us to any thing it is our parts to run bouldly: but he
which runs beyond yt mark, and passes his race, shall feel at the length
by evil success what it is to go beyond his bounds. M It had been good for
Peter that he had had experience of the imbecility of his faith, and of the
present power of the Lord, and that he had learned to think modestly of
himself, not in extollinge himself above others, as though he had played the
man, and done some notable act. Truly his desyer seems very preposterous:
he would ru^ne beyond the Mark, when as he had not well wayed his
imbecillitye and imperfection. We must not desyer more then we ought,
neither must we take those things in hand which excede our strength, specially
when there is no need, but every man must count with him self what, and
how much he has received of the Lord.

29. And he said come: And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he
vvalked on the water to go to Jesus.

C. It may here be demanded why the Lord granted to Peter's request: for by
this means he seems to allow it. Answer.
This question may easily be answered, that the Lord sometimes does very well
forese in denyinge those things which we ask, and sometimes for the best
he does grant our request though it be not expedient, that we having
experience and trial of our own folly, may yield our selves unto him. So in
time he frames his faithful servants to sobrietye and modestye, in yelding
unto them more then is necessary.

Furthermore in that this profited Peter and the rest, it does profit us also
at this day. The power of Christ does more brightly shine in the person of
Peter, in that he followed Christ upon the water, then if Christ had walked
alone upon the same. Peter's infirmity is common to al men.
For Peter being come upon the sea, and saying his own infirmitye was
co^trayned to acknowledge the power of God, and to call unto the Lord for
help. So that Christ, notwithstanding his infirmity) most gently stayed him,
and would not suffer him to be drowned.

The like happens daily unto us: for as Peter began to syncke so soon as
he was possessed with fear: even so the flowinge and vain cogitacions of the
flesh, herevppon bring to pass that we syncke even in the midest of our
business: Notwithstanding the Lord bears with our weakness, and reaches forth
his hand, that the water might not altogether ouerwhelme us.

He vvalked on the water to go to Jesus. M. This place confuteth the
Maniches, The of (...) ^chies.
and such like heretics which denied the truth of the human nature of
Christ, saying yt his body was not a true body, but a fantastical body. Thus
they reasoned to vphoulde their error: it pertayneth not to a true and perfect
body to walk on the sea: but Christ walked upon the sea: therefore he had no
true or reeall body, but a fantastical body. These men consider nothing
more to be in Christ then in a bare man, as though it were impossible to God
to help a human body from sinking in the sea. But what say they unto this
that Peter at the commandment of Christ walked upon the sea? Why do they
not consider that he which caused Peter to walk upon the sea with a human
body, can much more easlye himself do the like? They should way the power of
Christ, if not in his own deed, yet at least by the deed of Peter.

30. But when he saw a mighty wind, he was afraid: and when he began to
sincke, he cried saying Lord save me.

But when he savve a mighty, B. In that Peter walked upon the water, it is
to be attributed unto his faith, F^^ ^reth^ ^ger.
to the which al things are possible: but now that he begins to drown his
distrust is suffie^tlye bewrayed. For as by faith we overcome all dangers, D^
ge^^ da^^
so by distrust we faint and sincke in the smalest peril we come unto The
beginning therefore of Peter's synckinge was his distruste, which had more
regard to the boysterousnes of the wind then to the force of Christ's word, by
the which he said, come. Furthermore this sinking of Peter was a punishment of
his unlawful petition. Lord save me C. Peter seeing the evil success of his
rashness, he appealeth to the mercy of Christ. Wherefore let us (although we
are worthily punished) come unto Christ that he may have mercy upon us, and
help us, how little soever we deserve the same.

31. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him and said
unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

And immediatelye Jesus M. Here we have an example of the help of God, how
ready the same is to deliver from peril all such as call upon him. That
which happened unto Peter happens oftentimes unto us, for when soever we are
delivered from peril and danger, and from affliction: what other thing is
done the^ this that we read of here. Thus said the Prophet David, (...). 18.
^firmi^ borne (...) at the (...) god.
he shall send down from the heyght to fetch me, and shall take me, out of
many waters. The Lord does always bear with our infirmity, when we fly unto
him how soever we deserve to be forsaken. O thou of little faith Jesus teaches
Peter that the danger which he feared, came not of the waves, or of the wind,
but of the weakness of his faith, and therefore putting out his hand to help
him he rebukes him and says. O thou of little faith why did thou doubt?
For it is not sufficient to have a vehemente faith for a time, but we must
have a constant and continual faith: neither must we have only respect to the
greatness of the danger, and what we are able to do, but we must have respect
what we are able to bring to pass by constant faith in Christ. C. Wherefore
Christ saves Peter so gentlye, that notwithstanding he winketh not at his
fault, for he openly condemns the weakness of his faith.

^tion.
Notwithstanding it may be demanded whether every fear does argue and betoken
a defecte or want of faith, for the words of Christ seem to prove that
there is no doubting or fear where faith rayneth. Answer.
It may be answered that doubting which is directlye contrary to faith is
here reprehended by Christ. It may be that a man may doubt, and not offend,
namely when the word of God is not against him, by the which he might be
persuaded. But the case of Peter was otherwise, who being instructed by the
commandment of Christ, and having all ready experience of his power, swerued
notwithstanding from that double foundation and ground, to vain and perverse
fear. M. We are taught therefore by this that we have need of constant faith
in the midst of the raginge floods of this world, which threaten destruction
unto us, when we make have to com unto Christ. Peter took this journey in hand
being dangerous with a great faith and feruente heat, but before he came
half way he was cooled, he continued not as he began. Perseverance and
constancy must be in him that follows Christ.
A. Wherefore let us pray unto ye Lord to geeue unto us not only the
earnestnes of faith, but also a constancye and perseverance to continue in the
same to the end.

32. And when they were come into the ship the vvind ceased,

B. That is to say when the Lord Jesus and Peter were come into the ship.

By the words of John which says: Then would they have received him into
the Ship, and immediatlye the Ship was at the Land whyther they went: it
might seem to be gathered that Jesus went not into the Ship at all, were it
not for Mathewe and Mark, which by express words affirm the same.

A. Thus therefore the words of John, and the other Euangelystes may be
united, as if they should have said. Then would they have received him into ye
ship and he went into the Ship to them, and when Christ and his Disciples
were in the Ship together the wind ceased.

M. Here we learn that there is no storm or wind so boisterous, but that
Christ is able to quiet and calm the same. For it is he alone which can send
and maintain as well the external as ye internal peace of his Church, the
which he has declared oftentimes.

33 Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying: of a
truth thou art the son of God.

Then they that were in the A. Now it follows what came to pass after the
finishing of this excellent miracle. They that were in the ship seeing ye power
of Christ and the present help which he brought in so great trouble came
and worshipped him saying, Of a truth thou art the son of God

C. This was spoken not only of the Disciples, but also of the Mariners, and
others that were in the ship. They therefore which as yet had not given
sufficient credit unto him, now at a sudden confess him to be the son of
God, by the which voice they attribute unto him the honor of the Messiah. For
although this high misterye was not commonly known, how that the son of
God should be revealed in the flesh: yet notwithstanding they had learned out
of the Prophets, ye he which should come to redeem mankind, should be
called the son of God, and they which celebrate the glory of Christ with
this title, sufficiently declare that they believe in Christ. Miracles served
to set forth the glory of God.
M. Here we see that the miracles of Christ served to this use, namely to
testifye of the power of God, whereof he was the minister, although he by his
power wrought the miracles, by the which he moved men to behold the glory of
God. These things are to be noted against the false miracles yt are attributed
unto saints.

34. And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Genesareth.

C. The Evangelists speak here of that place which took the name, and was so
called of a certain lake: but we will not stand upon the denominatio^ of the
place, because it is no matter of importance.

35. And when the men of the place had knowledge of him, they sent out
messengers into all that country round about the coaste, and brought unto
him all that were sick.

A. Now ye miracle which was wrought upon the sea, brought his fame through a
great part of that Country, insomuch that all they which were touched with the
love of God, preached the glory of the son of God. C. The Euangelyst
therefore does testifye that the glory of Christ was not reveled by two or three
miracles alone, but that all that Country or part of Iewrye was filled with
many testemonyes, the fame whereof might easily come to Jerusalem and to other
Cities and Towns there abouts. Whereupon we gather how filthye and how
wicked the ingratitude of that countreye and people was, which maliciouslye,
and disdaynfullye shut their eyes at the manifest brightness of Gods glory: yea
which went about so much as in them lay to extinguishe ye same. But now it is
our parts in this so great a heap and multitude of miracles to acknowledge
wherefore and to what end Christ came, Chri^ Phis^
namely to be a Physician to heal all our disseases were they never so
incurable. And therefore it shall be good to remember that place of ye Prophet
Esaye which the Euangeliste Matthew alleged at the first: saying, Math^ Esay^
he took on him our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. And although he be
not on the earth at this day, yet notwithstanding it is most certain that
he sends those graces and blessings now from heaven, whereof he gave us a
visible documente, when he was on the earth. But because every man is infected
with all manner of disseases, until such time as he heal them, let us not
only offer our selves unto him, but also let us seek to bring others unto
him, which have need of the like health and remedy: A. as these men did which
Brought unto him all that were sick M. For this is the nature of love, The^
charit^
to have no man contented with his private fruishion of Christ, but to make
the same common also to his neighbors and brethren.

36. And besought him that they might toutche the hem of his vesture only. And
as many as touched it were made safe.

B. It is likely that these men were superstitious, when as they restrained the
grace of Christ to the toutchinge of his vesture: but thereby they defrauded
him of his due honor, when as they believed not the simplenes of his word to
be of sufficient power. But least he should quench the smoking flax, he
applies himself to their rudenes.

Notwithstanding here is no occasion offered, whereby they should please
themselves, which seek ye grace of god in word, or in garments when as S.
Paul plainlye says, (...). 2.
yt we ought not to conceive any thing of Christ unless it be worthy of his
spiritual and heavenly glory Their infirmity was to be borne withal for a
time, which not knowinge Christ to be God, sought to have a more perfect
knowledge of him. But now that he fills both heaven and earth with the odor
of his grace it is not meet that we should apprehend the saving health which
he offers from heaven with our eyes and hands, but with a pure faith. (...)
9.
A. As concerning the touching of the hem of Christ's vesture read the.ix.
Chapter before handled.

The.xv. Chapter.
THen came to Jesus Scribes and Phariseys (which were come from Jerusalem)
saying.
The^ came to Jesus Scribes Bu. In this Chapter ye Evangelist has written, as
concerning the traditions of men. C. The which Chapter is worthy to be noted,
because a vice no less hurtful the^ common is here reproved and condemned. We
see how wanton, and diverse, men be in worshipping and serving God. For they
invent and deuyse daily new worshippings: and the more wise that every man
would seem to be, the more he seeks to show forth the same in deuysing how
to serve God. We speak not of forreyners, but of the househould of the Church
of Christ, whom God specially has advanced to this honor, that he has
given them a plain and prescript rule of Godliness in their mouth. God has
prescribed and appointed how he will be worshipped of us, and in his Law he
has set down unto us perfect holiness. Notwithstanding, a greater sort take
upon them to add, and join to, many of their additions, as though it were a
light and small matter, yea a thing frivolous and vain to obey God and to
keep that which he commands. They which are of any auctoritye and credit,
Traditions thrust in by men.
thrust in their comme^ts and expositions to the same end and purpose, as
though they had somewhat more perfect then the word of God. Then by little and
little it grows to be a law and a cruel and violente rule: because when men
have once gotten license and auctoritye to command, they by and by precisely
and straytely require the observation of their laws, and will in no wise
suffer the least jot or titill of the same either by contempt, or by
negligence to be omitted. But in the mean time the worship of God (whose
beginning and head is obedience) is viciated and polluted with their vain
traditions. Yea their auctoritye is preferred before the auctoritye which
belongs unto God. So that by this means the common sort of people are
constrained violently, and tyrannicallye to apply their whole study unto
tryfles. But this place teaches first that Which were come from Jerusalem
Bu. As in these our days the schole of the Deuines, and the colleges of
Moonkes have their censors, and overseers of learning, which heretics call
inquisitors of evil manners: Scribes.
so that university of Jerusalem, and conuenticle of the Phariseys, had their
overseers and inquisitors of learning and Doctrine, which in this present
place are called Scribes, that is to say, lettered, learned, and
interpretoures of the Law. C. Notwythstanding for what purpose they came now
unto Christ, is not expressed: yet it is lykelye, that they being moved and
styrred by this fame, came to learn at his hands if that he might seem
unto them a fit master: and it may be that they were sent to spy and to view
the behavior of Christ. Bu So at ye first they sent messengers unto John
because (as they thought) he went about some new thing. John. 1.
C. But what soever the occasion of their coming was because they brought with
them a proud stomach and loftye countenance, the least offense might easly
exasperate and provoke them to byte Christ.

Whereby we may see how hard a thing it is to bring them unto sound doctrine
in whom there rayneth ambition and a desyer to rule: but specially such as are
adicted to ceremonies, who when they have a wonted use and custom to mayntaine
ye same will admit no newnes, but absolutely do condemn what soever is
unwonted. To be short there is nothing, neither can any thing be imagined more
imperious loftye and proud then these kind of men.

What these Scribes and Phariseys were we have showed before.

2. Why do thy Disciples transgress the traditions of the elders? for they
wash not their hands when they eat bread.

Why do thy Disciples M. Behold in what thing the envious Scribes and
Phariseys those holy ones which came from Jerusalem, begin to calumniate Christ
the teacher of verity and trothe. They find not falt here with the negligent
observing of the law of God, but for the violatinge of men's traditions they
accuse Christ. Neither do they say, wherefore do thy disciples transgress our
traditions, but the traditions of the elders, when as notwithstanding they had
more respect unto themselves then to the elders: but they seek to grieve and
burden Christ with the auctority of the elders. Papists allege traditions.
In like manner there are some at this day which continually obiecte the
fathers, the Church, and the counsels: as though the religion of Christian men
stood in the observation of men's traditions and as though the neglecters of
the same were enemies of the Church, and the kepers, friends. C. But seeing the
controversy stands upon human traditions, this question pertayneth nothing
at all to pollitique laws, the use and scope whereof pertayneth to another
end, then to determyne and appoint how God shall be worshipped. Wherefore seeing
that there is a difference of human traditions we must use a certain
distinction. Th^^ of tr^
For some of them are manifestly ungodly and wicked Cana of Gallilae to stand
after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, John ^
unless the ceremonye had been free, and not tied to any necessity: But here
consisted the fault, because they thought that with out wasshing of hands God
could not truly be worshipped. In the beginning the custom of wasshing of
hands was not brought up without some special pretense and meaning. We know
how severely the law of God requires external cleannes: not because the Lord
would have his seruau^ts occupied in the same, but to the end they should
diligently take heed and beware of all spiritual pollution and fylthe.
Moreover in wasshings, the law held a certain mean. But there start up
new-fangeled teachers, which thought yt they should not be counted wise
enoughe unless they added somewhat to the word of God: hereuppon there sprange
and flowed up certain wasshings, whereof the Law makes no mention at all. The
law makers themselves did not boaste that they invented and appointed any new
thing, but that they did only add certain cautions which should be means to
preserve the law of God. Ind^^ things not be necessa^
But by and by followed corruption, when yt the ceremonies brought in, began to
be thought part of ye worship of god: and also when necessity was thrust, into
things that had liberty, and voluntary choice, made a bondseruant. For God (as
it was said even now) would be worshipped according to his prescript word and
therefore no adding to his law is tolerable. For as he suffers the
faithful to have external rytes to themselves in the which they may exercise
themselves to godliness, so be will not suffer them to be myngled with his
word: as though in the^ religion were set and planted.

For they wash not their hands M. This forsooth is the transgression which
these holy hypocrites of Jerusalem reprehe^d and blame. A high tradition in
deed, to offend such worthy persons at ye breach thereof. B. But there is no
doubt, but that this was done by the assured dispensation of God, that ye
disciples should neglect this tradition before these find faults or
inquisitors, to the and Christ might have occasion offered unto him, to inuey
against human traditions. C. But the cause of the offense taken is more
plentifully declared by the Evangelist Mark saying. A. And when they saw
certain of his Disciples eat bread with common, ^^ke. 7.
(that is to say with unwashed hands) they complained: for the Phariseis, and
all ye Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat not, obseruinge ye
traditions of the elders. To be short the Scribes used many things, which
willi^gly they took upon them to observe: those were secundarye laws invented
of curious me^ as though the simple commandment were not sufficient. God
commanded all men to be washed yt had polluted them selves. This commandment
did extend to cups, to water pitchers, to garments, and to other implements
of househoulde, least they should toutche any unclean thing. But to mingle
to these new washings, was idell vanity and vain idleness. There was no cooler
wanting (as says S Paul) for the inuencions of me^ to have a show of
wisdom, but if they had rested themselves and been contented with the only love
of God, their modesty should much more have pleased him, then their scrupulous
carefulnes. They would take heed least any man should eat meat unawares being
unclean: but truly the Lord was contented and well pleased if men did pourge
those spots that were known. The order of washing was curiously urged of the
Jews.
For these cautions had no end, or mean, because men could scarce move their
finger, but some new blot or other should be found: but this corruption was
much more the worse, because it was cast into men's consciences as a religon, yt
he was giltye of pollutio^, which did not oftentimes wash his body with water.
In the common sort of people peradventure they would have borne the neglecting
of this seremonye: but because they had conceived such excellency of Christ and
his Disciples, they disdayned yt the rits ordained by their elders (the use
whereof was holy among ye Scribes) should be broken and not observed by them.
Popish holy water is made by this place.
Those Papists are deceived which compare their holy water, to ye wasshing
which the Jews used, and affirm it to be necessary, to wasshe away sin. But
and if this their holy water were lawful, and void of such corruptions, yet
notwtstanding ye necessity which they always urge is to be condemned: but
thus, men willingly put ye snare upon themselves. For the Diuill would never
have thus snared their consciences, unless men the^ selves of their own
accord, had compelled him to put the snare upon them. As for example, men are
fallen to such superstition, that every friday upon their own free will, they
abstain from flesh: and now there is come a law by the which they have
bound themselves, as to a thing of necessitye.

3 But he answered and said unto them, why do ye also trangresse the
commandment of God because of your own tradition?

Bu. Christ puts his adversaries to scilence, and makes them blanke by a
contrary question, or by a figure called Antistrepho^, making that to rebound
against themselves which they darted at him. C. But this answer consists
of two parts. The first part is (as occasion to make this Sermon, as follows
more orderlye in our Euangelyste Mathewe whom we have in hand.

When the Lord in like manner demands of the Scribes and Pharisees why they
did violate and transgress the law of God, for their traditions, he does
not as yet plainly clear his disciples of the fault objected against them, but
does only admonish, how unjust and preposterous their curious cauillation is.
They take it disdainfully that the precepts of men are not exactly kept: but
how much more grievously should they have taken the matter seeing that ye law of
God was less esteemed than the traditions of men, to the observation of the
which they wholly endeavored themselves? It appears therefore ye they are
rather ambitiously offended then upon any true zeal, when they go about to
prefer men before God. A. Therefore when Christ could not abide the glory of
his father to be transferred unto me^, The law of God ought to be preferred
before men's traditions.
nay rather to have God less regarded then men. E. he repelleth so malicious
a cauil, in a thing of no force, with a more sharp and nipping reprehension
saying, why do ye also transgress the comaundeme^t of God for the traditions
of men? B. To transgress the commandment of God, for the traditions of me^,
is to debillitate, and frustrate ye laws of God by teaching somewhat whereby
men may be withdrawn and hindered from obseruinge and keeping the laws of
God. And we must understand those to be men's traditions which are joined to
the Law of God, as though God had not prescribed unto us a certain and
perfect rule before. For pollitique laws ought not to be counted traditions:
for here in this Chapter mencio^ is made only of the worship of god. Theris no
Antithesis between the laws of god and pollitique laws. Furthermore the
Church has need of some discipline: Traditions of men tie the consciences of
gods people.
but those laws are taken out of the word of God neither do they tie ye
consciences of men. It cannot be therefore but that the commandments of God
must be violated and broken by men's traditions: yea, and that the decrees of
me^, should be preferred before ye ordinances of God. Have we not had
experience of this matter among the adversaries of Christ, Papists strain
^gnat and s^low af^
with whom abominable whoredom is but a tryfell counted: but to eat flesh
upon a friday, is a heinous offense.

4 For God commands saying: honor father and mother: and he that curses
father or mother, let him dye the death.

For God commands M. Because they should not think him to be an unjust
accuser he brings in evident prose of that which he had spoken. Honor
father and mother B. God commands ye the children should help the parents,
being either impotent by age, or in poverty, or in any other affliction: the
which thing Christ sufficiently declared, as may appear by the words of Mark
where it is said, Mark^
and so ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother: for the
which words this our Evangelist Matthew has in his 6. verce following these
words. 1. Ti^
And so shall he not honor his father and mother. After the same manner S Paul
says, honor those widows which are wydowes in deed.

And again, ye elders ye rule well are worthy of double honor. Bu. Honor
therefore in this place rather pertayneth to help, according to the nature of
the Hebrewe word then to salvation, and that ciuyll duty of life. C. In what
sense therefore Christ says ye the Phariseis do tra^sgresse the commandments
of God, it may easily be gathered by this text. They did not openly, or
manifestly abolish the co^mau^dements of God as to imagine that which he had
forbidden to be lawful: but covertly they did transgress in suffering the
commandments of God, careleslye to be omitted. It is a manifest and familiar
example which Christ brings, it is the commandment of God (says he) that
children should honor their parents. Child^ ought^ ^nour (...) Parc^^.
Because the holy oblations redounded to the profit of the priests, they
required the same so straytly, yt they counted him a more grievous offender
which willinglye offered not sumwhat, then he which dishonored his parents,
and defrauded them of their due right Finally that which by the law of God was
voluntary and free, according to the judgment of the Scribes and Pharisees,
was of more weight, then any of the commandments of God. Therefore so often
as we are so bente to observe the laws of men, yt we have no regard or care
to keep ye law of God, we are thought and judged to transgress the same.
Hereafter following he says that the Scribes and Phar. made the commandment
of God, of none effect, because of their own traditions: because they had
the people in such awe, and so bound to their will, that they might have no
leisure to read and study in the word of God: and because they were thought
to bestow their time well. which had learned all their traditions at their
fingers end: hereuppon came the liberty to sin. For he was thought to
break the law of God, without ponishement or offense, which had placed
holiness in any one tradition of the elders. Now let every man judge
vprightely and indifferently, whether this kind of wickedness be not much
more in the Papacy at this day, ^us of ^cy.
then it was in the time of the Jews. The Pope truly with all the rabble and
route of his clergy, deny not but that we must obey God: but when we come to
the matter in deed, they make the commandment of God of none effect for
their own traditions, for as we said before, whoredom and theft ar counted of
them venial sins but to eat a morsel of flesh on the friday, is deadly sin.

And he that curses father or mother, let him dye This is spoken to the end
we should know that it is no small or light matter to dishonor parents,
because the ponishement for such is severe and greuouse. The which saying does
not a little amplify the fault of the Scribes and Phariseys, in that so
fearful a thretnynge does nothing at all terrify, or move the^, for their
fault, and crime, in granting liberty to contemners of parents.

5 But ye say: every one shall say to his father and mother: what gift so
ever should have com of me, the same is turned unto thy proffite: and so shall
he not honor his father, or his mother.

6 And thus have ye made the commandemente of God of none effect, because of
your own traditions,

But ye say:. C. This is a defective kind of speech: which in Mark is more
full where it is added, And so ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father
and mother A. Some understand in this first sentence these words, Is without
fault.

C. Christ therefore teaches, that the Scribes and Phariseis do very wickedly
give liberty unto children to dishonor their parents, so that they offer
their volu^tary sacrifyce, which sacrifice might be omitted without offense to
God.

Neither must we take the words of Christ so, as though the Scribes should
keep men from all just obedience: But he means that the Scribes hunted so
earnestlye after their pray, that the parents could have no help or relefe
by their children B. As if Christ should have said, God, Honor dowe unto
parents.
to confyrme the law of Nature, commanded that every one should honor his
father and mother, and should releue them to their power, promising long life
and happiness to such as fulfill the same: and death likewise to the breakers
thereof. But you, being led by couetousenes, do turn that to your own
commodity and gain, which should be a help, succor, and relief to
parents, teachinge men that it is better, and more holy to meintaine the
duties of the temple, and to offer free will offeringes, then to help and
comfort the nedye parents being in poverty: and ye show a wile and craft,
by the which children may begile and deceive their parents, which crave their
help and relief: namelye that they should speak thus unto their father or
mother: Consider and way that the gift which I offer to the temple, is
profitable to thee. for if that, which is offered to God, the father of all, be
well bestowed: then shall the godliness of the child profit the parents. And
thus by craft, under the pretense of godliness, the father is forsaken, contrary
to the express commandment of God, that the prystes may have their luker
and gain. The Greek text (according to the very bare word) has, what gift
so ever comes from me, thou shall be helped, or may be helped. The which
sentence the interpretour resolves by a more fete se^ce (as it may seem)
thus, Comes of me, is not expressed, but understood, in the Gereke text.
What gift so ever comes of me, that is turned to thy profit. That is to
say, The gift which should come from me into Corban, (that is into the
treasure box of the temple,) that is altogether spente for thy use, and is
bestowed to help thee, so that the temple is defrauded of the right dew to
the same. Corban the box of the temple.
At the which saying, the parents being afraid, had rather starve then to to
be helped with the things consecrated to the temple. Hnd so shall he not
honor his. M. We must here note diligently that Christ does not simplely
blame the Phariseies, because they required gifts for the temple, and
voluntary offeringes of the people: but because they taught that those things
which were given to the temple were given unto God: and that therefore it was
far better to give unto the temple then to help the need of parents,
because that they which gave unto the temple, gave both to God and to their
parents: but that they which gave to their parents did not so. When as
therefore the superstition of men was such that they thought it far better to
give unto God, then to men, the tradition easily came to this pass, that now
althinges by little and littel must be given to the temple and vestry,
voluntary sacryfices must be paid, but in the mean time there were very few
which had respect to the necessity of their parents as they ought: and thus
they made the commandment of God, of none effect And thus have ye made the
commandent of God. etc.

A. For this matter read the exposition of the fourth verse goinge before.

7 Hypocrites, full well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying:

C. Now the lord proceeded farther with his reprehension. For he speaks now
of the cause it self, which he deuideth M. When he calls them hypocrites,
it is as much as if he should have said, You thyncke that it is unknown
unto me what you are, and what you seek for. Ye are counted for just men, and
Gods friends, because ye have always the worship of God in your mouths,
but I know what ye are, ye are hypocrytes, and counterfaytes. A. The like
reprehention we have in Luke. You are they which iustefie, your selves before
men, Lu^^
but God knows your hearts, because that which is excellent in the sight of
men is abominable in the syghte of God.

Full well did Esaias prophesye of you. M. Christ uses the testimony of the
prophet to declare that the hypocrisy of these men, is no new and unwonted
thing, but of long continuance: and that he is not the first which carped at
the^, but that they were reprehended of the prophets, whose earnest
reprehensions might declare that God was displeased with their hypocrisy
long before. C. Although therefore the prophet Esayas did not prophecy of
the time to come, but had respect only to the men that were in his age and
time. Christ notwithstanding says that this prophecy pertayneth unto these
Scrybes and Phariseies: because they were like unto those old hypocrites with
whom the prophet contended. M. For this prophecy of the Prophet is to be
understood of all manner of hypocrites, of the which stock these were the
branches. Furthermore this word, prophesied, in this place signifies, spoke
a great while ago, and a great while ago reproved you. A. Neither should it
seem strange unto us, that Christ in this place, and in nany other places
inueyeth so sharply against these hypocrytes. De^^ tra^^ per^^ ne^^
B. For there are no enemies of true godliness, more hurtful, then the fynders
out, and defenders of human traditions: and what are they when they have done
but vain hypocrytes? Wherefore Christ the defender of truth and perfect
godlynes, upon the gravity and authority of his spirit calls them by
their proper name, and severely reprehendeth them.

8 This people drawethe nigh unto me with their mouth, and honor me with
their lips, but their hearts are far from me.

C. The sum of this doctrine is, that the worship of God is spiritual,
^rituall ^ship be^^eth to (...).
and not grounded upon sprinckelinge of water, or in any other ceremony: and
that there is no other reasonable service of god, but that which he has
appointed by the rule of his word. A, To draw nigh unto God, is spoken after
the manner of the old law, when men came unto the temple of God, where he
showed him self to be present, upon the propiciatorie of the Arc. This
people therefore draws nie unto me with their mouth, that is, they come to
the temple in my presence to pray. To honor God with the lyppes, ^onoure
^^ueth (...) God.
is to power forth certain obscure prayers with the lips, without any
affection, and to offer them unto God as things accepted and allowed. after the
which manner some persuade them selves that God is honored and worshipped. C.
Christ has not altogether respect unto the words of the Prophet:
notwithstanding the prophet makes mention of two vices, by the which the
Jews provoked the vengeance

But he reprehendeth this, namely, when men ground salvation in external
things, and seek to please God only with external profession, ^rifie.
fayning that thing in the sight of men, which in deed is far from their
hearts. ^hyngs ^serned ^er.
These two things therefore must be joined together, the mouth nie, and the
heart far of, to put away hypocrisy. For there are two parts Esaias
therefore threatened that the lord would blind both the Prophets and the
people, for two causes, for their hypocrisy, and for their perverse
worshippinge of God. This is the so^me therefore: because the true worship of
God is spiritual, nothing pleases him unless the internal sincerity of the
heart be joined with it: and that is hypocrisy which appoynteth holiness in
external pompes and shows.

9 But in vain do they serve me, teachinge the doctrines and precepts of men.

But in vain do. C. The Hebrew text (according to the very word) has thus.
They were taught to fear me by the precepts of men. The which place is thus
turned, by the threscore and ten interpretours, but in vain do they serve me,
teachinge the doctrine and precepts of men. In vain: that is without fruit.
The Hebrewe text sounds thus much, as if they should say, The religion of
this people, with the which they worship me, consists in the precepts of
men, and of men's institutions. Gods word is sufficient to teach us how to
worship him.
As in the former part we see the service and worship of god to be spiritual:
so in this place we are taught that if we will please God, we must subscribe to
his word, and content our selves with the same. For God must not be
worshipped after our will, or at the pleasure of men, but according to the
prescript rule of his word. For except these two things concur and meet
together in the worship of God, it is no worship, but with God, abominable
execration and execrable curse. For (as we have said) because God will be
worshipped after his own will alone, he will in no wise abide to have new
worshippynges devised and invented to him. When men therefore suffer them
selves to wander from the word of God, the more they curiousely weary the^
selves in worshipping him, the more they heap vengeance to the^ selves against
the day of judgment, unless they repent, because religion by such feigned
inventions is profaned. In these words there is apposition, Teachinge the
doctrine and pre. C. For Christ pronounces those men to err. which instead
of doctrine thruste in the co^mandementes of men: or which from thence fetch a
rule to worship God. Such are the precepts of the choice of meat and
drink, of not marying, and an infinite sort mo: the which being observed of
some, they think by and by, that they do God good service, Fained
worshippinges ar abominable.
when as in deed they have done nothing less. Let this therefore abide firm in
our minds, that saying obedience is better unto God than sacrifice, all feigned
worshyppinges before him are but vain: yea (as witnesses the Prophet)
accursed and detestable.

10 And he called the people unto him, and said unto them: hear, and
understand.

And he called the people. M. Greuouse truly was the accusation of Christ
against those Hypocrites and Phariseies: but his accusation was so evident,
and manifest true, that they were not hable to gainesay the same. C. Now he
tourning him self to those that were more tractable and easy to be taught,
more plainly expounds that which before he had touched, namely, that the
kingdom of God consisted not in meat (as says S. Paul. Romans 14.
) For saying that external things are pure by nature, the use of them is also
free and pure. For we can not gather unto us any uncleanness by the good
creatures of God. Ignorance is not acceptable unto God.
Hear and understand. M. Although the lord love those that are simple and
rude yet notwithstanding he loves not their gross ignorance and dullness in
understanding, and concerning his truth: Here therefore he teaches the rude,
to the end they might be apt to understand: and in reasoning with the^, he
both reproves them, and teachethe them. Whereby we gather that God, our
merciful father does pardon our dulnes, how rude so ever we be.

11 That which goes into the mouth, defyleth not the man: but that which
comes out of the mouth, defyleth the man.

That which goes into the mouth. C. By a figure called Synecdoche, he
says, that those evil things come out of the mouth of a man, which are by
nature evil in him. For he applies it to the present cause: as if he should
have said, that we draw not in uncleanness with our mouths when we eat meat
and drink: but that al manner of filth and uncleanness proceeds of our selves.
Whereupon the Evangelist Mark says thus, Mark^
The things which proceed out of a man, those are they that defyle the man. For
he reherseth many things hereafter, which proceed not out of the mouth.
Ma^ence (...) wel^ all eu^
The well headde and natural place of uncleanness, is even in the conscience of
man. Christ teaches here that a man is not defiled with external things,
which of them selves are pure: evil works although they be external, yet
notwithstanding they do spring from the heart, and therefore they do always
defile. God^ ^tures
Wherefore we can not impute the fault to the creatures of god, how so ever we
abuse them. Wine does not defile, but the unbridled and immoderate desire
procedynge from the heart does defile. Apparel will not defile: but if a man
so trim him self that he may please him self and others, and that he may
go ambiciousely, this is internal, and this defilethe The unshamefast eye is
in fault, and not the woman which the eye beholds. Gold is not unclean,
but that wicked vice couetousenes, which is the rote of all evil, is unclean.

This place is very aptly and to the purpose sited and alleged against those
which prescribe choice of meats and drynkes unto Christians. Popis^ of mea^
drinck^
for here the difference of meats is taken away. Titus
All things ar clean to the clean: but to the unclean and unbelieving, there
is nothing clean, for even their mind and conscience is defiled.

It is no master what meat thou eat: but it is a matter with what mind thou
eat it. This parable Christ him self expounds in the.xvii verse folowinge.

12 Then came his disciples and said unto him: knoweste thou not that the
Phariseies were offended at this saying?

C. Because the Scribes were proud, and scornful to be taught, Christ
takes not much pains in pleasyng them, but thought it sufficient to touch
their hypocrisy and disdain. Thus the offense which they conceived at the
first is doubled, when they saw their wasshynges to be rejected and despised
of Christ, as triffeles, not by negligence, but even of set purpose. Now,
seeing Christ douted not, neither was afraid to stir up the malliciouse and
poisoned minds of the Scribes and Phariseies against him more, and more by
wounding them with their own weapon, making ye same to go through their own
sides: let us learn by his example, ^ry in ^ige (...) agree.
not to oil our tongue, or to use painted words, but so to frame our words,
deeds and sentences, that thereby we may seem, not to seek greatly to please
all men. Notwithstanding the disciples (as the manner of the rude and unlearned
is) coniectured that Christ dealt very unaptly and amiss with these second
sort of men. For their admonition tends to this end, that Christ should seek
to salve the offended minds, by correctinge his sharper sayings. This is
commonly the manner of the infirm and weak to judge amiss, and with a
sinister judgment of the doctrine which they se received by not indifferent
and unjust ears. And truly it were to be wished that the doctrine of Christ
might be pleasantly, and without offense, allowed, and received of al men: but
because Satan does blind the minds of many men, and sets their hearts of
fire to madness, he holdethe many minds overwhelmed with brutishe and
beastly insensible dullness, so that it can not be, that the doctrine of
salvation should savor well to all men. No it must be the savor of life unto
life to some, and to other some, the savor of death unto death. Notwithstanding
it is our parts to take heed so much as we may, (...) must ^ded.
least any offense arise of the manner and form of our teaching: but it were
extreme madness to make us behave our selves more wisely then we be taught of
our heavenly master. B. No man truly ever took more heed to avoid the geuynge
of offense, then did our savior Christ, that is, to speak or do any thing,
whereby any man might be revoked from piety, or hyndered from salvation, (for
that is to offend) Notwithstanding it could not be, but that by his words
and deeds, the wicked oftentimes should submit the^ selves and willingly take
offense. The virtue of Christ offended the Jews.
Hereuppon it came, because he was counted a Nazarite, and the son of Joseph,
because he was humble, and abased him self, kept company with sinners, healed
on the Saboth day, preached him self to be Christ, and teached the liberty
and freedom of external things. The reprobate Jews made all things that he
said or did, to be offense to the^ selves. But what does Christ? He could
not, (notwithstanding their obstinate wyckednes) but go forward with that which
he had begone, namely, to preach the truth. both by words and deeds, to
the elect and chosen. He knew that he was set to be a destruction to many
that were Israelles, no less, then he was appointed to be the resurrection or
vprising again of many. The Disciples might have objected to Christ, Luke. 2.
that which many weakelynges obiecte to the mynisters of the word in these
days, Why dyddest thou not hold thy peace? or why dyddest thou not speak more
ientlely? for these men are offended. For weakelinges take upon the^ to judge
and condemn, because there is no better success in preaching of the Gospel.
C. But we see how little Christ regarded that kind of offense, which the
wicked maliciously took to them selves.

13 But he answered and said. Every plant which my heavenly father has not
planted; shall be plucked up by the roots.

But he answered and. C. Because weak minds were wounded and offended by
the inprofytable success of doctrine, Christ goes about to remedy this evil.
And he takes this remedy, saying, that there is no cause why the good should be
troubled, or why they should have a worse opinion of his doctrine, although it
were the savor of death unto some. Every plant. B. Some understand this
sentence, of opinions: C. as if it should have been said, that all the
inventions of men, and what so ever came not out of the mouth of God, must be
plucked and rooted up, and perish. But Christ rather had respect unto men:
so that his words are in effect as if he should have said, that it is no
marvel if the doctrine of salvation were mortiferous and deadly to the
reprobate, because they are always carried hedlonge into destruction. Wherefore
we must understand those to be planted by the hand of God, which by his fre
adoption are graffed into the tree of life. And in the prophets we shall
oftentimes find these words planted of the lord, Esaye. 5. Ierem. 2. Ierem:
12, Amos. 9.
when they mean that the lord has chosen some to be his people.

So the father has planted into the kingdom of heaven, whom he gives to the
son to justify. These being planted upon the true land of Israel, shall
never be pluked up. But these reprobate and outcaste Phariseyes were never of
this number, but being externally of the vine of the lord, were in a short
time cut of as unfruitful branches: therefore they being now incurable, and
ordained to destruction, Christ pertayneth not unto them. C. And in this sense
also, the prophet calls the Church renewed by the grace of Christ, a flower
planted by the lord. Esaias. 60.
Finally, because election comes only of the lord, the reprobate must
needs perysshe, how so ever it come to pass: not that God destroys the good
and innocent, but because they by their own malice, turn all things, be
they never so wholesome and profitable for them, to their own destruction. And
so it comes to pass that ye Gospel is ye sauoure of death unto death to
them, 2. Cor. 2
as witnesses S. Paul. The effect of the Gospel.
For although the Gospel be set forth for the salvation of all men, yet
notwithstanding it brings not forth the fruit of salvation, but only in the
elects. B. Wherefore these words and examples of Christ ought to confyrme
and strengthen so many as shall offend, the evil and wicked by word or deed,
when they following the word of God, set forth nothing but the glory thereof,
and the faith of our lord and savior Jesus Christ. Let them only beware, The
duty of a preacher.
that they neither do nor say any thing of them selves without good
authority, and that theye sow the seed of the word of God, with great
reverence and fear, and also that they ever pray for the dyrection of godds
spirit. If they thus doing offend any man, let them remember these words
of Christ, namely, that every plant which the heavenly father has not
planted, must be plucked up by the roots, that is to say, it is ordained by
the will of god, that all they should perish, which are not predestinate by
the father to eternal life: Pre^ ^tion.
and that therefore of necessity it must needs come to pass, that in all good
things some shall be offended. But (as we said before) it is our parts
very dilygently to beware, and take heed, least that they se, or here any
thing by us, whereby they may justly be offended: but that they may have all the cause of offense in them selves, although they would seem to take the same
by our good demeanor. C. To be short, a faithful and good teacher will so
temper, moderate, and guide, what so ever he publishes, that it shall
proffite all men: but so often as it comes otherwise to pass, let him
comfort him self with the answer of Christ. Christ very well, and aptely
put forth this similitude, to prove that the cause of destruction is not in
the doctrine but that the reprobate which have no rote in god, (...) w^ ow^ na^^
work their own destruction and damnation, who, when the doctrine of Christ
is set before them, power out their secret poison: and thus they accelerate and
hasten death to them selves. Moreover Christ by this similitude towcheth
Hypocrites, which seem for a season to be like unto good trees that are
planted.

Such were the Scribes and Phariseis, which sprang up and grew in the church
of God, much like to the Cedar trees in Lybanus: to the end their defection
and withering away, might seem the more absurd. Therefore in the church of
Christ pure, and sincere doctrine shall be always preached. Wherefore let the
teachers consider and way, Era^ of the
what the capacity of men does require If any after their doctrine rage and
wax mad, let the ministers of Christ suffer them. For although they seem to
stand very well in the Church, yet nevertheless they shall be plucked up by the
roots at the length, because they are not planted of the lord. And where as
Christ might very well have said that they shall perish which carelessly and
disdainefully reiecte salvation offered unto them, he proceeds farther, and
says that none shall stand for ever, but such whose salvation is firm and sure
in the election of God. ^riginall (...) salua^
By the which words he plainly shows that the first oryginall, and
beginning of our salvation, comes of ye grace, by ye which God chose us to
be his sons, before we were created, and before the foundation of the earth
was laid.

14 Let them alone, they be the blind leaders of the blind. If the blind lead
the blind, both shall fall into the ditche.

Let them alone. C. He means that we should not set so much by men, that
their offense should greatly move us. Notwithstanding a judgment, and
discression is nedeful to be had. For when they are offended by their own
wyckednes, and not by ignorance, we must not regard them, but pass even
through the myddest of them. Hereuppon came that old distynction of avoiding
offenses, namely that we beware least we give the offense to the weak: but if
any wicked, ^^s ge^ offen ^n.
obstinate, and maliciouse person, take the offense it is no matter to us, we
need not care. For it is necessary ye christ which is the rock of offense
should be buried, if we will satisfy the obstinacy of all men. Therefore it
shall behoue us to discern between the weak (which are offended through
ignorance, and are by and by conformable) and the proud and obstinate, which
take offense to them selves, least any weak person be molested and troubled
through our defalte. But when the wicked obstinatelye kick against us, let us
go void of care, even through the midst of their offenses.

For he which does not spare and give place to his weak brethren. is
churlishe, and does tread those (as it were) under his fete, to whom he ought
to reach out his helpinge hand. But to care for others, it is no part of our
bewetie, saying they must of necessity fall into offense, if we go forward in
our calling, and discharge our duty. Furthermore, when it shall come to pass,
that they are alienate, and fallen from Christ, by the color and cloak of
offense, let us let them alone, least they draw us with the^ also. The cause
why the Phariseies were offended was arrogancy and disdain: they contemned
and greatly despised the doctrine of Christ, notwithstanding that it came from
God the father: In their hearts they bare the cause of offense. wherefore Christ
commands to let them alone.

They be the blind leaders of the blind. E. Or they be the blind guides of the
blind: according to the nature of the Greek word. C. In this sentence there
is a great Emphasis or force, by the which Christ shows that the Phariseies
were rather offended by pride, then through infirmity, because they were to
wise in their own opinions, and sought to rule all men according to their
will. For when they stomble in ye plain way, it is evident, that they are
wilfully blind. Now to what end should a man suffer him self to be led by
the^, unless he would fall into the same pit of blindenes, whereunto they are
carried hedlo^g. For Christ the son of righteousenesse which shines unto us,
and which does not only show us the true way by the light of his Gospel, but
will have ye same also preferred of us: does very well revoke his disciples
from that sluggishenes, and wilful blindenes, least they should fall into the
same state that they were in.

For he adds. If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditche.
C. A sentence worthy to be noted, Blindness and ignorance, are the cause of
destruction
by the which the lord shows how prerilouse and daungerouse a thing it is,
for men to be ruled by those that are blind: namely, that it will at the
length come to pass, that by obeyinge them, and by walkyng with them in
darckenesse, we shall come into the like destruction. Hereby we gather that
all men are inexcusable, which under the coullour of simplicity and modesty,
suffer them selves to be deceived, and snared with errors: as they which at
this day being in error and blyndnesse, say that they were so taught by their
teachers, and pastors, under whom they ought to be governed, and say also that
their error shall be imputed to the Bishops, But Christ here plainly
affirms that those blind also shall fall into destruction which followed
their blind guides. No man therefore in his right wits will harken and obey
these blind Phariseis: for none can please them, but such as shut their eyes
against the son. As for exaumple. Papists maintain blyndnesse.
Those which bear great rule among the adversaries of our savior Christ,
are captains: how shall we please them, if we behold the light and the
Gospel?

If we bend our selves to behold the light (that is, to follow Christ) by
and by we kyndell their furyouse rage against us. No man did ever bear
more with the weak, and suffer their infyrmities, then did the Apostel Paul:
Notwithstanding when he saw such kind of men, which would bring men's
consciences into bondage, Gala. 2.
he stoutelye bente him self against them, in no wise geuinge time or place
unto them. for he would not be blind, and have blind guydes to lead him.
The Evangelist Luke, in rehearsing this sentence, notes no circumstaunce: but
says, that Christ used this similitude generally, even as in rehersinge many
of the sermons of Christ, he shows no cause why they were made. It may be
that Christ repeated this self same sentence often times, A. As in diverse
places we may find, that he has repeated many other.

15 Then answered Peter, and said unto him: Declare unto us this parable.

C. To answer in this place, (according to ye manner of the Hebrews) is as
much to say, as to speak, as thus. Then spoke Peter and said unto him. etc.
For Mark has. And when he came into the house away from the people, Mark. 7.
his disciples asked him of the symilitude. But in this place Peter being as it
were the mouth of the rest, says, Declare unto us this parable

16 Jesus said, are ye also yet without understanding?

C. Because the Disciples do bewraye their intolerable rudeness, Christ does
justly reprehende them, and rebukes them, because as yet they want
understanding: yet notwithstanding he lets not to teach and instruct
them.

17 Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever enters in at the mouth, goth
into the belly, and is cast out into the draughte?

C. The sum and effect of Christ's words in this place, is to declare that
men are not polluted with meats: M^^ ^f^le (...) man.
but that they have spots and dregs of vices included within them, which
openly burst out in works. M. This is more plainly expressed in Marcke,
where we read thus, There is nothing without a man that can defile him, when
it enters into him: but the things which proceed out of a man, those are
they that do defile the man. Therefore the cleanenes, or uncleanness of a man,
consists in ye quality of the heart, not in the quality of the belly. C. If
any man object and say that the inte^perature of meat and drink is a
pollution and defiling of a man: we may easily answer, that Christ speaks not
here but of the natural and lawful use of those things which ye lord has
given us. A^
To eat and drink, of it self is a free thing, and indifferent: if there
come any corruption. it comes of man him self, and therefore it ought to be
thought internal, not external.

18 But those things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from the
heart, and they defile the man.

A. For this matter read the exposition of the eleventh verse.

19 For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, breakinge of
wedlock, whoredoms, theftes, false witness, blasphemies.

C. Hereby we gather ye which before we noted, namely that Christ at the first
spoke of ye mouth, for the circumsta^ce of the present place. for now he
makes no me^tio^ of ye mouth, but says that al viciouse things that do
defile and pollute come from the heart of man only. In this Mark differs
from our Evangelist Matthew, namely, yt he reckeneth up more vices then the
other does. And although these words of our savior Christ are spoken after
an improper manner, yet it is sufficient for us, if we thereby may gather his
meaning, namely yt al vices do proceed from the evil and corrupt affections of
the heart. It is an improper kind of speech to say that an evil eye proceeds
from the heart, yet in deed there is no absurdity, ^orrup^ ^at is in (...)
defy^^ whole (...)
or ambiguitie in so saying, because an impure and unclean heart does defile
the eyes, and makes them mynisters and instruments of evil desires.
Notwithstanding Christ does not restrain all that is evil in the man, to
manifest sins, but to the end he might more plainly declare the heart of man,
to be the seat and receptacle of all evil, he says that there remain
testimonies and fruits even in the sins.

20 These are the things which defile a man. But to take meat with vnwasshen
hands, defyleth not a man.

A. The Greek text has, These are the things which make a man common. But
common, defiled, and unclean, are all one, as may appear by the words of
Peter, (...). 10.
That which the lord has purified count not thou common: The which words
were an answer to this, I did never eat any thing common or unclean. The
Jews did call those things common which the Gentiles used commonly, and
therefore impure, and profane. And that which the Greek phrase calls common
the Hebrew phrase calls unclean or defiled.

21 And Jesus went thence and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sydon.

And Jesus went thence M. This hystorye is very plentyfull, and requires
great dylygence to be considered of. C. For it teaches how the grace of
Christ began to appear to the Gentiles.

For although the full time was not come in the which Christ should publyshe
and reveal him self to the whole world, notwithstanding he thought it good to
give certain forewarninges of his common and general mercy, which at the
length, after his resurrection was offered both to the Jews, and also to the
Gentiles. And departed into the coasts of Tire. B. The Evangelist Marcke
adds saying, ^e. 7.
And he entered into a house, and would that no man should have known: but he
could not be hyd: signifying that Christ went not directely to Tire and
Sydon, but abode in that corner for a time as though he had been a pryuate man.

But Mark speaks according to our fleshely sense and understanding.

For although Christ foresawe by his dyuine spirit, what should come to pass,
yet notwithstanding, in that, that he was the minister and messenger of the
father, he kept him self within the limits and bounds of the office and
calling which was enjoined him: therefore the Evangelist Mark says that he
could not be hyd, meaning as he was man. B. For it is necessary yt he should
play the Apostell of circu^sition, sent specially to the Jews: According to
the saying of S. Paul, This I say, Roma. 15.
that Jesus Christ was made a minister of the Circumsition for the truth of
God, to confyrme the promyses made unto ye fathers. Math. 10.
Whereupon our savior gave his disciples charge that they should not come into
the way of the Gentiles. But because the time was at hand that the Gentiles
should receive Christ being rejected of the Jews, the father would not have
him altogether hidden from the Gentyles.

22 And behold, a woman of Chanaan (which came out of the same coasts) cried
unto him saying: have mercy on me O Lord, thou son of David: My daughter is
pitiously vexed with a devil. And behold a woman C. An excellent Image of
faith is depaynted unto us in this strange woman, that a comparison being made,
we may know that the Jews (whose impiety was horrible) were worthily and
justly deprived of ye promised redemption. For when Christ did bring unto them
openly the promised redemption, and offered the same with a loud voice, and
by doing of miracles before their eyes, they were blind and deaf: When as
notwithstanding they boasted them selves to be the heirs of Gods covenant,
his chosen and peculiar people, and his priestly kingedome: but this woman, who
had no fellowshyppe with the sons of Abraham, and to who^ the covenant (as
it might seem) pertayned not, being called by no voice or sign, came
running unto Christ of her own accord, and voluntary will.

Of Chanaan. B. The Evangelist Mark says, that this woman was a Greek out of
the nation of Syrophaenitia: Notwithstanding, between Matthew and Marcke there
is no contrariety: for we know that it was a common use and manner among the
Jews, to call all forrayne nations Greeks: and therefore the Apostel Paul
uses that Antithesis often times, but specially in his epistell to the Romans.

Romans 1, 2.3 and.10. 1. Cor. 1. Gala. 3.
But saying she came out of the parts of Tire and Sydon, it is no marvel if
she were said to be of Syrophenitia, when as the Region or country is called
Syria which was a part of Phaenitia also. But the Jews despitefully called
all the inhabitauntes of that country Cananaeans. And it is likely that they
for the most part take their oryginall and beginning of the people of Canaan,
who being banished out of their country, fled thither, as to the next place
of exile.

In this both the Evangelists do agree, that the woman was of a profane
nation. not brought up under the law of Moses, and that she came unto
Christ of her own voluntary will, humblye to crave help at his hands. Bu
Notwithstanding it pleases some to think that she was a Cananeaan, so
called of the country Cana, which Cana is written without the letter H. This
Cana is a great city of Phaenitia, borderyng upon the tribe of Asser: of
the which we may read in the.xix. chapter of Joshua. But that Cana is
written with the Hebrewe leter. P. K. And as concerning that Chanaan which
our Euangeliste Matthew has: The Greek letter ch is as much as. chapter
it is written in all aunciente Greek books, that I have seen with this letter
ch chapter Cried unto him. M. For Marcke says that she heard of him.

Faith therefore comes by hearing as says saint Paul in the tenth to
the Romans. Faith comes by hearing.
Have mercy on me. M. She calls upon, and craves his mercy, in whom she
believes: she cries not to the Apostels, but unto Christ. Neither had she thus
desired his help, unless she had hoped certainly to obtain the same.

O Lord. C. She calls Christ lord, by the common use of her speech. Thou
son of Although this woman were a stray, and foreign ar from the flock of
Christ, yet notwithstanding she had received some taste of godliness: for
without some knowledge of the promyses, she had not called Christ the son
of Dauyd. For although the Jews erred and swarued from the pure and perfect
doctrine of the law, yet notwithstanding the fame of the promised redemption
was ryfe among them. And because the restoring of the church, did depend upon
the kingdom of David, when so ever mention was made of the Messiah, the name
of the son of David was by and by in their mouths, and truly this
confession was common to every man. But when the true faith decayed amongst
them, by the wonderful and inspeakeable goodness of god, it came to pass, that
the odor and sweet smell of the promises came to the Gentiles theraboutes.
Although therefore this woman was not familiarly taught and instructed by any
master: yet notwithsta^dinge she did not rashely feign or immagin a faith, as
concerning Christ unto her self, but conceived the same by the law and the
Prophets. Wherefore very wickedly that dog Seruetus, S^ w^ fai^
to the end he might despoyle Faith of her promyses, has very much abused
this example. According to this sense, we do not denis, but that there may be
some detayned faith at sometime, to the which the parfect and distinct
knowledge of sound doctrine is not known: this always noted, that faith ever
proceeds from the word of God, and has his beginning of true rudime^tes and
instructions, that it may always be annexed to some light of knowledge.

My daughter is pitiously vexed C. The Evangelist Mark says that this woman
came and fell down at the fete of Jesus, and prayed him to cast out a devil of
her daughter, A. By the which words he declares, ye she conceived some great
and excellent thing of Christ, in yt she attributes to him power to cast out a
devil.

23 But he answered her nothing at all, and his disciples came and besought
him saying: send her away for she cries after us.

But he ansvvered nothing. Bu. Wonderful lettes and impediments are here
objected against the woman and such greuouse occasions ar set before her, yt
unless she had received a sound and perfect faith, she might have forsaken
Christ, and spoken evil of the gospel of ye kingdom. C. Therefore the
Evangelists for diverse causes do commend the faith of this woman, as now for
her invincible constancy: for seeing that the silence of Christ was a certain
kind of repulse, it is marvel that she was not cast down and dyscouraged by
this temptation: but her continual prayer was a sufficient testimony and
witness of her perseueraunce.

Notwithstanding this should seem to be contrary to the nature of faith and
invocation, (...). 10.
as saint Paul describes the same, saying, that no man can pray arighte,
without he have first heard the word of God. Who therefore will say, that
this woman had faith, who (Christ holding his peace) gathers and conceiueth
a trust of her own self? But for so much as Christ speaks two manner of
ways, and yet holds his peace, we must note, that although he did then
keep silence, yet notwithstanding he spoke to the mind of the woman: and so
this secret instinction of his spirit was instead of the external preaching.
(...) spea^ his (...) and (...).
Thus the lord oftentimes speaks to his faithful servants, and yet
holds his peace. for they bearing them selves bold, upon the comfortable
testimonies of Scripture, where they hear him speakinge, doubt not but that
he will be merciful unto the^: and yet notwithstanding he does not by and by
accomplish their desires, and grant their petitions, but seems rather as
though he did not hear. We se therefore to what end Christ held his peace,
not to extinguyshe the faith of the woman, but rather to kyndell her feruente
faith, and to inflame her to be more earneste. Wherefore, if so small a seed
of doctrine in the woman of Canaan, brought forth such plentiful fruit, it
were to to much shame, if we should faint and quayle, when he differreth us,
and satisfies not our request.

And his disciples came and besought. The dyscyples being weary and anoyed with
the importunate suite and crying of the woman: came unto Christ and besoughte
him to send her away, saying, Send her away. E. That is to say, dispatche
her, either by granting to her her petition, or else by satisfying her by some
other mean.

C. The disciples trewly crave nothing in the woman's behalf at the hands of
Christ: but because of her importunate suite, they desire to have her sent
away. Bu. For they them selves show the cause why they would have her sent
away saying. For she cries after us. as if they should have said, She
weryeth us excedinglye and above measure with cryinge, and with her complaints
she is irksome unto us in so much that it is a reproach to us all, if she thus
follow us, thou neither rebukinge her, nor grauntyng her petition, whereby we
may be in quiet. C. But what a foolish imagination and deuyse of the Papists
was it, Popish prayer to saints.
by this place to teach to pray unto the dead saints. For let us grant
that this woman craved some help or favor at the disciples hands (which can
not be gathered by the text) yet notwithstanding there is a difference between
the dead and the living. Bu. It is most sure and certain that the sayncts
which are alive on the earth, do pray for such as are in trouble, affliction
and mysery, but it is most uncertain that the saints in heaven do pray for
us, yea it is most sure that they are ignorant of our cogitations and desires.

24. But he answered and said: I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

C. Here he shows ye cause why he does not hear and answer the woman of
Canaan, because he would give him self wholly to the Jews to whom he was
appointed a minister of the grace of God. Therefore he argues of the vocation
and commandment of his father that no help must be showed to strangers and
forreners. Not that the power of Christ was always shut and included in such
strait bonds: but hecause the time did so require, that he beginning at the
Jews, might for ye time keep him self whollye unto them. Ephe. 2.
but after his resurrection ye time came that he should preach peace unto the
Gentiles which were alienate from the kingedome of God. Math. 10.
For this cause Christ at the first commanded his Aposteles to keep the^ selves
or to preach only to the Jews, Roma. 15.
and not to come into the way of the Gentiles. The Apostell Paul also, to
this effect callethe Christ the minister of the circumsition He does therefore
truly deny him self to be sent, saving only to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel: that is to say, to the Jews: until the fulness of time came in the
which the Gentiles should succeed. Bu. Hereby let us learn how greatly the
lord esteemed the people of Israel, in granting to the^ such a prerogative,
that the son of God him self should say that he was specially sent unto them.
Whereupon the truth of gods promise may be gathered, in that all things
that God by the prophets had spoken and promised, are now offered and
performed to this people. Furthermore, he does not only call the elect and
chosen, the lost sheep of the house of Israel, but also all such as came of
the stock of the holy fathers: because God comprehended all under the
couenaunte, and because the redemer was promised to all without exception, even
as without exception, he revealed, and offered him self to al men. This also
is worthy to be noted, Luke 19.
that he pronounces him self to be given to the lost sheep, even as in an
other place he says that he came to save that which was lost.

25 Then came she and worshipped him saying: Lord help me.

Then came she. B. This woman had a wonderful trust, when that neither the
silence of Christ, nor the answer which he made to the disciples (by the which
he might seem to deny to show to her any favor at all) could any whit
discourage her, but began so much the more earnestly to pray. for says the
Evangelist, she came and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me. The more
sharply she was repoulsed, the more vehemently she prayed and craved help.
Faith that is firm can not be beaten down.
C. She semethe therefore obstinatly to contend, as though she could extorte
somewhat from him by violence. But without al doubt the goodness which by
faith she had conceived of the Messiah, did thus imbolden and encourage her.
And whereas Christ precisely denying that this her request pertayned to his
office, she was not dyscouraged, neither left of her suite: it must needs so
come to pass (as we said before) by the fyrme and constante faith which
she had conceived. And this is a true probation and trial of our faith, when
we will never suffer the general principle of our salvation, which is founded
upon the word of God to be taken from us. Lord help me. A. As if she should
have said. I do not perceive that I am yet altogether repoulsed and driven
from thee, although thou will not vouchsafe to make me answer, thou art sent
hither to be a comforter of the afflicted: help me therefore which am grievously
afflicted: for thy goodness I beseech the o lord to help me

26 He answered and said: it is not mete to take the childrens breadde, and to
cast it to dogs.

Some translations have, it is not semely to take ye chilore^s bread. C. Now
Christ by a more sharp and biting answer seems to put her quite out of
comfort, and to take al hope from her. for he does not only teach that all
grace which he has received of the father, ought to be dispensed to the
Jews, lest they should be defrauded of their peculiar right, but also not
without contumely and reproach, he compares the woman to a dog, declaring
thereby that she was unworthy to be partaker of his grace. B. But he meant by
this colloring and hiding of his goodness, to have a farther trial, and a more
excellent example of her faith. For although she were compared to dogs, yet
notwithstanding she took it not so haynously, that acknowleginge her self to
be a dog, she would not require the benefit of sons, but of dogs only.
C. But to the end we may have the true meaning and understanding of this place,
we must note that every particular gift of god is not called ye childrens
bread, but only those benefytes which severally he had bestowed upon Abraham
and his sede. For from the beginning of the world ye goodness of God was so
dispersed every where, and so filled heaven and earth, that al men knew the
father him self. But because he had preferred the sons of Abraham to honor,
more than any of the sons of men else, ye bread of the children is yt which
properly pertayneth to ye adoption, by the which ye Jews only were elected and
chosen to be sons.

The Gentiles had the use and fruitio^ of the light of the son, of the vital
and lively spirit, and of the food and increase of the earth as well as the
Jews: but the blessinge which was to be hoped for in Christ, remained only in
the house of Abraham. For otherwise the Jews (which did excel) should have
been no better the^ the Gentiles. Therefore Christ says it is not meet to
take childrens bread and cast it unto Dogs, meaning that it is not well
bestowed, which is taken from the Church of God, and committed to the common
use of profane me^. But this ought to be restrained to ye time in the which,
God was only inuocated and called upon in Judea. For when it came to pass
that the Gentiles were admitted into the same fellowship of salvation (the
which came to pass, when by the Gospel Christ shyned every where) the
difference was taken away in so much that they which before were Dogs, are
now reputed among the children and sons. (...) made ^^ntiles (...) were
^ges, to (...) sons (...).
C. The Jews were in place and stead of sons, but the Gentiles being
alyenate from the grace, were as Dogs. Here therefore ye swelling of flesh
must needs lie in the dust, when we hear, that in the first beginning we
were dogs. This sentence truly serves very well to bring to humillitye,
that we may know what our state and condition was before grace, we were
without all doubt Dogs.

In the beginning truly the excellencye of man's nature, in the which the Image
of God did shine, was greater, than that so odious a name, should belong to all
the Gentiles, and to kings themselves, who^ God has adorned and butifyed with
his own title: but the fall and disobedience of Adam brought to pass, that
the Lord justly did cast out all those with dogs to the dungehill: which by
the fault of our first Parents were made bastardes: specially when there is a
comparison between the Jews (which are exempte from the common state and
condition of men) and the Gentiles, which are banished from ye kingdom of God.
For the Jews did excel, not by their own merit, but by the benefit of the
couenaunte: ^o^ has ^s
but we are not sons, were it not that the father had not adopted us by
Christ to be his sons and heirs, who by the same Christ promised grace to
his sons, not to Profane Gentiles. The purpose of Christ is more plainly
expressed in Mark where it is said, let the children first he fed: Mark 7.
for it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto whelps.
For he admonishes the woman of Canaan that she deals as preposteriouslye as
one that in the midst of supper fouldeth up the Table. B. In this answer
also there was some hope given to her and to all the Gentiles, namely that when
the Jews were satisfied the Gentiles should have the bread of life broken and
distributed unto them: that is to say, it should come to pass that the
Gospel of the kingdom should be preached unto them after it had been preached
to the Jews. C. Moreover, although Christ here had specially regard to take a
trial and proof of the woman's faith, yet notwithstanding withal he does
teach and show what horrible punishmente and dreadful vengeance did depend
and hang over ye Jews, for rejecting that inestimable benefyte offered freely
unto them, which was denied, and might not be granted to others, who fervently
and with greedines craved and begged the same.

27. She aunsweared and said: truth Lord, for the Dogs eat of the crommes,
which fall from their masters Table.

Bu. The woman having so oftentimes the repoulse, and being at the last
reprochefully compared to an unclean dog, is notwithstanding neuermore
styrred and provoked to conceive hatred nor never a whit the less infirm and
weak in faith, A constants faith in the woman of Canaan.
but seking to overcome herself, the more constantlye that the Lord denies
her request, the more importunately she contendeth by continual craving to
obtain the same. E. For she refuses not the opprobrious name of a dog,
neither does she envy the Jews for their honorable title to be called
sons, but calling them also Lords whom Jesus called sons, she takes
occasion of that, by the which she seemed to have the repoulse, to the end she
would not be denied: as if she should have said: I do not take from before
the^ the dellicate bread with the which they are fed at their fathers table:
that only do I require which commonly masters and Lords grant unto their
dogs: rich and plentiful is their table, and I content and satisfye my
self with the crommes only which fall without regard from their board. C. This
aunsweare of the woman declares and sufficientlye proves that she was not
carried and led by any blind, blunt, or violente motion to talk with Christ and
to crave this benefyte at his hands, no, but rather by a well advised, and
grounded faith. For, because God preferred the Jews before any other people,
and nation, she also leaves unto them their due honor of adoption, and does
protest that she means nothing less but that Christ should feed and
satisfy them, according to the order prescribed unto him by his heavenly
father: she only makes her peticion to have the crommes that fall from her
masters table. And truly God did never so include and tie his grace to the
Jews, but that he would suffer ye Gentiles to have some taste thereof, though
it were but small. So that nothing could be more aptly, and dulye spoken by our
savior to express the dispensation of the grace of God which then
flourished, than this. And the similitude which he brings is most fit: as if a
man should have a great sum of money in his hands, which he means to
give unto some other, and in giving the same to the party to whom he meant it,
it comes to pass that a piece falls from him, the which piece he
suffers to be taken and carried away of one to whom he meant it not, neither
was it due: even so our Lord and savior Christ had his ha^dfull of mercies:
the which were due, by promise made to Abraham, to the Jews, notwithstanding
it came to pass that in paying the same, some crommes of mercy were taken up
by the Gentiles which he let fall unto them. M. By this place we learn so to
persevere and continue in faith, that we leave not of to crave that, which we
would obtain. To this effect also pertayneth the example of ye importunate
widow and the unjust Judge. Luke. 18.
Furthermore we learn that our rude and base estate ought not to stay us in
coming to Christ, but that we ought rather to take occasion thereby more
boldly to come and to crave those things at his hands, whereof we have need.
What is more vile then a whelpe? and yet notwithstanding, because it belongs
to the Lord of the house, although it eat not of the childre^s bread, yet
notwithstanding it is allowed to eat of the crommes that fall from the Table
without check.

28. Then Jesus aunsweared and said unto her: O woman great is thy faith, be it
unto thee, even as thou will. And her daughter was made whole eue^ at that same
time.

Then Jesus answered Bu. Hitherto the Euangelyste has described the true
nature and quality of faith: and now he adds the effect that comes of
faith. First of all Christ commends the faith of the woman, Christ faith*
then he gives unto her that which she required, and also declares that
she has obtained it by faith.

For the greatness of her faith declared it self in this, that she having but
a small spark of Doctrine, did not only know ye proper office of Christ, and
attributed unto him heavenly power, but also constantly went forward by such
narrow strayts, and soore lets, and suffered herself to be abased and compared
to a dog, so that she might retain the help of Christ, of the which she
was fully persuaded: to be short, she so tempered her trust with humillity,
that she arrogated nothing rashly to her self: and yet notwithstanding by the
feeling of her own unworthiness, she shut not up the well of the grace of
Christ against herself. B. By this faith truly nothing shall be impenitrable,
or impossible to him that prays. But by the title of this profane woman. the
ingratitude of this people which boasted themselves to be holy and acceptable
unto God, is condemned. Nevertheless, how this woman is truly said to believe,
which is not only destitute of the promise of Christ, but by the words also
of his own mouth is repelled and put away, we have declared before. For
although he does sharpelye (as it might seem) refuse her prayers, yet
notwithstanding she being thoroughly persuaded of the Messiah promised from
above, cease not to hope well: and therefore she feels the gate shut
against her, not that she is altogether driven away, and quight shut out of
place, but to the end she might with a more serious endeavor of faith pearce
even through the small chinckes and cleftes of the gate.

Be it unto thee even as thou B. This voice of Christ contains a profitable
doctrine. C. For we are taught that we obtain all things at the hands of
the Lord by faith, yea even those things which seem impossible unto us:
because God always estemeth so much of faith, that he is always ready, in
matters expediente, to grant us our desyer. The Euangeliste Mark brings in
the words of Christ thus: and he said unto her, for this saying go thy way,
the devil is gone out of thy daughter.

And her daughter was made whole, even at the C. The Lord does never deceive
or disapoint us of his word, ^btay^ thin^ ^he ha^^ God.
but perfourmeth ye which he promises even in due time.

Mark adds these words saying: and when she was come home to her house,
she found that the Devil was departed, and her daughter lying on the bed.

29. And Jesus went away from thence, and came nigh unto the Sea of Gallilae,
and went up into a mountain and sat down there.

And Jesus went away from thence Eu. Christ our savior was much more
enclyned in the time of his flesh or whilst he was on earth, toward his
people, then he was to strangers. Among the Gentiles he bestowed at once but
one benefit only, as upon this woman of Canaan, and ye almost constrained:
but by and by among the Jews, he distributeth many benefits, and to the most
part, being neither provoked by the thanckefulnes nor by ye faith of the
Jews, but of his own free will. For he heals all those that are sick and
disseased with diverse kinds of disseases being brought unto him, yea were they
never so incurable, without money freely. And Jesus went away from thence M.
Namelye from the parts of Tire and Sydon. C. Mathewe and Mark declaring the
return of Christ from the parts of Tire and Sydon, do seem to disagree very
much. But where as our Euangeliste Mathewe says that he came into the parts
of Magdala, and Mark, Mark 8.
into the parts of Dalmanutha, it is nothing: for when as, there were diverse
bordering Cities situate beyond the lake of Genascreth, toward ye mount
Thabor, it is no marvel if a double name were attributed to the middell
region. There appears more difference in this, that Matthew says he healed
many, being diversely disseased: and Mark does make mention but of the
healinge of one deaf man. Yet notwithstanding this may easly be resolved.
Mark chose the celebratinge of that miracle to himself, which our savior
Christ showed in the way, and the fame whereof being dispersed styrred up the
inhabitaunts of that country by little and little, to bring their sick
persons to him to be healed. For we know that the Evangelists do not
curiouslye note every thing that Christ did: but do write so sparingly as
concerning miracles, that they toutche but few only, and that for examples
sake. Again Mark thought it sufficient to set before us one proof of the
power of God, in the which his Majesty appears as myraculous as if he had
rehearsed many more of the same sort.

And went up into a mountain Christ having wrought a miracle upon the deaf
and dumb, came to the Sea of Gallilae, and there, because he would have rest
and quyetnes he went up into ye mountain, not that he feared any thing but
least he should stir up the minds of the Phariseys, being already bent
against him, his time of revelation being not yet come.

30. And much people came unto him, bringinge with them those that were lame,
blind, deaf, dumb, and other many, and cast them down at the fete of
Jesus. And he healed them.

And much people came M. Behold our savior Christ could not be hid as yet:
for how can the brightness of the Sun be hidden? and how could the power of
Christ be kept secret.

Bringing with them the blind, M. The like general healing of those that
were disseased, the Euangeliste has oftentimes described before. Math. 4.8.9.
and 14.
And cast them down at M. Even as the infected and sick sheep are often
times cast down at the sheepeheards feet. And he healed them Bu. Here our
Lord declared his power, which is the true Physician both of soul and body.
M. Hereby also we gather the gentleness and humanitye of Christ, who (although
he sought to hyde himself) healed notwithstanding by and by the disseased
and sick of those which importunately on heaps ran unto him. Bu. These
things ought to confirm our faith, and to cause us to commit our selves
without all fear to so mighty and gentle a Lord, Saints may not be sought
unto for help
and not to seek in our sickness and trouble, for health and help at the
hands of creatures, as of S Laurence, our Lady, and S. Cornelius, which cannot
help: for salvation belongs only to Christ.

31. In so much that the people wondered when they saw the dumb speak, the
maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see.

In so much that the people wondered M. The cause of the admiracion, is the
straungenes of the miracles which exceded humane reason. And for this cause
miracles were ordained before of God namely that the power of Christ thereby
might be revealed; and the minds of mortal men amazed, and their faith
increased. Read the five and thirty Chapter of Esaye. And they glorified the
God of Israel. M. Because they saw his power visitinge his people. This ever
comes to pass by all true miracles, False miracles dishonor God.
that the name of God is glorified: but false miracles have a quyte contrary
effect.

32 Then Jesus called his Disciples unto him and said: I have compassion on
the people, because they continue with me now three days and have nothing to
eat: and I will not let them depart fasting, least they miscary by the way.

Then Jesus called his Disciples M. Jesus called his Dysciples unto him to the
end he might prepare them to ye miracle which he was about to do, and that
he might make them likewise affectioned: And so they were in deed, as we
may read in the sixte Chapter of the Acts of the Apostels whereit is said.
Acte^
Also commandment and charge was given to Paul to be myndfull of the poor
to help them, Gal^
in the which he was very dilligent.

I have compassion on the people The miracle here mentioned is not much unlike
that which we touched in the 14. Chapter going before: this is only the
difference, that where as before Christ fe^ time thousand me^ with five loaves
and two fishes, he now feeds sower thousand with 7. loaves and a few
fishes. Furthermore, whereas then twelve baskets were filled with the
fragments, now of the great abundaunce less remained. Heb^
M. Behold we have a king and hye Priest, which is touched with compassion on
those that are his. We se here how great care he has always for our
necessitye and that in extremity when all hope is gone, we nothing regarding
or forseing the danger to come: but how much more shall he help us if we
call upon him, and put our trust in him. For sometimes he suffers us to be
oppressed with great myseries, even as he suffered these men for the space of
three days to suffer hunger: the which they might better abide then we,
because they were in a more whot Region. The^ we^ Chri^ wa^^
But we must here specially note, that nothing can be wantinge to them that
follow Christ: for saying the Lord has a consideration of hunger, and takes
compassion upon them that suffer the same, he will not in any wise suffer them
to be afflicted with the same, above that which they are able to bear. Yet
notwithstanding we must not so understand these three days, as though the
people had eat nothing all that time: but they are said to fast three days,
because they were in a desert place where wanted ordinarye food, and things
necessary for them. Moreover it may be yt in those whot Regions men had a
less desyer to eat, then we have in this gross and cold air: wherefore it
is no marueyle if they were three days without meat.

And I will not let them depart M. This is ye effect of mercy and
compassion, which cannot but help the afflicted.

Least they myscary by the way Behoulde here, how love and compassion have
always providence, and a care for things to come adjoined with them, not
only respecting things present, but having a care also for things to come,
and for all kind of misery. Bu. Let us learn therefore to here the word of
God, to believe in him, (...). 5.
and to cast all our care upon him: for he cares for us.

33. And his Dysciples said unto him, whence should we get so much bread in
the wilderness, as to suffice so great a multitude.

C. The Disciples here bewraye their unreasonable and brutishe dulnes, in that
they have forgotten the former document of the power and grace of Christ, which
they might have applied to their present necessity. But now they forget to
crave remedy at his hands, as though they had never seen any such thing.
M. Even so the wisdom of human reason wayeth not the power of God, ^e
rea^eth ^s po^
but only the faculty and power of creatures. Even so Moses also said: where
should I have flesh to give unto all this people? (...) 11.
and again he said: six hundred thousand footmen are there of the people
among which I am, and thou have said I will give them flesh that they may eat
a month long. Shall the sheep and the Oxe^ be slain for them to find them?
either shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them to serve
them? A wonderful oblivion and dulnes was it truly in the Apostells to forget
that Christ fed even now so many thousand men with five loaves and two
fishes. C. And because the like dulnes creeps daily into our hearts, we
must so much the more beware least that our minds be drawn from the
remembering and consideration of gods benefits, that the experience of the
time paste, may teach us to look for the same thing to come, which God
oftentimes already has given unto us.

34. And Jesus says unto them: how many loaves have ye? and they said:
seven, and a few little fishes.

A. Christ was not ignorant how many loaves were there, but he demanded this
question to the end they knowing ye want and necessitye might the more wonder
and marueyle at the power of God.

And they said: seven, M. Here we see that the Lord has more loaves the^ he
had before to feed a smaller multitude. Whereby we may learn that the power
of God is not tied to creatures which are but means to show the same, and that
it is all one to him whether the quantity be great or small, 1. King. 14.
according to the saying of Ionathas of his small army in comparison of the
huge multitude of his enemies. Increase comes by the blessing of God.
For as the blessing of God being no less in one lofe then in twenty, is
sufficient to nourish a great multitude: even so if the same be wantinge, a
hundred loaves are not sufficient to feed ten men. Let us therefore holely
depend upon the providence of God.

35. And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground, and took the
seven loaves, and the fishes. etc.

A. Read our annotacions in the fourthtene Chapter going before.

36. And he sent away the people, and took ship, and came into the parties
of Magdala.

A. Our savior Christ having showed the wonderful power of his Godheade sent
the people away, to the end they might return to their own home.

Into the parties of Magdala B. Mark has instead of Magdala, Dalmanutha.
Read the nine and twentye verce goinge before. 1. Kings. 17.
There is mention made of Magdala in the seuentene Chapter of the first Book
of kings.

The xvi. Chapter.
THe Phariseis also with the Saduces, came and tempted him, and desyered him
that he would show them a sign from heaven.
The Phariseys with Bu. If the life of our savior Christ be nothing else, but
an institution, order, Man's life (...) a continual warfare on earth.
and rule of our life, then it follows that our life is a continual warfare
upon earth. For Christ stands always ready and appointed to battle. M.
Wherefore the Evangelists do not only propound and set forth unto us the
doctrine, and miracles of Christ, but also the temptacions and cauillacions of
the adversaries: as does our Evangelist Matthew in this place.

By the which we are admonished that the truth never wants adversaries: The
truth never wants enemies. chap 8.
and that the scorns and cauils of the adversaries, do serve very much for the
confirmacion of the truth. C. The Euangelyst Mark says ye the Phariseys came
forth, and began to dispute with Christ: whereby we gather, that when they were
overcome with reason, and invincible arguments, this was their last refuge, to
be obstinate and to pretend some other matter, least they should be
constrained to subscribe unto the truth: But although ye manner of ye
disputacion be not here expressed, yet notwithstanding it is likelye that they
cauilled and brabled about the office of Christ, wondering and seekinge, why
he durst be so bold to bring in any new thing and why he should so
mightelye extol himself, as though by his coming, integrity and perfection
were restored and given to the kingdom of God. When there was nothing left to
obiecte against him and his doctrine, they require a sign to begeue^ them from
heaven. Whereas it is most certain that they would have given no more regard
to an hundred signs then to the testemonyes of Scripture. Moreover the power
of Christ was now set before the eyes of all men, and was palpable (as it were)
and might be felt with the hand. They neglected the signs by the which God did
familliarly manifest and reveal himself: how much less would they have
regarded an obscure and secret sign? Papists would have the Gospel
confirmed by new signs.
Even so the Papists at this day, as though the doctrine of the Gospel were
never confirmed, require to have the same proved by new miracles. With the
Saduces Let us here note, that although there was mortal hatred and contencion
between the Saduces and the Phariseys, in so much ye there were continual
braules and stryfes between them, yet notwithstanding in one league and
mutual consent they join together against Christ. Even so when the wicked are
at controuersye and strife, and envy one another, The set (...) cro^ b^ ^des^
w^
even then they agree in one against the Lord, and become (as it were) sworn
brethren to oppress the truth. Came and tempted him In that the Evangelists
say: they came and tempted him, they declare that they came not with sincere
minds to learn any thing but rather by fraud and deceyte to catch that
which they thought should be denied unto them, or at least ye which they
imagined not to be in the hands of Christ. For, because they persuaded
themselves and judged Christ to be a contemned and base person, they went about
nothing else, then by findinge out his infirmity, to abrogate what soever had
gotten praise with the people. So the unbelieving are said to tempte God, so
often as they accuse God of impotency, infirmity and weakness, when he
grants not unto them the filthy desyer of their minds. And desyered of him
that he vvoulde C. The same demand they made before in the twelueth Chapter.
(...) fay^ she^ ^gion.
Bu. Incredulitye, and deceytfull hypocrisye, fayneth and bears a show of
faith and religion. For the Phariseys seem to make their petition thus
(according to the manner of the wicked and malicious enemies of God.) We
truly have an earnest longing and desyer for the Messiah, and we have looked
for him many years, and we wish for nothing more then his coming.

Wherefore we would willingly receive thee O Jesus, if we were sure, and
certainly persuaded that thou were ye Messiah promised by the Prophets. Go to
therefore and teach us by some signs from Heaven, or in the air, teach and
prove (we say) that thou art the same (whom thou would seem, and whom
many believe to be) by those signs.

Bu. But they spoke not these things with a sincere mind, desyering to be
taught, and to believe, but rather seeking occasion to calumniate and accuse
him.

2. He answered and said unto them: when it begins to draw toward even,
ye say it will be fair weather, for the sky is read.

M. Luke says that he spoke the same words to the multitude thus: when ye
see a cloud rise out of the West straight way ye say, there comes a shower,
and so it is. And when ye see the Southwynd blow ye say it will be whot, ^e
12.
and it comes so to pass. Ye hypocrites, can ye discern the outward
appearance of the sky and of the earth, but how happens it, that ye cannot
skill of this time? By ye which words our savior Christ declares that his
power is sufficiently proved to acknowledge the time of his visitacion, unless
that they would willinglye shut their eyes and refuse the manifest light. For
he uses a very apt similitude and meet for the purpose. For although the
air be mutable, insomuch that one while tempests do sodaynlye arise, another
while it is calm and fair again: yet notwithstanding by nature men do know
by signs whether the day following will be fair or soul. Christ therefore
demau^deth of the Scribes and Phariseys why they do not know the kingdom of
God so openly revealed by euidente signs: for hereby it was manifest that
they were to much adicted and given to earthye and momentany things, insomuch
that they made no count of things spiritual: neither were they blinded so
much by error, as they were by wilful and obstinate malice: whereupon he
gives them that title whereof they were worthy saying.

3. And in the morninge: it will be foul weather to day, for the sky is
glouminge read. O ye hypocrites, ye can descerne the outward appearance of
the sky: but can ye not discern the signs of the times?

O ye hyprocrites C. Our savior calls them hypocrites because they seem
and said to seek that which they would not behold, being showed unto them.
Bu. As if he should have said, if in these earthye and small things ye be
such dilligente markers of signs, and are so prompte to judge of the
quallitye of tempests, why do ye not also know ye signs of these times? Ye
know the Law and the Prophets, which have forshewed signs of these times
which ye see before your eyes, by ye which ye might learn what is now done in
the kingdom of God. But ye have no care to know or understand any thing of the
kingdom of God: and whereas ye ask now a sign to be given you from heaven,
it proceeds of mere hypocrisy, and unbelief. Ye discern the outvvard
appearance A. The Latyne translation has, ye can discern the face of the
Heaven: and it is so called after the manner of the Hebrew phrase: as in
Genesis, the face of the earth, the face of the deep, the face of the waters:
again it is there said. Gene. 1.
And fowls that may flee upon the earth in the face of the firmament of
heaven. In the which place he called yt the face of the firmament of heaven,
which Christ takes here for the air.

But can ye not discern the Luke speaks in the singular number saying, how
happens it that ye cannot skill of this time? M. the signs of the time or
times in the which Christ should come, were the miracles of Christ, which the
Scribes and Phariseys hard dailye prophesyed by the Prophets as in the 35.
Chapter of Esaias. Esaias. 35.
Furthermore it was prophesyed of Judah after this manner. The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, Gene. 49.
and a Law geuer from between his feet, until he come which must be sent.
But then ye kingdom was taken from the Jews: for they were the^ subject to
the rule and Dominion of the Romans. They saw furthermore dyscorde for
religion among the people, in so much that a house was divided into many
parts, the father arysing against the son, and the son against the father.

These signs were set before all men to behold, yet notwithstanding the end
of them was not considered of the Scribes and Phariseis, because they made no
account of them, being addicted to their own glory, and deadly enemies unto
Christ. A. It is no maruayle therefore if he reprehended them so sharply,
when they would seem to seek yt which they desiered not. C. And this
reprehension pertayneth almost to ye whole world: for, because men do wholly
give themselves and apply their senses to ye use of those things that are
present, there is no man almost which in this part is not of sufficient
wisdom. How comes it to pass then that signs be so unsavory unto us, by
the which God calls us unto him, but only by this that every man geuinge
himself to voluntary slouthfulnes, choketh the light offered unto him? For the
calling of Christ and the present offering of eternal salvation was
manifest unto the Scribes as well by the Law and Prophets, as by his
Doctrine, to the which he added miracles. Many such there are at this day
which in doubtful things say yt they do justly suspend their judgment
because a certain definition must be looked for: yea they count this a hye
point of wisdom to seek all that they can to avoid all inquisition of the
truth. As though in deed they were not toto slothful to care for earthly and
carnal things so dilligently, and to neglecte the eternal salvation of ye
souls, and that under the vain pretense of gross ignorance. Of this place
certain unlearned men do very absurdlye gather yt it is not lawful by the
behoulding of the Heaven, to judge and conjecture of the temperature of
weather. For Christ rather argues and proves of ye true order of nature that
they do justly perish by their ingratitude which being wise enough in matters
of this present life, It is lawful to note and observe the outward apperaunce
of the Heavens.
do willingly obscure and ouerwhelme with their dulnes the light of heavenly
truth. M. It is not evil therefore to judge of the outward apperance of the
sky but rather profitable, and appertayninge to the glory of God, in his
creatures. But we do not yet hereby allow that superstitious observation, and
marking of the heavenly signs, by the which many take upon them to forshewe
and prophesy of wars, of plenty and scarcenes, of sicknesses and disseases
and such like. The works of God have C. Mark adds saying that Christ groned
in his spirit: by the which words he declares that he took it greuouslye
and bytterly when he saw these men careleslye to resist God. And truly it
becomes all those that seek the glory of GOD, and which have a care of the
health of men to be so minded, that nothing should more greuouslye wound
them, than when they see unbelievers to indeuer themselves to stop the way of
believing against them, and to refer all their wit and policy to that end,
that they may obscure the brightness of the word and works of God with their
clouds. B. The grief therefore which Christ had conceived extorted this
reproach against them to be called hypocrites.

4. The froward and aduouterous nation requires a sign, and there shall no
sign be given unto it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas. And he left them
and departed

The frovvarde and aduouterous A. Look for the exposition of this verce in the
twelfth Chapter going before. E. O wicked and aduouterous nation, far
degenerating from ye elders, whose title they challenge unto themselves.
Subtly it requires a sign from Heaven whereat to calumniate, but it shall be
given unto it which it abhors, and not a thing to carpe at. In the mean
time no sign shall be given them but out of the earth, because al their endeavors
shall be frustrate, when they shall see him reuyued, whom they thought to be
extinguished and buried. That seems wonderful unto them which happened to
Jonas the Prophet, the like sign and wonder shall be given to them, but more
wonderful. By this dark sentence the Lord Jesus signified that he should be
slain, and buried of them and by and by by his deuyne power rise again. C.
The sum therefore, and effect of these words is yt the Jews were satisfied
by no signs, but were tickeled and styrred up to tempte God by a wicked
desyer. For he does not simplelye call them an aduouterous nation, because
they required some sign, the which the Lord oftentimes granted to his
servants: but because of a set purpose they provoked God, he so calls them
and compares himself to Jonas.

Mark makes no mention of Jonas, yet notwithstanding the meaning of the two
Evangelists is all one.

And he left them and departed M. The Evangelist has not rashly or in vain
described the diverse and sundry journeys and perigrinations of our savior
Christ, for they were not taken in hand without good cause. He went oftentimes
from one place to another for their sakes whom he went to call, as appears
by this place, I must go and Preach to other Cities. Sometimes he departed
because of their unbelief and mallyce from whom he went: ^e. 4.
and such was the cause which we here read of. For the Euangeliste says
not simplely. And he departed: But, he left them and departed: to the end
he might show, that Christ being offended at the mallyce of the Phariseys and
Saduces, departed, because he would leave them in their blindness, and to teach
his Dysciples that ye doctrine of the kingdom of God, did nothing at all
profit among these kind of men. These things are to be noted that we may
learn to whom the doctrine of the Gospel doothe appertain, and to whom it
does not appertain. ^^ke. 8.
B. Moreover whyther Christ departed, the Evangelist Mark shows by these
words. And he left them and went into the ship again, and departed over
the water.

5. And when his Dysciples were come to the other side of the water they had
forgotten to take bread with them.

B. This historye the Evangelist Mark touches also, who in steed of that
which our Evangelist has here: they had forgotten to take bread with them,
says, and they had but one loaf in the ship. Peradventure Christ departed
sooner then the Dysciples looked for, and therefore they forgot to take bread.

C. Christ therefore by the occasion offered, exhorts his Dysciples to beware
of all corruption which might defyle and pollute sincere pietye and godlynes.
The Phariseys came a little before, who showed them selves to be infected with
poisoned obstinacye: and the Saduces came to bear them company: on the other
part stood Herod, that pestilente aduersarye and corrupter of sound doctrine:
among these dangers, it was necessary that the Dysciples should be
admonished to take heed unto themselves. For seeing the disposition of man is
naturallye inclyned to vanitye, and errors, when we are beset with perverse
feigned inuencions, with false doctrine, and with such like pestifferous
dangers, there is nothing more prompte and ready to swerue from the true and
proper puritye of the word of God, than the same. Error being once grounded
truth is abbolished.
And if it come to pass that we be once entangled, it never lightlye
happens that true Religion has perfect rule in us: but that this may
appear more euidient unto us let us way the words of Christ.

6. Then Jesus said unto them: take heed and bevvare of the leven of the
Phariseis and of the Saduces.

Take heed and bevvare S. Our savior Christ here uses a serious admonition
and forewarninge, by the which he declares that it is not given to every one
to discern and judge of false doctrine and to beware of the same. Of the leven
of the Phariseys C. In steed of the Saduces which are here joined to the
Phariseys, Mark 8.
Mark places Herod: Luke 12.
and Luke only makes mention of the Phariseys. Howbeit it is uncertain
whether Luke reherseth ye same Sermon of Christ: for he defyneth the leven to
be hypocrisye: and briefly passes over these words as though there were no
ambiguity or doubt at all in the same. False doctrine is compared to leven.
And although the metaphor of the leven which is here compared to false
doctrine, might in another place be referred to the hypocrisye of life and
manners: Yet notwithstanding it shall not be absurd if we say that those
things which Mark and Mathewe according to the order of the history do
handell at large, are more sparinglye set down of Luke, and that out of order,
and place: so that in deed there is no discrepance or disagreemente at all
between them, howsoever in words there may seem to be. And if it may be
lawful to follow this conjecture, hypocrisye will note unto us somewhat more
tha^ a feigned and counterfeyte show of wisdom, namely it will declare it to
be the wellspringe and original it self of vain pomp and glory, which
bearinge some great outward show before men, is of no price or estimation
with God. Ierem. 5.
For as the eyes of the Lord (as says Ieremye) do behold the truth: so by his
word he frames ye faithful to sound and perfect godlynes yt they may
clean unto righteousness with a sound and perfect heart, according to the saying
of the Lord. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
Deuteronomy. 10.
but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to love him, and to
serve him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. But contrariwise the
traditions of men, Traditions of men bring in hypocricye
spiritual worship laid a part, bring in deceytfull coullers as though God
might be taken by such flickeringe intisements. For although outward
ceremonies do excel and have a beutifull show, yet notwithstanding before God
they are as childishe toys and tryfels, sauinge only yt by their supportacion
and aid we are exercised and brought to true pietye and godlynes. Now let us
note and see why the Evangelist Luke has put hypocrisy instead of false
doctrine, and by this name comprehends the leven of men, which only puffs
up, but contains nothing that is sound before God: yea rather which brings
the minds of men, from the right study of Godlynes, to vain rytes and
ceremonies of no force. But because the exposition of our Evangelist Mathewe is
more euidente and plain, we will stand upon the same. When the Disciples
were reprehended of the Lord, they knew at the length that they were
commanded to beware and to take heed of Doctrine, it is most certain that
this was the meaning of Christ to the end he might fortifye them against
the present corruption with the which they were beset on every side: and
therefore he spoke of the Phariseys and Saduces: because those two sects did
rain tyrannically in the Church, and by their wicked opinions did oppressed
and keep under the Doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, insomuche that
nothing almost remained sound and perfect.

B. But what and how great this their Hypocrisy was, Christ himself by most
plain words in the three and twentye Chapter following declares, of the
which also we have noted many things in the fifte Chapter goinge before. He
calls their doctrine leven, because even as leven, it corrupted and infected
many.

Herod with the false teachers, which professed no such thing. We aunsweare
that forsomuche as he was half a Jew, Auns^
unlike to his auncetours, and disloyal, he sought by all means possible to
seduce the people that dwelt under his Dominion. For this is the manner of all
Apostatase, to make one myxsture or other, that a new Religion may arise, which
may abbolishe the first. Because therefore he went about craftily to subvert
and overthrow the principles of true and aunciente godlynes, to the end, that
Religion at the length might florishe which was most fit to his tyranny, yea
because he sought to bring in a certain new kind of Iudaysme: the Lord
does not without good cause command his Dysciples to take heed of his
leven also. For as the Scribes dispersed their errors out of the temple of
God: so the Court of Herod was a shop of Satan to forge and quyne other
errors. Even so at this day in the Papacy we see that Antechrist does show
out his deceyts not only in Temples and dens of Sophisters and Monks:
Anti^ Rom^ ^lye s^^^ his k^
but by the help and aid also of Courtelyke deuynes he stays up his
kingdom, so that no art, cunninge, or policy is wa^tinge to the same. But as
Christ did then prevent present euilles, and as he styrred up the minds of
his Dysciples to beware of those things that were noxious, and hurtefull: even
so by this example we being admonished, let us learn at this day wyselye to
take heed what corruptions may hurt us. More easlye may a man make fire and
water agree, Pope^tions a^ Gospe^ not agi^
then the feigned inventions of the Pope, with the Gospel. Whosoever therefore
desyereth to be unfeignedly a Dysciple of Christ, let him seek to keep his
mind pure, from those leuens. But and if he be infected and polluted
already, let him labor so long in purginge himself, until he find no
spot or blot any more cleaninge to him. M. But what this doctrine of ye
Phariseys and Saduces was, of the which Christ admonished his Disciples to
beware, it is to long by particulers to reherce: Two (...) of leven*
notwythstandynge it may be divided into two kinds. The did consist of the
external works of the law. For this matter we have noted

7. And they thought within themselves saying: we have taken no bread with us.

A. Some turn this and say. They contended among themselves: because Mark
for (...) has (...).

B. The Dysciples supposing that Christ spoke of the leven of bread, thought
that they were forbidden to eat bread with ye Phariseys, and that they
should count them as excommunicate: and thereupon it came into their minds
that they had taken no bread with them, and so they contended among
themselves for the same.

8. Which when Jesus understood, he said unto the^: O ye of little faith, why
take ye thought within your selves, because ye have brought no bread.

Which when Jesus knevve E. Namelye yt his Disciples were careful, because
they had forgotten to bring their vittayles into the ship, A. fearing for that
cause least they should want food: whereas notwithstanding they had him with
them which with nothing had fed so many thousands. C. By the which they show
again, how little they profited both by the doctrine of their Master, and also
by his wonderful works. Therefore according to their deserving he sharply
reproves them saying. O ye of little faith As if he should have said, why
does this care vex your mind, because you have forgotten to bring bread, as
though any thing should be wanting unto you, although ye provided not for
yourselues. C. This wicked and ungodly care proceeded of distrust. They therefore
which have no faith or ye which they have being very small, are found
sometime either very negligent, or else very careful, ^uste is ^se of ^erate
and that in vain. It comes of distrust that we are so exceeding careful
for things to come, whereas before time we have had experience of his help,
and have found him to be a helper in time of need. So yt if hereafter we do
distrust, we shall not only with the Dysciples be accused of little faith and
distrust, but also of ingratitude, which is the occasion of the defect and want
of faith. For ingratitude is ye cause, Ingratitude is the cause that we are
overcome in temptation.
that we are not only troubled in temptacion and trial, but also that we
are oftentimes overcome. C. Therefore all they are convinced of infidellity,
which having oftentimes felt the power of God, do distrust, and care out of
measure for the time to come. For as faith does cherish and keep the
remembrance of the gifts of God in our hearts, so unless the same be
brought a sleep, we shall never forget them.

9. Do ye not yet perceive, neither remember those five loaves, when there were
five thousand me^, and how many baskets took ye up? Do ye not yet per. E. The
Evangelist Mark says. Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye
your hearts yet blinded? have ye eyes and see not? and have ye ears and hear
not? do ye not also remember? As if he should have said, you being taught and
learned so many ways, do ye not yet understand? is your hearts yet blinded with
such cares? and after the manner of the Phariseys do ye not see that, which is
before your eyes? that which you hear with your ears is unto you as though
ye hard it not. By these words he teaches sufficientlye, yt we must not
have a sluggish or slepinge mind to get a sure trust and confidence in the
power and goodness of God, but such a mind, which in the works of God
understands his power and goodness.

Neither remember M. The forgetting of ye gifts, and wonderful works of God
does bring great hurt unto faith, and brings to pass ye he which has
received knowledge of Divine matters, does make no more account of the same,
then if he had never known what it had mente. And therefore Moses did
oftentimes inculcate and beat yt into the peoples heads, Deuteronomy. ^4. and 25.
saying: take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul dilligently yt thou
forget not the things, which thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not
out of thy heart, all ye days of thy life. And in ye Psalms, where it is
mentioned how the Isralites went back from God, but specially in the
threescore and eyghtene Psalm, where it is said. They kept not the covenant of
God and would not walk in his Law: Psalm 78.
but forgot what he had done, and the wonderful works that he had showed
for them. And our savior Christ at his last supper, when he sought to keep
and confirm his Dysciples in a sure trust, and true love toward him, he
instituted and ordained for a remembrance the Communion of his body and
blood, in the breaking of the bread, Matthew 26.
and in the communicatinge of the cup.

10. Neither the seven loaves, when there were four thousand men: and how
many baskets took ye up?

A This Historye is declared at large in the fyftene Chapter going before.

11. How happens it that ye do not understand, that I spoke it not to you
concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leven of the Phariseys, and of
the Saduces?

A. The fault of so gross ignorance he lays upon his Disciples. As if he
should have said, these things were not so lately done before your eyes: you
had even of late sufficient proof and experience of my power how comes it to
pass then, that so soon ye forget ye thing, which should be always in your
minds? Surely the only cause is ye gross blindness of your hearts.

12. Then understood they, how that he bade not them beware of the leven of
bread: but of the doctrine of the Phariseis, and of the Saduces.

Then understood they C. Our savior Christ took this name of leven in good
part, Math. 13.
when he said that the Gospel was like unto leven. But the Scripture very
often by this name means every corrupt and feigned invention by the which the
natural purity of every thing is defiled. In this place there is no agreement
between these two, namely between, ye simple veritye and truth of God, and the
feigned inuencions which men bring in, upon their own brain. Neither is there
any cause, why any sophister or subtle fellow should deny this to be
understood of every corrupt doctrine: saying that there can no other
doctrine be found which can sustain the name of pure and unleavened doctrine,
but that only which is come from God. Whereupon it follows, that that is
called leven, which is mingled or mixste, with any other thing: then that which
does pertayne to it self, according to the saying of S. Paul, 2. cor, ^
namely that ye faith of Christ is falsified so soon as we are led from the
simple truth of Christ. But of the doctrine of the Pha. C. At that time the
ordinary auctority of the Church did belong to the Scribes and Priests,
among whom the Phariseys were chief. When as Christ therefore by name
commands his Dysciples to beware of their Doctrine, it follows that all
they are to be shonned, and avoided, which join and tie their own inuencions
to the word of God, how honorable and mighty soever they seem to be.
Wherefore that subjection of those men is abhomible and accursed, which of
their own free will submit themselves to the laws and inventions of the Pope.

13. When Jesus came into the coasts of the Cittye which is called Caesaria
Philippi, he asked his Disciples saying, whom do men say that I the son of
man am?

When Jesus came Bu. In this present Historye, the Evangelist in a short
compendium sheeweth the whole sum of Mark ^ Luke ^
C. Mark says that Christ had this communication with his Dysciples as they
were in their iorneye. And Luke says he had it when he was praying, and had
no body with him saving his Disciples. But our Evangelist Matthew does not so
curiously note the time: yet notwithstanding it is most certain that they
three have written this History: and it may he that Christ in that
perigrination after he had prayed a while demanded this of his Disciples.

Into the parts of Casaria Philippi B. This Caesarca, is at the river of
Jordan, and was called at the first Panneas, but afterward it was called
Caesaria Philippi, by Philip the son of Herod the great, and the brother of
the Tetrarche, which beheadded John. The which Cesarea also after that, for the
honor of Nero, was called by Agryppa, Neronia, as apereth by Josephus, (...).
li. 18. (...). 3 de ^ui. and cap. 16.
in his eightene book of the antiquities of the Jews, and the third chapter.
But the bounds or borders of this Cesarea Philippi, was the region of the
Jews, whereupon it was inhabited both by the Syrians and Jews together.

Of this City there is often mention made by Luke, (...). 10.12.^1.
in the Acts of the Apostels. C. There is also an other Cesarea, namely that
ancient and noble Cesarea, which at the first was called the tower of Strato:
M. This City Herod the great builded, between Dora, and Ioppa, and for the
love of Augustus Caesar, he called it Caesarea. Of the first Caesarea our
Euangeliste makes mention, and because he would make a difference, he calls
it Cesarea Philippi.

Whom do men say that I the son of man, am? E. Our Savior Christ demanded
this question, to make him self better known unto his Disciples, (...). 17.
and to confirm the^, for in the knowledge of him only, there is salvation,
and everlasting life. He knew that the judgment, of the common sort of
people (as concerning him self) was diverse: He knew also the simplycitie of
his disciples, whereby it might have been that they had been hyndered and let,
from the knowledge of the truth by the errors of the common people.

C. Upon this consideration therefore, to confirm them, he does not only
demand what they, but first of all what the people thought of him. His
question might seem to be, to know what the common fame (as concerning the
redemer, which was the son of man) was. Notwithstanding his question is
other wise, namelye to enquire what men thought of Jesus the son of Mary.
But he, according to his manner takes unto him, the name of the son of man:
as if he should say, Now, so long as I am in my flesh upon the earth,
(...) the ^f man.
as one of the common sort of men, what do men judge of me? M. Christ does
wyllyngly confess the humility of his humanytie, so often as he calls him
self the son of man. for that also was ordained to the glory of God. This
humble and base form of the son of man, was an impediment, and let to the
Jews, to behold the glory of Christ. The son of man, is nothing else but
man, according to the phrase of the Scripture: as in this place: What is man
that thou art myndefull of him, Psalm. 8.
or the son of man that thou visitest him? And in an other place: what art
thou which fear a mortal man, Esaye. 5.
and the son of man, which is compared to grass?

14 They said: some say that thou art John Baptist, some Helias, some
Ieremias, or one of the number of the Prophets.

They said, some say that thou art C. Here is no mention made, neither of the
sworn ennemies of Christ, neither of profane contemners, but of the most
perfecteste and soundest part of the people, and even as it were, of the
chosen flowers of the Church. For the Disciples only rehearse those which
spoke honorablye of Christ: and yet notwithstanding the light being before
them, they came not to the same so exactly as they should, but rather harkened
to their own dreams, and fantasies. Whereby we may behold and see how great
the debilitie and weakness of man's wit and understanding is, in that, not
only he is not able to conceive any thing that is right or true, but also he
makes of true principles, errors, Moreover it may be, seeing Christ is the
only sign of concord and peace, by the which God gathers the whole world
to him self, that the greater part herupon takes occasion, of greater
disagrement. Among the Jews trewely, the unity of faith co^sisted upon no
other than upon Christ: and yet notwithstanding they which at the first
seemed to have some consent and agremente, are now swarued and fallen into
diverse opinions. We see also how one error brings forth an other. B. For
this diverse opinion of Christ, came partly of this, because the common sort
of people had another opinion in their mind first: namely that souls do
remove from one body to an other: The error of the Jews as concerning the
soul of man.
whereupon it came to pass that they were the more ready to this false
immagination. Yea there are many of the Jews at this day, which think that
every man is borne again three or four times. John the Baptist. M. As the
Herodians, of whom it was spoken before in the fouertene chapter.

Some Helias. Those that thought him to be Helias, took occasion so to think
by the prophecy of Mallachy, as concerning the coming of Helias, whom they
looked for to appear in his body again: with the which error also many at
this day are blinded, who believe that Henoch and Helias shall appear in their
bodies, and be as it were forerunners, before the second coming of Christ,
when as notwithstanding Christ him self taught that the same prophecy of
Helias, Math. 11.
was fulfilled in Iordane. Some Ieremias. Diverse were brought into this
opinion, because it was said unto Jeremy by the mouth of the lord, Ierem. 1.
Behold I put my words in thy mouth, and behold this day do I set thee
over the people, and kingdoms, that thou may root out, break of, destroy,
and make waste: and that thou may build up, and plant. And a littell after
he says: Behold, this day do I make thee a strong defensed town, an iron
pyller, and a brazen wall, against the whole land, against the kings and
mighty men of Judah, against the priests and people of the land. All which
things they thought should be fulfilled in Christ. Or one of the number of the
Prophets. M. In that they suspected Christ to be one of the dead Prophets,
the straungnes and unwonted sight of ye miracles might seem to give them
occasion so to think: for they thought that those which were so restored
from the dead to this life, were endued by God with far greater power and
virtue, than they were before when they were alive. C. But although the Jews
were after this manner divided among them selves by the coming of Christ,
yet notwithstanding the varietye of such opinions ought not to be a let or
hynderance to the godly, but that they may seek to attain and get the pure
knowledge of Christ. For if any man under the cloak and pretense of the variety
of opinions, give himself to ydlenes, and neglects to seek Christ, the same
shall be quyte void of excuse, yea though we might be his Judges. Much less
then shall he escape the judgment of God which for sects and the diuersitye
of opinions forsakes Christ. Furthermore in that the Jews doubted of the
person of Christ, we see that Satan has gone about this even from the
beginning that he might revoke and call men back from the true knowledge of
Christ himself, and set before them new forged and invented Christ's. Th^^ of
(...)
And because he could not quight pluck that perswation out of the minds of
the Jews which they had conceived of Christ to come, he therefore set before
them false Christ's. They there fore erred in the person of Christ. But ye
enemies of the Gospel by the craft and subtiltye of Satan, do err in the
office of Christ, whereabout they contend: they acknowledge him to be ye son
of God, but they spoil him of his power, some more, some less, insomuche that
they make him a vain spectacle and glass to look in: herevppon also it
comes to pass that there are at this day so many opinions of Christ: the
which opinions ought not to hinder our faith were they never so many, as we
said all ready even now.

15. He says unto them: but whom say ye that I am?

He says unto them: Antith^ comp^^ things ^trarye.
C. The Antithesis is to be noted. For he sets his Dysciples before men to
the end it may appear how absurd a thing it is, that because other men do
disagree, we should therefore be withdrawn from the unity of faith. For
whosoever addicte and give themselves simplely to Christ, and seek not to ^^de
any thing of their own head to his Gospel, shall never want the true light.
But here is required intentyue watchinge that when the world slydeth away to
their own feigned inuencions then that they in any wise hold themselves fast
by Christ. Satan will never leave of to seek either to tear Christ in pieces
or else to put on another person. Wherefore among the confused and iarrynge
voices of the world, let ever this voice of Christ sound in our ears, by
the which we shall be separated from wandering and straying men, that we be not
of the common multitude, and that our faith be not carried among the contrary
waves of opinions. For how diuersely so ever men judge of Christ, his true
disciples notwithstanding shall have a certain faith, neither are they
troubled, because they se men disagree among them selves: they acknowledge
Christ to be the son of god, they know the end of his coming, and they are
not ignorant of the power wherewithal he is indewed. Christ therefore discerns
his from the multitude, when by distinct and sole interrogation he says, But
whom say ye that I am? And requires a more certain and full knowledge of him
self, of those that are his. As if he should say: But ye which have now
heard such great matters of me, and which are the witnesses of my works, I
say, what do ye think of me? Whom say ye that I am? M. Christ is not
satisfied and sufficiently contented, ^ssion of ^with ^th is ^ed of Chri^
that we judge well of him with our heart, but he also requires that we
confess him with the mouth. He says not whom do ye believe me to be: but he
says, whom say ye that I am? when as therefore Christ meant to send his
Apostels into the world as witnesses of him, to whom it was not enoughe to
think well of him, but also to teach openly that they thought well of him:
this (I say) considered, he does justly require the confession of the light:
otherwise he was not ignorant what they would judge of him.

Bu Therefore all other things ouerpassed and set aparte, specially when as to
be wise after the manner of the common sort of people, is to be foolish,
let us know that it is not sufficient to confess Christ, after the opinion
of the common multitude.

16 Simon Peter answered and said: Thou art Christ the son of the living
God.

Simon Peter answered. B. Peter answers for all the rest: because as the
Gospel testifies, he was always more fervent and ready to put forth him
self, then the rest. So in another place, when Jesus said, John. 6.
will ye go away? Then Simon Peter in the name of all the rest answered and
said, Lord to who^ shall we go? thou haste the words of eternal life, and
we believe and are sure that thou art Christ the son of the lyuinge God.
Peter was the mouth of the Apostels.
How Simon was called Peter, read the first Chapter of John and there ye may
see.

Thou art Christ C. A short confession of Peter, yet notwithstanding such a
confession as contains the whole sum of our salvation. For under the name
and title of Christ both the everlasting kingdom, and Priesthood, is
contained, that our sins being put away by the sacrifyce of his death, he
might reconcyle us unto God, and purchase unto us perfect righteousness. And
that we being received into his safegarde and defense, he might inriche us
and bestow upon us all kind of blessings. The Euangeliste Mark has: thou
art Christ. But Luke has thou art the Christ of God.

Yet both of them spoke in one sense, for in times paste, 1. Kings. 24.
kings were called the Christ's of God, that is to say the anointed of God.
And this manner of speech Luke uses in another place, saying that Symeon had
received an aunsweare of the holy ghost, yt he should not see death, Luke 2.
except he first saw the Lords Christ. For it was in deed the deuyne
redemption, which God offered by the hand of his son. It was necessary
therefore for him which should be ye redemer, to come famous and excellent
from Heaven by the annoyntinge of God. Read the.16. verce of the first Chapter
going before. This our Euangeliste does more plainly then ye other two
express Christ to be The son of the lyuinge God, For although Peter as yet
did not (peradventure) understand so distinctly how Christ should be begotten
of God: yet notwithstanding he did believe him to be of such excellencye, the
he had his original and beginning of God, not as other men, but that the true
and lively deytye dwelte in his flesh. M. Furthermore he calls him the
lyuinge God, because he only having life in himself, Acts. 17.
quickens all things, and because in him we live, move, and have our
being. C. There is therefore a difference between the true God, and the deadde
Idols which are nothing. John. 17.
B. Peter trewly in this confession confesses the father and the son, in the
knowledge of whom consists everlasting life. It follows therefore.

17 And Jesus answered and said unto him: Happy art thou Simon, the son of
Jonas, for flesh and blood, has not opened that unto thee, but my father
which is in heaven.

And Jesus answered and said unto. M. These words declare with what
thanckefull affection our Savior Christ received the answer of Peter: by
the which also we see, how great love he bears toward those that are his,
and how much he rejoices over our felicity. He does not reiecte the answer
of Peter, but confirms it, C. and pronounces him to be blessed in deed,
Luke. 4. Math. 8.
which unfeignedly with heart and mind confesses the like. Bu. I say with
heart and mind we must confess: for the devil also confesses, but not with
his heart. C. But Christ spoke not this only to Peter, but he meant to declare
wherein the only felycitie of the whole world consisted. And to the end all
men with the more earnest affection may aspire, and come to the same, first of
all we must note, that all men by nature are miserable and accursed, until
they find remedy at the hands of Christ. Then, whosoever has gotten
Christ, nothing pertayninge to parfecte blessedness can be wantinge to him,
saying that we can wyshe for nothing better then the everlasting glory of God,
to the possession of the which glory, Christ brings us.

Happy art thou Simon the son of Jonas. The latten text has, Math. 21.
Simon Bar-Iona: which is as much to say, as Simon the son of Jonas, or the
son of John: as may appear by this place, where it is said, Simon Iohanna,
loueste thou me more then these? Jonas is here put for Iohanna by contraction:
for in that age they did commonly use the Chaldee tongue, unless peradventure
his father had two names, Iona and Iohanna. Notwithstanding all the ancient
Greek books with one consent read it Jonas, sauinge one only, and here in
this place of our Evangelist, and in the first, and.xxi. chapters of John, we
read Jonas, in the latten text Iona, Bar-Iona in the latten text, is put in
steed of the syrname, the which the Hebrews have not.

Because flesh and bloudde has not opened. A. As if he should have said,
Man has not revealed this unto thee: according to the common phrase of the
Scripture, where often times flesh and bloudde is put for man. As in the
prophecy of Esaias, Esaias. ^
The glory of the lord shall appear, and al flesh shall at once se it. Gala, ^
And the Apostel Paul says, I comuned not of the matter with flesh and
blood. etc. Again, Ephe^
we strive not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against power, etc.
Also S. John says, that they which believe in the name of Christ, are not
begotten of blood, or by the will of the flesh, but by the will of God. C.
Christ therefore in this place under the person of one man admonishes all men
to ask faith of his father. and to attribute unto him the dew praise of his
grace. Whereby we gather that the minds of men do want that understanding by
the which they might perceive and know the mysteries of heavenly wisdom,
hidden in Christ: yea all the senses of men do quayle in this part, until
such time as God does open our eyes, that we may see his glory in Christ:
Let no man therefore proudely burst forth, trustinge to his wit and
understanding: but let us humbly suffer our selves to be taught in our
hearts, by the father of lights, that his spirit alone may illuminate our
darkness. And let all those which are endued with faith, and which know
their own blyndnesse, learn to attribute that unto god which belongs unto
him. Mat^
M. This sentence agrees with that which we heard even now, in the
eleuenthe chapter, where it was said, No man knows the son, but the
father. And Christ in an other place says. Every one which has heard and
learned of the father comes unto me. By the which words he plainly
declares that says is the gift of God: lest we should attribute any thing
to our own wit and strength. To be short, lest we should impute that to our
selves which is proper to God. ^his the ^of God.
M. Furthermore we learn hereby ye faith is not a thing of so small weight,
that it should be common to all men, when as we here in this place, that it
comes to none, but to such to whom it shall please the father to give it,
There are many truly, which deny not this faith with the mouth, but confess
the same: but from whence did they receive it? Surely not from the father,
which is not the father of all men, but only of the elect: but it came from
flesh and bloudde, that is, from the institution of the parents, of whom
theye have received the same, as a certain opinion: and because they have
received the same of men, and not of God, therefore they have neither received
the same trewly, neither have they it aright, neither are they blessed in
deed, neither can they be said justly to believe. Wherefore we speak not of
these, nor of their faith, when we teach that faith does iustifye a man, and
bring him to salvation and blessedness: but we speak of those, which as they
are chosen, so they receive from God this revelation of faith, being lively
and of force. Whereupon I wish that every man would beware that he seduce not
him self, but that he prove and try from whence he has received his faith.
In the mean time we must here take heed that we reject not ye use of
preaching the Gospel, because of the fathers revelation. The father truly
reuealeth his son by the holy ghost, the which is therefore called the
spirit of revelation. But yet that spirit uses the ministry of the word,
(...). 1. (...). 3.
Whereupon the Apostels are called the ministers of the spirit: As apereth in
the epistelles of S. Paul to the Corinthians and Galathians.

Which is in heaven. A. Hereby we gather that the preaching of the Gospel,
which concernethe and belongs only to Christ, and a christian man's
faith, is not of man, but of the father in heaven.

18 And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock, I will
build my congregation. And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

And I say unto thee. M. Because that Peter by his confession gave the due
honor unto Christ. Now Christ also after he had confirmed this confession,
shewethe what he judges of him, and also what account his father makes of
him for this confession. Thou art Peter. Bu. The lord promised that he would
give this name unto Peter, as may appear by the words of John saying. chap. 1.
Andrewe found his brother Simon first, and says unto him we have found
Messiah, (which is by interpretation anointed) and brought him to Jesus. And
Jesus beheld him, and said: thou art Simon the son of Jonas, thou shall be
called Cephas: which is by interpretation Peter. Now the lord confirms that
which he had promised, because he would not seem to have given him ye name
before in vain: and because the lively stone might still abide fyrme in the
temple of God. B. He is called Peter of this word Petra.

For although Peter and Petra, Peter signifies a stone.
differ nothing with the Greeks, and both of the^ signify a stone, yet
notwithstanding it is certain that the Evangelist meant to signify some
diversity, otherwise there was no need of variety. Therefore the name of
Peter was derived of the primitive Petra, a stone. As if he should have said,
I promised that thou should be called Peter, now I give thee ye name, and
will have thee so syrnamed, because thou art endued with that faith, which
being like to an immovable stone shall never fall, but shall abide firm and
sure. C. Although this is extended to all the faithful which are the temples
of God, Ephe. 2.
and being knit together in faith, are made one temple: yet notwithstanding the
singular excellency of Peter is noted among the rest: even as every one in
his order receives either more or less, according to the measure of the
giving of Christ. Christ therefore commends Simon for the firmenes of his
faith, by the which (many other of the Jews, erring in the knowledge of
Christ) he firmly stood in the truethe, which he had learned by the deuyne
revelation of God.

And upon this rock I will build my congregation, B. That is to say. upon
this thy firm confession, by the which thou do acknowledge and believe me
to be Christ the son of the living God, I will build my church, that is,
all those which I mean to acknowledge and take for my church, flock, and
famylie, will I indewe by my spirit, with the like faith, for I will seek to
teach and instruct the^ in this, by my ministers. For as the Apostell Paul
says, He has appointed some to be Apostelles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and teachers: to the edifyinge of the saints, to
the work and ministration, even to the edyfyinge of the body of Christ. etc.
And the edifyinge of God consistethe in faith, 1. Timo. 1.
as the same Apostell Paul testifies. That which our Evangelist Matthewe
calls here a Rock, 1. cor. 3.
the Apostell Paul calls a foundation, saying. An other foundation can no
man lay, then it that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Ephe 2.
And in an other place: Now therefore, ye are not strangers, and forreners: but
Cittezens with the saynctes, and of the household of God, and are builte upon
the foundation of the Apostels and Prophets, Jesus Christ him self being the
headde corner stone. 2. cor, 10.
etc. This word of edifyinge or building is very familiar to Christ and the
Apostels, contrary to the which, is destroying. C. But by this place it does
appear how the name of Peter does belong both to the name of Simon, and also
to all other that are faithful: because al they that are builded upon the
faith of Christ, are made by holy consent and unity into a spiritual
building, that God may dwell in the midst of them. For Christ declaring that
this should be the common foundation of the church, meant to gather and bring
all that to Peter, which should in the world belong to all the Godly: as if he
should have said, Ye are now truly a small number of men, and therefore
this your confession has small dignity at this time: but shortly the time
will come when the number shall increase, and be greatly enlarged. And this was
of no small force, to animate and encourage the disciples to constancy,
namely, that although their faith was obscure and base, yet notwithstanding
they were chosen of the Lord, as the first fruits, that at the length of
that contemptible and base beginning, a new Church might spring and arise.
which church should be a conqueror even against hell gates: as we shall here an
on. I will buyld my congregation. M. The latten translation, has Ecclesiam
meam, my Church, which is a Greek word, and signifies a congregation, or
conuocatio^ of people. The which word the threscore and ten interpretours used,
so often as in the old testamente they red this word Cahal, or Edah, which
two words signify a congregation, flock, or multitude. Psalm. ^
As in the.xxii. Psalm, In the myddeste of the congregation will I praise thee.

And in the fyftene chapter of the book of nombers, Num^
there is mention made of this word congregation, three times at the least.
And in Deutronomye it is said, De^^
Into the congregation of the lord. etc.

Moreover in Exodus, Ex^^
the four and thirty chapter, we have this word congregation, and in the
seventh Psalm. Psal^
The which word, the threscore and ten interpretours sometime call by the
name of Synagogge, and sometime by the name of Church. But in this place,
Christ calls every congregation, flock, corporation, and society of
faythefull men, his church, whom God has chosen to everlasting life in the
same says, hope, and love of the spirit, in what place of the world soever
they be. This Church was at all times, as in the time of Adam, Noe, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, and in the time of all the Prophets, although it
were but small. There was a Church of the Jews, and of the Gentiles: and
there is a Church or congregation as yet at this day, of the faithful which
believe the same salvation, and remission of sins, by Christ, although he
was made man, and suffered. There has been always but one Church, the headde
whereof is Christ, as the Apostel Paul teachethe in his epistell to the
Ephesians. Eph^
Oftentimes the Church is taken for the Seniors of the Church, as in this
place, If he bear not them, Mat^
tell the Church, if he hear not the Church, let let him be unto thee as an
Ethnike or a Publicane. M. Let them therefore see which at this day boast and
glory in the title of the Church, being in deed ennemies of the Church, what
head they have and of whose congregation they are members. The woulfe loves
the shepefoldes but not as a sheep, not as the pastor, but as a wulfe. We must
also note this, that Christ said not to Peter, I will build thy Church, but
my Church: that we may know the church to belong to Christ, and not to Peter.
(...). 10. (...) 21.
For Peter is not lord of the Church, but Christ. Christ says that his
sheep are every where. And the Apostels call those that are Christians the
flock of the lord, not their own flock: they acknowledge them selves to be
mynisters, ^^er. 5.
and not lords. Herupon the Apostell exhorted the bishops to reign over their
flock, not as lords, but as geuers of good insaumple to their flock.

^hurche ^geth to (...), not (...) Pope.
The church therefore belongs to Christ and not unto any one man. It is given
to him of the father, of whom as a son he has received al things with full
power. And then, beyond the right of the first begotten, (...). 20.
be redeemed his Church or inheritance, with a great price, even with his own
preciouse blood. And in an other place it is said, (...). 7. (...), 5.
Ye are boughte with a great price, be not therefore the servants of men. Also
in an other place, Christ dyed for all men, that they which live might not
live unto the^ selves, but unto him which died for them. And again. No man
lives to him self, and no man dies unto him self, for whether we live or
die, (...). 14.
we are the lords. for Christ dyed and rose again, that he might be lord
both of the quick and the dead. They greatly err therefore. which seek for
rule in the flock and congregation of the lord: and also which refusing to
submytte them selves to the power and domynion of Christ, lay their heads
under the feet of men.

And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Z. The gates of Cities
for the most part are very strong, ^ates ^ot pre^ against (...).
and have percullices to set before them. C. Therefore by the name of Gates, all
kind of force and munition is noted. Z. and by hell Gates all Satanicall and
deuelishe power is to be understood. These promises are great and most firm,
which do pacify and comfort the consciences of the faithful, when they
consider them selves, to be so setteled and granted, that they know for a
suertie, how they are able to resist all the power of Satan. According to
the saying of saint Paul. Roma. 8.
There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. And, If God be
with us, who can be against us? who spared not his own son, but gave him for
us: how then should he not with him give us all things? Who shall say any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? etc.

C. Although the pronoune (it) may be referred either to the rock, to faith,
or to the Church, yet notwithstanding the latter sense does better agree,
namely that the firm state of the Church shall stand immovable, and
invincible against all the power of Satan: and that because the treweth of God
shall for ever endure. 1. John. 5.
Also to this sentence agrees the saying of John. This is the victory which
overcomes the world, even our faith. M. Christians therefore hold them
fast by the true rock. being so firmly builded upon the same, that
nothing can overthrow them. For this is a most sure and certain promise,
that they which are united in Christ, and acknowledge him to be their
mediatoure, shall even to the worlds end be defended from all harm. For that
which is spoken of the body of the Church, pertains to every particular
member of the same, in that they be one in Christ: A. According to the saying
of our savior Christ. I know my sheep, and they follow me, John. 10.
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand. Notwithstanding we are here taught,
Christ's congregation so long as it is on earth, shall ever be subict to
persecutions.
that so long as the church is upon the earth, it shall never be quiet, but
still subject to reproach and ignominy. For in that the Church is said to
have the preemynence over Satan. it is evident that Satan shall still seek to
destroy it. But let us by this comfortable voice of Christ, glory and
tryumphe over him void of all fear and care: seeing that Christ is our
captain and conqueror.

19 And I will give unto thee, the keys of the kyngedome of heaven: and what
so ever thou byndest in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and what so ever
thou lousest in earth, shall be loused in heaven.

And I will give unto thee, the keys. C. Here our savior Christ begins
now to entreat of the public office, or of the Apostelship, the dignity
whereof is adorned with a double title. for Christ says B. The Metaphor is
herupon taken, because the chief power of the house, and of the city, is in
his power and rule, which has the chief custody and use of the keys, for
that he may let into the house or city, whom he will and seclude and keep out
whom he list.

Hereupon the lord, when he promised to Eliakim, the son of Helkia the
servant of king Ezechias, the chief power in the kings court in
Jerusalem, he spoke thus by the Prophet Esaias, The keye of the house of David
will I lay upon his shulder, Esaias. 22:
so that he shall open, and no man shall shut. He shall shut and no man shall
open. For there he prophesied of this Eliakim, speakinge of Sobna, which was
the chief governor of the kings house thus, In that day shall I call my
servant Eliakim, the son of Helkia. And with thy garments will I clothe him,
and with thy girdell will I strengthen him, and thy power will I commit into his
hand, and he shall be a father of such as dwell in Jerusalem and in the house of
Judah. The same metaphor the lord used in an other place saying, Woo unto you
Lawyers: for ye have taken away the keie of knowledge, Luke. 11.
ye entered not in your selves, and them that came in ye forbad, that is to
say, ye withstode the doctrine of the kingedome of God, lest it should be
brought out to the^, that they might be partakers of the same. C. Christ
therefore says that the Scribes and Phariseies which were interpretours of ye
law, had the keye of knowledge, or the key of the kingdom of heaven: for we
know that the gate of life is opened no otherwise unto us then by the word of
God. The (...) is the (...) life.
Whereupon it follows yt the key is given into the hand of the ministers
thereof. Notwithsta^dinge it is demanded why the lord promised yt he would give
that unto Peter, Math^ Auns^
which he seemed to have given before at the making of the Apostels. But this
question is answered before, where we said that the twelve were but forerunners
for the time: so yt when they returned unto Christ again, they had finished
ye race and end of their calling. But after that Christ rose again from
death, then they were appointed ordinary teachers of the church: and in this
respect this honor pertained unto the^ ever after. Bu. Therefore he says here,
I will give: and not I have given. He promises that he will give the keys, he
gives them not. But after his resurrecttion he said unto them, Peace be unto
you. As my father sent me, eue^ so send I you also. And when he had said these
words, he breathed on them, and says unto the^, John. ^
receive ye the holy ghost. Who so euers sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them. And who so euers sins ye retain, they are retained. In the which
words, As my father sent me. etc. there is a comparison, not an equality.
For Christ was sent, yt he might be the redemption of the whole world: the
Apostels were not so sent, but only to preach. But as Christ was sent, of the
father, for the salvation of the whole world: so the Apostels were sent to
prech this salvation, yt they which believe their preachinge, might be saved, as
if he had heard Christ him self: as he says in another place, He which
hears you hears me. Moreover he says not, They shall be given, but I will
give: Luke, ^
by ye which words Christ challenges all this power of the kingdom of heaven
to him self, as lord in so much that he might commit the same to whom it
pleased him. For here it makes no great matter, not only who receives, but of
whom any thing is received.

And what so ever thou bindest in earth. C The second metaphor or symilitude
pertayneth properlye to note the remyssion of sins. ^^ssion of ^^es by the
^pell.
For Christ delyueringe us by his Gospel from the everlasting pain of
death, louseth the snares and fetters of maledyction, with the which we were
held bound. Therefore he declares that the doctrine of the Gospel was
ordained to louse our bands, that being loused in earth by the voice and
testimony of me^. we might also in deed be loused in heaven. B. But this
metaphor is taken of this, (...) 42.49 (...) 61.
yt the Prophets do preach, that the office of christ is to louse peculiarly
those that are bound. So Christ him self speaks unto Paul, saying, I will
send thee to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, that they may be turned from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, ^es. 26.
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among those
which are sanctified by faith. Where he expounds that to be the power of the
keys, which consists in the remission, and retayninge of sins.

Bu. The Apostelles did never after any other manner louse or bind. As for
example: ^s. 2.
Repent you (says the Apostell Peter) of your sins, and be baptized every
one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.

Thus Peter used the keys that were committed unto him, thus he loused in
earth promissynge remission of sins, by the word of Christ to them that
believe. Yea and Christ ratified and confirmed this message and preachinge of
Peter. for to them that confessed their sin, and trusted to his mercy, he
remytted, as Peter had promised. Also the Iayler of the prison said to Paul
and Sylas, (...). 16.
Syrs, what must I do to be saved? and they said believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved, and all thy houssholde. Behold the Apostelles
do louse him that is bound, forgeuyng him his sins, and that by the keys,
by the preaching of the Gospel, the which preaching, because he believed,
the lord pronounces him to be loused in heaven. C. But because a great many
do not only wickedly reiecte the delyueraunce offered unto them, but also by
their obstinacy, do bring more greuouse judgment to them selves, the power
of bindynge also, and the commandment of the Gospel is given to the
ministers. Of the which matter we have an example in the Acts of the
Apostelles.

Bu. The Jews (says saint Luke) were full of indignation, and spoke against
those things, which were spoken of Paul, raylinge on it: Then Paul and
Barnabas waxed bold, and said. It was meet that the word of God should first
have been preached to you. But saying ye put it from you, and think your
selves unworthy of everlasting life: lo we turn to the Gentiles, Acts, 13.
for so has the Lord commanded us. Again, when the same Paul had
playnelye preached to the Jews, remyssion of sins by faith in Jesus
Christ, Acts. 18.
they having said contrary, and blasphemed, he shoke his raiment, and said
unto them: your bloudde be upon your own heads, from henceforthe will I go
blameless to the Gentiles. By the which means truly he bound the
unfaithful, and the word of God was fulfilled. For so long as the Jews
persisted in their obstynate and rebelliouse belief, the bonds of their
sins were not loused. Binding pertayneth to the Gospel.
In like manner in an other place Peter bound Simon Magus, with these words,
Thy money peryshe with thee, because that thou have thought the gift of God
might be bought with money: Acts 8.
thou haste neither part nor fellowshippe in this business, for thy heart is
not right before God.

By these examples we see, how the Apostels did bind and louse, remyt, and
retain sins. C. How be it we must note, that to bind and retain sins,
is a thing accidental to the Gospel, and as it were contrary to nature: as
Paul also teaches, 2. Cor. 10.
when he speaks of vengeance, ye which he says he is ready to take on al
disobedience: and by and by he adds, when your obedience is fulfilled. For
unless the reprobate, by their own fault should turn their life to death
and destruction, the Gospel should be to every one, the power of God to
salvation: yet notwithanding, because the same being heard, the impiety of
many, openly bursting forth, does more provoke the wrath of God to such it
must needs be a deadly sauoure. To be short, the intent and purpose of Christ
was to certify his disciples of the salvation promised unto them in his
Gospel, that they might have no more doubt to seek for the same, than if he
him self should come a witness from heaven: Again he mente to bring a
terror and fear to the minds of the wicked, and contemners, lest they
should think to mock and despise the mynisters of his word, vnponished:
the which two things were very necessary. For, because the incomparable
treasure of life is set before us in earthen vessels unless the authority
of the external doctrine were after this manner stablished and confirmed, 2.
cor, 4.
every momente almost the faith and credit thereof would fail, and vanishe
away, Again, the wicked do thus bouldly dally and scoff, because they thyncke
that they have only to do with men. Christ therefore pronounces that by the
preachinge of the Gospel in earth. it is revealed, what the celestial
judgment of God shall he: and that from no other thing we ought to fetch
the certainty of life or death. Here appears great honor, that we are the
interpretours of God, to testify salvation to the world. An excellent
majesty is it of the Gospel, that there is an imbassage said to be between
God and men of mutual reconciliation. The Gospel is a reconsiliacion between
God and man.
To be short, a wonderful consolation and comfort is it, to the minds of
the Godly, that the message of salvation, brought unto them by a mortal man,
is confirmed and ratified before God. In the mean time let the wicked and
ungodly scoff and deryde at their pleasure, the doctrine which is preached by
the commandment of God: at the length they shall feel, how truly and
seryousely God threatened them by the mouth of men. Many trewelye do despise,
blaspheme, and rail at the Gospel: but when this power of binding is given to
the mynisters of his word, let not ieringe scorners think that they shall be
suffered to deryde the word of God without ponishement.

Wherefore let all Godly teachers, being armed with this trust and confidence,
promise without all doubt, this lively grace of God to the^ selves, and to
others: and let them no less boldly thunder against all impudent contemners
of their doctrine.

Christ truly went not about to flatter Peter, but to comfort him, and to
show, that a new revelation must not be looked for from heaven, but that we
must be sure and certain of the doctrine which is taken out of the Gospel.
Hitherto we have plainly expounded the proper and true sense of the words, in
such wise, that nothing can be wanting, unless that Romish Antechrist, seking
to bring in a cloak for his tyranny, dare take upon him, wickedlye falsely to
pervert the true meaning of this place. And although the light it self of
true interpretation, which we have brought, be sufficient to pourge his
obscure darkness yet notwithstanding, lest any thing should stay or hinder the
godly readers, we will with a brefe confutatio^ wipe away his stinkynge and
unsavory calumniations. First of all, he fayneth and immagineth Peter to be the
foundation of the Church. But what man is he so blind that sees not, that
to be spoken of the faith of Peter, which he refers to the person of man.
We grant that in Greek Peter and Petra (a stone) do signify al one thing
(as is showed before) saving that Peter is Nomen Atticum, and Petra a name of
the common speech: but this variety was not without cause noted of Matthew:
for the kind is altered to note some other matter. And there is no doubt, but
that Christ with his own words did note some difference. Augu^
Very wisely therefore does S. Austine teach us, that Petra (a stone) is not
so called of Peter, but Peter of Petra, eue^ as we are called christians of
Christ. 1. cor. ^
But we will not be tediouse: seeing ye saying of Paul is most certain and an
infallible truth, Ephe ^
when he says that the church of Christ can be founded, and builded upon
nothing, saving upon Christ only. The Pope can not bring in an other fou^datio^
without blasphemy, and without he rob Christ of his honor. And truly how
much we ought to detest and abhor the tyranny of the Pope and papacye,
^christ of ^^e takes ^r the fou^^on of the ^che.
I can not with words express sufficiently, because by the means of him and
his, the foundation of the church is taken away, insomuch yt the open mouth and
goulfe of hell swalloweth up miserable sowles. Moreover this part (as it was
said before) pertains not as yet to the public office of Peter, but only
one special place among the rest, amid ye holy stones of the temple, is given
unto him. Those glorious titels which follow do pertain to the office of the
Apostelship. whereupon it follows, that nothing was spoken to Peter which
pertains not to the rest of the Apostels also. For if the dignitye of the
Apostelshippe be common among them, then must all things else be common which
are annexed and knit to the same. But Christ speaks only to Peter by name.
For as one in the name of all confessed Christ to be the son of God, so in like
manner Christ speaks to one, whose words notwithstanding pertain
indifferently to all the rest.

Neither is that reason of Cipprian and others to be rejected, ^^ian.
when he says that Christ spoke to all in the person of one, that he might
commend the unity of the Church. ^^he su^^cie.
Notwithstanding Peter's successor (the Pope I mean) makes exception and
says, that he to whom these words were specially spoken, and to whom the
foresaid power was committed, was preferred before all the rest. But this is as
much as if they should contend and go about to prove that he was a greater an
Apostell then all the rest of his fellows. For the power of binding and
lousing ca^ no more be taken from the office of teaching and Apostelshyp, than
can the light or heat be taken from the son, But let us grant yt Peter had
a prerogative among the rest, to excel the rest: yet notwithstanding very
folishely do the Papists infer and seek to prove that the supremacye was given
unto him to be ye general head of the church. For there is a difference between
dignity and empire: neither is it all one to have honor among a few, and to
gather the whole world under his dominion and rule. And truly Christ laid no
more weight on him than he was able to bear. He is commanded to be a porter or
door keeper of the kingdom of heaven: Peter was made a door keeper of the
kingedome of heaven.
he is commanded to dispense and bestow the grace of God in binding and
lousyng, and to execute his judgment in earth, namely, so far as the power of
a mortal man may extend it self. Therefore, what soever is given unto him, it
must be restrained to ye mesure of Grace: with the which he is endued, to the
edification and building of the church. Thus ye huge and monstrous e^pire
which the papists falsely arrogate to the^ selves falls down and is
overthrown. But although there were no controversy about Peter, yet
notwithstanding there comes nothing herupon to the tyranny of ye Pope. For
there is no man in his right mind, yt will grant this princelike power to the
papists which they take to them selves, saying yt it was given here to Peter,
and that he might bequeth and dispose the same afterward to his posterity as
his birthright and inheritance. for he is not permitted to give any thing to
his successors wherefore ye papists make him liberal of an other man's goods,
and of ye which pertains not to him. To conclude, how long soever ye
succession should continue, yet notwithstanding the Pope shall get nothing
thereby, until he be proved the lawful successor of Peter. Peter dyed at Rome.
But how proves he this? For because Peter died at Rome.

As though Room by ye horrible slaughter and death of ye Apostel sought to
get unto it self the supremacy. But they immagin that he was also bishop there:
how fond this imagination is, littel children ca^ not be ignorant. Furthermore
although the Roman bishop had been ye successor of Peter, yet notwithstanding
when he deprived him self of so great honor by his falsehod and disloyalty,
what soever Christ gave to the successors of Peter, profits him nothing at
all. It is well known yt the Popes court is at Room: but as for the sign of
a church they show none at all there. It is far from the office of a pastor,
to be ambiciouse, and to contend for lordeshyppe and Empire. Trewely how much
so ever Christ bestowed in extollinge the heirs of Peter, yet notwithstanding
he was not prodygall that he would give his honor to Apostatas. It is most
certain that Christ sought so much to extol and magnify the persons, as he
did the doctrine of the Gospel, and the dignity thereof: both to condemn
the ingratitude of men toward God and his doctrine, and also to encourage his
disciples boldly to execute their office.

20 Then charged he his Disciples, that they should tell no man, that he was
Jesus Christ.

Bu. Christ here forbids his disciples to promulgate and publishe that
which they had confessed: the which might make a man marvel, seeing that he
came to be the salvation of the Jews, and the light of the Gentiles. M. Was
not that true which Peter in his own name, and in the name of his fellows
confessed? yes verily. Furthermore was not this knowledge of the truth
necessary to salvation? yes undoubtedly, had not Christ also enjoined this
office of preaching to his disciples before? Answer.
if we remember that which was declared and expounded in the tenthe chapter
before, when Christ sent forth his Apostelles to preach: namely that they were
not made teachers to geeue a full and parfecte testimony to Christ, but to
the end they should prepare and get disciples to their master, which before
time had been out of the way, and to make those apt to be taught which were
very dull: and that it was a temporal commandment, to the which the
preaching of Christ brought an end. Now because the time of his death was at
hand, they trewely were not as yet redye or ripe to testify of the faith, yea
for the infirmity and weakness of faith, their confession should have been
made a jest and mocking stock: the lord therefore commands them to be
scilent, until they knew him to be the conqueror of death, and until he
also had endued the^ with new constancy. M. By this and such like places we
may know that ye truth must not at all times be spoken. Truth at all times
must not be spoken.
for the knowledge of the truth has his degrees and his times, out of the
which nothing must be brought that is unfruitful. Hereupon the wise man
says, there is a time to be scilente, and a time to speak.

21 From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples, how that he
must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and hye
priests, and Scribes, and must be killed, and be raised again the third day.

From that time forth. Bu. Christ in every place directs his words and
communication to those things, that were most parfecte, and is very dyligent
to instruct his disciples parfectly, least they should err any thing in the
knowledge of mysteries, or should want any thing in the skyll of those things,
which pertayne to the mystery of salvation, and of the kingdom of God.
Wherefore he does now more fully instruct his disciples, expoundinge unto
them the mystery of redemption, that is, of his passion and resurrection. And
suffer many things. C. He shows the^ what he must suffer, that he might make
his disciples apt also to bear the cross. for the time of conflicte was at
hand, to the which he knew they were far unmeet, except they were armed
with a new fortitude. This was first of all to be done, namely to begin his
kingedome, not with glitterynge pomp, not with abondance of richesse, not with
the joyful acceptance of the world, but with the most shameful kind of
death. And truly there was nothing more hard the^ to overcome so great an
offense, specially if we consider what an opinion they had already conceived of
their master. For they imagined that he should be the aucthor of earthly
felicity. They were led therefore with a vain hope, gredely gaping for the
time in the which he should reveal the glory of his kingdom. They wayed so
littel in their minds the ignominy and shame of the cross, that they thought
it impossible that any thing not honorable should happen unto him. For this
was a greuouse saying and circumstance, that he should be rejected of the hye
priests and Scribes, in whose power the rule of the Church consisted. Whereby
we may gather how necessary this admonition was. The Euangeliste Luke says:
And he warned and commanded them that they should tell no man that thing,
saying. The son of man must suffer many things and be reproved of the
Elders, and of the bye Priests and Scribes and be slain, etc. He would not
therefore at that time be published to be Christ, because he should be
crucified and rejected.

Of the seniors C. When we hear that the elders and Scribes, were the chief
enemies of Christ, we may see how great the discipation of the Church of
Jerusalem was. For the sacrifycers did not only sacrifyce, but also teach:
therefore of the Prophet Mallachy they are called Angels, ^achi. 2.
or messengers. These were then the enemies of Christ, which could in no wise
abide his Doctrine. But and if this were spoken of the Priests of Egypt, or of
the sacrifycinge Priests and teachers of other Nations, it had been no
maruayle: but this is spoken of those Priests which bare the chief rule of
the Church of God in earth The which thing ought to be an example unto us, yt
we suffer not our selves to be seduced and deceived with counterfeytes which
do not their duty truly, and as they ought. Let us always remember that
Christ is the head corner stone which the builders rejected: ^h. 21.
as he himself says to Phariseys in the one and twenty Chapter.

And be raised again the third day. C. Because it could not be but that the
only mention of the Cross should trouble the infirm and weak minds of the
Dysciples, Christ by and by seeks to salve this sore saying that he must
rise again from death ye.iii. day. And truly, when as in his Cross, only the
infirmitye of the flesh appears, our faith shall find nothing to stay and
lift up it self, until we have respect unto his resurrection, in ye which
the power of the holy ghost most brightly shyneth. Therefore the Mynisters and
Preachers of the word of God must wisely way and consider this, ^lorye of
^es re^tio^ and ^the ^lwaies ^ed to^.
that when they covet to edify, and to teach with profit, they must always
join the glory of the resurrection with ye death of Christ. Let us consider
therefore that the absolution of true faith and confession does pertayne to
this end, namely, that we believe, and confess that the Lord Jesus Christ
dyed for our sins, and roose again for our justification For the which read
in S. Paul's Epistell to the Romans. Romans 4.


22. And when Peter had taken him a side, he began to rebuke him saying:
master favor thy self, this shall not happen unto thee.

And when Peter had taken him, C. It was a great sign of moderate boldenes,
for Peter after this sort to take his Master a side: howbeit he might seem
to have a consideration of the reverence due unto him, when he took him aside,
because he durst not be boulde to reprehende before witnesses: notwithstanding
Peter exceded the boldness of modestye, to admonish him to favor himself, as
though Christ had not been in his right mind.

He began to rebuke him, Love not guided by reason.
M. Peter truly loved Christ more then any one of the Apostels, but his love
was to carnal as yet, and not according to knowledge: and therefore he uses
more liberty in speaking to Christ, as we may see in many other places. So
also here, when he thought that this thing which he heard should be a
shame to Christ the son of God, and that it might be avoided, and did
think that Christ was inflamed with a certain impotent zeal, and that he
was bent against the wickedness of ye elders, Scribes, and hye Priests of
Jerusalem, whereupon he knew that he should be afflicted, yea, and killed by
them: being ignonoraunt of the mystery of redemption, of the necessity of the
Cross, of the will of ye father, and of ye end of Christ's coming: for this
cause, he taking Christ a side rebuked him, and goes about to wythdraw him
from his purpose. He being affected with a preposterous zeal, co^sidereth
not what he does: he goes about to hinder Christ from ye work of our
redemption, and from the fulfylling of the will of his father. Rash zeal.
C. But such is the force of rash and indiscreet zeal, and to this issue it
dryueth men, and so carries them hedlonge, that they are not afraid to take
upon them to teach God what he has to do Peter judges it an absurd thing
that the son of God should be crucified of the Elders, which came to be the
redeemer of the people, and that he should be put to death which was the Lord
of life. And hereby we are taught how our good intencions are accepted before
God. Good intencions of men not guided by the word of God.
So great pride truly is naturally ingraffed in men, that they think great
injury is done unto them, and do murmr, if that please not God, which they
judge to be right and good. So that we see with how great pertinacye the
Papists do boaste and vaunt of their deuocions. For truly when they do so
arroga^tly rejoice in them selves: God doothe not only reiecte that which
they judge worthy of so great praise, but does also condemn it, as mere
madness. If truly sense, and carnal judgment might prevail, the intencion of
Peter was godly, or at least tolerable.

But Christ so sharplye reproved him, yt he could not put him to greater
reproach. For what means so severe a reprehension? Answer.
The reason truly is manifest, namely, because in the person of one man, he
would pacifye and stay all the rest, least they should seem to allow their
indiscreet zeal. For although the lusts of the flesh in vnrulelynes, are
like unto brute beasts, yet notwithstanding there is no beast more furious
and unruly then the wisdom of the flesh. Therefore Christ so sharply
inueyeth against the same and does (as it were) suppress it with an iron
mallet, that we learn only to seek for wisdom out of the word of God, and
to judge that only to be right, which the word of God does allow.

Favor thy self The Lattine text is, Propitius tibi sis: the Greek text has
only, Propitius tibi, so that we must understand esto or sis: and the
omitting of ye verb, makes much for the affection of Peter, declaring that
his mind did greatly abhor the same: for the word of abhorringe, or
forbidding is more peculiar to the Hebrews. Gene. 18.
Abraham said unto God, be it far from thee, that thou should do this
thing and should kill the just with ye wicked. And in another place, be it
far from thy servants, Gene. ^
that they should do so, the Hebrew word is Talila, which signifies
prohibition: as if thou would say, stay thy self, or it is not good for
thee: so that whereas the Greek text has only propitius tibi, peradventure
sit Deus is better understood the^ sis: as if we should say, God forbid this,
to happen to thee. This shall not happen Bu. These words do show how Peter
abhorred that which Christ said should happen to him, as if he should have
said: no man with indifferente ears could abide to hear yt the son of God
must be crucified: for death happens not to the lively son of the lyuinge
God, which rayseth other from the dead, and has declared by so many invincible
arguments that he is the Lord of life and death Therefore, that by no means
shall come to pass which thou say shall happen unto thee, and that thou
should suffer many things of ye elders and Scribes in that Cittye, in the
which we hope to rain with thee in excellent glory for ever.

23. But he turned him about, and said unto Peter: go after me Satan, thou
hinderest me: for thou sauerest not the things that be of God, but those that
be of men.

But he turned him about and said to Peter. M. Because that Peter went about
to withdraw Christ from obeyinge his fathers will, he is sharply reproved
of him. C. But some very fondlye make much a do about this word (come back)
as though Peter were commanded to follow and not to go before. Math^
For the Devil also had the repoulse at the hands of the Lord by the same
words, as we have already declared. And the Greek word Hupage, signifies
to avoid or depart, whereof the latyne word apage is deryued. Christ
therefore puts his Dysciple from him, and makes him stand a loofe, because
he plays the part of Satan, by his preposterous and indiscreet zeal.
Neither does he simplely call him an adversary, Pete^ ^led S^
but he gives him ye name of the Devil in token of great disdain. Bu. As if
he had said, avoid with this thy counsel: I ought to have more regard to
fulfill my fathers will, although it be never so hard to the flesh: thou which
art inoued with more knowledge of the father than any of the rest, and which
ought to be a helper unto me, and a faithful companion, that I might
fulfill my fathers commandment, do dehorte and diswade me (so much as
lies in thee) from the same, and that not lightlye, but in reprouinge me:
avoid with this thy wisdom, for thou show thy self to me to be Satan,
an open ennemy, and a most wicked conspirer. As concerning this word Satan we
have spoken before in ye 4. (...). 8.
Chapter. The Evangelist Mark has these words, but he turned about, and
looked on his Disciples, and rebuked Peter saying: go after me Satan, Christ
therefore spoke these words to the rest of his Dysciples, for he knew that
they were of the same mind also. Wherefore, for the example and erudition of
others, he rebukes Peter the more sharply, but for our sake also. C. For
thieves, adulterers, and such like are ashamed to excuse their filthynes: but
a good intencion is obstinately defended and maintained of all men. Wherefore,
the Lord uses more severity in correctinge this wicked zeal of Peter, than
if he had committed any other crime. Thou hynderest me E. The Greek text
has, thou offendest me. C. Peter was in deed an offense unto Christ, when
he dehorted him from his calling. For by and by it follows, Because thou
sauerest not those things that be of God

Hereby it appears how greatly men are deceived in their ungodly zeal. For
when Peter went about to hinder his Masters office, he did not only seek
to deprive himself, but all mankind also, of everlasting salvation: yet
ignorantly. Here therefore we are taught in one word how much we ought to
abhor those things which do withdraw us from the obedience of Gods will. And
there is no doubt, but that Satan does use men as instruments, when they
allure us and withdraw us from our duty toward God, Peter could not stay
Christ from his purpose. ^^p yt ^y be^ be a^
But Christ geeueth us here an example, to beware of that friendship, be it
never so pleasant, which does call us from the obedience of Gods will, and
does bid us, sparinge our selves, to sauer those things which are of men, and
not ye things that are of God. For otherwise, our flesh is so inclyned, that
we should spare our selves, and neglecte the commandments of God. But if
Christ so sharply reprehended the friendship of Peter, (to whom it was not so
dangerous) what shall we do which are easlye seduced? But those things
which are of men C. Here Christ opens even the very wellspring of the whole
evil, when he says that Peter sauoreth only those things which are of men.
Therefore least the Heavenly judge send us away and our practices, hedlonge to
the devil, let us learn, not to be adicted to our own sense, but obedientlye
to embrace that which the Lord commands and allows. B. If we savor those
things that are of men, then are we enemies unto God, and Satan's friends.
Therefore whatsoever proceadeth of our selves, it is here by the words of
Christ condemned. Whereupon S. Paul says that the wisdom and understanding
of the flesh, Romans 8.
is death and enmitye against God. What then shall we arrogate unto our
selves? where is free will become? where is the judgment of reason? but where
is the Church built upon Peter, who now is called by the name of Satan the
Devil? Now let the Papists go and extol their fond imaginations to the
Heaven: they shall feel at the length when they appear before the trybunall
seat of God, what boastinge doothe prevail, which Christ here pronounces to
be Satanicall and deuelishe. But we, (accept we mean willinglye, to stop
the way against our selves, which leads to everlasting life) may learn
out of ye mouth of Christ to sauore those things which are of God.

24. Then said Jesus to his Disciples: if any man will follow me, let him
forsake himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

Then said Jesus to his Disciples C. Mark says, Chap 8. Chap. 9.
when he had called the people to him with his Dysciples also, he said unto
them. etc. But Luke says he said unto them all. Because that Christ
perceived that Peter and the rest of his fellows, did abhor the Cross and
affliction, he takes occasion to speak generally of patience and sufferaunce
of the same: neither does he only exhort the twelve, but all those that are
godly, to ye same. The like sentence almost we had in the sentence goinge
before in the eyghte and twentye verce of the tenthe Chapter, but there ye
Apostels were only admonished of persecution which was prepared and ready to
fall upon them so soon as they began to execute their office: but here he
begins to instruct and teach all them in ye first exercise, and common
beginning, which take upon them the true profession of the Gospel, for he
says generally. If any man will follow me to the end he might refell
and put away the fond Imagination of Peter. For he settinge himself to be
an example to all men of denying himself, and of patience, declares that he
must bear and suffer that which Peter thought to be very unmeet for his
person: and calls all the members of his body to imitacion, and to follow
their head: as if he should have said, If any man will be my Dysciple, let him
deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me, or else, let him frame
himself according to the example that I have set before him. For he means
that none can be thought to be the Dysciples of Christ, but such as are the
true followers of him, and are prepared to run in the same race. B. In steed
of that which our Euangeliste has here, if any man will follow me: Luke 14.
the Evangelist Luke has, If any will be my Dysciple.

Let him deny himself C. Our savior Christ prescribes here unto us a
brief rule of imitation, to the end we might know in what thing specially
he would have us like unto him: Two things make us like unto Christ.
but this rule consists and stands upon two points, M. To deny our
selves, is to put of our own will and affections, and to submit our selves to
an other man's power, and to live only unto him, to whom we have addicted and
given our selves. John ^
I seek not (says our savior Christ) mine own will, but the will of him
that sent me. Also he says, John ^
my meat is to do the will of him which sent me. Again, O father not my
will, but thy will be done. Luke ^
We are not ignorant how naturallye men are wrapped with the love of them
selves, how much they are adicted unto themselves, and how greatly they
esteem of themselves. But truly if we desyer to enter into Christ's schole,
1. Cor^
we must begin with that foolishnes whereunto the Apostell Paul exhorts
us: and then to go forward to brydell and subdue all our affections. Let us
understand therefore that we are nothing of our selves, but ye God is all in
all in us. To this denying of our selves pertayneth that which the other
Evangelist declares that Christ spoke saying: Luk^
If any man come unto me and hates not father and mother, wife, children,
brethren, yea and his own soul, he cannot be my Dysciple. And a little after
he says, Even so every one of you which forsakes not all that he has can
not be my Dysciple. Vers^
Read also the tenth Chapter goinge before.

And take up his Cross C. Christ speaks here of the bearinge of the Cross,
not because the life of men is free from common miseryes, but because God would
exercise those that are his specially to the end he might make them
conformable to the Image of his son. M. This word Cross is here taken
Metaphoricallye for all kind of afflictions, but specially for extreme
afflictions: by the which he shows that his Dysciples must bear not only
the light afflictions, but also those that are extreme and heavy. C.
Furthermore, although God do lay his Cross as well upon the good as the
badde, yet notwithstanding none are said truly, to bear the Cross, but such
as willingly take the same upon their shoulders For they that are unwilling
must bear the Cross, but they bear it impaciently. The^ haue^ and the^
pert^^ to tha^


As for example, the wild and untamed Horse, will not willingly suffer a man
to sit upon his back, yea he winceth, and flingeth to cast him of, shewinge
all tokens of wildnes: yet notwithstanding he is tamed and broken. The gentle
Horse, willingly bears his Master, and whyther soever he is dyrected, he
runs, and suffers himself to be tamed. Even so is it of the godly and
ungodly: when God exercises the ungodly with the Cross, they resist so much
as they may, but it helps them nothing at all. Contrariwise the godly offer
their shoulders unto God, even as the Camel, which lies down till the
burden and load be laid on her back: by the which obedience truly, Christ
is glorified in them. We do by nature reiecte the Cross: but when we do
submit our selves unto God, and when with true humility of the mind we suffer
what soever he lays upon us, then do we bear the Cross. This therefore
is the patience of the godly, to bear willinglye ye Cross which is laid
upon them. Luke the Evangelist adds more saying, He that takes not up his
Cross dailye, in the which words there is contained a greater weight: for
Christ thereby signifies, that our war and fight shall have no end, until
we depart out of this world, Bu. least that any man should think that he had
done bearinge the Cross, if he had once suffered affliction: but we must
continue to the end until we have finished our race C. Let this therefore be
the continual meditaticion of the godly, when they have passed many troubles
and griefs, to prepare themselves to suffer new, A. and never let them be
weary though their Cross be dailye laid on their shoulders.

M. And this is that which our savior said, ^0.
whosoever continues to the end the same shall be safe. It is very grievous
truly to be oppressed daily with ye cross: but if you consider the eternity of
the life to come, and the shortness of this present life, that thing which
flesh and blood thinks so heavy shall be very light: eue^ as the Apostell
Paul in ye fourth Chapter of the second Epistell to the Corinth. teaches.
(...) 4.
And follow me C. These are words of Consolation, And follow me: for who
is so proud that he will refuse to follow the son of God? The Dysciple
ought not to complain and find any fault, when the Master goes before, and
he commanded to follow after. By these words he declares that he
requires nothing more than that he himself has showed, namely yt we by
his example pacie^tly bear the Cross. So the Apostell Peter says, Christ
suffered for us leaving us an ensample that ye should follow his steps, 1
Peter. 2.
which did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth: which when
he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered he threatened not: but
committed the vengeance to him that judges righteouslye. A. Therefore as
Christ suffered many things before he entered into his glory, even so by many
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.

25. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it. Again, whosoever does lose his
life for my sake shall find it.

A. A most excellent comfort is this, yt whosoever loses his life willinglye
for Christ's sake, does get life unto himself. For the Evangelist Mark
plainly prescribes this cause of dyinge to the faithful: therefore it is
understood in the words of Mathewe. All are not Martyrs you suffer death
without fear.
For it comes oftentimes to pass that ambition or desperation dryueth
profane men to contemn and to despise this life, yet notwithstanding they go
bouldlye to their death in vain. Bu. Therefore to loose the life in this
place signifies to despise the life of this world for Christ's sake, and to
tread those things under foot, in the which the world sets life, and the
chief felicity. That truly is nothing else but to deny our selves, to renounce
our selves, and to bear patiently such calamitye as is laid upon us, whereby
we may brydell all fleshlye affections. C. The threatninge which is here set
on the contrary part, serves very much to the dryuing away of the sluggishnes
of the flesh, which admonishes us that such as desyer greatly this life,
purchase to themselves the loss of this life. And there is an Antithesis
between temporal and eternal life: as we have showed before in the tenthe
Chapter.

26. For what does it profit a man, if he win all the whole world, and
loose his own soul? Or what shall a man give to redeem his soul again
withal?

For what does it profit C. Here he confirms the former sentence, namelye
that we ought not to be unwilling to forsake this life. For what is all the
world in respect of man's life? for it is immortal. And lose his own soul
Here our savior Christ admonishes that the soul of man is not created, to
the end he might have the same for a short time in this world, but to the
end he may live immortal in heaven: The soul of man is immortal.
as if he should have said, What negligence is this, and what beastly
incensible dulnes, that men are such bondslaues unto the world, that they have
no consideration wherefore they were borne? and that they are ignorant how that
an immortal soul is given unto them that the race of this life being ended,
they may live perpetuallye in heaven? And truly all men will confess that the
soul is more worth than all the riches, and pleasures in this world but in
the mean time the sense of the flesh blinds them that will they nill they
their souls are carried to destruction and everlasting perdition. Therefore
least the world by his intysing allurements do bewitche us let us always call
to mind the excelle^cye of our soul: the which if it be well wayed, will
easlye drive away all the vain imaginations of earthly felicitye. The
Euangeliste Luke has, Chap. 9.
and loses himself.

Or what shall a man Bu. B. What exchange shall a man give for his own
soul? The Greek word signifies that by the which any thing is redeemed.

Bu. Wherefore let every one of us endeavor our selves to despise corruptible,
and momentanye things, and to hold fast those things that are eternal: ye
which we shall easly do, if so be we mortify all carnal things, and retain
only Christ the life.

27. For the son of man shall come in the glory of his father, with his
Angels: and then shall he reward every man according to his deeds.

For the son of man shall come C. To ye end his former doctrine might ye
better sincke into their minds, he sets before their eyes the Judgment to
come. The (...) gener^ Iud^^
For it is necessary, to ye despysinge of this life, yt we be touched with
the feelinge of a heavenly life But the flownes of our minds has need of a
help to look up toward heaven. Therefore Christ calls ye faithful to his
trybunall seat, to the end they may continuallye remember that they live to
no other end than to aspyre and come to that blessed redemption, which at that
time shall be revealed. But to this end the admonition tends, that we may
know that they contend not in vain, to whom the confession of says is more
precious and dear, than their own life: as if Christ had said: commit to my
charge, and custodye without all fear your souls: for I will come at the
length a revenger which will restore you to perfection, allthough you seem for
a time to perish. B. That therefore which he speaks here, must be referred
to the sentence goinge before, when he said: The one should find his life,
and the other should loose it: namely when the son of man comes to
Judgment, and shall give to every one according to his deserving. But Christ
exhorts all those that desire to seem followers of him and his Dysciples, by
three reasons, to deny themselves, to take up his Cross, and to follow him.
Of the which the first is, that he shall loose his life, which would save the
same, and that he shall save it, which loses it: the second is, that to him
(which appeared a mortal man for a time in the flesh) all Judgment is given,
and that therefore he shall come in the glory of his father with his Angels
that he may give to every man according to his deeds: to the denyers of
him, hell fire, and to the professors of him, the kingdom of his father. For
as Mark in his eyghte Chapter and Luke in his nynth Chapter declare, he
repeateth here to his Dysciples the same thing that he spoke of before in the
tenthe Chapter. Whosoever shall deny me before men, Man Lu^ Man
him will I also deny before my father which is heaven. And as Luke says and
Mark: whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this aduouterouse
and sinful generation: of him also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he
comes in the glory of his father with the holy angels. ^c. 7
Then he shall say unto the^, I never knew you, Depart from me ye that work
iniquity. Then shall they receive according to their life and deeds. What thing
can be so heavy and greuouse unto us in this life, that we should not rather
do, and bear the same, then we should offend this general judge of all men,
and cause him to pronounce this bitter sentence against us saying, Go ye cursed
of my father into Hell fire. A. It is better therefore to deny our selves, and
to contemn this life for Christ's sake, then to be deprived for ever of
everlasting life. B. The third reason (which brings a wonderful consolation
with it) is, that he says the time is not very long in the which he shall
come with great power, and that some of them which were present should se the
same. What is he now ye will not follow him, and for his sake, deny him self,
and take up his cross, who^ he knows shall rain very shortly gloriously in
divine power, and that he him self shall rain with him. For whosoever
suffers with Christ shall reign with Christ. In the glory of his father, C.
Christ makes mention of the glory of his father, ^^o. 2
and of the angels, lest yt his disciples should judge of his kingdom according
to the present sight. for as yet it lay hyd, being base and contemned under the
show of a seruante. He shows therefore that he shall be in an other manner of
estate when he shall come to be the judge of the world. (...). 25.
A. For the son of man shall come in his glory, and all his angels with him:
and he shall sit upon the seat of his glory, and all nations shall be gathered
before him: Also these things serve to terrify those which delight in their
wickedness and vice, which shall not be able to abide his face. For although
the lord took upon him human nature, yet notwithstanding he abides unchanged
in the eternal glory of his father, and has lost nothing, either of his
divine substance or glory. for he is of like substance, majesty, and glory,
with the father.

All the Angels serve him, being the ministers of God, Angels are Gods
mynisters. 4. Kin. 19.
and ordained to fulfill his commandment. Whose power how great it is, may
appear, in that one angel dispersed the mighty camp of the Assyrians in one
night, a hundred four score and five thousand of them being slain. But and if
one angel be of such power, what shall they not be able to subdue and
overthrow, when they being altogether come with the lord to Judgment?

And then shall he reward every man B. This sentence is often used in the
scriptures, the which they pervert, who go about to prove yt we are justified
by our works, because forsothe we are judged according to the same: Works are
not the cause of salvation.
when as Christ speaks not here of the cause of salvation.

They consider not that the tree is judged according to his fruit, and yet
notwithstanding that the fruit, makes not the tree, but the tree the fruit.
The fruit makes not the tree, but the tree the fruit.
When we se figs on the tree, we judge by and by the tree to be a fygge
tree: yet notwithstanding the fygges are not the cause, that it is a fygge
tree: but when it was made a fig tree, then it brought forth figs. Even so
in all things the work judges of the worker: For it makethe not the worker,
but is brought to pass, and wrought of the worker. In like manner good works
do declare a good man to be the son of God, but they make him not to be the
son of God. Therefore works do not justify, that is to say, they do not
make us the more acceptable unto God: the which works can be nothing else
but sin, condempninge, if so be they be wrought before thou be purified, and
regenerated by the spyrite of God: because that an evil tree can not bring
forth good fruit. But the lord describynge his judgment, says (after the
manner of men): Three causes of our salvation.
that every man shall be judged, according to his works: even as we commonly
are wont to judge.

Neither does he say, that every man shall receive according to his works, as
though that our works were the first cause of our salvation. For the
special cause why we obtain everlasting life, is died for the salvation of al
mankind: but this also is a free gift of the good will of John. 3.
For he that believes, has everlasting life, but that faith also by the
which we do believe, is the work and gift of God in us for the merit of
Christ.

Also good works, may after a sort be said to be the cause of our salvation,
(but improperly) because every man shall be rewarded according to his deeds:
but these also are the gifts of Gods good will, the effects of Christ's
merits, and the fruits of faith. For there is no good work acceptable unto
God, but that which is done for the love of God: the which love no man has,
but he which believes in God. And no man can believe in God, but such as are
inspired with the spirit of God, which pertayneth only to the sons of God.
This spirit is only given unto those whose sins are remitted, and whom he
has chosen before the foundation of the world was laid.

All the parts therefore of our salvation, are a gift and work, of the
willing and free will of God. But we must note here that Christ said not, he
shall give to every man according to his faith: (the which lies hyd, and
which every wicked man boasts that he has) but according to his works,
which can not be obscure and hid: Works are a seal of our Faith. 2 Cor. 5.
for works are a seal of our says. The Apostell Paul speaks thus of this
Judgment of Christ, we must al appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every man may receive the works of his own body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad. General judgment.
And in an other place the Apostell says. Thou heapest unto thy self wrath
against the day of Judgment, when shall be opened the righteous judgment of
God, which will reward every man according to his deeds: that is to say:
praise, honor, and immortality, to them which continue in good doing, Roma.
2.
and seek immortality. But unto them that are rebels, and do not obey the
truth, but follow vnrighteousenes, shall come indignation, wrath, tribulation,
and anguishe, upon the soul of every man that does evil. C. Let this
therefore be the sum, that these two do very well agree, namely that we are
justified freely, because we are acceptable unto God, without our merit, and
yet notwithstanding that he according to his good pleasure, gives and
imputes and undeserved reward to our works. A. As concerning the which
matter, read the fyfth chapter goinge before.

28 Verily I say unto you, there be standinge here, which shall not taste of
death, till they se the son of man come in his kingedome.

Verily I say unto you. M. As touching this word (verily) read the fifth
chapter goinge before. There be standinge here. C. Because the disciples might
dought among them selves when this day should come, the lord erecteth the^ with
a more special trust, saying, that it shall not be long ere that he give unto
some of them a show of his glory: as if he should have said. If you think the
time to long before I come, I will come betime: for before you dye, that
kingdom of God which I bid you hope for, shall be set before your eyes.

M. Some understood this sentence of the extreme and last day of judgment,
thinking that Christ me^t here that John the Evangelist should not die until the
day of judgment: John ^
but the Evangelist him self shows that this opinion of him conceived, was
not true. Wherefore we must understand that the coming of the kingdom of God,
is the revealing of the heavenly glory, which Christ began at his
resurrection, and afterward more fully revealed the same, by sending his holy
spyrite, and by working miracles. B. Therefore to see Christ coming in his
kingdom is nothing else in this place, then ye which Mark and Luke have, Mark ^
To see the kingdom of God, that is the glory and good success of the
kingdom of God. The Evangelist Mark expressly says, Until they have seen
ye kingdom of God come with power The kingdom of god was com before, Math. ^
whereupon he commanded to preach that the kingdom of God was at hand. And in
an other place he said unto the Phariseis, If I by the spirit of God cast out
deuyls, then is the kingdom of God come upon you. Math. 12.
But because the kyngedome of God was not yet so gloriouse, as it should be in
all the world after his resurrection: he truly says, Until they have seen
the kingdom of God come.

Collos. 1.
Of this kingdom the apostel Paul writes thus, when he speaks of the
Gospel: Which is come unto you, even as it, is into all the world, and is
fruitful and grows. etc. But more largely in an other place when he says:
I have therefore whereof I may rejoice, through Christ Jesus, in those things
which pertayne to God. For I dare not speak of any of these things, which
Christ has not wrought by me, ^oma. 15.
to make the Gentiles obediente, with word and deed, in mighty, signs, and
wonders, by the power of the spirit of God: so that from Jerusalem, and the
coasts round about unto Illiricum, I have filled all countries with the
Gospel of Christ. This gloriouse power of the kingedome of Christ did chiefly
declare it self within.xx. years or theraboutes, after his passion: until the
which time no doubt, many of those, to whom the lord presently spoke, were
alive. But to what end does Christ speak this? Surely to the end he might
learn them some comfort against the time of the cross and affliction, because
shortly the kingdom and power of God should be declared and revealed. ^ilip.
4. ^bre. 10.
So are we comforted by the holy ghost, so often as we hear it said, The
lord is nigh, and will not be flacke. The coming of Christ truly seems to
be far hence, but does he not in the mean time show unto us his power? Some
understand this place to be spoken of the transefiguration of Christ in the
mount, which is declared in the chapter followinge: as though that Christ by
these words should promise yt there were some disciples in the company, to whom
he would show his glory in the earth, so far as ye eyes of mortal men might
perceive the same. A. But we have showed already the true and proper sense and
meaning of Christ's words.

Which shall not taste of death. Bu. That is, they shall not die. The like phrase
of speech we have in the.viii. chapter of s. John, and in ye second of s.
Paul's epistel to the Hebrews.

The.xvii. Chapter.
AND after six days Jesus takes Peter, James, and John his brother, and
brings them up into an high mountain.
A. This history is declared by three of the Evangelist, Mark. 9 Luke. 9.
namely by this our Evangelist Mathewe and Mark and Luke. C. In the which
hystory we must first of al se, to what end and purpose Christ would put upon
him his heavenly glory for so short a time, and would take only three of his
disciples to be witnesses of this sight. Some think that he did it to the
end he might arm his disciples against the temptation which was at hand by
reason of his death: but that is very unlikely. For why did he deprive others
of the same remedy? Yea, why does he plainly forbid them to publishe that
which they had seen, until after his resurrection, unless the fruit of the
vision had been after his time?

There is no doubt therefore, The cause of Christ's tra^sfiguration.
but that Christ meant to declare that he was not delivered unto death against
his will, but that he came unto it willingelye to offer the sacrifice of
obedience unto his father. This kingedome came not into the minds of the
disciples, until Christ rose again: neither was it necessary at that time to
conceive the deuyne power of Christ, which they knew to be the vanquisher,
and ouerco^mer in the cross and affliction, but they were taught against an
other time, as well for them selves as for us, least that the infirmity of
Christ should offend any man: as though he had suffered by necessity and
force. for it is evident that it was no more hard unto Christ, to exempte and
deliver his body from death, Christ suffered because he would,
than to adorn the same with heavenly glory. We are taught therefore that he
was subiectte unto death, because he would: and that he was crucyfied,
because he offered him self. For the same flesh which honge upon the cross
and lay in the sepulcher, saying before it was partaker of the heavenly
glory, might have been free from death and the grave. But we are taught that
Christ so long as he bare the form of a seruante in the world, and his
majesty hidden under the infirmity of his flesh, there was nothing detracted
or taken from him: because he did abase him self of his own free will, but
now his resurrection took a way that veil, by the which his power for a time
was covered. And the Lord thought it sufficient to chose unto him three
witnesses, because this number was prescribed by the law, to testify and
prove any matter. Deuteronomy. 19.
And after six days. B. As co^cerninge the number of the days Mark agrees
with Matthew. But Luke has, And it fortuned that about an eight days after
these sayings. But this ought to offend no man. C. For Marcke and Matthewe
number six whole days, which came between the time ye Christ spoke the
words goinge before in the xvi. chapter, and the time in the which he was
transfigured: but Luke faith it was done within eight days after,
comprehending as well the day in the which Christ spoke, as also the day in the
which he was transfigured. We se therefore how well diverse words
comprehend one sense and meaning.

And brings them up into. Luke says that ye lord went up into the mountain
to pray: no doubt to pray unto the father, that he would manifest and reveal
his glory to his disciples, for the which cause he brought them up into the
mountain. By the which example of Christ we are taught to be likewise
affectioned to the glory of Christ's kingdom, and toward those also, Math.
6. Luke. 11.
to whom as yet it has not apered. So Paul prayed: as it appears by his
epistels. But Christ him self has taught us to pray, saying. Hallowed be thy
name.

2 And was transfigured before them, and his face did shine as the son, and
his clothes were as white as the light.

And was transfygured before them. S. That is to say, he put on a new figure
or form, full of all glory and excellent brightness, and did not appear as the
son of man, in a base and contemned person. C. Luke says that this was done
when he prayed. But by the circumstance of the place and time we gather that
which we said eue^ now, namely, that he prayed that there might be a visible
sight or show of his deity in the brightness of a new form, the which thing
he obtained: not because it was necessary that he should pray for that which
he wa^ted him self, or because the will of his father was doubtful: but
because in humillitie he referred all that he did to his father: and would by
his exaumple encourage us to pray.

And his face did shine, C. Luke has. And it came to pass, as he prayed, the
fashion of his face was altered. Yet notwithstanding this transformatio^ did
not set forth Christ to be seen of the disciples, according to the glory which
he has now in heaven: but he gave them a taste of exceeding glory, according
as they were able to comprehend the same. His face did then shine as the son:
but now it does far excede the son in brightness. A strange and unwonted
brightness shone then in his apparel: but now his divine majesty shines
without apparel in his whole body. So God appeared in time paste to the holy
fathers, not as he was in him self, but as they were able to abide the beams
of his exceeding brightness.

M. But whereas Christ was transeformed from the form of humillitie into that
heavenly and divine shape, it was a manifest token, that the state in the which
he was then, was not eternal, but mutable and subject to change: not that the
substance of his body was subject to trasmutation and change, in so much
that the verity of his human flesh, should be turned into the verity of
the spirit. God forbid: but yt there should be a tra^smutation of the human
condition and fragillitie, his manhood abidinge still. By pra^ arc tra^^med in^^
M. But where as he was transformed while he was at prayer, it shows how
we are tra^sformed into God when we are praying: for the which cause we ought
to be ye more earnest to pray. Herupo^ it came to pass that the fathers and
holy men were so often times in mind rapte and carried into heaven. As Peter
the Apostel of Christ: Acts. ^ Dani^^
Daniell, to whom an Angel appeared when he was in prayer, declarynge unto him
things to come. Cornellius, who in prayer saw an Angel. ^ctes 10.
And Paul, who as he prayed saw Ananias in a vision, laiing his hand on him.
Also the same Paul testifies of him self thus, ^ctes. 22.
When I was come again to Jerusalem, and prayed in the temple, I was in a
trance, and saw him saying unto me: make have and get the quickly out of
Jerusalem: for they will not receive thy witness. Hereby we gather that they
are most far from the company and fellowship of God, and of the heavenly
spirits which are never led by the feruencye of the mind to prayer. And
his clothes were as white as. C. It is not mete that any man should dispute
or reason subtly about the whitenes of his apparel, or of the brightness of
his countenance: seeing that this was not a perfect declaration of his heavenly
glory: but a sign which did only pertain to ye measure and capacity of
flesh. M. For as darkness is assigned by Christ to the kingdom of Satan, and
external darckenes to the condemnation also of the wicked, for the horror
which they shall suffer: even so an exceeding light and inspeakeable brightness
is ascribed to the kingedome of God, for the glory and pleasure which the
elect shall have. ^^h. 13.
The just (says our savior Christ) shall shine as the son in the glory of
their father. As the light. E. It is red in a certain ancient Greek book. As
the snow, and the Euangeliste Mark says also, ^^ke. 9
thus: And his raymente did shine and became very white, eue^ as snow: so white
as no fuller ca^ make upon ye earth

3 And behold there appeared unto the^ Moses and Helias, talking with the^.

And behold there appeared. B. No doubt this apperinge, and talk of Moses and
Helias did make very much to the declaration of the kingdom of Christ.
Notwithstanding it is demanded whether they were truly present, or whether
that a figure or show only of them was set before the face of the disciples:
even as vysions of things absent were set before the Prophets. Although
the matter be so probable, that both parts may have good occasion to dispute,
(...) dead and ^^ing are ^ddes ^deme^t.
yet notwithsta^dinge, it is more lykely that they were truly brought into
that place. Neither is it any absurdity at all to say, (saying that God has
both body and soul in his hand and power) that the dead for a time may be
restored to life, according to his will.

Moses and Helias, did not rise unto the^ selves at that time, but they rose
at the will and commandment of God, to be present for the time with Christ.
Again, Moses and Helias, who^ they never saw: it may easily be answered that
when God had set them in ye midst before them, Answer.
he gave the^ signs and tokens, by the which they might be known unto them.
This truly was done by an extraordinary manner of revelation, that they might
certainly know Moses and Helias. Answer.
to say that the law and the Prophets had no other scope or end then
Christ. For it was a great aid and help to our faith ye Christ came not
forth without testimony, but was co^me^ded of God long before. B. Therefore in
Moses the law, and in Helias, the Prophets are represented.

M. For although Helias left nothing written behind him, yet notwithstanding
after Moses he was the chief and excelled all men: He restored the polluted
law of God to perfection: yea he was an excellent meintainer, and setter forth
of true godlynes and piety, which was then almost extinguished. C. The talk
therefore of Moses and Helias with Christ, is the agreement of the law and
Prophets with Christ. For it behooved the Apostels to be confirmed and
persuaded, yt it was no new doctrine or religion which Christ preached unto
the^, but the same whereof ye law and prophets bear witness. for except they
had been persuaded in this that Christ did not teach any thing contrary to the
law and prophets, they had ever doubted, neither had they ben able with a
constante mind to preach the Gospel. We have therefore here a notable seal
of our faith, A sure seal of our faith.
when we know yt the doctrine of christ is not newely sprung up (as some
imagine) but of long continuance Talking with them. A. Only Luke shows for
what cause they talked with Christ in these words. That appeared in the
majesty, and spoke of his departinge, Luke. 9.
which he should end at Jerusalem.

M. He calls the death of Christ a departinge, John. 13
or a going out namely of this world. So in an other place his death is
called a going out of this world to the father. C. But this talk ought not to
be restrained to the private persons of Moses and Helias, but rather to the
imbassage, which long before was enjoined and committed to them. For
although they were lately dead, and had finished the race of their calling,
yet notwithstanding, the lord would that they by their voice once again
should confirm that which in their life they had taught: to the end we might
know, that the salvation set forth in the sacrifice of Christ pertains unto
us, as well as to the fathers. M. Therefore the word (end) which Luke
uses, does pertain to the Prophets and truethe of God, that the same which
God promised by the Prophets, as concerning the departure or endinge, or
death of his son might be fulfilled. C. Now, when the Prophets prophesied
of the death of Christ, he sat (which is the eternal wisdom of God) in
the secret throne of his glory.

Whereupon it follows that he being man was not subject unto death: but so
far as he willingly submitted him self. M. Therefore they talked about the
cross and resurrection: to the end the Apostels might understand that it was
the will of God that he should be slain at Jerusalem, and rise again, even
as it was foreshewed by the law and the prophets Whereupon Christ him self
after his resurrection, expounded unto the^ the law and the Prophets, Luke, 24
teachinge that it so behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from
death.

4 Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord here is good being for us.
If thou will let us make here three tabernacles: one for thee, and one for
Moses, and an other for Elias.

Then answered Peter. M. The Evangelist abuses this word (answered)
according to the manner of the Hebrews, when as nothing went before, whereto
answer might be made. But the Eua^geliste Luke more plainly rehearses these
words, saying. But Peter and they yt were with him, were heavy with sleep.
And when they awoke, Luke. 9
they saw his majesty, and two men standing with him. Behold here how that
three of the chief Apostels which were with Christ ar a sleep, when he
prays. Math. ^
So they slept again in the gardein when Christ was redye to be taken. This
was their infirmity, and yet theye were not rejected of Christ, but are borne
withal, till they were by little and littell confirmed, that they might be the
more perfect. The w^^ must (...) withal.
By the which example we must learn to bear with the weak, and not by and by
to cast them of. Luke adds further, saying. And Peter said unto Jesus:
Master it is good being here for us. C. These words (says the Evangelist)
he spoke when Moses and Helias were gone.

Whereby we gather, that Peter was afraid least that by their departure, that
sweet and gloriouse sight should vanishe away. And although it be no marvel
yt Peter was so ravished with the sweetness of that sight, that all other
things despised, the sight thereof and the fruition of the same only could
suffice him: (as it is said in the Psalm, Psalm^
in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there is
pleasure for evermore.)

Yet notwithstanding his wish and desire was preposterous, Pet^^ ^initie.
because he knew no end of the vision: secondely, he very foolishely made an
equality between the lord, and his servants: thirdely he erred, because he
would have builte earthly tabernacles unto men, which were received into
heavenly glory. We say that the end of the vision was not known unto Peter.
For when he heard out of the mouth of Moses and Helias, that Christ must
shortly dye, he as a man void of sense, immagineth that temporal show of
glory to be eternal. What kingdom of Christ should this have been included and
compassed within the space of twenty, or thirty foot? What should have become
of the rede^ptio^ of the whole Church? and where should have been the
fellowship of everlasting salvation? Therefore the two Euangelystes do very
well note that he knew not what he said. Marcke adds the cause, namely for
that they were afraid. God truly did not seek to make the Apostels have any
farther profit in understanding, than in this, that they should have a
feeling as it were at one sight, and in a momente, of the deity of his son.
Afterward, in process of time, he showed unto them the fruit, and corrected
the want of judgment, that was in them. Mark therefore means, that Peter
was as a man in a trance, and amassed, and that he spoke accordingely. In like
manner we do not know oftentimes to what end the lord declares his power unto
us: but he corrects our ignorance and infirmity, and in continuance of time,
teaches us what his purpose was.

5 While he yet spoke, behold a bright cloud shadowed them. And behold there
came a voice out of the cloud which said: This is my beloved son in whom I
delight, hear him.

While he yet spoke, behold a bright cloud shado. C. When the lord means
to show unto us a sign of his presence, he commonly sets before us a
cloud, to the end he might bring us to humillitie, lest we should rashely
burst forth into secret matters, which our sense and reason is not able to
comprehend: and least we should be to wise, forsakinge sobriety: For we can
not be sober, except God put the bridell in our mouth, and restrain our pride
and follye. The imbecillitie of man's wit and understanding, can not
conceive the glory of God. therefore the cloud is set as a courtaine between
God and us, whereby he may bridell our natural folly: for we are to bold and
curiouse. Eue^ so now to the end he might bring his disciples to humillitie,
he hydeth his heavenly glory from their eyes. A. The which thing also ought
to profit us, ^^hn. 6.
that we acknowledging the imbecillitie of our minds, may avoid all
curiosity, in sekinge the works of God. for he dwells in the light, which
no man can attain. If men knew what Clouds do signify, and to what end they
are set forth, ^^ust ima^ and the ^g up of ^^es.
they would restrain and brydell that fond and vain delighte in settinge up
Immages and Idols to represent the person of God. For he being invisible, with
what boldenes dare they set him up to be seen as visible? This cloud (as it
was said) being set before the disciples eyes, had a type of the presence,
and grace of God. For so God was wont to show his presence in his people,
under Moses and Aaron specially in the tabernacle of witness: also in the
departinge of Israel out of Egipte. Psalm. 10 4
Herupon the Prophet David ascribes unto God that he makes the clouds his
chariote, and rydeth upon the wings of the wynd. Acts. 1. Math. 24.
And Christ assended into the heavens in a cloud. And he shall com again at
the day of judgment in a cloud. And S Paul says, 1. These. 4.
that we shall be taken up in the clouds to mete Christ in the air. Shadowed
them. M. To the end, the exceeding brightness of Christ transfigured, which
the Apostels could not bear might be mittigated. Furthermore to declare the
louinge kyndenes of God, because he would behold and mark the^. For this
shadowing of God, was a sign and token of deuyne protection: as we may read
in the Psalms, Psalm. 91
where it is said, he shall cover thee with his wings. C. The disciples were
also admonished that they must come to their wonted war, and fight again,
least they triumphed before the victory.

And behold there came a voice out of. C. This also is worthy to be noted,
that the voice of God sounds out of the cloud, but neither body nor face
was seen. Therefore that admonition of Moses comes to our remembrance, Deuteronomy.
4.
namely that God has not a visible shape. least that we being deceived
should think him to be like a man. It is true that in old time he appeared
dyuersly and many ways to the fathers, by the which they knew God: Hebr. 1.
yet notwithstanding he always abstained from such signs which might give
occasion to make Idols. Against images.
And truly when the minds of men are too much adicted to vain fantasies, it
shall be unprofitable to give any occasion to help forward and support the
same. this specially was a manifest revelation of Gods glory.

But when the cloud being set between he calls us unto him, by his voice,
how absurd and folishe a thing is it, to seek to set his presence before
our eyes in a wodden tree, or stone? It is only faith which is able to pearce
into the secret place of this light: it is a secret place truly and without
access to the sense of the flesh, but not unto faith, which seeks not a
carnal God, but is directed a right to seek him by the word. The voice is
certain, the which whosoever hereth, has the testimonye of the spyrite that
God speaks, the which testimony is of more price and weight unto them, than
al fleshely reasons. The voice comes out of the cloud, to the end they
might believe that it proceeded from God. M. The Cloud was no dombe spectacle:
for the word of God was added. So when Christ was baptized, the father being
not content that he had opened the heaven, and that he had sent down the holy
ghost upon his son, Math. 3.
added his word also: of the which we have spoken before.

For he will not have us to judge and speak of these signs after our own
judgment and sense, but after his will, and therefore he adds his word.
The like consideration we must have of the sacraments of the Church. This is
my beloved son. C. Here is a secret Antithesis of Moses and Helias, with
Christ: and God commands his disciples to be content with his son only. B.
As if he should have said, Why are you sorry that Moses and Helias are gone? Ye
have all things in this your master, my only son, in whom I am well pleased,
here him: as for that which Moses and Helias, and other of the Prophets,
what soever they be, can teach, it makes no matter, because (if you have
faith) you shall learn al things at his hands more perfectly. There is a
great Emphasis in this word son) by the which name he is extolled above
servants. By Christ we are made heirs.
This is only the beloved, for whose sake we are beloved, and by who^ the
father is well pleased, and does good unto mortal men. In vvho^ I am well
pleased. C. By these words God declares Christ to be a mediatoure. Christ a
mediator.
in whom he reconcileth the world unto him self. As the Apostell Paul
expoundech it at large, in his epistell to the Ephesians, saying.

Which ordained us before, through Jesus Christ, to be heirs unto him self,
according to the good pleasure of his will to the praise of ye glory of his
grace, where with he has made us accepted through the beloved: by whom we have
redemption, and by his blood remission of sins. C. Seeing therefore it was the
purpose of God to make a difference between Christ and other men: as by these
words we may truly and properly gather, that he is by nature his only
son: it is likewise brought about, that he is only loved of the father, and
only appointed a teacher, that all authority may rest and stay upon him. If
any man demand, Does not God love angels and men? we may easily answer,
that the fatherly love which is showed upon angels and men, does proceed from
Christ, Auns^^
as from the well. For the son is not love of the father, that all other
creatures should be hated, but that he might make them partakers of that which
properly pertains to him self. Howbeit there is a difference between us and
aungelles. Ang^^^ not ^^^ciler.
For they were never alienate from God, that they should need a reconciler:
but we were ennemies by sin, until such time as Christ became the
propiciation for our sins. Yet notwithstanding this is certain, that God is
mercyful to both, in respect that he imbraceth us in Christ: because the
aungelles can have no firm conjunction or copulatio^ with God, Chri^ the so^^
two (...) perso^^
without the head Christ. Now saying the father speaks here, and
distinguishes him self from the son, it follows that they are two distinct
persons, but of one essence and majesty. A. As towchinge that which
pertains more to the exposition of this place, the reader may find in the
third chapter going before. It follows in the text. Hear him. C. By this
voice the Church is called and referred to Christ the only teacher, that it
may wholely depend upon the words of his mouth. The ex^cie of the ^pell.
For although Christ came to bring credit and authority to the law and the
Prophets, yet notwithstanding he does so excel and shine in the bryghtnesse
of his Gospel, that by ye same he quite puts out those sparks, which
shyned in the old testament. For he is the son of ryghteousenes, at whose
coming it was parfect day. M. Therefore there is a great emphasis in the
pronoune demonstratiue (him) as if he should have said, I would not have you to
depend upon every one, whether it be Moses or Helias: but I would have you
hear this my son, this is the only teacher and master of all men: if any
man desire to hear me, let him hear him. Not without cause trewly did the
father appoint his son unto us, by a singular prerogative to be a teacher,
commaundinge to hear him, and not every one. C. Whereupon the Apostell says,
God in times paste diuersely, and many ways spoke unto the fathers, but in
these last days he has spoken to us by his own son. ^c. 1.
The father in few words commended unto us the authority of Christ, when he
said hear him, but in the^ there is comprehended a greater weyghte and force
then commonly men esteem and judge. For it is even as if he should command
all men to seek only at his mouth for the doctrine of salvation, to depend
wholly upon him, to cleave unto him, and to harken only to his voice. And in
deed, what can we ask or look for at the hands of men, when the word of
life it self is familiarly, and openly revealed? It is meet that all men's
mouths be stopped, and all tongues scilent, after that he has spoken in whom
the heavenly father has placed the treasure and richesse of all wisdom, and
knowledge. And trewely he spoke, ^^s. 2.
even as it became the wisdom and Messiah of God to speak, that is, he so
set forth his will, that he left nothing to others, to speak as concerning
the augmenting of the same.

^uenti^ men
Wherefore to the end he might keep us in his doctrine, he makes the devices
and inventions of men to fail. He sends forth teachers daily: but such,
which purely and faithfully teach and set forth that which they learned of
him, and not which corrupt the Gospel with their additio^s. Therefore the
authority of Christ is not diminished, when that the office of teaching is
committed and granted unto the ministers of the word. For Pastors are so
ordained, that they may govern the Church in the name of Christ: not
withstandinge so that Christ remains still the only pastor. He is therefore
to be heard, not because he descended from heaven, but he must be heard in his
word by his mynisters. 1. John. 4.
For we are commanded to prove the spirits, whether they be of God or no: but
this proof and trial must be had by the word of God: after this manner we
shall always hear Christ.

Christ the only teacher and master was heard even from the beginning, and
must be heard to the end of the world, if we seek to obey the will of the
father. We al grant that Christ is the son of God, our Lord, and Savior,
and the spouse of the Church: but where Christ should be heard alone, there
some refuse to give this glory unto Christ, that he should be heard alone,
and taken for the only teacher. They obiecte this place: He which hears you,
hears me: Luke, 10.
which sentence was spoken to the Apostelles, to the mynisters and preachers of
the Gospel.

First let them show that they are the ministers of Christ, bringinge with
them the Gospel, then shall that sentence pertayne unto them. Let them suffer
us to hear the voice of Christ, and then shall we at the length hear him
speakinge in them. To be short, there is no faithful teacher of the Church,
but he which is the disciple of Christ, and offers others unto him to be
taught.

6 And when the Disciples heard these things, they fell on their faces, and
were sore afraid.

And when the Disciples, C. God would have his disciples stricken with this
terror, to the end the vision might be the better printed in their minds. In
the mean time we do see how great the infirmytie of our nature is, which so
greatly fears at the hearing of Gods voice. The infirmity of man.
For where as the wicked do either mock and deryde the same, or else carelessly
neglect it, it comes herupon to pass, because God does not by force compel
and constrain them: but it is necessary that the majesty of God, so soon as
we do feel the same, do deiecte and cast us down

M. For the voice of God is terrible unto flesh: for how should it not be a
terrible thing to a mortal and earthely man to hear from heaven the voice of
the immortal and omnipotent God, full of majesty? And this is that which the
Israelites spoke unto Moses. Deuteronomy 5. Exodus 30.
If we hear the voice of the lord our God any more, we shall dye. for what
flesh has it ben, that ever heard the voice of the living God, speakinge
out of the midst of the fire (as we have done) and yet live? Therefore we
must lay aside that which is carnal in us, that we may have that which is
spiritual, and come into the parfect fellowship of God For this cause God talked
to us by his son, and Apostels, and speaks daily by other ministers.

7 And Jesus came and towched the^ and said: Arise, and be not afraid.

And Jesus came. C. Christ executes his duty in erecting those that lie
prostrate For therefore he came down unto us, that he being the captain
and guide, the faithful might come without fear, into the presence of God,
and makes his majesty that it seems not terrible unto them, which otherwise
would consume and destroy all flesh. Moreover he does not only comfort his
disciples with his word, but also confirms them by towchinge: A. to the end
he might drive all fear from them. Be not afraid, M. As if he should say,
This voice which you heard is not the voice of an angery God, but of him that
is well pleased: A, there is no cause therefore why ye should fear. M. So that
Christ in this place does interpret his fathers mind, and does comfort
the dismayed minds of mortal men: which ought also to bring great
consolation unto us.

8. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man save Jesus only.

And when they had lift up, M. After this vision, after the voice of God was
heard, and after the great fear, Christ is only left unto them. C, that
they might be taught, that a temporal glory did pertayne to the law and the
prophets, that Christ might remain only clear and evident. M. For Christ is
the end of the law and all the Prophets. Therefore if we will use the works
of Moses aright, let us not cleave unto them, Ch^^ be^^^ ^ses.
but let us seek that by them, we may be led by the hand (as it were) unto
Christ, whose mynisters Moses and al others, are Furthermore we hear not
now any more the voice of the father out of the cloud, because he spoke
once to the end we might ever after hear the voice of his son. C. So long as
we are terrified by the majesty of God, our minds wander and go astray, and
are busied about men. But we have only respect unto Christ, when we have any
taste of the grace or mercy of God: who always must be prayed unto, that all
respect and regard of creatures may vanishe away. This place also may be
applied against them, and to condemn their superstytions, which so mingle
Christ, not only with the Apostelles and Prophets, but also with all the
company of saynctes, that he rather seems to be one of them than Christ, or
the anointed son of God.

9 And when they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them saying:
show the vision to no man, until the son of man be risen again from the
dead.

And when they came M. Christ would have the Vision published, but not till the
convenient and due time came, namely, after his resurrection. At the which
time his deuyne power openly declaringe it self, that temporal view and
sight of his glory began to take place, that it might be certaynely known,
that when he was most abased, yet the glory of his deity abode fyrme and
sound, although it were hyd from the flesh. M. Therefore the time of
resurrection was to be looked for, in the which the son of God was to be
declared by the spirit of sanctification, so that the thing which was done
before a part and in secret in the mount, should now find faith and fruit
in more excellent and euidente things. C. He would not therefore that his
miracles should lie hyd and buried, but he would that in dew and conueniente
time they should be openly published and declared. And this reason shall be
applied to other places, which speak of the like prohibition. After these
words Marcke and Luke add, saying, ^rke. 9 ^ke. 9,
And they kept that saying within them: and demanded one of an other, what
the rysyng from death again should mean?

10 And his disciples asked him saying: Why then do the Scribes say, that
Helias must first come?

And his disciples asked him. C. So soon as mencio^ was made of the
resurrection, the disciples by and by began to conceive the beginning of the
kingdom of Christ: for they so put forth this name, because the world would
acknowledge him to be the Messiah. For, yt they Imagined otherwise of the
resurrection, then Christ would have them, it is apparent by the words of
Mark, who says that they disputed among them selves, what the risynge again
from death should mean: A. as it was said a littell before. C. Peradventure
the dotinge error did then prevail, ^rrour (...) Rab^
which at this day is counted a sure and certain oracle among the Rabbines,
namely, that the coming of Christ is taken two manner of ways, because from
the beginning he should be contemptyble and base, but afterward his kingly
dignity should succeed, and take place. And trewely this error had some
color or show, because it proceeded from a true beginning. The Scripture
also does commend unto us two manner of comminges of the Messiah: because it
promyseth that there shall be a redemer, which by his own sacrifice shall take
away the sins of the world. And to this end pertain the prophesies. (...).
9.
Rejoice O daughter Syon, behold thy king comes poor, sytting upon an
Ass. In like manner it is written. He has neither beauty, nor favor, when
we shall look upon him, there shall be no fayrenesse: (...) 53
we shall have no lust unto him: Howebeit he only has taken on him our
infirmities, and borne our pains. Secondly the Scripture declares him to be
the conqueror of death, which shall bring all things in subjection under
him. But we see how the Rabbines with their feigned inventions, corrupt the
sincere doctrine of the Scripture. ^ror of ^ribes.
B. But the Scribes falsely gathered, by the fourth chapter of Malachy, that
he should not come in the spyrite, before the coming of Messiah. And because
they saw that thing came not to pass, they took thereuppon occasion to
prove, that the time of Christ's coming was not yet come, and so consequently,
that this Jesus was not Christ: C. and that because he came without Helias.

The which thing they went about to put into the peoples heads, and to
persuade them in the same: to the end they might discredit Christ, that he
might not seem to be the lawful Messiah.

Bu. But when the Apostels them selves knew for a suertie, both by infinite
miracles, and also by the late transfiguration, that he was very Christ,
although Helias went not before, but was only seen of them with Moses in
the mount, they ask him, Why then do the Scribes say that Helias must first
come? As if they should have said, We euidentely see by thy mighty and
meruaylouse works, but specially by that vision showed unto us in the mount,
that thou art the Messiah promised in the law and Prophets: but we neither
see, nor know, that Helias went before thee. Tell us therefore, why do the
Scribes teach that Helias shall come, and that he must goo before the
Messiah? This force has the conjunction (then) which make this to depend
upon that which went before. M. But where as the disciples bring the words
of the Scribes unto Christ, it is an exaumple of wisdom, The desire that
ought too be in the ignorante.
and of a mind seking the truth This desire of knowledge ought at this day to
be in the^, which are simple, and ignorant of the truethe: that if they here
any thing spoken by the adversaries against the truth, they may bring the same
straight way to their teachers, whereby al impedimentes set aparte, they may
abide and continue in the truth received.

11 Jesus answered and said unto them: Helias trewlye shall first come, and
restore all things.

Jesus ansvvered. C. We have showed already, Why John the Baptist was ca^^ed
Helias.
whereupon this error sprange among the Jews. Because that John the Baptist
should be like unto Helias, in repayrynge the decayed state of the Church,
the Prophet Malachy gave unto him also the name of Helias: the which place
was rashely taken and understood of the Scribes, as though Helias the Thesbite
should come again into the world. Christ therefore now witnesses that the
Prophet Malachy foretold nothing in vain, but says that his prophecy is
misconstrued: as if he should have said, The promise of Helias coming was
true, which is also fulfilled but Helias was rejected of the scribes, whose
vain name they do falsely obiecte against me. Helias shall first come. B.
This ought to be referred to the time of the prophecy. As if he had said,
The Prophet Malachy did not falsely speak this, for Helias is come already. for
the prophecy was fulfilled in John the Baptist, coming in the power and
spirit of Helias. And so the angel also declared to Zacharias, the father of
John, saying, And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Helias,
Luke. 1.
to turn the hearts of the fathers. Matthew. 11.
And Christ him self in an other place says. If ye will receive it, this is
Helias, which was for to come.

And restore all things. C. A restitution is here attributed to John the
Baptist, yet not a parfecte restoringe, but because by a continual order he
gave that to Christ from hand to hand, to be absolved, which he had begone. M.
For he, by his preachinge brought the people of the Jews unto Christ, even
as the Angel said before to his father he should do.

12 But I say unto you that Helias is com alredye, and ye knew him not: but
have done unto him what soever they lusted. In like manner shall also the son
of man suffer of them.

But I say unto you that Helias is come. A. As if he had said, Let not the
false immagination of the Scribes as concerning the coming of Helias move you
any thing at all, whom I certify you to be com already, not in the body, but in
the spirit, even as the lord understood by the words of the Prophet. But have
done unto him what That is he suffered many things, he was undeservedly
rejected and contempned, and also reproched with diverse slanders: As testifies
our savior Christ, saying. Matt^
John came neither catinge nor drinkinge, and they say, behold he has a
devil. And at the length Herod cut of his head, if not by their procurement,
yet at the least by their consent and willinge minds. M. Christ says not
here, They did as they ought to do, or they did what so ever the lord
commanded to be done: but he says, they did what theye would or lust to do.
The like (says he) shall they do to the son of man. And as they did
nothing to the son of man, so did they nothing to John the Baptiste,
without the will and sufferance of God: But they for their parts, had not
respect or regard unto the will of God, but rather to the fulfilling of their
own wills and maliciouse minds, this God used to the executing and fynishinge
of his work. The lord therefore suffers the wicked to do unto saynctes,
The^^ fetch^ with bod^^ to th^^
what so ever theye will, as towchinge their bodies, and uses their mynistery
to the glory of those that are his: Wherefore, if the like happen unto us at
this day, let us not think that we are rejected and cast out of God, or that
he has forsaken us.

In lykevvise also shall the son of man suffer. C. He teaches that it ought
not to seem a new or unwonted thing, if they reject the master as they did the
seruante before. And least any man should be troubled by the newenes of the
thing, the lord says that mention was made before of this in the Scripture,
namely that as well the redemer of the world, as Helias his forerunner should
suffer the repulse at the hands of false and wicked teachers. For Mark
adds, They did unto him what so ever they should, as it is written of him.

13 Then the disciples understood, that he spoke unto the^ of John the Baptist.

A. Because not only in this place, but also in an other place mention was
made of Helias, where Christ had spoken of John the Baptist by name: by this
answer of Christ, the disciples easily understood what he mente.

14 And when they were com to the people, there came to him a certain man
kneling down to him

B. Luke says that this came to pass the Luke ^
next day, as they came down the hill.

^arke. 9.
Mark declares that the Scribes were disputing with the disciples. C. For the
Lunatike child being brought amongst the^ in the absence of Christ, the
Scribes thought that they had gotten good occasion to inueigh and speak evil:
and therefore prosecuting the same, they were very earnest with the disciples
and urged the^, that if they had any power to heal the child, ^he malice
^he scribes.
they should show it. It is likely yt the disciples tried what they could do,
but in vain: so that the Scribes as conquerers triu^phed: neither do they
only deride and mock the disciples, but also proudely they inuey against
Christ, as though in ye person of his disciples, his power were abased. But
this their wicked dealing joined with ingratitude, exceded maliciously to
suppress so many miracles, by the which they had learned of what power and
ability Christ was. For of set purpose they sought to extinguishe the light
set before their eyes.

15 And saying: Master have mercy on my son, for he is Lunatike, and sore
vexed, for often times he falls into the fire, and often into the water.

Master have mercy on my son. B. The father had a fervent desire and great
care for the health of his son: because as Luke says, he was his only son,
who^ instead of (have mercy on my son) has (behold my son) For he is
lunatike. C. The Evangelist Mark speaks of an other kind of dissease, saying
yt this man was dumb. Yet notwtsta^dinge these two very well agree between the^
selves, that he was du^be, and at certain times mad also. ^l^na^ ^^re.
For they are called lunatikes, which under the wane of ye Mean, have either
the falling sickness, or else are tormented with a giddines in the brain.

It is a very vain opinion which some fain, saying yt this name was invented by
the craft and subtlety of Satan, that he might defame the good creatures of
God, for common experience teaches yt those disseases do increase, and
decrease according to the course of the moon: yet notwithsta^dinge nothing
staieth but yt Satan may ad his violent force, to natural means. It is very
probable that this man was neither deaffe nor dombe by nature, but that his
tongue and ears were possessed of Satan: then, when the debillitie and
weakness of the brain and finnewes, made him subject to the fallinge sickness,
a worse evil was added of satan. Hereupon it came to pass that he sought his
own destruction, yt he would lie rent, and torn, and that he would fall down
like a dead man For often he falls C. Let us here note ye nature of Satan: The
nature of Satan.
He is a murderer, and ready to destroy, and has many ways to hurt, were it
not yt he were stayed and let by the power of God. Look how many infirmities of
the flesh and mind there are, which we feel and know to be innumerable, The
miserable estate in the which we are set out to move us to prayer.
so many darts has he always to hurt us. We are worse than mad, if our
miserable estate and condition move us not to prayer. And in this apereth ye
inspeakeable goodness of God, namely, that where as we are subject to so many
dangers, he does vouchsafe to defend us: specially if we consider with how great
a desire the devil our enemy is inflamed to hurt us. But this consolation also
ought to come into our minds, that Christ came to bridel and so restrain his
furiouse rage, and that therefore we in so many dangers, abide in safety,
because ye heavenly medicine far surmounteth all our evils. The care of God for
his children.
M. Here therefore the care and providence of God appears, in that the child is
saved and preserved, so often times being cast by the evil spirit into the
fire and water; to be destroyed, for god saved him and suffered not the evil
spyrite to destroy him. This is a great comfort and consolation to the godly.

16 And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not heal him.

A. Why the disciples could not cast out the devil, we shall see by and by.

17 Jesus answered and said, O faithless and crooked nation, how long shall I
be with you? How long shall I suffer you? bring him hither unto me.

Jesus ansvvered. A. Our Evangelist Matthew pretermitteth many things which are
added by Mark and Luke. O faythlesse. C. Although our savior Christ seem to
direct his speech against the father of the Lunatike son, yet
notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that he had respect unto the Scribes.

For it is certain that the rude and weak are not here reprehe^ded, The
obstinate (...) are no^ to be forborne.
but such, as (being obstinately wrapped in malice) do resist God. Therefore
Christ says yt such are unworthy to be forborne any longer: and says, yt he
will shortly make a dyuorce and separation between him and them. There are some
which thinck it better to direct these words to the Apostels only, and that
because of the words following in the.xx verse, for your vnbelefes sake etc.
But the former exposition does better agree, yt we may know that the Scribes
hereby were reprehended. C. For they went about (as it was said before) to
extinguishe ye light set before their eyes. Again, Christ does deal more
favorably with those that are his. And crooked nation. E. That is to say,
perverse, froward, and always bending from the truth, and so obstinate, that
they could not be persuaded in the truth, neither could abide or suffer the^
selves to be taught, or persuaded to any thing that was profitable for the^.
Such did the Israelites show them selves to be, in so often murmuringe against
God, in so often rebelling against Moses and Aaron. who^, neither those
meruailouse signs and wonders, which were done for their sauegarde and
health: neither so horrible and fearful punishments of their rebellion:
neither the inspeakeable clemency and gentilnes of Moses, and his infinite
labor and daily care for the^, could make to do their duty toward him.
These with whom Christ had to do show forth no less obstinacy and crooked
frowardness then they. C. Wherefore not without cause does our savior make
exclamation against the^, saying, that they are no longer to be borne withal,
and that he calls them a faithles, and crooked nation. For they bring taught
by so many examples before should have learned thus much, not to backebite and
slander.

How long shall I be with you? The words goinge before were very sharp, but
these are much more sharper: for what greater evil can happen unto us, then to
be forsaken of Christ, The louinge kindenes of Christ.
and to be left to despair? Here the lord Jesus after a sort co^tendeth with
him self: for by his goodness, he greatly coueteth to overcome the malice of
the Scribes and of all the people beside: yet nevertheless he reprehendeth the^
as they deserved. He went about to bring the^ unto God: but they were winding
every way, and crooked as serpe^tes, and rejected the grace of their visitation
with a proud and careless mind. Hereby we see that men must be handeled
according to their disposition and nature: A cons^tion (...) ^uery (...) ought
(...)
for Christ delte not with the^ alwais after one manner of fashion. For he
allured those yt were tractable with great humanity, lifted up the weak,
moderatly also pricked forward the flow and negligent, and spared not the
windinge crooked serpents, who^ he saw to be incurable. They are very unwise
therefore which have not consideration, and temperature. Al scripture given by
divine inspiratio^, is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to
amend, (as says S. Paul) that the man of God may be perfect and given to all
good works. 2, T^^
Yet notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that the mind of Christ retained
still one kind of moderation.

These are thu^deryng words against the unbelieving: yet nevertheless he was
sorry for their wickedness. Bring him hither. A. Although the Scribes which
stood by were unworthy to behold and see so wonderful a miracle, yet
notwithstanding our savior Christ (such was his cleme^cie) commands him
that was afflicted with so grievous a dissease, to be brought unto him before
them all.

18 And Jesus rebuked the devil, and he departed out of him, and the child
was healed even that same time.

And Jesus rebuked. M. That is to say he commanded him: according to ye which
we read in ye. 8 chapter going before. Whereupon the Evangelist Mark more at
large expounding this, says that Christ after this manner spoke unto the
spirit. Thou dombe and deaf spirit, I charge thee, Mar^
come out of him, and enter no more into him. This reprehension declares a
certain indignation and anger of Christ against the unclean spirit: and that
justly. For how should not he which came to save al men, be angry with the
spirit of perdition, and the enemy of ma^kinde? For the more the love of
Christ was toward mankind, ye greter was his hate against those spirits which
were the ennemies of the health of mankind. And he departed out of. A. At the
power of Christ it must needs be, that the power of Satan be brought to
nothing. The deuilles (although against their wylles) are compelled to obey
Christ: (...) devils (...) Christ.
What shall they do then, which never cease to resist his power? Shall they
be stronger then he?

And the child was healed. A. Behold now the obstinacy and perverse dealing
of the Scribes is overcome, by the which they proudely triumphed, as though
the power of Christ were aswaged.

19 Then came the Disciples to Jesus secretly and said, Why could not we
cast him out?

C. The disciples marvel yt the power is taken from them, with the which they
were endued before (as we may read in the.x. chapter of Matthew) when as by
their own salt they had deprived the^ selves of ye same. for it follows.

20 Jesus said unto the^: Because of your unbelief. For verily I say unto you:
If ye have faith like a grain of mustarde seed, ye shall say unto this
mountain remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove: neither shall any
thing be impossible unto you.

Because of your unbelief. Bu. Again incredulity and hardenes of heart is
condemned: moreover faith and the great force of the same is commended unto us.
^efecte of ^is the ^of evil.
And whereas our actions come not to good end, and our matters have not good
success, it comes by the want and defect of faith. Christ therefore assigns
and imputes this want, to the incredulity of the disciples. M. He says
not, for the unbelief of the father of the Lunatike child, but for your
vnbelef, A. to the end he might stir up his disciples to ask the increase
of faith.

If ye have faith. M. By the similitude which he brings of ye grain of
mustard seed, he shows the liuelines and efficacye of faith. For that being
the least among seeds, ^th. 13.
does in short time spring and shote up above all other herbs: eue^ so if
faith be lively it does earnestly show forth it self, nothing shall be
impossible unto it, it shall overcome al things: ^ely says
for it seeks to do nothing, but that which pertains to the glory of God:
and what soever it takes in hand, it is certainly persuaded that ye lord
will finishe it, for the which it prays continually. But lest any man should
by and by gather (as certain perverse men do) yt whosoever has faith as a
grain of mustarde sede, may remove mountains, and do al things else: and say,
we believe, therefore we are able to do all things, yea if need be, to remove
mountains, and also to cast out evil spirits: we must note of what faith the
lord speaks here. Three kinds of faith.

1. A historical faith.


Let us understand therefore, yt there are three kinds of faith. The first is
that, by ye which certain things are believed to be such as they are declared
to be in the Scriptures: as in Scripture we here that there is one God, being
omnipote^t, and the creator of all things, 2. A iustifyinge faith.
this faith is called an hystoricall faith. The second is that, by the which
we believe the promises of God, and apprehende the mercy and grace of God in
Christ Jesus. this faith is said to be a iustifing faith. The third is that, 3.
A faith of miracles, or a particular faith.
by the which a man does firmly believe yt there is nothing impossible unto
God: and the mind carried by a certain inspiration of the spirit, to do
meruailouse things. and this is called the faith of miracles. The first
James. 2.
Thou beleuest yt there is one God you do well, the devils also believe and
tremble.

The second kind of faith pertayneth only Titus: Titus. ^1
by the which faith we are made members of Christ's body, and are saved: of
this faith Christ speaks not here: neither do al they yt have the same, work
miracles straighte way. The third kind of

A. This faith may also be called a particular or special faith. And it is no
doubt a singular gift of ye holy ghost, 1. Cor. 12.
as s. Paul teaches saying, To some faith is given by the same spirit. the
which truly can not be said of the justifying faith, which pertains not to
a certain only, but to all the elect and chosen of God.

This faith saves no man, neither does it change the hearts of men: and
therefore it is such a faith as is given also to the wicked. M. And therefore
we have already heard in the.vii. chapter going before, how the wicked at ye
day of judgment shall say unto Christ, Matthew. 7.
Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and by thy name cast out
deuilles, and done many miracles through thy name? To whom it shall be answered,
I never knew you: depart from me ye that work iniquity. C. And in an other
place the Apostel Paull says, 2. Cor. 13
If I have all faith, so that I can remove mountains, and have no love: it is
nothing. Of this faith Christ speaks here, when he says, If ye have faith
like a grain of mustarde seed.

Ye shall say unto this mountain. B. By the remouinge of mountains, he
understands every hard thing, yea, such things as are impossible to nature:
not because the faithful must therefore remove mountains: although in deed they
could do it, or any other thing more impossible to the force of nature, if so
be the same did pertain to the settinge forth of the glory of God. For the
faithefull are so addicted to the glory of God, The faithful man wissheth
nothing contrary to the glory of God, and the proffyte of his neighbor.
and to the profit of their neighbors, that they can wish for nothing, but
as those two things do move the^: wherefore they will neither remove
mountains, nor do any other thing, of ye which they are not certain yt it will
make to the proffite of me^, and to the glory of god. Paul also (as we showed
a littel before) brought in the removing of mountains for the greatteste
miracle. 1. Cor. 13.
C. It is certain therefore, That speech is called Hyperbollicall when we
advance or depresse, any thing out of measure.
that this is a Hyperbollycal kind of speaking, when Christ says, that by
faith a man may remove mountains and trees. Notwithstanding this is the
effect and sum of his words, that God will never fail us, if so be that we
open the gate and give passage to his grace. And yet, he means not that God
will give what soever comes rashly into our mind, or mouth, when as there is
nothing more contrary to faith, then to follow the folishe and rash desires of
the flesh: for who soever is endued with a true faith, desyereth and wissheth
nothing contrary to the will of God. This modesty and sobriety therefore must
always be kept, that we desire no more then that which is promised unto us:
and that also we direct our prayers according to the rule given unto us. If
any man do object and say that the disciples knew not whether it was the
lords pleasure to heal the lunatike person: we answer yt their ignorance
came through their own falte. For Christ (as it was said before) speaks here
of a special faith, the which faith, as matter and occasion seruid, had his
secret and inward instructions. And this is that faith which Paul speakethe of
in that place, which we have twice cited before. How comes it to pass then,
that the Apostels want the power of the holy ghost, which they had received
before to do miracles, but only because by their own negligence, they had
extinguished the same? But where as Christ spoke of the particular faith,
according to the circumstance of the place, it is extended to the common faith
of the whole church.

21 Howbeit, this kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting.

Howbeit this kind. Chr. Some understand this to be spoken universally of al
manner of evil spirits: M. Othersom understand it only of the chief
spirits, which are not cast out but by fasting and prayer. A. This later
opynion is more firm and true then the first, C. because when Satan has
taken sure hold, and full possession, and rangeth at his pleasure, the victory
and conquest will be more difficulte and hard, and therefore we must fight with
all our strength.

But by prayer and fasting. C. We must here diligently note, that the
disciples askinge why the devil gave not place unto them, he answers, Fayth^
more (...) then f^ and p^
saying that he would not because of their unbelief, to the end we might know
that al force and power is attributed unto faith, and not unto fasting and
prayer. For when this faith prays earnestly, it requires fasting, according
to the nature of true prayer, that is to say, a ceassynge from all worldely
and fleshely busynes.

Wheruppon the Lord in effect makes this answer to his disciples, You
being young coniurers dare presume to encounter with the devil without a firm
and constant faith, and ye go to join with him as with a tryffelinge and
dallyinge fight: but truly, ye have to do with a puissante Antagonista, and
strong ennemie, who can not lightly be ouercom, but with great fortitude. ^yer
hel^ Faith, (...) fasting ^er.
Therefore your faith should have been stirred up by prayer: and because ye are
slow and cold to pray, ye should have taken fasting un, to you, as an aid
and help thereunto. Hereby it is evident how ridiculous the Papists ground
their remedy and medicine in fasting, to expel deuylles, when as the lord
refers it to no other end, than to kyndell the heat of prayer. But the
world here has ever erred and been deceived. For men have thought that
fasting has been a work meritoriouse: and that of long time. For this is the
saying of Hipocrites (as may appear by the words of the Prophet), ^y. 58.
Wherefore fast we (say they) and thou see it not? we put our lives in
straightness, and thou regardest it not. Their error therefore is doubble,
because they think their fasting to be meritoriouse, and acceptable also,
without the true piety of the heart. for there is no merit in our works,
neither is fasting of it self so acceptable, as this which the lord
requires saying, Honor thy father and thy mother. And this is the cause that
the almighty says thus by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias. Think ye this fast
pleases me, (...), 58.
that a man should chasten him self for a day, and to wrythe his head about
like a hoope, and to lie upon the earth in a heary clothe? Should that be
called fasting, or a day that pleases the Lord? Does not this fasting rather
please me, that thou lose him out of bondage, that is in thy danger? that thou
break the oath of wicked bargains? that thou let the oppressed go free, and
take from them all manner of burdens? to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
bring the poor wandering home into thy house. etc. Wherefore abstaining from
meat, (...) end of ^inste.
drink, and the affections of the flesh is but a preparatiue and mean, to
make us apt to pray: for it is as a certain rudiment and childishe
instruction, for our infyrmitie and external exercise. So that fasting is a
seruante to prayer, and a mean to make the same more fervent. And thus does
the Scripture speak of prayer.

22 While they were occupied in Galile, Jesus says unto them: it will com to
pass, that the son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men.

While they were occupied. C. The nearer that Christ's death approached, the
oftener he admonished his disciples, least that sorrowefull show should
quayle their faith Christ spoke these words immediately after he had wrought
the miracle: for Mark says, that they departed thence, and took their
iorneye through Galile, and would not that any man should know of it. for he
was fully determined to com to Jerusalem at the solemn feast day, because he
should suffer ye Easter following. It will come to pass that the son of. B.
This is now the third time that our sauyoure Christ admonishes his
disciples of this matter. Read the.xvi. chapter goinge before, the.xxi, verse.

23 And they shall kill him. and the third day shall he rise again. And they
were exceeding sorry.

And they vveye exceeding sorry. C. The Evangelist Luke shows the cause why
they were so sorrowful saying: Luke. 9.
But they wist not what that word meant, and it was hidden from them, that they
understood it not. And they feared to ask him of that saying, Therefore
although they had been before admonished of this matter, yet notwithstanding
they are no less troubled than if they had never heard of ye same. Of such
force is an opinion conceived, that even in the most clear and manifest light,
it blinds the mind. The Apostels imagined that the state of Christ's
kingdom should be delectable and pleasant: they thought ye so sone as he was
known he should be received with the consent of all men: there was nothing
seemed more incredible, tha^ that the hie priests, Scribes, and seniours of the
people should be enemies unto him. Therefore they being before in error, refused
what soever was spoken contrary to the same. For Mark says, that they knew
not what the lord meant. But how comes it to pass, that they are thus
ignorant, when as Christ speaks so plainly and evidently unto the^, but
because one vain opinion blinded their minds. And where as they durst not be
so bold to ask any farther question, it may be yt they were stayed by a
certain reverence, and also by the gross and absurd opinion, with the which
they were made amassed. But this shamefastness and reverence was not al
together commendable, because it incresed their doubt and wicked sorrow.
Notwithstanding the sede of godliness which was sown in their minds, did more
stay them from departing from the schole of Christ, than did the pure knowledge
of the truth. For they had a certain beginning of faith and true
understanding graffed in them: but they had not learned so far as to know
the nature of the kingdom of God, and the promised renouation in Christ.
Hereby we gather what praise and dispraise they deserved. M. If the Apostelles
had understood those things which he spoke unto them, they would not have so
greatly sorrowed. For Christ says in an other place, John. 16.
if ye loved me, ye would greatly rejoice, because I go unto the father, for
the father is greatter than I. John. 14.
And in an other place. It is good for you that I go away They sorrowed when
mention was made of his death: they considered not the glory of his
resurrection: they knew not the mystery of his cross. This admonition trewely
did not proffite them by and by, but after a while it did profit the^ greatly.
The death of Christ and his glorious assentio^ must be joined together.
Wherefore let us here learn, that whenever mention is made of the death of
Christ, to remember his gloriouse triumph, and ascension into heaven, which
bring unto us a new life.

24 And when they were come to the city of Capernaum, they that use to
receive tribute money, came to Peter and said: Does your master pay
tribute?

And when they were come. C. First of all, we must note the end and scope
of this history: namelye that Christ by payinge tribute, willingly declared
his subjection, according to the form of a seruante, which he took upon him,
without constraint or necessity, and abased him self of his own free and
voluntary submission, to the end the world might judge of him, as of a common
man. Cryb^
But the manner of payinge was that every man should chose a city (as a
certain habitation) in the which he would be cessed. There is no doubt
therefore, but that Christ came to Capernaum, as to his own city, to pay
tribute.

They that use to receive tribute. C. This trybute was not for toll, neither
for passage, nor ferrye, but it was a yearly trybute, which was laid upon the
Jews, by the which they were constrained to pay that unto tyrants, which
they were wont to pay unto God only. For we know that this trybute was
prescribed unto them in the law, where it is said: Thus much shall every man
give, Exod^^
that goes into the number: half a sicle after the sicle of the sanctuary: a
sicle is twenty halfepence. Now when the kings of Asia had brought this
tribute unto the^ selves, the Romans by their example encroched the same. So
that the Jews being as it were alienate from the empire and government of
God, paid to profane Tyrants, the holy tribute appointed and commanded in
the law. Christ^ iecte to (...) ^bute.
But it might seem very absurd, that Christ which came to redeem the people,
should not be free from tribute. To the end he might take away this offense, he
teaches by plain words, that he did it of his voluntary will only and
proves the same by a miracle: because he could exempte him self from
earthely gouernemente, which ruled the sea and the fyshes therein. A. As
towching the sum and value of this tribute, The val^ (...) a sycle.
we must know that a sicle was a piece of money in value worth fouer grotes,
equivalent with that which is called Stater: wherefore the half part of this
sicle, is two grotes, that is to say, the fifth part of a french crown, as
they went in France, as very exactely declares the learned master William
Budeus, in his book de Ass.

Because therefore every man was levied and ceased at two grotes, the
receyuers of ye same asked Peter whether his master paid the same, saying:
Does your master pay tribute? M. C It is lykely that these exactours of
trybute did ask the disciple, as concerning his master, for some subtle
deceit, and evil intent: to see if they could fyshe out that matter, which
the Scribes and Phariseies angled for, in the.xxii. chapter followinge: namely
whether he would deny the authority of Caesar. Christ therefore was here
sharply reproved by the exactours of trybute, as though he had denied the
common right. But as those kind of men were contumeliouse, so opprobriously
they execute their office For Christ having no certain restinge place, they
come unto him, and demanded whether he will answer to the laws, he goinge
from place to place, as an uncertain gueste. for every man was appointed to
pay tribute in his own City. But the answer of Peter very modestly excuses
the matter to please and content them.

25 He said yea. And when he was com into the house, Jesus prevented him,
saying. What think thou Symo^? of whom do the kings of the earth take
tribute or toll? of their children or of strangers?

He said: yea. C. He paieth, and will pay, says Peter. Whereby we may gather
that Christ before according to the manner and custom paid tribute, because
Peter promyseth the same, as a thing undoubted.

A. And it is lykely that Christ came to Capernaum, as to his own city, to
pay tribute (as it is said before) to declare his volu^tary submission. C. But
whereas they demand it of Peter, rather tha^ of any other of the disciples,
we Judge that it was done, because Christ dwelte with him. for if they had been all of one house, the exaction had been common to them all. The Papists
therefore very fondely upon this place, affirm that Peter was equal in
dignity with Christ. He chose him say they, to be his viccar, and gave him
due honor, whom, (in payinge tribute) he made equal to him self. Trewly by
this reason they make all the vycars of Christ to be swineherdes, Pope by
^lace ^th him ^o be a ^hearde.
and all swyneheardes to be Christ's vycars, for they paid trybute as well as
Peter, or Christ. But if the dignity, and supremacy of Peter appeared in
payinge tribute, how comes it to pass that the Pope, being Peter's successor
refuses to pay tribute? and why does he make Caesar to pay trybute unto him?
Thus trewely does their foolishenes declare it self, which according to
their own affections deprave the Scriptures.

And when he was come into the house. M. Some thyncke that this house belonged
unto Christ: whose opinion is refuted by the words of Christ him self, saying.
Matthew. 8.
Foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air have neastes, but the son of
man has not where to rest his head. It is more credible therefore that this
was Peter's house. Math. 8. Mark. 1 Luke. 4.
For it is evident by the eight chapter goinge before, that Peter had a house
with Andrew his brother in this City Capernaum. Jesus prevented him saying.
It is like that Peter was about to speak unto Jesus, as concerning this
matter, but he, not taryinge for Peter's talk, preuenteth him. C. In the
which Christ showed a plain token of his divinity, declaringe that nothing
was hidden from him. Of their children, or of strangers?

E. Christ puts not this word Children, for subiecttes, least he should
say in vain, Then are the children free: by the which words he teaches
that he is a kings son.

26 Peter says unto him: of Strangers. Jesus says unto him: Then are the
children free.

Of Strangers. A. That is of those which pertain not to the honor of the
kings majesty, or which are not so nere of bloudde to kings.

Then are the children free. C. To what end do the words of Christ here
tend? Does he speak this to the end he might make him and his free from
subjection of the law? So some do expound it, that christians are free by
right: but notwithsta^dinge to be subject to common politic government:
because otherwise humane society ca^ not be maintained. But there is yet an
other and more simple meaning of this place. For, because it was daungerouse,
least the disciples should think that Christ came in vain, because in paiinge
of trybute he did after a sort take away the hope of delyueraunce he does
symplelye affirm that he does therefore pay trybute, because he would
willingly abstain from his own right and power. Whereby it may be gathered,
that nothing of his kingedome was diminyshed. Bu. For thus he seems to argue,
All kings sons are free from paying of trybutes. But I am a kings son, my
father being the heavenly king of kings, according to my divine nature, and
according to my humain nature the son of David the gloriouse king. Therefore
I am free from the tributes of kings. Response.
neither laws ordained by God, that he which is the son of God, should be in
the same bondage that other men are in: notwithstanding he of his own free
will, till the glory of his kingdom was revealed, The humilytie of Christ.
became as a servant and was obediente in all things. This place has the Pope
very folishly abused, to the end he might make his clergy free from the laws.
As though truly the shauinge of their crowns, The Pope abuses this place.
made them the sons of God, and free from tribute and toll. But truly the
purpose of Christ was nothing else than to challenge to him self the honor
of a kings son, to the end he might be priuileged, and free from the common
law. The error of the Anabaptists.
Wherefore the Anabaptists also very ignora^tly wreste these words of our
Savior, to take away pollitike order and government.

27 Notwithstanding least we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast
an angle, and take the fish, that first comes up: and when thou have opened
his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of twenty pence: that take, and give unto
them for me and thee.

Notwithstanding least we offend. M. It may be demanded in what thing they
should offend. Responce.
and be as it were the authors of troubling the kingdom. For otherwise the
Jews would not willingely have borne that servitude of tribute: and many of
them would openly have resisted the Romans, as we may see in Josephus, and
therefore it came to pass that Christ was accused of this matter before Pilate
Therefore least there should be in him any show or token of a seditious
mind, Suspi^ Rebelli^ must be ^ded.
he would not do that which he might have done. And cast an angle. C. Although
we grant that Christ had not always plenty of money, yet notwithstanding
we must not think that need constrained him to command Peter to do this
thing: but rather that he did it to the end by a miracle he might declare him
self to be the lord of all, and that he had not only men, but also the wild
untamed fyshes, tributory unto him. And we read that this was done but once
only, because one document was sufficient.

And when thou have opened his mouth. M. Here we must note and way the
argument and proof of Christ's divinity, in that he knows the secrets of
the sea, and rules the fyshes that swymme in the deep, and causes the fyshe
here mentioned to come to Peter's hook. For seeing that he had declared him
self to be the king of all, and to be the natural son of God, it was
necessary that he should show some token of the same to Peter, by some deed or
sign, to the end he might be acknowledged to be the Lord of all things, and
of the fyshes of the sea also.

That take, and give unto them for thee and me, A. We have already declared
that the Papists upon this place do very fondely gather the supremacy of
Peter, because that Peter is joined unto Christ in payinge tribute. They
consider not that Peter was a cittezen of that city, and that therefore he was
constrained to pay trybute in that place.

The.xviii. Chapter.
AT the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying: Who is the
greatteste in the kingdom of heaven.
At the same time. C. By the other two Evangelists, which wrote this historye,
it appears that the Disciples came not of their own frewyll unto Christ, but
when they had privily disputed in the way, their secret talk and whispering was
bewrayed. And there is no absurdity at all in this, that Matthewe making have
to the answer of Christ, shows not the whole order of the history, but
lettinge pass the beginning, briefly shows why Christ reproved the
foolish desire of Supremacy in his disciples. But for so much as Christ inquired
of their secret talk, and constrained his disciples to confess that the
thing which they wisshed for, ^tion.
was suppressed, we are taught to beware and take heed of al secret emulation
and desire to excel. Further we must note the circumstance of the time: the
foreshewinge of death had made them sorrowful and heavy: yet notwithstanding
they being as it were full of toys, and drunk with the poetical Nectar, do
contend by and by for the principallitie. How could it be that such sorrow
and care, should so sodeinly vanishe away out of their minds, if that men
were not by nature too much given to Ambition, that forgettinge the present
war and fight, triumph before the victory? Wherefore if the Apostels so
sone forgot the sermon of Christ, so lately made unto them, what shall happen
unto us, if we leauinge the meditation of the cross, give and addict our
selves to sluggishenesse, to negligence, and to vain speculations.

Who is the greattest in the kingdom of heaven. E. The Greek text has the
comparatiue, for the superlatiue degree: as thus, Who is great in the kingdom
of heaven. C. This disputation as concerning the supremacy, arose not
hereupon, ye Christ for him self and Peter, paid the tribute (as many think)
because the same began before they came to Capernaum: but because he spoke unto
them of his death and resurrection, with many words as they were in the way,
and also comforted them, they being ignorant what his resurrection was,
(except it should be a certain possession, and renewing of the kingdom:)
therefore they began this disputation. M. For the Apostels did not contend or
dispute of the heavenly kingdom to come, but of such a kingdom which they
thought should be in this short life, according to the manner of the
kingdoms of this world: as concerning the which kyngedome they questioned
with him, after his resurrection, saying: Lord will thou at this time, Acts.
1.
restore again the kyngedome of Israel?

C. Therefore they omittyng the occasion of sorrow and heaviness, draw unto
them selves that which was spoken of his resurrection: whereupon among the
secure and careless, this contention arose. And because they flee from the
former part of doctrine, which is sower and bitter to the flesh, God suffereeh
them to be seduced, and to err in his resurrection, that they might dream of
that which should not come to pass, namely, that Christ by the bare
preaching of his word should possess an earthely kingedome, and that they in
the same should be part takers of great pleasure. M. They might also have been moved to the same disputation, when they heard that it was said before
unto Peter, Matthew. 16.
To thee will I give ye keys of the kingdom of heaven. A. Although this was
not spoken properly to Peter alone, but to all the mynisters of the word in his
person, as we have showed before. M. In like manner they had seen James, Mark.
5
John, and Peter, only to be taken (they being left behind) to the raysinge
up of the rulers daughter. And also they only went with Christ up into the
mountain. Math. 17.
C. But in this question there were two faltes. For first the Apostelles, all
care rest to be given them, and their pention Roma. 12.
To the first vice, the vain curiosity of these men at this day is a kynne,
which leauinge the lawful race of their calling, leap out of time, above the
heavens. The Lord in his Gospel calling us to his kingdom, shows us the
way by the which we may come thither. Rash and inconstant men, nothing
consideringe of Faith, of Patience, of the invocation of God, and of other
exercises, fall in hand to dispute as concerning that which is done in heaven
But this is even as if one being about to take a journey, inquyring where his
lodging should be, mouethe not one foot. For when as the lord commands us
to walk in the earth, whosoever he be that disputethe how the dead do sit
in heaven, he does stay him self from coming to the kingdom of heaven. A.
Some think that the Apostels in this place, called the new people (whereof
they them selves were the first fruits) the kingdom of God: as if they
should have said, which of thye Apostelles shall be the chief, when thou
beginnest to reign by the church in the whole world? Grievous sins remain
in the saints of God.
or else, who shall be chief now in this our administration. By this question it
does sufficientely appear that not only the relics of sin, but also great
sins do remain in the saints and faithful. The Apostelles were holy and
faithful, yet notwithstanding they were ambitiouse and spiteful.

2 And Jesus called a child unto him, and set him in the midst of them.

And Jesus called a child unto E. The Greek word Paidion, for the which we
read this word, child, although it be sometimes used for a great boy, yet
notwithstanding in this place it is not used as a diminutiue in vain. For it
makes the matter to have the greater Emphasis and force, when he does not
only call them to the imitacion of every child, but also of every small
child. Bu. And the Lord, to the end he might make them bear in mind ye
which he was about to teach, he uses not only words, but also a lively
pattern and express example. The same did the Prophets oftentimes use,
because it was profitable both to teach and also to demonstrate, to move, and
to printe those things in mind, which we would have remembered. For the action
does set the thing to be seen before our eyes, and the words do declare
unto us what the action means. And therefore the Prophet Jeremy, Jeremy
does not only say that the Cittye of Jerusalem shall be destroyed, but he
takes also an earthe^ pot and breaks the same in the presence of those yt
were with him saying: Even so will I destroy this City and this people says
the Lord. Also the same Prophet makes bonds, and chains, Jeremy
and shows them unto all men, and afterward he expounds the meaning of
them. The like does the Lord himself go about in this place, and therefore
when he had called a child unto him, he set him in ye midst of those that
contended and disputed: and then by and by he declares the meaning of this
example by words saying.

3. Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye tourn, and become as children: ye
shall not enter into the kingedome of God.

Verily, verily, I say unto you M. This earnest and grave affyrmation of our
savior Christ makes this sentence of more weight and importance. For
although all the words of Christ ought to be counted true and certain, yet
notwithstanding it is euidente that those things are spoken with a more
earneste affection, which have this asseueration adjoined unto them: and for
that cause they ought to be dyligently heard and considered. What other thing
does our savior Christ mean by this affyrmation then to extorte faith
from us, and to admonish us that except we believe we shall certaynely
peryshe?

Except ye turn. M. Namely from that way in the which ye are entered, ^ion
stat^ (...) from the ^^^gdome of ^^d.
disputing for the superiority, which way leads not to the kingdom of
heaven, but to the kingdom of Satan: except (I say) ye be otherwise then ye
now are. A. ye shall never be part takers of the kingdom of heaven whereof I
have spoken unto you. C. He means that they were ungodly minded and therefore
he reprehendeth their ambition. And become as children, ye shall not. Behold?
here what the conversion is, ^^millitie.
whereof he speaks, namely humillitie and voluntary submission, as in the
verse followinge he declares more at large.

Ye shall not enter into the kingdom. Bu. This is a horrible sentence. for he
speakethe not of some light kind, or of some fatherlye correction. but of a
perpetual refusal and forsakinge: as if he had said, So far ye are from
excellinge in the kingedome of heaven, that ye shall have no access or
portion at all in the same: because I will utterly forsake you, except ye turn
and be converted from your perverse desire of ruling, to the true submission
and humillitie of the mind.

4. Whosoever therefore humbles him self as this child, the same is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

Whosoever therefore. M. Here he does more plainly declare what he mente by
this saiynge, Except ye turn, and become as children. C. The sum of his
words, is this: They which desire ambiciously to excel their brethren,
shall be so far from obteyning their desire, that they shall be far inferior to
them. According to that which he says in an other place, He that exalts
him self, shall be brought low, and he that humbles him self, shall be
exalted. For he reasonethe of the contrary, because only humillitie does
exalte us. But where as, he commands his disciples to be as children, his
words are not to be extended to all the quallities of a child generally. For
we know that there are many faltes in children. Cor. 14.
Wherefore the Apostell Paul exhorts us to be children in malice, but not
in sense and understanding. But because infantes do not know as yet what
preferment and principallitie means, for the which they should contend.
Christ by their example seeks to take away ambition out of the minds of those
that are his, least they should be like unto the children of this world, which
are never content with their vocation and state. To the which effect
partaineth this saying of the Apostell Peter: 1. Petr. 2.
Wherefore lay aside all maliciousenesse, and al guile, and faynednes, and
envy, and all backebytynge: and as newborn babes desire ye that milk (not
of the body but of ye soul) which is without all deceyte. etc.

But if any man obiecte and say, Response.
as though of necessity they should hold in all points. Because therefore so
great symplicitie does reign as yet in the age of infantes, that they are
ignorant of the degrees of honor, and the affections of pride, Christ does
very aptly propou^de them for an exaumple. And to this end partaineth the
conversion that he spoke of even now, namely that the disciples had already
applied them selves too much to the manners of worldely men, and that therefore
if they would come to the mark they must turn back again. The reward of
humillitie.
Every man desired to have either the first, or the second room: but Christ
will not so much as grant the fotestoole to any man, but to him which
humblethe him self to the lowest degree. And to such he pronounces
prefermente and dygnitie, least we should think to loose any thing by abasinge
our selves. And hereuppon may be gathered a short definition of humility,
namely, that he is humble in deed, A definition of humillitie.
which neither arrogateth any thing to him self before God, nor disdainfully
despises his brethren, or coueteth to some his superior, but counts it
sufficient that he is taken for one of the members of Christ, desiryng
nothing else, but that the head may excel. We have an example of true
humillitie in Christ, John. 13.
in washinge the Apostelles feet, which he adds very well after the
contention of the Apostelles for the supremacy, to cure the same. Also S.
Paul's speakinge of our savior Christ's humillitie says. He made him self of
no reputacion, Phili. 2.
taking on him the faith of a servant, and became like unto men, and was
found in his apparel as a man He humbled him self, and became obedient unto
death, even to the death of ye cross. By the which words the Apostel calls
us to the true humillitie of the mind after the example of Christ. Read for
this matter in the twenty chapter following, Math. 20. Luke 22.
and in the two and twenty of Luke. B. To be short we must be like unto
children in this, that as they are void of disdain, malice, deceyte,
hypocrisy, ambition, and pride, and are modest, simple, innocent and humble:
even so should we. M, And we must note that Christ says, Whosoever: not
whosoever of you: to declare, that to be great in the kingdom of heaven, did
not pertayne to the Apostelles only, but to every one of the faithful also.
Neither are these words an answer to the demand which the disciples
made, but rather an admonition to withdraw them from the vain desire of rule,
that they might seek rather to be in Gods favor, which is prepared for all
those that are of an humble and contrite heart, and not for the Apostels only.

5 And whosoever receives such a child in my name, receives me.

And whosoever receives. M. Some do understand this place to be spoken of
children that were come to a ripe age, and to have already a sure faith in
Christ, as were those which cried Hosiah-na to the son of David, as
concerning the which Christ made answer out of the Psalm of the Prophet
David, Matthew. 21.
saying. Out of the mouth of infantes and suckelynges thou haste ordained
praise. The which cry of children did declare a great faith toward Christ.
And this may be spoken of those children to whom John writes saying, John. 2.
I wrighte unto you children because you have known the father. For they were
the children of Christians, and therefore they were endued with the faith of
Christ, and were such to whom he might take good occasion to wrighte. And in
another place the damsel of.xii. years of age, which Christ raised from
death, is called Paidion which signifies somtymes a child in the state of
infancy. Mark ^
Therefore least any man should contemn the example of a little child, he does
wonderfully commend children: for Mark says that he took the child
himself in his arms, as a singular and most precious pledge: The (...)
Christ^ ^ward^ ^^^^dren. Luke ^
after the which manner also Symeon is said to take the child Christ in his
arms There are others which rather think (and better a great deal) yt
Christ did not only speak of children in age, but of such as in manners, and
in simplicitye are children of what age soever they be. Therefore Christ
calls those children, Metaphorically which layinge a part all haughtines and
pride of mind do frame themselves to modesty and submission. And by this
means the faithful are taught how they should esteem one of an other, when
that every man submits himself. For how can there be any mutual amity
among the children of this world, except that one of them do satisfy an
other a desire? The (...) are de^
So that the more every one is desyrouse of glory, the more boldly he usurps
rule, to the end he might be a lofte, but the humble are a mockinge stock, or
at least altogether despised: but the more every one abaseth and humbles him
self, the more acceptable and honorable he is before Christ. And to the same
effect pertaynethe that little sentence which is added by Luke, Luke. ^
saying: He that is least among you shall be greattest. Yet notwithstanding
he does not mean that they which are deseruidly and justly despi^ed should be
great, but such, which being void of al pride are disdained for their
humillitie.

In my name, A. What it is to receive in the name of Christ, read in the
tenthe chapter goinge before.

6 But whosoever does offend one of these little ones which believe in me: it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drouned in the depth of the sea.

But who so does offend M. According to the order of ye Antithesis and that
which went before, it should have been said: But who so despises one of
these little ones: ye which thing truly he mente, as appears by that which
follows, when he said: ^erse. 10.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: but he thought it
better to use the word of offendinge. C. For this is added to the consolation
of the godly, ^^^ce.
least their condition and state of life should be grievous unto them, if ye
world despise them. And this might be a great let and hinderance unto them,
not to submit them selves and be lowlye, when that they see themselves for
their lowlines to be the more despised. For it is no small matter, not only to
be disdayned of proud men, but almost to be trodden under their feet. Christ
therefore by this consolation does animate and comfort his Disciples, namely,
that although the world should despise their pouertye and base estate, yet
notwithsta^dinge that God will have a regard unto them. Notwithstanding as yet
there might also seem to be a farther meaning in ye word of Christ: for
there was spronge up a co^tencion among them about the superiority and
excellency in honor and dignity: whereby it might easly be gathered, that the
Apostels were infected with a wicked desire of rule. For it cannot be, but that
he must needs be contumelious against his brethren, which stands to much in
his own conceit, or seeks to be preferred before all other men. Christ our
savior seekinge to heal this disease, denounces against the same horrible
ponishmente. But by this word (offend) he comprehends more than if he had
forbad them disdain: ^rse of (...).
although in deed it comes upon nothing else that men careleslye offend
the weak, than upon this, that they geeue not unto them that estimation and
honor which is due unto them. Now seeing that there are many kinds of
offenses, (...) kyn^ ^ence.
we must note and learn the manner of offendinge. If any man be either made
to stumble, or be seduced from the right way, or hindered in the same through
our fault, we are truly said to offend him. Therefore whosoever seeks to
escape this ponishment which Christ here severely pronou^ceth, let him reach
out his hand and help those little ones, which are abiecte, and despised in
the sight of the world, because Christ in this place commends them unto us,
that they may be unto us an occasion of voluntary humilitye: even as ye
Apostell Paul commends this doing, and prescribes it as a rule to the
children of God, saying: Be not hye minded, Roma. 12.
but make your selves equal to them of the lower sort. And again he says,
let no man stand in his own conceit.

It were better for him M. As if he should have said: It were better for him
that a mylstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than to
abide those pains which remain unto him in the world to come. That a millstone
were hanged E. He makes mention here of a grievous kind of ponishment,
which the Palaestines used (as says S. Hierom) to po, nishe notable offenses
and wicked acts. The Lattin text for a millstone has Mola asinaria, which
signifies the greater stoone that lies undermost in the Mill, ye which stoone
in Greek is called Asinus, an ass, of the which comes Asinaria.

S. Hillarye says that it is called Mola asinaria, or the Asses stoone,
because the Ass did use to turn the same about at such times as any thing
should be ground: according to the manner of those milles which we have in
these days, in the which, a horse being blindfoulded, tourneth the stone
goinge still round.

And that he were drowned in the E. The Greek word signifies the bottom
of ye sea, or that which is even in the midst of the sea: for commonly it is
seen that the farther from the shoore the deper it is. He understands and
declares the certain and undoubted ponishment by two things, namelye by the
greatness of the stoone, and by the depenes of the sea. C. But because Christ
makes here mention of a kind of ponishmente which was then very fearful
and terrible, and by the which heinous offenses were punished, we may hereby
gather how dear and precious they are in the sight of God which are abiecte,
contemned, and despised in ye world. Roma. 15.
A. Wherefore let us learn to take up one another among our selves, even as
Christ has taken us up into the glory of God

7. VVo unto the world because of offenses: necessary it is that offenses
come: but vvo unto the man, by who^ the offense comes.

Who unto the world because. A. This is a kind of bewayling: as if he should
have said, Alas, how evil shall it happen unto the world, because of the
offenses and sto^bling blocks which are laid before the little ones. C. This
place may be expounded two manner of ways. Actiuely, that Christ may be said to
curse the authors and causers of offenses: Active offenses and Passive
and so under the name of, World, all the unbelieving must be understood. Or
passiuely, yt Christ may be said to be wail ye evils, which he saw to be at
hand, and ready to fall upon the world because of offenses: as if he should
have said, yt there could be a no more pernitiouse and hurteful plague, and
which should bring greatter desstruction, than that which should come to
pass, by the trouble and fall of many through offenses. And this sense does
best agree: for there is no doubt but that Christ speaking of offenses by an
other occasion, did prolonge and augment his talk, to the end he might make
his disciples more atte^tiue to beware and take heed. Men truly are seduced
from the right way by many offenses. For what is the cause that so many depart
from Christ, and so few come unto him? offenses. Least therefore Satan, we
being a sleep, should circumuent us and deceive us, the lord makes exclamatio^,
that we must take heed of nothing more then of offenses: because satan having
an innumerable company of sto^bling blocks in a redynesse, never ceasseth to
lay the^ before us at every step: and we being weak by nature, are sone
overthrown. And so it comes to pass that so few go forward in the faith
of Christ: and that scarce the tenth part which enter into the race of
salvation, by reason of werynes, come not to the end of the same. It is a rare
thing to find one that does persevere and continu to the end in Christ.
Perseuera^ce.
And often times the ministers give occasion of offense, which being the chief
soldiers, The mynysters are often times stomling ^lockes.
and as it were the standard bearers in the Church, are alienate and withdrawn
from Christ. Of the which matter we have spoken in the.xiii. chapter goinge
before.

Necessary it is that offenses come. C. The lord sekinge to whette and stir
up the care and diligence of his disciples, Offen^ necessa^^
tells them that it can not be avoided, but that they must pass by diverse
stombling blocks. So that this sentence is a confirmation of the next
sentence, because Christ hereby teaches how many inconveniences do depend
upon offenses, saying the Church shall never be free from them, The (...) cam^
(...) from of^
neither can be. But he does not here express the cause of necessity, or why
it is necessary ye offenses come: as ye apostel Paul speakinge of heresies and
sects, says that there must be sects among ye Corinthians that they which
were parfecte among them might be known. 1. Co^ ^
But we must note this yt God would have men subject to offenses to the end he
might exercise their faith: but as for Hipocrites god does as it were fan and
fist them as cockell and chafe from the pure wheat. But if any man do obiecte
and say that it is very absurd, that ye lord should lose the brydel, and give
liberty unto Satan, to bring destruction to miserable men: we answer yt it is
our parts and duties to have a reverent consideration of the secret counsel
and purpose of God, Auns^
which is, that it is necessary yt the world be troubled with offenses. M.
Wherefore when our savior Christ says yt it is necessary ye offenses come, no
man ought to be troubled, saying that it sets forth unto us ye providence
of God. About this word of necessity the anciente writers subtly disputed
and wrytt, to avoid that which might have been said, namely ye God is the
author of evil. We say that the judgments of God are insearchable, and that
this necessity is one of the judgments of God: of the which, The (...) of
offe^ the (...) of God.
because we can geeue no certain reason, we must not seek to deny it. This
necessity comes of the providence of God: and yet for all that he is not
therefore the author of evil, God (...) autho^ (...) ^uyll.
or the cause of the falte. Other ponishme^tes by the which the rebellions and
blindness of infidelles is ponished, do proceed from God: when he suffers the
wicked to fall, and gives them over into filthy desiers, and shameful
filthiness, in yt he is a just judge, and cannot be said to be the Auctor of
euil^ for the wicked cannot be excused from sin. So we must judge of
offenses, that the judgments of God are certain and sure, by the which he
does revenge the contempt of his word and rebellion the which vengeance
when he lays upon the wicked, cannot make him to be blamed. Neither ought
it to seem a new thing unto us, that we see at this day so many offenses:
for ye which Christ foreshewed is fulfilled: and the devil (although God lay
stombling blocks) does nevertheless his duty, seeking to wtdraw us from Christ.
There is another necessity which comes of the corruption of the world. For so
great is the pride and wickedness of the world, so greatly it rejects and
contemns the truth, and so corrupt is the Judgment of the same in her
wisdom, that it is impossible ye offenses should not come. Again the world
knows not those things which belong unto God, neither can know, because
they seem foolish unto it. So is it commonly spoken of things so corrupted
that they cannot be remedyed.

But vvo unto the man by whom C. After that Christ had exhorted his Dysciples
to beware of offenses, he inueyeth again against the Auctors of offenses.
Whereby we gather that the wicked are not excused howsoever they do this by
the providence of God.

8. Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot hinder thee: cut him of, and cast it
from thee. It is better for thee to enter into life hault or maimed, rather
tha^ thou should (having two hands, or two feet) be cast into everlasting
fire.

9. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee. It is
better for thee to enter into life etc,

Wherefore if thy hand C. To the end the woe and threatninge before
pronounced might have ye greater vehemence, Christ adds saying yt we must
neither spare our hand, our eye, or our foot, if so be that they be occasion
of offense. B. This is a hyperbollicall kind of speech the which the Lord
only uses to amplify: as if he should have said that we must with such
diligence and constancy resist offenses, that we must think it better to
have our eyes pluckte out, and our hands cut of than that offenses should be
maintained. For if any man in this case be loathe to loose one of his members,
he casts his whole body into everlasting destruction. What horrible
destruction therefore remains for them, and what bitter vengeance, which
destroy their brethren by offenses: So yt this amplifying pertayneth as well to
ye Auctors of offenses, as to those before who^ Satan lays offenses. But
because these two Verses were expounded at large in the fifth Chapter going
before, Verse. 2^.
I thought it sufficient now to note for what end and purpose our savior
Christ repeteth this sentence: B. namely yt he might show that offense is so
hurtful a thing, that it is much better for us to want the thing most
necessary and dear unto us in this life, than to maintain offenses.

10 Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones. For I say unto
you that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my father, which
is in heaven.

Take heed that ye despise not B. He concludes the whole Argument. Pride is
the mother of reproach.
Because pride is the mother of contumely and reproach, and ingendereth a
bouldnes and carelesnes to offend, Christ not without good cause (seeking to
bring speedy remedy to this disease) gives a commandment not to contemn
and despise little ones. And certainly (as we showed even now) whatsoever he be
that has a just care of his brethren, he shall not easily give occasion of
offense. But this conclusion and end of Christ's Sermon tends to the same
matter that it did in ye beginning, namelye that we must by submission and
modestye contend and strive amongst our selves, because God does embrace
little ones with a singular love. And truly, it were to absurd not to have
those regarded of a mortal man whom God has in so great price and estimation.
But when our savior Christ says (take heed) he exhorts to vigilance and
care: and that upon good consideration. For he knew how hard a thing it was
even to saints, not to despise and contemn others which are base and abiecte
in the sight of ye world. That ye despise not, M. Or according to the Greek
word. Contempt of Gods children.
That ye compte not other men as abiectes, and disdain them, thinking your
selves in your own conceyts better than other men: for, he that thus does,
may easily offend those who^ he contemns. One of these little ones A. Of
the which little ones he spoke before saying, whosoever offends one of these
little ones which believes in me. etc. He calls those little ones which
laying lustines and pride aside, frame themselves to modesty and voluntary
submissio^. For I say unto you that in Heaven their Angels C. That the
faithful little ones are of great price unto God, he proves by two
arguments. Psalm 34.
The Angel of the Lord taryeth round about them that fear him, Psalm 91.
and delivers them. And again: he shall give his Angels charge over thee,
to keep thee in all thy ways. And in another place they are said to be
ministering spirits that are sent to minister for their sakes which shall be
heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.
Do alvvayes behoulde the face of my father C. That is to say, they see
familiarlye ye face of God. M. Christ speaks here after the manner of this
world, because to be always in the presence of the King, and continually to
behold his face, is a sign of domestical and entiere familiaritye and favor:
as we read of the servants of Solomon: 2. King. 10.
Blessed are thy servants which stand here always before thee. As it is
therefore a great sign and toke^ of the love and clemency of the Prince
toward those subjects whom he appoints to be near unto him and about
his person in office: even so our savior Christ goes about to set forth the
great love of his father toward his little ones, in that their Angels do
always behold his face, Angels are the kepers of the faithful.
which Angels are their defense and guard to be defended by: As appears by
the words of the Prophet Esaias saying: Esaias, 63.
The Angel that went forth from his presence delivered them. C. Howbeit it
was not the purpose of Christ sim, plely to teach how honorably God does
deal with the faithful in assigning and appointing unto them Angels to be
their kepers, but also to declare and pronounce a threatening against those that
contemn them: as if he should have said, that they shall not escape
unpunished that despise the children of God, whose Angels are always in
Gods presence and call for vengeance at his hands. Wherefore we must take
heed that we do not make small account of their safegarde, who have the
Angels of God appointed to defend them. Whereas some understand this place
that every one of the faithful has his several and proper Angel appointed
unto him, they seem to want discretion and a good understanding. For the
words of Christ sound nothing hereunto: neither does he seem any whit to
affirm that any man has his proper Angel, the which in deed is plain
repugnante to the doctrine of holy Scripture, which testifyeth that ye Angels
do compass the faithful about, and not that any one Angel is peculiarly
belonginge to any one man. M. C. And ye Prophet Daniell when he brings in
the Angel of the Greeks, and the Angel of ye Persians, Daniel
seems to affirm that certain Angels are set over kingdoms and provinces
as Princes. But whereas some may obiecte that which is written in the Acts of
the Apostels of those that said: it is his Angel: It may be answered that they
so thought by a common conceit imagining that every faithful man had an
Angel appointed unto him to be his guide. Auns^
Or it may be answered yt they called ye his Angel simplely which was
appointed by God unto Peter to be a minister of salvation and a keeper. Whereby
the opinion of certain cannot be gathered, namely yt eueryone has his proper
Angel te^ding on him. C. Let that foolish imagination therefore cease as
concerning the good and evil Angel, and let us hold it sufficient to believe
ye Angels have a care committed to them of the whole Church, and that they
help every particular member of the same as occasion and necessity requires.
M. Whereas therefore certain Christians worship their Angels, they are moved
thereunto by a double error.

Opinions ^uste have Gods word ^or a warrant.
By the one, because it is not certain that every man has his proper Angel.
for it is a great presumption and rashenes to hold any opinion, without the

11 For the son of man is come to save that which was lost.

For the son of man. M. This is the other argument of the providence and
louinge kindness of God toward his faithful, taken from the cause of
Christ's coming into this world: by the which argument he does withdraw us
from the cogitacion which might bring us to the contempt of our brethren,
when we see some falte in them, whereby we think that we have just occasion
to despise the^. As if he should say, I am come to save ye which was lost,
and to receive that which was abiecte, of the which there is no account made
in this world: despise not and destroy not therefore those, whom I am com to
save This is a most profitable admonition to teach us that we ought not to
disdain any sinner. C. For it is to bad that they should be rejected by our
disdain, who^ the son of God so greatly estemeth. And although the weak
have faltes remaining in them, which may deserve contempt, yet is not our
disdain thereby excusable: because they are not to be esteemed for their
vertewes, so much as for Christ's sake, after whose example whosoever frames
not him self, shall declare great pride to remain in him To save that which
was lost. A. He thought it better to say that he came to save that which was
lost then that which was littell: to the end he might the more effectually by
his example exhort us to have the weak and abiected brethren in good
estimation: because he came not only to save them, and to redeem them, but
such also as perished in death.

12 How think ye? If a man have an

13 hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, does he not leave ninty
and nine in the mountains, and goes and seeks it that was gone astray.

How think ye? M. He thought good to add this pleasant similitude to make
the matter more plain. Luke. 5.
C. Howbeit Luke shows a farther occasion of this parable, namely that the
Phariseis did murmur against the lord, because he was daily conuersaunte with
sinners. The duty of a good teacher.
Christ therefore goes about to declare that a good teacher must seek no
less to recover and save that which is lost, than to preserve and keep that
which is under his hand and custody. Yet, (as it should appear by our
Evangelist Matthew) our savior Christ by his similitude proceeds farther,
namely that ye disciples of Christ are not only friendely to be borne withal,
but also that their faltes are to be suffered, to the end we might bring
those that wander into the right way. For although it comes often times to
pass, that they do wa^der and go astray, yet notwithstanding because they are
sheep, over whom God has made his son Christ the shepeherde, they must
be brought from dispersing, and reduced from error into the right way. For to
this end pertayne his words, that we must take heed that we destroy not that
which God will have saved.

14 Even so, it is not the will of your father in heaven, that one of these
littel ones should perish.

M. This is the application of the similitude, by the which Christ declares
that the faithful are cared fore of God the father, how abiecte so ever they
be in the world, in so much that he stayed not to send his only son into
the world to save them. Two things to be noted.
Here are two things therefore to be considered: the one is, that God is so
affectionated toward those that are

15 Moreover, if thye brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his falt
between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother.

If thy brother trespass against thee. C. Because our savior Christ had
preached and spoken before as concerning the hearing with the infirmity of
our brethren, he now shows more plainly how, wherefore, and to what end
they must be borne withal. For otherwise a man might easily obiecte and say,
that there is no other way to beware of offenses than for every one to wink at
other men's faltes, and so to bear with evil. Christ therefore prescribes a
mean, which shall neither to much offend ye weak, and yet notwithstanding
shall be very meet and apt to cure their disseases. For severity is
profitable, Seueritye.
and worthy of great praise, being framed according to the nature of medycine.
To be short, Christ does command his disciples so to forgeeue one an other,
that nevertheless they seek to reprove and correct faltes. The which thing
ought wisely to be considered: because there is nothing more hard than in
sparinge and forbearinge men, to reprehende them notwithstanding freely for
their faltes. All men for the most part do seek to cloak one an others
falte, and to deceive them selves with mortal flatteries, or else they do
hate those without all measure who^ they ought to bear withal. But Christ does
commend unto his disciples mutual love which should be far from flattery.
Only he commands them to season their admonitions and reprehensions with
moderation, and reason, least in being too sharp and severe, they quighte
discourage the infirm and weaker sort. Three degrees of brotherlye correction.
And to this end he puts down unto us three sondery degrees of brotherly
admonition or We ough^ (...) hyde one (...) others f^
giving a plain commandment, that we seek to hide so much as in us lies the
faltes of our brethren. For it is most certain that they which are delighted
with the shame and infamy of their brethren, are led thereunto by hatred and
evil will: because if love remained in them, they would seek to maytaine their
honesty, and to cover the shame of their brethren. Notwithstanding it may be
demanded whether this rule ought to be extended to every sin without
exception, although it be never so haynouse. For there are many which will
admit no public judgment, until that the offendour be pryuately
admonished. And truly there is a manifest restraynte in the words of
Christ. Auns^
But it may be answered that Christ does not symplely and without exception,
give commandment that every one which offends should be admonished or
reproved priueily or without witness, but he would have us to use and prove
this way of pryuate admonition, when that we are privately offended. Neither
does our savior Christ entreat here symplely of paciente sufferynge of
injury: but generally he teaches that we ought to be corteouse and louinge,
one toward an other, Cour^
least in dealinge too sharply with the weak, we destroy those which should
be saved. Therefore these words (against thee) do not signify unto us the
injury done unto any man, but it makes a distinction or difference between
secret and manifest faults. For if any man sin or offend against the
whole congregation, he must be openly reproved, though he be an elder or
senior, according to saint Paul's doctrine to Tymothe, where he says. Them
that sin rebuke openly, 1, Tim ^
that others may stand in fear. And truly it were a ridiculouse and foolish
matter, that he which has openly offended in so much that his falte is known
to every one, should be of every one admonyshed: because if a thousand knew
of it, he must then be amonished and reproved for the same offense a thousand
times. Wherefore the distinction which is here alleged of our savior
Christ, (...) ought not ^ly to de^e our bre^n.
must here be noted, least that any man in publishynge secret faltes, rashely
without necessity defame his brother.

Go and tell him his falte. M. He says not blame thy brother, but Go and tell
him his fault. Or admonish him: and that Between thee and him alone C. Our
savior Christ by these words goes about to temper and myttigate our
exceeding severity and sharpness which does greatly hinder us under the
pretense of zeal, in so much that thereby we violate and break the knot of
brotherly love. ^he zeal ^eketh the ^de of love.
Zeal ought so to move us that the end thereof be love: and that specially
when that the good estate of our brother depends upon the same. Let us not
therefore be to hasty, but use a mean in correctynge our brothers faltes. If
he hear thee. C. Christ here confirms his doctrine, by the utility and
proffite that should come thereby. For it is no small matter to bring that
soul unto God which was the mantion and resting place of Satan. But whereupon
comes it to pass that they do syldome times repent which fall, but only
because they being enuiousely vexed, do harden them selves in obstinacy.
(...) pertay^ to Chri^
Therefore there is nothing more mete for Christians than brotherly love and
frendely admonition, which reconcileth those unto God, which before were
fallen from him. But whosoever intemperately and without reason rusheth forth
into a foolish heat, and feruency, does willingely cast away and lose the
health of his brother which he had in his hand. M. Finally, to hear in
this place, is taken for the admittinge and wyllinge receyuinge of the
brotherly admonition and correction, for the acknowleginge the fault with
repentance, and for the desire of a reco^ciliation. For thus it is written in
Luke. ^^ke. 17.
If thy brother trespase against thee, rebuke him: and if he repent, forgive
him. C. In the which place our savior Christ commands us to be content
with private reprehention, if that our brother be brought to repentance.
Hereby we may gather also how necessary the mutual liberty of reprehencions
is among the faithful. For seeing that every man does more often sin daily,
it is to to cruel to betraye by our silence and dissimulation their good
estate, whom friendly reprehencio^ might save from destruction. For although
this way do not at all times prosper and take effect, yet notwithstanding he
is in great fault which neglects the remedy prescribed of the Lord in helping
and defending our brother. Therefore if thy brother which has trespassed
receive thy gentle admonition and repent, there is no cause why he should be
brought into obloqui and defamed. Let him that is the admonisher or corrector
hold himself contented with this that he by his secret admonition has
brought his brother which erred into the right way, by the which means he
has delivered his brothers soul from death: according to the saying of S.
James, where he says: James. 5.
Brethren if any of you do err from the truth, and another convert him* let
the same know that he which conuerteth ye sinner from going astray out of his
way shall save a foul from death, and shall hyde the multitude of sins. God
only has the hearts of men in his hands.
C. This also is worthy to be noted, that the Lord to the end we may be the
more strong and bold to do our duty ascribes that honor appertayning to
him self unto us. For it pertayneth unto none to convert any man, but unto
God only: yet notwithstanding it pleases him to adorn us with this power,
namelye to win and recover our lost brother. A. The same manner of speech uses
ye Apostell Paul wrytinge to Tymothe where he says thus: 1. Timot 4.
Take heed to thy self and to thy Doctrine and continue therein: for if thou
shall so do, thou shalt save thy self, and them that hear thee.

Thou have vvon thy brother A. He expresses the name of brother again, both
to the end he might encourage me^ to seek for the prosperitye of their
brethren, and also to declare that this discipline ought to be among
brethren, that is to say among the members of one ecclesiastical body, and
professors of one Christian religion. For S Paul says, 1. Cor. 5.
what have I to do to judge of the^ that are forreiners? Therefore if any
which is called a brother be a whoremonger, 1. Cor. 5.
either a couetouse person, or a worshiper of Images, or a slaunderer, or such
like: with such see that ye eat not. And thus far as concerning the first
degree of brotherlye admonition.

16 If he hear the not, then take yet with thee one or two, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses, every matter may be established.

And if he hear thee not. Bu. The second degree is a more severe and sharp
admonition before two or three witnesses, C. by the which, he that behaved
him self so stoutely before one man, may be admonished. Bu. For if thou can
nothing prevail with a wicked man by frendely, familiar, and private
admonytion, take unto thee certain grave men and such as thou know the
party that is gyltie to be afraid of, by reason of authority, in the
presence of whom, urge him, whom thou wouldeste have reformed with vehemency.

Answer.
if that we distinguish and make a difference between the kinds of denyinge
and continuinge obstinate. He which precisely denies his fact, and
affirms that he is unjustly burdened must be omitted: because in vain he
should be urged to the confession of his falte before witnesses. But because
many men do seek to avoid that peruersely, which wickedly they have
committed, or else impudently do excuse the same, until they be urged and
pressed by great authority and proof: this way is very well observed. And
that the words of Christ ought thus to be understood, it is evident by the
word of reproving, which was mentioned in the verse goinge before. To
reprove or rebuke, is by demonstration to convince and overcome. But how
sholdest thou convince him of his falte which obstinately denies the whole
matter? For he, which without shame denies his falte, does take away all
occasion to be admonished any more. Now let us see to what end Christ would
have witnesses. Surely to this end, that the admonition might be more seriouse
and of greatter waighte.

That in the mouth of two or three vvitnesses. E. He uses this word
mouth, for the word or testimony: Witness^^ ought (...) had in (...) of wag^
as if he should say that the whole accusation should be firm and ratifyed by
the testimony of two or three, that if it should happen any man to be so
impudente, that afterward he would deny that he had offended, that in such
case he might be convinced by those witnesses. But when as any man shall deny
in the presence of two or three witnesses that he has offended, and refuses to
acknowledge his falte, then we must commit the matter unto God, for we can
proceed no farther: notwithstanding in the mean time he shall have those that
were present witnesses of his obstinacy. This place is taken out of the law,
namely out of the ninetene chap. of Deutronomy: Deutro^^^^
the which place our savior Christ tourneth somewhat into an other sense: and
yet no absurdity thereby aryseth. Moses forbids to pronounce or judge upon
any secret or unknown matter. And he says that this is the lawefull way of
tryinge, that by the testimony of two or three the case should stand and be
stablished. Christ speakinge of the same law, says that the cause is
sufficient, when two or three witnesses do arise to condemn the contumacy of
the man. Neither shall he have any just cause to complain for the publishinge
of his falte, which has refused to hear two or three.

17 If he hear not them. tell it unto the congregation: If he hear not the
congregation, let him be unto thee as an Heathen, and as a Publican.

If he hear not them. Bu. The third degree is the sharp and severe
reprehension before the Church or congregation. For if the offender be not
tractable, but perverse, obstinate, impenitent, and so shameless that he
despyseth all admonition, and exhortacion, goes forward in his filthy
conversation, and defyleth himself and others to, the^ must the matter be
wholely referred to the Congregation, that before the same he may be reproved
more sharply the^ he was before, and be made also ashamed openly.

^estion.
Tell it unto the Congregation, C. It may be demanded what he means by the
name of Congregation. For Paul commands that ye Corinthian, Cor..5.
which was gilty of most filthy and abominable incest should not be
excomunicated not of any certain number, but of the whole Congregation: and
therefore it may seem probable that Judgment was here committed to the whole
multitude. But because at that time there was no Church which had given her name
unto Christ nor no such order appointed, ^^swere.
and because the Lord himself speaks according to the manner of the time:
there is no doubt but that he applies it to the order of the old Church
even as in certain other places he frames his speech according to the
known custom. ^^tth. 5.
When he commanded to leave the offringe at the Altar, until we were
reconciled to our offended brother, there is no doubt but that by the present
and legal form of ye worship of God he would teach that we cannot pray
aright, nor offer any thing unto God, so long as we are at dissension with our
brethren. He had respect therefore after this manner to the discipline which
was now used of the Jews: because it had been very absurd to commit
Judgment unto ye Church which was not. But seeing the Auctority and power of
excommunication belonged to the Elders among the Jews, the which Elders did
represent the person of ye whole Church, Christ very aptlye and to ye purpose
says that they which offend, must be brought unto the Church, if disdainfully
they contemned secreete admonition, and scoffed at the same. We do know that
when the Jews were returned from ye exile and banishemente of Babylon, a
counsel being chose^ which they called Sinhedrim, a law and reformation of
manners and Doctrine was appointed. This rule and government was lawful and
acceptable unto God, and it was a brydell to restrain and keep in good order
all such as were perverse and unruly. Answer.
We may easelye answer, that although there were then a corrupt and
perverse way, yet notwithstanding that Christ does iustlye commend the order
which before time was appointed of the fathers. But when as within short time
after he had erected the Church, and had taken away the corruption he
restored the pure use of excommunication. Notwithstanding there is no doubt
but that the order of discipline which floryshed under the kingdom of Christ,
succeeded and came in the place and steed of the old. And truly saying the
profane Gentiles observed and kept ye shadowed right and custom of
excomunicatinge, it is euidente that it was put into the minds of men by God
from the beginning, that if any were polluted and unclean, they might be
stayed from holy things. It had been a shame therefore and great reproach unto
ye people of God to have been expert and altogether ignorante of that
discipline, of the which there was a remnant left among the Ge^tyles. But
Christ puts that unto us which was observed under the law, because the
matter stands with us as it did with the fathers. And yet for all that it was
not the purpose of Christ to send his disciples to the Sinagoge, The Sinagoge
of the Jews a maintayner of evil. John. 9.
which willingly suffered it self to be defiled with filthy spots, and
excomunicated the true and simple worshippers of God: ( A. of the which matter
we have an euidente example in the man that was blind from his nativity.) But
he admonished them that an order ought to be observed in his Church, which
order before time was appointed very Godly under ye law. C. If any man
obstinatelye reiecte the first admonitions, or continuing in his vice declares
himself to contemn the same, when that he is admonished the second time
again before witnesses, he must be brought before the Judgment of the
Church, that is before the Elders of the Congregation according to the
commandment of Christ: where he must be more sharply reprehended as by
public Actoritye, that if he reverence the Church, he may submit himself
and obey. But if he hear not the Church A. As if he had said But and if he
be as yet so incurable, yt he will not be corrected neither by secret and
brotherly admonition, neither by the conscience, consent, and agreement of two
or three, neither by the shame of the publishinge and disclosinge the fault,
neither by the auctority of the Elders, then leave him to his sin, let him be
cut of from the company of men, and let him be of no better estimation then if
he were a heathen or a Publican. C. That which is spoken here of heathen men
and Publicans, confirms the former interpretacion, where we spoke of those
kind of men. For, because heathen men and Publicanes were greatly hated and
detested among the Jews he compares unclean and incurable perso^nes to
such. Notwithstanding that heathen men and Publicanes were so abominable in
the sight of the Jews, Christ wills them not to forsake them selves and to
despair, for of such his Church was gathered: Neither is this place for their
purpose which think that the faithful ought to abhor the Publicane. But
Christ to the end he might the more easily be understand of the rude and
simple, borrowed the manner of speech of the Country where he was. So that
his meaning is that we ought to have nothing to do with the contemners of
the Congregation until such time as they repent. C. Notwithstanding we must
not cast from them all hope of salvation, but must commit them unto the Lord,
until such time as there appears some sign of repentance. Matthew. 5.6.
As concerning heathen men and Publicans, read the five and six Chapters
going before.

18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven. And what soever ye lose on earth shall be losed in Heaven.

Verily I say unto you, Bu. This sentence pertayneth to the explication and
confirmation of that which went before. For, because he had said: If he hear
not the Church, let him be unto the as a heathen or a Publicane: and because
this might be the secret answer or privy thought of the brother which was
the co^temner: If they despise me I will despise them, and if they condemn
me, I will condemn them also: because of these things (I say) he confirms
here the Judgment of the Church, and under the testimony of an oath he says
that before the Lord also they are either condemned or absolved, which the
Church by deuyne Judgment either absolueth or condemns. A just ^muni^ is
(...)
Therefore a just excommunication ought to be feared, but an undeserved
excommunication is of no force. Whatsoever ye bind on earth C. This place is
nothing at all like unto ye which is written in the sixtene Chapter goinge
before: but is otherwise to be understood. Yet we make them not so contrary
but that there is some affinity between the^. Chiefly therefore they agree in
this that they are both general sentences, and that they have always one
manner of power of binding and lowsinge, namely by the word of God, both one
commandment, and one promise. And in this they differ that the former place
in the sixtene Chap. of Matthew is peculiarly and specially to be understood of
the Preachinge which the mynisters of the word use, and this place pertayneth
to the discipline of excommunication, which is granted unto the Church.
Christ there went about to declare the auctority of Doctrine, but here he
appoints discipline which is an Appendix, or thing annexed to the same.
There he said that the preachinge of the Gospel should not be in vain, but
that it should be to some the savor of life unto life, and to other some the
savor of death unto death: here he affirms that although the wicked to
deride the Judgment of the Church, yet notwithstanding that it shall not be in
vain. So that we must remember this distinction: that in the sixtene of
Mathewe he speaks of the word preached, simplely, and here he speaks of
public judgment and discipline. The Church binds, (...) Church (...)
power ^de.
whomsoever it excommunicateth: not that it casts into perpetual ruin and
desperation, but because it conde^neth his life and manners, which is evil,
and does admonish him of his damnation at hand, unless he repent. Again
the Church lowseth, whomsoever it receives into the fellowshippe of the same:
because it makes him partaker of the unity which is in Christ Jesus. C.
Therefore whosoever forsakinge his sin acknowlegeth his falte, and craves
pardone at the hands of the Church, the same is absolved and lowsed not only
of men, but also of God. On the contrary part, whatsoever he be that makes a
scorn and jest of the admonitions of the Church, if he be condemned by the
same, he may be sure and certain, that he is also condemned in heaven.
Neither shall he have now any more to do with men, but the lord him self
shall be the revenger. ^ection.
If any man do obiecte and say that God by this means shall be as it were an
under judge which subscribeth to the opinion and judgment of mortal men:
^^^swere.
we may easily answer, and say that Christ does not give authority to his
Church, to the end he might diminishe the right that pertains unto him and
to his father, but rather to the end he might bring the greatter majesty to
his word. For as in the syxtene chapter goinge before, he went not about to
stablishe every doctrine, but that only which came out of his mouth: Even so
in this place he says not that al judgment shall be firm and stable, but
that judgment only which proceeds from his members, whereof he is the
headde. Whereupon it follows that men are in no point prejudicial unto God,
when they pronounce nothing but that which comes out of his mouth, and do
only seek to execute that faithfully which he commands. ^iste the (...)
of the ^e world.
For although Christ be the only judge of the whole world, yet
notwithstanding he will have the ministers of his word to be proclaymers of
his Justice, and the Church also to set forth his judgment. And so it comes
to pass that he derogateth nothing from him self, in vsyng the ministry of
me^, but byndethe and lowseth him self notwithstanding. Bu. Herby it is
evident how unorderly, yea how falsely many gather of this place, that the
Church can do al things, and specially that it can make laws as concerning
religion, the which whosoever despises, despises the laws of God. But truly
Christ speaks not here as concerning the power to make divine laws, but as
concerning Christian and brotherly admonition, as concerning exhortation,
reprehention, correction, and taking away offenses, A. and of the Judgment of
the Church, yt which ought to follow the word of God in all things, that it
may be not only humane but divine Judgment. C. Notwithstanding here arises a
question, That saying the Church does suffer many Hypocrites, and does absolve
also many, which do but feign repentance, whether such are absolved in
heaven or no? Absolution.
For he appointed this unto us as a pledge of his heavenly grace, which
pertayneth in no point unto Hypocrites, which pervert the pure use of
reconciliation.

This brings no small comfort to the godly, to the increasynge of their
hope, when that they hear their sins to be put away before God and his
angels so soon as they have obtained pardone at the hands of the Church.
In the other part the mind of Christ is nothing ambiguouse and doubtful. For
Christ, The obstinat by the judgment of the Church are condemned in heaven.
to the end he might abate the pride of obstinate persons, which deny them
selves to be under the rule of men, and always appeal to the tribunal seat
of God, pronounces that the dampnation pronounced of those whom they so
despise, is ratifyed before God and his angels in heaven. In the mean time he
encourages his mynisters to execute Just seuerytie, least they be discouraged
at their wicked obstinacy, which contemn and reiecte discipline. Whereby we
may behold and see how that the jurisdiction of the spiritual Church
which ponisheth syn by the word of the lord is most excellent, and a
reamedy against corruption, a preservative of health, the foundation of order,
and the bond of unity:

Therefore when the Church does excommunicate manifest and open adulterers,
whoremasters, thieves, murderers, sediciouse persons, periurers, falsewitnesse
bearers, obstinate persons and such like, which being admonished of their
faltes, do make a ieste at God and his Judgment, they usurp nothing to them
selves without authority, but use their power and rule committed unto them by
God. Finally least any man should despise this judgment of the Church, or
make small account that they are deprived the company of faythefull men: the
lord openly declares that their judgment is nothing else but the
settinge forth of his Judgment, and that the same is established and
confirmed in heaven, which they do in earth. For they have the word of the
lord, by the which they may condemn the perverse and obstinate: they have the
word of the lord, by the which they may receive the penitent into favor
again. The Church of god can not err.
And they cannot err, nor swerve from the judgment of God, because they judge
not but by the law of God, which is not uncertain, or any earthly opinion,
but the holy will of God, and a divine oracle. Herby also we may see how
folyshely the Papists wrest this present place to maintain their
counterfaite authority, Popish excommunication grounded here.
which was nothing else but tyranny. It is most sure and certain that
authority, to excommunicate was committed to the Church: but whether any one
man, not called by the church but created by the horned and monstruouse beast,
which sendethe forth at his own will and pleasure, vain blastes of
excommunication, whether any such (I say) have any authority by the word of
God, there is no doubt, for he has not. For it is evident that the lawful
government of the Church was committed not only to the Clergy or ministers of
the word, but also to certain of the layty, as to maiestrates which should
be judges of the manners of the people. Yet notwithstanding they being not
contented with this impude^cie go about farther to prove out of this place (as
we towched before) that what burdens so ever they lay upon men's shoulders,
they ought to bear it. We will not say that they being mortal ennemies of
the Church usurp and take unto them selves by vyolence, the power and
authority permytted unto the Church: only we say that they abuse this place
of Scripture, not understanding the meaning of our savior Christ. Auricul^^
^^^fession.
With no less madness and foolishnes also, they go about by this place to
defend their Auriculer confession.

But so vain and friuolouse are their resons, that they deserve not in this
place any confutation.

19 Again I say unto you, that if two of you agree in earth upon any manner
of thing, whatsoever they desire, they shall have it of my father which is in
heaven.

Again I say unto you. M. Some old Greek books have,

Again verily I say unto you. In this word (Again) there is a
confirmation: if we add unto it, Verily, it will be a double confirmation: as
if he should have said: It shall not be only confirmed and ratified in heaven
if ye excommunicate any man: but moreover I say unto you, if ye pray for a
sinner unto God, he will hear you: not only the universal Church, but also
two, if they with one consent pray faithfully. C. Furthermore he teaches
that God will not only geeue his spirit of counsel and wisdom to those that
ask it, Faithful^ in publiq^^ asse^blies (...) pray with consent.
but also will bring to pass that whatsoever they shall do, by his word shall
want neither power nor effect.

But he ioynyng consent and agremente with prayer, teaches how soberly and
reverently the faithful ought to behave them selves in public assemblies. The
sinner must be admonished of his sin, and except he receive admonition, he
must be excommunicated. And herein we must not only ask counsel at the mouth
of the lord, that nothing be done contrary to his word, but also we must go
forward by prayer. Whereupon yt which we taught before, appears here more
euidente and plain, namely that liberty is not granted unto men to do what
them list, but that they must apoint God to be the revenger of their
government, that he him self may defend and confirm his judgments, whereof
he is the author. Therefore the Church ought to be endued with the spirit of
judgment and discretion. Furthermore we must here note yt christ went about to
confirm the faythefull as concerning the efficacy of prayer, ^^blique ^^^yer.
and to commend public prayers, to the which there is a promise added. This
concord (truly) and agreement is acceptable unto him, and is blessed of him,
that it might have the full effect. Therefore as in many other places God does
often promise that he will here our pryuate and secret petition: even so Christ
here vouchsafes to add a singular promise to our public prayers, to the
end he might the more stir us up to use them often.

Upon any manner of thing what so ever. Bu. This is not to be understood so
generally, as though God would grant the rash and foolish petitions of men.
For it followethe: Being gathered together in my name, And saint John
writes thus: This is the trust that we have to Godwarde, ^ohn. 5.
that whatsoever we ask according to his will, he hears us: And if we
know that he hear us, whatsoever we shall ask, we know we shall obtain of
him.

20 For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them.

For where two or three. C. This promise is more large then that which went
before. For the lord does promise here his presence so often as two or three
shall come together in his name, ^^ist is pre^^ prayer.
that he may direct the^ with his spirit and wisdom: and that he may bring
all their enterprises to good success. There is no cause therefore why they
should doubt, which commit them selves unto him to be governed, but that by
his presence they shall obtain their hearts desire.

And seeing it is an inestimable benefit to have Christ our guide in all
things, which may bless our works and counsels, even as there is nothing
more miserable then to want his grace: this promise ought to be no small
spur or provocation to prick us forward to lead a godly and holy life one
with an other. For whatsoever he be that neglects holy and godly meetings
and comminges together, or seperatethe him self from his brethren, and
behaueth him self neglygently in imbracinge unity, by these he declarethe
that he makes small account of the presence of Christ. This promise
therefore is most worthy to be noted, which ought to encourage us as well
to publyque prayers, as to common and universal agreemente.

For what can be better to us, then the presence of Christ? Of whose counsel
if we be destitute, Esaias, 8.
it must needs be fulfilled upon us which is written, Take your counsel
together, yet must your counsel come to naught.

In my name. A This clause or restraint must first of all be noted: by the
which is declared, C. that they which desyer to have Christ present with
them, must come together in his name. They come together in the name of
Christ, which reiecte and put away all impedimentes which might stay them
from coming to Christ, they also which sincerely come unto God, which
whollye give them selves to obey his word, and which suffer them selves to
be governed with his spirit. There is no doubt where this symplicitie
rayneth, but that Christ will show him self openly, and will so further and
help forward their beginning, that they shall well know and peyceyue, The
wicked come together to pray in their own name.
that they are not come together in vain. But on the contrary part, they are
not gathered together in his name, which settinge aside the commandment of God
(in the which he forbids any thing to be taken or added to his word) do
all things according to their own will. The which thing may euidentlye be
seen in the kyngedome of the Pope. General cou^sayles.
C. The Papists cry that the counsels could not err, and that therefore their
decrees ought to stand: because so often as two or three are gathered
together in the name of Christ, he is in the midst of the^. But truly first
of all they should consider and be sure, whether they came together in the
name of Christ or no, whose faith, doctrine, and affection they deny. Saying
therefore they consider not of this, who seethe not that their coming
together was not in the name of Christ? Who sees not that they confound the
difference between holy and profane congregations? Who sees not that they
take away all power from the Church, and give the same to the sworn ennemies
of Christ? Let us understand therefore that none are encouraged to trust and
hope for this promise, but the true and sincere worshippers of God, which
seek Christ with a pure heart. But as for all false, unclean, and
counterfayte counselles, let us despise them, which weaue the web of their
own immaginations, and let us always cleave unto Christ and his Gospel.

B. This is also a singular comfort unto us, that the lord has made a
promise to so small a number, Unity.
even to two or three: to teach how acceptable we are unto him, when we agree
in one, be we never so few: Much more therefore we shall please him, if
there be many of us that are lynked in unity.

21 Then came Peter to him and said: Lord how often shall I forgeeue my
brother, if he sin against me: till seven times.

Then came Peter to him. B. When Peter had dyligently harkened to those things
which Christ spoke, as concerning the power of kyndinge and lowsynge, he
demands whether he that offends must be often forgeuen. C. But Peter made
this objection, according to the sense and reason of the flesh.

It is naturallye ingrafted in all men to desire to be forgeuen: insomuche that
if any man do not obtain pardone by and by, he will complain and say that
he is extremelye handled and ungently dealt withal: but he which thus
desires to be gentlely entreated, is oftentimes very far from shewinge
gentleness toward others. Therefore when the lord had exhorted those that are
his to mekenes and sufferaunce, this doubt came into Peter's mind, in so much
that he demanded saiinge, How often shall I forgive my brother? as if he
should have said: What will come to pass if we be thus ready to forgive?
shall not our lenity and gentelnes give occasion and liberty to offend? he
demands therefore whether it be mete often times to forgive those that offend?

22 Jesus says unto him: I say not unto thee until seven times: but seventy
times seven times,

Jesus says unto him. C. Christ is so little dissuaded from that which he had
spoken, by the objection of Peter, that he plainly affyrmeth, that there
ought to be no end of forgeuing. For he would not prescribe any certain
number, but rather give commandment that we ought never to be weary.

But seventy times seven times. M. Here the certain number for the uncertain,
and the finite for the infinite is put: by the which our savior Christ
declares that we must forgive our brother so often as he co^uerteth. For as
God is always ready to forgive, even so we must follow his clemency, unless
we will be bastardes, and degenerate from our heavenly father. Repent^^ is the
(...) of God,
For conuertion or repentance is the work of God, the wonderful power of his
spirit, and a new creation. The which if we reject we are greatly iniuriouse
unto God. C. Luke the Evangelist seems not a littel to disagree from Matthewe:
because he simplely brings in the commandment of Christ, namely, that
we should be ready to forgive seven times. Luke 17
For he writes thus, If thy brother sin seven times a day against thee, and
seven times in a day tourneth him unto thee saying, it repents me, forgive
him. Yet notwithstanding the sense is all one, yt we should not forgive once or
twice only, but that we should receive the offender into our favor so often
as he submits him self unto us. This is only the dyfference, that out
Evangelist Matthewe makes mention that the lord reprehended Peter, because he
was to strait and severe, Hyperbol^ excess in ^^uauncing (...) depressing
and that Hiperbolically he increases the number, the which number is
sufficient to set forth unto us at full the meaning of our savior Christ.
Neither did Peter demand whether he should forgive his brother seven times,
as though he meant any certain number, but he made this demand to the end he
settinge forth a great show of absurdity might withdraw Christ from his
purpose, as we showed a little before. Therefore he which shall be ready to
forgive seven times, will also be content to forgive seventy times. Moreover
in the words of Luke there arises an other question: ^^estion.
because Christ does not command us to forgive except the sinner by
conuertinge and submittinge him self unto us, declare his repentance: for by
this he seems to grant liberty to his disciples, to deny pardon and
forgeuenes to the wicked We answer that sins are remitted two manner of
ways. ^^swere. ^^es ar ^^^ed two ^^^er of (...).
If any man do unto thee injury, and thou laying away all desire of revenge,
ceassest not to love him still, but doste in steed of reuengement, bestow
good tournes on him: although Repentance is a holy thing.
For repentance is a holy and acceptable thing, and therefore it has need of
a ripe examination and trial: but so often as the offender shall show a
probable and likely sign of repentance, Christ would have us to admyt him to
reconciliation, least by repelling and shaking him of, he fall into despair.
Thirdely we

23 Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain man that was a
king which would take accomptes of his servants.

Therefore is the kingdom. M. What he means by this parable, it is euidente
by that which he adds in the end of the chapter, saying, So likewise shall
my heavenly father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts, forgive not every
one his brother their trespasses. C. For, because it is a hard matter to bring
us to mercy and that specially when we must suffer and bear many sins of our
brethern, the lord very aptly with this parable confirms the doctrine goinge
before, teaching that they which will not yield to forgive the offenses of
their brethern, To the crewell God will be crewel also
are to hard, severe, and cruel, by the which they do not only hurt their
brethern, but also them selves, prouokinge the almighty to be likewise cruel
toward them and not to be entreated. For this similitude consists specially

How unworthy therefore is he to drink of the well of Gods mercies which
will give no one drop of mercy to his brother?

The kingdom of heaven. C. Here Christ makes mention of the spiritual
condition of the Church: as if he should have said, The matter standethe so
between God and men, as it stands between the soul and the spiritual life,
between the master which is a cittezen and an earthly master, and his
servants, between money, and the business of this present life. B. The
kyngedome of heaven (says he) is like, when as notwithstanding he brings in
the example of the unfaithful servant. But he meant not to propounde a
similytude which should hold or agree in all points, Parables and
simrlitudes do not in all points agree
for parables do not agree in every respect: This was only his meaning. Will
ye have God to be merciful to you, be ye then in like manner merciful to your
brethren.

24 And when he had begone to reckon, one was brought unto him, which ought
him ten thousand talentes.

And when he had begone to reckon. M, In that he makes mention of ten
thousand talentes, and of a hundred pence also, we are admonished that we
owe more unto God then our brethren owe unto us.

For we do more grievously and more often sin against God then any one of our
brethren do or can sin against us.

When as therefore we pray daily to be forgeuen of God, how wicked a thing
is it, not to forgive our brother less faltes, which daily craves pardon and
forgeuensse at our hands.

Ten thousand talentes. Bu. To the end our savior Christ might set forth
unto us the ample and plentiful mercy of God, he names ten thousand
talentes for the greatest debte and sum, impossible to be paid, For he says.

25 But for as much as he was not able to pay, his lord commanded him to be
sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had: and paiemente to be made.

But forasmuch as he was not able. Bu. There is no man able to satisfy for
his sin. Sati^^ can (...) made (...)


For most false and blasphemouse is the doctrine of Monks, which say that
satisfaction may be made for our sins.

The Prophet trewely, Esaias, ^
and christianlye says, that all our sins are heaped upon Christ, and he
has satisfied for us all. A. Therefore all we being detters, are constrained
to flee unto the mercy of the lord, that we may obtain remission of so great
debt.

His lord commanded him to be sold. C. To discuss here narowely upon every
point were but in vain. For God does not show rigor always at the
beginning, until we being brought by compultion to make intreatye, do ask
pardon at his hands: nay he does of his mercy and goodness oftentimes
preuente us: but he only teaches that if God should deal extremely with
us, and according to Justice, we should be brought to naught. Furthermore if
he should require of us that which is due, ^^er is the (...) refuge ^^^ertay^^
to syn^^.
how great occasion have we then to flee unto prayer: because that is the only
refuge that remains to sinners. Bu. Whereupon the Prophet David being
oppressed with the burden of sin, ^^^lm 143
said: Enter not into Judgment with thy seruante O lord, for no man luying
shall be justified in thy sight.

And his wife and children. Christ speaks here according to the manner of
the country. For it was an old law that he which was not able to pay should
be a bondma^ to the creditour, and should be punished by the body, for that
which he was not able to pay in money, As concerning the which matter, Gelius
in the first chapter of his twentieth book writes. A. In the sacred histories
also we read, that a certain woman of the wives of the Prophets cried unto
Elisa, King. 4.
saying: thy servant my husband is dead, and thou know, that thy
seruante did fear the lord. And the creditour is come, to fette my two
sons, to be his bondmen.

26 The servant fell down, and besought his saying: have patience with me, and
I will pay thee all.

Z. In this, yt he promises here to pay al, the similitude does not hold. For
a faithful mind dare not presume thus to say, neither can it have trust to
his own righteousenes. for Christ alone has satisfied.

27 Then had the lord pity on that servant, and lowsed him, and forgave
him the debt.

Then had the lord pity. M. Here the proper nature and office of the Gospel
is depaynted and set forth unto us: ^^me 51.
Here also is declared how the lord deals with us, who despyseth not an
humble and contrite heart, as says the Prophet. ^^es are ^^waye by ^he mercy
(...) God only.


And forgave him the debt. This also is to be noted, that sins are forgiven
by the mercy of God only, and not for man's merytes.

28 So the same servant went out, and found one of his fellows which ought
him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat,
saying, pay that thou owe.

29 And his fellow sell down, and besought him, saying: have patience with me,
and I will pay thee all.

So the servant went out. Bu. The manners and behavior of wicked persons ar
here described, Cruelty of wicked persons toward their brethern
who having received a general quittaunce of infinite sommes of det at the
hands of God, will not for all this remit and forgive a small trifell, and a
farthinge in comparison of the other so^me.

Which ought him an hundred pence. C. We must always note the great
difference between the two so^mes: for when as one talente is more than an
hundred pence, what is then to some or value of a hundred pence in respect of
ten thousand tale^tes? Bu. Budeus and Plinius Judge one of these pence to be in
value and estimation as much as one of our grotes: Budeus in. li. 2. de Ass.
Howbeit Georgeus Agricola in his. 4. book of Roman weightes makes a
difference between the^.

30 And he would not but went and cast him into prison til he should pay the
det.

Bu. Here more largelye is described the cruel, sharp, and cutthrote dealyng
of some toward their brethren for tryfelles, when as God wonderfully has
blessed the^ in all that their heart can desire.

31 So when his fellows saw what was done, they were very sorry and came and
told unto their lord all that hap, pened.

So when his fellows savve Bu. Here is set forth unto us the just anger of
the judge, and the punisheme^t which is laid upon al such wicked and ungodly
persons, as will not gentelly forgive the faltes and offenses of their
brethren.

They were very sorry. C. Although in these words no misery is to be sought
for, yet notwithstanding because they contain nothing but that which nature
describes we must know and understand that we shall have so many witnesses
adversaries against us before God, as there be men living amongst us: because
it can not be but that the cruelty which we show toward our brethern must
needs displese them and be hated of the^, specially when ye every one is
afraied of him self least the same should fall upon his own pate which he
sees to come upon an other man.

32 Then his lord called him, and said unto him: O thou ungracious ser-

33 uante. I forgave thee all that det, when thou desiredst me: should not
thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee.

Then his Lord called him. A. This is the Image and lively picture of the
Judgment of God, Cruelt^e shall be ponished.
by the which we are taught that the cruelty of men shall not escape
vnponished, which they show to their brethern

Should not thou also? A. This is an argument taken of the more to the less.

34 And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Iaylers, til he should
pay all that was dew unto him.

Eternal damnation.
And his lord was vvrothe. C. Here our savior Christ speaks of eternal
damnation. For as it was said before he was not able to pay the debt. All the
similytude beside tends to this end, (as our savior Christ expounds it
him self) that if we do not forgive, we shall not be forgeuen at the hands of
God: the which is also declared in the syxte chapter goinge before. This man
did not forgive, therefore he shall not be forgeuen. The Scripture does always
apply it self to the reason, capascitie and understanding of men, that thereby
they may be brought to the knowledge and feeling of spiritual and heavenly
things.

Wherefore some demand in vain, how God does ponishe, which has once
forgeuen sins: because the sense is here simple and plain, that although he
offer his mercy to all men, yet notwithsta^dinge cruel exactoures and
demaunders of their own (of whom no remission or pardon can be obtained) are
unworthy to have the fame. A. But this agreethe with that which S. James
writes saying: James. 5.
He shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy. C. The like
ponishement is appointed unto those which will not be reconcyled to their
brethren in this life, as apereth by this text, Matthew. 5.
Thou shall not depart thence until thou have paid the utmost farthing. But
the Papists show them selves too ridiculouse and foolish, in goinge about to
draw out their Purgatory fire out of these words.

Till he should pay all that was Bu. For they bring in this new exposition
upon this present place arguinge after this manner: This fellow was given to
the Iaylers, or to torment till he should pay the debt: therefore once he
paid the debt: but not in this present world, neither in Hell, Purga^^^
therefore in Purgatory: ergo, consequently there must needs be a Purgatory. A
fine and right Monkishe reason in deed. For trewelye this place being well and
truly understood, quight overthrows and quenches the flame of Purgatory.
C. For it is most certain that our savior Christ him self makes mention
here of eternal death, not of a temporal ponishement, or ponishement for a
time, by the which the judgment of God might be satisfied. A. And least our
interpretation might seem new (as theirs is) let those new inue^ters and
makers of fire hear what Chrisostom speaks, Chriso^^^
as concerning the true meaning of this place, when he says: Let every one
of us hear which continually showing cruelty, have compassion upon none, let
us harken I say which use Judgment, not against others, but against our
selves. Wherefore when thou do remember an other man's falt, consider that
thou do hurt thy self and not an other man. For thou gathereste thine own
sins, and not thye neighbors sins, to the Sithe, And what so ever thou
workest against the offender in this life, thou do it as a man: but God
does not so, but shall ponishe with great and eternal ponishementes. For he
gave the man to the tormenters, Chris^^ has (...) throw^^ ^^gatory.
until he did pay the whole debte: that is, he gave him to perpetual
ponishemente: for he shall never come from thence again: For, because he
could be no better by benefytes, it remains that he should be tormented in
pain, Thus far Chrisostom. Bu. Therefore the words of our savior Christ
are as much in effect as if he had said: He delivered him to be tormented for
ever.

35. So likewise shall my heavenly father do also unto you, if ye from your
hearts, forgive not (every one his brother) their trespasses.

So likewise shall my heavenly father. Bu. This is both the conclusion and the
key, by the which the sense and meaning of the parable is opened. B. But he
says expressly, From your hearts. for although we would seem oftentimes to
remitt those injuries done unto us, yet notwithstanding we do scarsely remit
and forgive them from our hearts, in so much that we make the same account
still of those that offended us, that we did before, and are as ready to do
them good as we were then. For commonly there remains a certain
mischiuouse remembrance of injury in our minds. ^^tained re^^ion.
But God is true and can not abide deceyte. Wherefore except all the
remembrance of injury be quite put out of our hearts, there is no hope of
forgeuenes, of those sins which we have committed, to be looked for at the
hands of God. M. Wherefore Christ taught us to pray thus unto the father:
^^th. 6.
Forgive us our dettes as we forgive our detters.

The.xix. Chapter.
AND it came to pass when Jesus had finyshed those sayings, he removed from
Galile and came into the coasts of Iewery, beyond Iordane.
When Jesus had finished. M. It does appear by Luke that this iourneye in the
which Christ goes to Jerusalem was the last, ^^t 9.
for he says thus: And it followed when ye time was come that he should be
received up, (...). 16.17.
he set his face to go to Jerusalem. And in the sixtene and seuentene
chapters going before, Christ spoke to his disciples as concerning this
Journey. ^^ancy in (...).
But with what constancye of mind he went to Jerusalem, the Evangelist Luke
declares, when he says that he set or hardened his face to go up to
Jerusalem. Whereby we are taught with how great boldness we ought to
take on us those things which we know are enjoined us of God, be they never
so sorrowful. (...). 21.
A. So the Apostel Paul with great boldness of courage, went to Jerusalem,
not being ignorante what should happen to him in that City.

And he came into the coasts of Ievvery. B, He would also visit this region
with his benefits, that he might spread the beams of salvation every where,
for the which end he came, being sent of the father into this world.

2 And much people followed him, and he healed them there:

And much people follovved. A. The Evangelists do very often declare how
the people followed Christ, among which no doubt many had a great desire
to learn. Read in the fourtene chapter going before.

And he cured them. M. That is to say, those that were sick, and followed
that they might be healed.

There. M. The Evangelist adds this word expressly. For Christ would not
that this multitude should follow him into Iewery, least he should give an
occasion to the backebitinges and slaunderouse reproaches of the Scribes and
Phariscies. He knew that except he had thus done, Luke 23.
be should have been accused of sedition unto Pylate, and that this sedition
should be moved from Galile (from whence he came) even to Iewry. He did not
avoid this slander, Occasion of evil must be avoided.
yet would he not give any occasion thereof. We are therefore admonished, that
because we cannot escape the slanders of the wicked, yet must we take heed of
this, that by our falte we mynister no occasion unto them to speak evil.

3 The Phariseis came also to him temtinge him, and saying unto him: Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for any manner of cause?

The Phariseies also came to him. Bu. The lord did good unto all men, and
therefore the report of his glory was spread abroad far and nere. But the
ennemies of the truth do envy the glory of the lord and are agreued, because
the people forsakyng the priests and the Scribes, cleaued unto the lord. The
Phariseis therefore are come on a heap together. C. And although they do lay
wait to deceive Christ, and assalte him subtillye, to the end they might
intrappe him, God turnethe all things to the best.
yet this their wickedness turned to our commodity: even as the lord
knows how to convert wonderfully into the proffyt of his, what so ever the
wicked do devise for the subversion of his true doctrine. For by this means a
doubt, which the liberty of diuorsement did engender, is dissolved and a
sure law of the holy and inseparable knot of wedlock set forth. The occasion
of this captiouse question is taken hereof, because howsoever he answered (as
they thought) it could not be but odiouse.

Is it lavvfull for a man. (say they) for every cause to put away his wife?
The subtle question of ye Phariseies.
Now if Christ had denied it, then would they quickly have cried and made
exclamation that he had abolyshed the law: if he had affirmed that it was
lawful, then would they have reported him to be a band rather then a Prophet
of God, which so lightly would give place and consent to the wanton and
voluptuouse lusts of men. This Dilemma and subtle question, they had
conceived in their minds: but the son of God (who knowethe how to subuerte
the wise in their own folly) does disapointe them, resistinge seuerelye
their unlawful divorces: and yet showing also, that he said nothing but
that which was agreeable

4 He answered and said unto them: Have ye not red how that he which made
man at the beginning, made the man and woman.

Have ye not red. C. Christ does not directly answer to the question of the
Phariscies, when as nevertheless he did very well satisfy it in declaringe that
the first ordinance must be kept, and that we ought to be content with the
doctrine of God, which is a most sure foundation. But he answers, that it
is not lawefull for a man to put away his wife for every cause, and he
answers so that he sends them unto the Scriptures, by whose words he
teaches that the order of matrimony was ordained by God, Matrimony^
and that no man ought to depart from the prescript rule of the Scriptures.
Even as if a man being asked now of the Mass should faithfully declare the
mystery of the lords holy supper, and in the end should affirm that they
were Sacrilegers and forgers, which dare presume to dyminishe, or to add any
thing to the pure institution of the lord, might confound after this sort
the fained sacrifice of the Mass. M. But because the question was moved by the
Phariseis, who boasted and bragged among the people of their skill and
knowledge in the Scriptures: He says, have ye not red? As if he should have
said: Why ask you me ye Hypocrites? you have the Scripture in the which ye
read, and therefore ignorance can not excuse you.

He that made man from the beginning. E. This word (Man) in the latten books
of the old interpretation is not red, The ^^tion of ^^^trimony.
but is left only to be understood. C. Christ takes this Axioma or general
proposition, From the beginning God joined man unto the woman that two might
make a whole and parfect man: therefore he that puts away his wife, puts
away (as it were) from him self the one half of his body: but nature cannot
abide that any man should divide him self, or tear his body in pieces. S.
Therefore Christ does so moderate and temper his answer, that he might
neither hurt the authority of Moses, nor recante his own doctrine which
he had vowched in the fyfth chapter goinge before: and that he might stop the
mouths of the Phariseies and lawyers, by the authority of the law. C. For
this is the sense and meaning of the words of Christ, That God the creator
of mankind, made man and woman, that every man being content with one wife,
should desire no other. For he stands upon this number of two As also the
Prophet Malachias, when he inueyeth against the having of many wives, he
brings in the same reason, namely that God in who^ the spyrite was more
abundant, so that it was in his will to create more, yet he made one man, even
after this sort as he is here described by Christ. Bu. He says not he made
man and woman: but he made them man and woman. ^^ene 1.
C. Therefore by the order of our creation, the inseparable society of the
husebande with one wife is proved. If any man will obiecte and say, ^biection
that by this means it is not laufull, the first wife being dead, to marry
an other: ^nswere.
we may easily answer, not only that the band is loused by death but also
that the second wife is substytute and placed instead of the first, as if
she were one and the same.

5 And said: for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh.

For this cause shall a man. C. He adds an other argument a Minori ad manus,
that is, from that which seems less, to that which seems the more rather to
be. ^^locke.
The band of wedlock is more holy then that which ioynethe children unto
their parents: but truly godliness byndeth the children unto their parents
with an inseparable knot: much less therefore may the housebande renounce and
forsake his wife. Here upon it follows that the divine bond is broken if
the husband be divorced from the wife. Furthermore it is to be douted whether
Moses do bring in Adam, or God him self speaking there: but whether of the
parts thou chose it makes little to the purpose in this place: because it
was sufficient in this place to allege the oracle and word of God, although
it was pronounced by the mouth of Adam. If Adam speak it, he has respect
unto that which God had commanded and done: and Adam in this place is a
Prophet, showing the work of God, and loking also unto ye end.

Man shall forsake father and mother. C. In this place he that maryeth a wife,
is not simplely commanded to leave his father and mother, for the^ should God
be contrary unto him self, if by matrimony he should abolishe the dewety
which he charge children to show toward their parents: but when the
comparison between the duties is made, the wife is preferred before father and
mother. But if any man should relinquishe or forsake his father, and shake of
the yoke to the which he is tied, no man might abide such a monster. Much
less therefore there is liberty granted to break wedlock.

C. B. Therefore trewely the natural and mutual affynite of the father and
mother with the children is holy: but the love of the husband and the wife is
more holy. Wherefore if time and occasion so require, the society of the
father must rather be forsaken then the fellowship of the wife.

And shall be joined to his wife. E. The Metaphor is taken of those things that
are so set together with glewe, A Metaphor is a transferring of words from
their proper signification.
that you would think them to be but one thing. By this word, Christ
excludes all causes, for the which the wives among the Jews were rashly put
away.

And they two shall be one flesh. C, By this saying, the having of many
wives is no less condemned, than the liberty of diuorcynge wives. For if the
mutual conjunction between two was hallowed of the lord, then the mynglinge
of three or four is adultery. But Christ (as we said before) does apply it
otherwise unto his purpose, that is, Adultery.
that whosoever is divorced from his wife, Diuorceme^ts are forbidden
teareth and renteth him self: because such is the force of holy matrymonye,
that the husband and the wife should grow together as one man. Neither was
it the meaning of Christ to bring in the impure and filthy speculation of
Plato, but did reuere^tly entreat of the order appointed by God saying.

6 Therefore now they are not two but one flesh: Let no man therefore put
asonder, that which God has coupled together.

Therefore now they are not two. B. Or, hereafter they are not two, that
is, after they are coupled together or married. Unity in marriage.
They were created two and not one, that is to wit, man and woman: and again,
by the copulation of matrimony, of two he made them one. Therefore it should
be as much against nature, to pull the wife from her husband, as to cut of any
member of the body Furthermore in Genesis (from whence this place was taken)
this word two is not red, Gene. 2.
but only on this wise: And they shall be one flesh. But the Evangelist Matthew
adds this word (two) to make the matter more plain: even as the Apostell
Paul has done in the sixte chapter of the first epistell to the Corinthians:
1 Cor. 6.
or else both of them did follow the threscore and ten interpretours.

That therefore which God has coupled. E. Or joined, and yoked in one yoke.
This phrase and manner of speech is taken from the Oxen which carry together
one yooke.

Let not man separate. C. By this sentence Christ does brydell the lusts of
men, least they should break the holy knot, by putinge away their wives. And
as he denies that it is in the husebandes will to dissolve wedlock, so also
he pronounces a law to all other, that by their authority they should not
confirm unlawful diuorses. For the maiestrate abuses his authority which
grants favor unto the husband to cast of his wife,

Yet notwithstanding Christ has a due respect unto this, that every man for
him self should deuoutelye reverence his promise made: and those, whom either
lust or concupiscence should move to divorce, should have a consideration of
this. What art thou that wouldeste make the breach of this holy coniunctyon
free unto thy self? B. Christ (truly) in this place accuses that mind to be
guilty of Adultery, Frowardnes in matrimony must be avoided.
which contrary to the laws of matrimony is so froward toward his wife,
that it were better for her to be free from him than to be joined unto him. C.
Moreover this doctrine may farther be extended. The Papists propoundinge and
settinge before us the Church pulled and torn from her head, do leave us a
blockish and maimed body: In the holy Supper, Christ having joined bread unto
wine, they are bold to take away the use of the cup from all the people:
Papists are adulterers.
to this diuelishe corruption, and adhominable aduoutry, we may boldly
obiecte this place of our savior Christ, and say. That which God has
coupled together let no man put a sunder.

7 They say unto him: why therefore did Moses command to geeue a
testimonial of diuorsemente, and to send her away?

They say unto him. M. By the words of our savior Christ they did well
understand his meaning, namely, that it was not lawefull to send away a
wife for every cause. And here they object unto him the authority of Moses,
which authority no doubt came from God: as if they should have said: Has
Moses commanded that which is unlawful? Thou say it is unlawful: but
Moses commanded it to be done: therefore it should seem by thy words that
Moses has offended, and sedused us. Therefore thou woldeste have us to credyte
thee more the^ Moses, who received this law and all others at the mouth of
God. Therefore thou resistest the doctrine of God.

8 He says unto them: Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered
you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so.

Moses because of the hardenes of your hearts C. The Phariseis had inverted
that crafty Cavil, which I have above noted, to entrap Christ, if he (as they
thought he would, and as it was lykely) had shutt out the lawefull cause of
diuorses. For that which God by his law permits, whatsoever it be, seems
lawful, whose only will appoynteth a difference of good and evil. But Christ
by an apt answer puts away their false malice, because Moses granted
to this their perverseness and frowardnes, and not as though he did approve it
to be good and laweful. M. He does not therefore deny but that Moses gave
commandment as concerning the giving of a byll of diuorcemente: but he
denies that he commanded to put away their wives: only gra^ting that he
suffered it, adding the cause, namely for the hardenes of their hearts, which
hardness of heart Moses oftentimes castethe in the Israelites tethe: as
apperethe in the ninthe, sixte, Deuteronomy. (...) and. 13.
and thirtenthe chapter of Deutronomy. As if he should say: He did suffer you
to do this, because by nature it was right, but knowing the hardenes of your
hearts, Of tw^ the lea^^ be chose^
he pardoned the less evil, least a greatter should be committed by you. For
he does not allow diuorsementes, that suffers them to be used, rather then
manslaughter should be committed. Neither does the testymoniall of
dyuorcemente prove that dyuorcemente it self is right and legyttimate, but it
is a witness of thy cruelty, who for every light cause do drive away thy
wife. And here be obiecteth this very fitly unto the Phariseies who were of all
men most obstinate and hard hearted, that he might declare unto the^ that this
their hardenes of heart is an old disease, and of long continuance.

But from the begininge it was not so. C. He calls them back to the pure
and first institution, ^^is and ^^^ques (...) be ^^ght to ye (...) constitu^^^^
which also ought to be unto us a firm foundation so often as the
adversaries of the Gospel do seek to invade us: that is to say, we must
refer all things to the first institution so often as they prefer their
own dreams before the word of God. Therefore Christ confirms his opynion
by a very good reason, because it was not so from the beginning. But he
takes it as a thing granted, namely, that when God from the beginning did
institute matrimony, he made a certain law and establyshed the same for ever.
which ought to stand in force to the end. Wherefore, if the institution of
wedlock ought to stand as a law that may not be vyolated, it follows
that whatsoever declineth from it, is not according to the nature of the
first law, but proceeds of the corruption of men. ^^^tion.
Now some man may demand whether it were lawefull for Moses to permyt that
which of it own nature is evil and viciouse? ^^^were.
We answer that it is improperlye said, to be permitted which he did not
seuerelye forbydde. Neither did he set forth a law of diuorcement, that by
his consent he might approve the^, but when the wickedness of men could not
be otherwise restrained, he brought a remedy that was most tolerable, that
at the least the husband should give his wife a testymoniall of divorce in
the which he should testify her chastity. For the law was not made but in
the favor of the women, least after they were unjustly cast of they should be
subject to any reproach.

Whereby we gather, that rather a punishment was laid upon the men then that
by pardone and permission, their lust was increased. Moreover spiritual
regiment differs much from politic and civil order. The lord comprehends
in ten words what is laweful, and standinge with the law of God. Now
because it may come to pass that many things may not be called before
man's judgment seat, of which nevertheless every man's own conscience may
reprove and convince him, it is no marvel though politic laws do wyncke
at them. As for example. The Law grants liberty to contend.
A greater liberty to contend is granted us by the laws than the rule of
charity does bear. and why so? because right can not be given to every one,
except the way to require it be as a gate open unto them. Charity ought to
be preferred before pollitike laws.
But the internal law of God pronounces that that ought to be followed which
charytie shall counsel. Neither yet is there any cause why the maiestrates
should hereby challenge an excuse of their neclige^ce and slouthefulnes, if
wyllingely they be slack in punishynge of vices, or if they admit that
which the mynistration of their office does require. But let private men take
heed lest by clokinge their offenses with the supportation of the law they
double the falte. For here the lord rebukes the Jews ouerthwartlye, as
though it were not sufficient for them that their perverseness should be
borne withal without punisheme^t, except they ascribe and make God the autour
of their iniquity. Wherefore, Custom is preferred before the Gospel.
if of the pollitike law a rule of lyuinge a holy and godly life, cannot
always nor in every place be required, much less of custom, A. which
nevertheless at this day is carelessly preferred of sum before the truth of
the Gospel, but not without cruel reproach against God.

9 I say unto you, who soever puts: away his wife (except it be for
fornication) and maryeth an other, breaks wedlock. And who so ever marieth
her which is divorced, does commit adultery.

I say unto you, that whosoever. C. The Evangelist Mark in his tenth chapter,
reports that this was spoken a part or in secret to his disciples, when they
came home: But Matthewe omytting this circumstance does prosecute the words,
as the Evangelists do often times leave out some thing in the midst of a
story, because it is sufficient for them to gather the sommes of things.
There is no difference therefore but that the one declares ye matter more
distinctly then the other. The sum and effect is this. Although the law
does not punish deuorces, which do disagree and dessente from the first
institution ordained of God, yet notwithstanding is it adulterye if any man
reiectinge his wife do take unto him another. Matrimonye cannot be broken at
the ma^s pleasure.
For it is not at the will and pleasure of man to break the promise made in
matrimony which he will have to remain constante and firm. Therefore she
that occupyeth and defiles the bed of the lawful wife is a harlot. Whoredom
resolves the knot of Matrimony.
But there is an exception added, because the woman by committinge whoredom
does cut of her self from the man as a corrupt member and sets him at
lyberty. And of the man Christ speaks expressly here, that he may for
fornication put away his wife: but he sheeweth not whether the woman may leave
her husband if he commit whoredom: the reason is, because he does only
answer unto that which was demanded of him. But if a general question be
moved on this behalf there is a common and mutual right of either part, even
as there is a mutual knot of faith and promise: otherwise the husband is the
head of the wife and the wife is subject unto her husband. But as far forth
as pertayneth unto the chastitye of Matrimony and to the faithfulness of the
bed, the like law is prescribed to the husband that is prescribed to the
wife. The man (says S. Paul) has not power over his own body, 1. Cor 7.
but the wife, neither has ye woman power over her own body but the man.
There is like liberty therefore: if the husband or wife do violate ye promise
of the bed, the chaste wife may forsake her husband if he be a fornicator, as
well as the husband may put away the wife if she have played the whore.
Certain there be which invent other causes for the which one of ye parties may
be deuorced from ye other. But we must take heed that we seek not to be
wyser then our heavenly Scholemaster whilst we presume to ymagine some thing
otherwise then his word does teach us. Some will have the Leprosy to be a just
cause of deuorce, Matr^^ ought (...) be bro^^ only (...) ^^^nication
because the contagio^ of ye disease may infecte both the husband and the
children. But as the godly husband is not enforced to touch his wife infected
with the Elephantine leprosy: so it is not permitted that he by and by put her
away. If any man will obiecte that they which cannot live chaste had need of
some remedy that they be not set on fire with concupiscence: we answer that
it is no remedy which is sought for without the limits of the word of God: and
moreover we say that the gift of continency shall never be lackinge unto them
if they give themselves over to ye Lords government, because they follow that
which he has prescribed. Some man does loath his wife, so that he will not
voutchsafe to company with her: shall this evil be remedied by having many
wives? An other man's wife is taken with the Palsy, or falling sickness, or is
grieved with some other incurable disease: shall the husband under ye cooller
of incontinency turn her away? We know that those which walk in the ways
of the holy ghost, are never destitute of his help. 1. Co^
The Apostell Paul says: for the avoiding of fornication let every man marye
a wife. He that has done this: although all things come not to pass
according to his desyer, yet has he discharged his duty. Therefore if any
thing be lacking it shall be by the assistance of Gods holy spirit repaired: to
go any further is nothing else but to tempte God. But whereas S. Paul notes
another cause, that is, 1. Cor ^
when it so chances that in despite of godliness the wives are rejected of the
unbelieving husbands, that the devout brother or sister is not then bond, it
is not contrary to the meaning of our savior Christ. For he does not there
dispute of the just cause of deuorce, but only whether the woman does remain
bond unto the unbelieving husband, after that she being rejected wickedly
in despite of God can by no means else return into favor with her husband
again but by denyinge God. Wherefore it is no marvel if S Paul refer the
disagreement with man, before the alienation from God: of the which thing we
will speak more hereafter. Answer.
Surely because it was the husbands part to pursue unto judgment the
adulterye of the wife, that he might pourge his house of this wickedness,
howsoever the matter should fall out, Christ absolueth that man that conuinceth
his wife of uncleanness, from the bands made in Matrimonye. And it might be that
amongst that corrupt and degeneratinge people, a great negligence in
punishing of that wickedness might rain. As at this day the perverse indulgence
and favor of the Magistrates causes that many husbands are enforced to put
away unchaste wives, because adultery is unpunished.

And that maryeth her that is divorced This part has been very evil expounded
of many interpretors. For they supposed that generally, ^^ror in in^^reters.
and universally singlenes was commanded so often as a divorce was made: so
that if the husband did cast of his adulterous wife, either of them was urged
with the necessity of singlenes. As though this were the liberty of divorce
only to lie a part from his wife, and as if Christ did not permit manifestly in
this case yt which the Jews after their own fancies were wont to use without
all consideration in every small tryfell. Therefore that was to gross an
error. For when Christ condemns him of adultery that marieth the wife which
is divorced, it is certain that he restrayneth this unto unlawful and
frivolous deuorses. The Apostell S. Paul therefore bids such to tarrye
unmarried, or to be reconciled unto their husbands, which are so put away:
because truly wedlock is not abolished by chidinge and dissension: As we may
gather by Mark, ^arke. 10
where by name the wife is expressed that departs from her husband: his
words are these: And if a woman forsake her husband and is married to
another, she commits adulterye: not because it was free for the wives to
give their husbands a bill of deuorcemente, sauinge so far forth as the Jews
had declined to foreign customs but Mark meant to note and set down, that the
abuse which was then every wheare common, was reprehe^ded of the Lord: because
after voluntary deuorce, either party entered a new into marriage: so that he
makes no mention of adultery. Therefore he that marieth her that is deuorced,
not for fornication, Adultrye.
but for some other cause, does not marrye his own wife but the wife of
another man: and therefore he does not contracte matrimony, but commits
adultery: although Moses to such a one as is deuorced, has permitted to
marrye another, by ye same law that he suffered the husband to put her away.
A. This is the true and perfect sense of the words of Christ, which I would
they had retained, which have followed other contrary interpretacions. C. For
here the adversaries of the Gospel did exercise a marvelous tyranye, Tyranny
in Papists.
permitting deuorces, and yet denying second marriages to the honest husband.
But what liberty has that man that is constrained to live in singlenes?
Surely his liberty is mere bondage.

10 Then said his Disciples unto him: if the case be so between man and wife,
then is it not good to marrye.

Then said his Disciples C. Much like as if the condition of men were not
indifferent, if they were so tied unto their wives, that so long as they
continue chaste, they should be constrained to endure all other things, rather
then to depart from them: this the Disciples do gather, that it is better to
have no wives than so to be snared, being moved thereunto by the answer of
Christ. M. If this (say they) be the state and condition of husbands yt they
may not be desolued from their wives if the wife displease them, it were much
more commodious not to contracte matrimony. The Jews until this time had used
great liberty in deuorcing their wives: the which being taken away as
unlawful, the Apostells thought it much better not to marry. C. But why do
they not in like manner consider how hard ye servitude and bondage of ye wives
is, but only because carnal reason forceseth those yt are adicted to
themselves and their own commodities, to neglect other men and to have only a
consideration of themselves? In ye mean time wicked ingratitude bewrays it
self, because by the fear and tediousnes of one discommoditye, they do
reiecte the singular gift of God. According to their judgment it is better
to avoid matrimony, than to tie themselves with the knot of perpetual
society: but truly if God ordained Matrimonye, for the health and profit of
all mankind, although it bring many sharp and unpleasant things with it,
yet is it not therefore to be despised. Let us learn therefore, if any thing
be not pleasant unto us among the benefits of God, not to be so diverse, and
waywarde, but that we may reverently use them: but specially we must take
heed of this wickedness, in the holy estate of Matrimonye, that we condemn
not the same.

Satan seeks to make matrimonye odiouse.
For, because that estate is always subject to many troubles, Satan goes
about to bring hatred and infamy to the same, to the end he might make men
forsake it. And in this point S. Hierom has sheewed himself to perverse,
Hieromes error.
because he does not only calumniate and speak evil of ye holy and divine
order of life, but also heapeth up all the places of opprobry that he can out
of profane authors, and all to defame the honestye thereof. But let us
remember that what things soever are troublesome unto us in the estate of
wedlock, are accidental: and come by the wickedness of men. Furthermore let us
remember, Sweet meat has sower sauce.
that because it began to be a medicine after our corrupted nature, it is no
marvel if sweet meat have sower sauce.

It is not good to Marrye M. This goodness which they speak of here must not
be referred to eternal life, but rather to the commodity of this present life.
Bu. For the Apostels understanding that the liberty of deuorcement should be
no more so free, that when soever they list they might put away their wives,
by and by they also think that it is far better and more commodious to
marrye no wife at all, than to marry her whom they must for ever receive and
cleave to. For they think it a cruel servitude, to suffer at home a froward,
brawlinge, and dronke^ wife. M. Therefore they spoke as carnal men, not as
spiritual. C. Wherefore the Lord refelleth and confuteth their foolishnes.

11. He said unto them: All men cannot comprehend this saying, save they to
whom it is given.

He said unto them all men cannot co^prehende this E. The Greek text has
(cannot receive this saying) or are not capeable of this saying) it signifies
not to understand: eue^ as we call that place capeable which is so large that
it is able to receive all yt is brought unto it. Euenso the Apostell Paul
writing to the Corinthians uses this word, saying: 2. Cor. ^
Set your selves at large and bear not ye the yoke with unbelievers: But that
saying enters not into the minds of all men. because they are otherwise
affectioned, in somuche that there remains no room for the institution and
ordinance of God. A. The like word also we may read in that which
follows, when he says: he that can comprehend it, let him comprehend it.
M. Christ sets before them the necessity of Matrimony, which is such, that
few are separated from the same: as if he should say: None can be free from
this saying, that is from the necessitye of this Maryinge, but such, to whom
the gift of continencye is given from above. C. For election or choice is not
in man's hand, as though in those cases he might do what him list. If any man
think it profitable for him to be without a wife, and so without any trial
had before addicteth and gives himself to the law of singlenes, he is
greatly deceived. For God (which pronounced saying: it is good for man that
the woman be adjoined unto him to be a helper) takes punishment on those that
do contemn this order: because mortal men do trust to much to themselves
when they go about to set themselves free from the heavenly calling.

Save they to whom it is given. C. The Lord here brings in one cause instead of all other, Contin^^ is the (...) God.
for the which we must take a wife, because it is the special gift of
continencye. For whenne he says, that all cannot comprehend it, save they to
who^ it is given, he plainly declares yt it is not given to all. Whereby their
pride is convinced which are not afraid to arrogate that unto themselves,
which Christ so manifestlye takes away. For they which are not endued with
the gift of continency, ought to know that they are created of God to marrye.
Neither truly, is wedlock a necessary evil as certain blasphemous persons
against the institution and ordinance of God do affirm: ^edlocke is a
^^cessarye re^edy against ^^ne.
but it is rather a necessary remedy against evil.

Wherefore except we cure and take away the disease which is naturallye
ingraffed in us, by wedlock, we sin against God. Howbeit Christ does not
here only speak of the suppressinge of lust, but also he shows that he
would have all those which have not the gift of continency to use wedlock,
not only to remedy the evil which is in them, but also to obey ye ordinance
of God. B. But whereas the Popes chaste Chaplines do affirm that every man may
obtain the gift of continency by prayer, ^opishe chas^^ye is mere ^^drye.
let us know that expressly they speak against our savior Christ who says:
All men cannot comprehend this saying, but they to whom it is given. But why
also do they not pray yt they be not overcome with surfeting and dronkennes,
and with the cares of this life? Yea why do they not obtain by their prayers
yt they may be blessed after they depart this life, The which thing were much
better. For faithful prayer is only for ye thing concerning the which, ^^yer.
the mind of him that prays is certainly persuaded that it will make to the
glory of God. Now it is not ye will of God that all men should live chaste or a
single life: therefore all singlenes does not make to the glory of God:
wherefore all me^ ought not to pray for it. Furthermore there are some which
think that this gift is given to very many, which will not acknowledge that
it is given unto them. But they that so say speak eue^ as absurdlye, as if
they should say that a man has had a great while in his hands, some notable
gift, at the hand of ye Prince, which he has wished for, and yet that he
knows not of it, neither will acknowledge it. For truly there can be nothing
more aceptable to a godly man called to the kingdom of heaven, than that he
may be made more fit and apt to the business of the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore if he have the gift of continency he will abstain from wedlock, as
from a great and grievous burden. There are many which falslye persuade
theimselues that they have this gift: and he which has this gift in deed,
and notwithstanding knows not of the same is not lyuinge. Even as there are
many which think yt they have the faith of Christ, which faith in deed
they have not: but there are none which having the right faith in Christ in
deed that can think that they have it not: for that is contrary to the
nature of faith. Let every man therefore submit himself to the will of God:
and if he have the gift of continency let him use it to the glory of God: if
he have it not, let him then use the ordinary mean which God has appointed,
namely, wedlock. The which being taken let him therewith be contented. A. As
concerning the which matter, read the Judgment of Paul, 1. Cor. 7.
which is a faithful interpreter of these words of Christ.

12. For there are some chaste which are so borne out of their mothers womb:
and there are some chaste which be made chaste of men. And there be chaste
which have made themselves chaste for the kingdom of Heavens sake. He that
can comprehend it, let him comprehend it.

For there are some chaste M. Now our savior Christ shows to whom this gift
of continency is given. And he puts down unto us three kinds of chaste
persons. Three kinds of chastitye.
Those which by nature are euenewkes or gelded. or which are made that all
others which forsake Wedlock, do presumptuously strive against God. As do the
Papists which urge this word of making chaste, as though it were in their
wills to enjoin men to the law of continency. For first Christ affirms yt
the father gave ye same to whom it pleased him. And a little after he
affirms that they rashely take upon them a single life, which are not endued
with ye gift of continency. Wherefore continency or chastisment is not subject
to our will, but whereas certain by nature are apt to marriage or Wedlock,
although they do abstain, yet notwithstanding they tempte not God, because
God sets the^ at liberty.

For the kingdom of Heavens sake B. Some very peruersly expound this clause:
for, the kingdom of heaven sake yt is (say they) to deserve everlasting life:
yt by chastity they might come to ye same, saying, that chastity or continency
is a meritoriouse work, esteming it to be in the liberty of all men to make
themselves chaste, Continencye in Papists was though as angels life.
and denying continency to be a peculiar gift. And so they do imagine that
continencye is not only an acceptable worship of God, but also ye state of
angellicall life. But truly Christ mente nothing else then yt they which were
chaste should always have this end before their eyes, that they being
loused from all the cares of this life, should give themselves wholly to the
study of godliness. It is a foolish imagination therefore to think that
chastitye is a virtue: Chastity is no virtue.
because it is more aceptable unto God of it self, than fasting is, neither
does it deserve to be counted among the duties of obedience which he
requires of us, but it ought to pertain to another end: yea Christ would
expressly declare that though a man were pure from whoredom, yet
notwithstanding that his chastitye is not acceptable unto God, if he only
have respect to his own ease and pleasure. B. They therefore are said to make
themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven, which when they may be married
men, do willinglye chose unto themselves a single life, that they may seek
only to set forth the glory of God, and being addicted to no special thing,
may seek for the profit of all men: that is, that they may have a care for
those things which properly pertain unto the Lord, that they may love him
above all things and their neighbor as themselves, that they may be holy in
body and mind, and that they may with an inseparable mind cleave unto him. It
is good for these men to live without wives: because it is given unto them so
to do, and because they so live for the kingedom of heaven. Such a one Paul
testifyeth himself to be, and exhorts other men to the same felicity, to the
end they having a less care of those things which are in the world, may
cleave unto te Lord, and may use the world as though they used not the same: 1.
Cor. ^
being ready at every moment to depart hence unto Christ. But after his
exhortacion he adds this saying: This I speak for your profit, not to
tangle you in a snare. What are these words in effect^ but this: All men are
not able to co^prehende this saying, save they to whom it is given? To be
short Christ teaches that it is not enoughe if such as were co^tinent persons
live chaste, unless upon good consideration, they abstain from having of wives.

He that can comprehend it, let him comprehend it C. By this part, our
savior Christ admonishes us that we ought not to despise the use of
wedlock, except we will cast our selves by blind wilfulnes into
destruction: for it was necessary that he should reach out his hand to his
Desciples, whom he saw ready to fall without judgment. But this admonition
is profitable for all men, because in the chosing kind of life, (which is the
life of bachilers as we term them) very few consider what gift is given
unto them: but run rashelye without choice whithersoeuer a foolish fervent
love carries them: and I would god, as it is profitable so once it might be
heard. I wish also unfeignedly yt this admonition of our savior Christ might
enter into the ears of Papists. But their ears are so stopped with the
bewitchinge of Satan, that contrary to nature and the will of God they put
upon them the perpetual snare of chastitye, whom God has called to
Wedlock. And then their miserable minds are so bound with the snare of a
deadly vow, Popish vo^es.
that they ca^ never easelye be vntangled again. A. For what mischief has
not the tyranny of ye bishop of Rome brought forth? by the which the
Priests, Moonkes and friars have been constrained to vow continual
chastitye. Of the which matter we may read somewhat in S. Paul's Epistell to
Tymothe. ^. Tymothe ^. and 4.


13. Then were there brought unto him young children, that he should put his
hands on them and pray. And the Disciples rebuked them.

Then were there brought C. This History is very profitable because it
teaches yt they are not only received of Christ which come unto him by the
motion of a holy desyer and undoubted faith, but they also which for want of
years are not able to feel how greatly they want his grace. ^nfantes are
^triued of Christ.
There is no intelligence or understanding in these little children, yt they
might crave the blessing of Christ, yet notwithstanding they being offered
unto him, he receives them gently and louinglye, and consecrateth them to his
father with the solemn right of blessing. ^uke 18.
The Evangelist Luke with a word not ambiguouse, calls them infants least any
man should think, yt mencio^ were here made of such as were of ripe years.
And we must note ye purpose of those which offer these children unto Christ:
for except there had been an undoubted persuasion in their minds yt he had
the power of the holy ghost, the which he should bestow upon the people of
God, it had been an absurd thing to bring these children unto him. Wherefore
there is no doubt but yt they desyer him to make these children pertakers of
his grace: therefore to amplifye the matter, Luke adds this word (also) as if
he had said: After they perceived how many ways he did help those that
were of discretion and cype years, and had conceived hope yt he would do the
like to young children, they brought them unto him knowing that they should not
go away clean void of all the gifts of the holy ghost if he laid his
hands upon them.

That he should toutche them C. The laying on of hands was a familiar sign
among the Jews, so often as there was any solemn kind of prayer or
blessinge: Laying on of hands. Exodus 29. Leuit. 1.
as when they offered sacrifice We have also an exsample in Isaac more
agreeable to this place when he laid his hands upon his son Jacob as
though he did offer and consecrate him unto God, Gene. 27.
that he might be the promised heir. That this was a common custom among the
Jews it is evident by another example of Jacob which blessed the two children
of his son Iosephe namely Ephraim, and Manasses. Gene. 28.
But they were not wont to lay hands on any man which were not endewed with
some notable power or virtue, or set in some hye office: even as the Apostell
takes an argument of the blessinge of Melchisedec, which blessed Abraham: Heb.
7.
neither does he feign the argument. For it is oftentimes red yt there were
Priests chosen which might bless the people, eue^ as though God were present
to bless himself. Blessinge.
The manner of blessing was prescribed unto Moses by the mouth of the Lord,
when he said: Ye shall bless the children of Israel and say unto them: The
Lord bless thee and keep thee. The Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and
be merciful unto thee. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give
thee peace. Numeri. 6.
The like also we have in the 118. Psalm. Psalm. 118.
Saying therefore the layinge on of hands was an aunciente and solemn order
of blessing among the Jews, it is no marvel if the Parents desire Christ to
use this Seremonye in blessinge their children.

And the Disciples rebuked B. That is to say they rebuked the Parents that
brought the children, as testifyeth the Evangelist Mark. Mark. 10
The Apostels were angry taking disdain yt Christ should have to do with
infants, yea they count it a reproach to his person, to admit children.

Neither did their error want a cooller or cloak. For what had this
excellent Prophet and Son of God to do with infants? But hereby we gather
that they are perverse Judges which esteem and judge of Christ after carnal
reason: for they do as it were rob him of his own virtues proper unto him,
and under the show of honor they yield unto him those things which belong not
unto him.

Hereuppon came a wonderful heap of superstitions which brought in unto the
world a feigned Christ. Wherefore let us learn to esteem and Judge no
otherwise of him, than he himself has faught, and to put no other person
upon him, than his heavenly Father has done already. We see what
foolishnes has chanced into the Papacy: Popish worshippinge of Christ.
which think that they do bring great honor unto Christ in worshippinge and
fallinge down to a piece of starche or feigned bread: a most filthye
abomination in the sight of God. Again because they thought it a great
dishonor unto him, to have the office of an advocate, they have made unto
themselves an innumerable sort of advocates: Papists rob God of his honor.
but truly by this means the honor of a mediator is quight taken from him. M.
If these infants which were brought unto Christ had been sick, peradventure
they would not have forbidden and stayed those yt brought them: but because
there was no occasion offered unto Christ to show forth his power in these
infantes (as they thought) because they wanted reason to gather any thing
either by his Doctrine or by his power: they saw no reason why these little
children should be brought unto Christ. And this was the cause why the
Disciples rebuked the Parents of the children. A. Such a preposterous zeal
was there in the Dysciples.

14. But Jesus said unto them: suffer the children and forbid them not to come
unto me: for of such is the kingedome of Heaven.

But Jesus said unto them M. The Evangelist Mark says, when Jesus saw it
he was displeased and said unto them.

And Luke says: when he had called the children. etc. By these our savior
Christ does testify that he would have children admitted, and taking them at
the length in his arms, he does not only embrace them, but also lays his
hands upon them and blesses them. Whereby also we may gather that even unto
this age of infancye his grace was extended, Infantes are made partakers of the
grace in Christ.
and no marvel: for saying all the posterity and ofspringe of Adam was
included under the condemnation of death, it must needs come to pass that all
from the highest to the lowest should perish, sauinge those whom the Redeemer
should deliver.

M. Therefore that embracinge which Mark makes mention of does declare, that
littelones do not only pertain unto Christ, but also that they are dear unto
him. For what is it to come unto Christ, but only to come unto life by
Christ? C. Therefore it were to cruel a deed to put away this age of infancy
from the grace of the redemption. So that we do not in vain hold up this
buckeler against the Anabaptists: The (...) the Anab^^tistes.
for they deny Baptism to infants because they be not capeable of that
misterye which is there sealed. But we reason and prove against them thus:
Baptism^ ought t^ denied t^ ^^fantes.
that saying Baptism is a figure and pledge of the free remission of sins
and of the divine adoption, it ought not to be denied unto infantes who^ God
does adopte and wash with the blood of his son Christ. And whereas they do
obiecte and say that repentance, and newnes of life are both together there
figured: we answer that they are renewed according to the measure of the
spirit of God, until the power which is hid in the^ do increase by degreese,
and openly shine in due time. But whereas they do contend that we are no
otherwise reconcyled unto God and made heirs of the adoption than by faith,
we grant that this is spoken of those that are come to ye years of
discretion: but as touching infantes, this place does prove it to be false.
The layinge on of hands (truly) was no tryfling or vain sign, neither did
Christ power out his prayers in vain into the air: for he could not offer
them sollemlye unto God, but he must needs make them clean and purifyed. And
to what end did he pray for them, but to this end that they might be
received among the sons of God: whereupon it follows that they were
regenerated by the spirit of God into the hope of salvation. The very
embracinge it self is a sufficient witness and testimony yt they were received
of Christ into his flock. Wherefore if they were partakers of those spiritual
benefits which Baptism do figure, it is an absurdity to say that they were
deprived of the external sign. And it is wicked and impudent bouldnes to
drive those from the sheepefoulde of Christ, whom he voutchsafeth to embrace
in his arms and bosom, and to shut those as forreners out of the gates whom
he makes of the household.

For of such is the kingedome of Heaven (...) godly children ^^mplicity.
M. He says of such, not of these: because he comprehends all sorts of
little children. For Mark and Luke add: Verily I say unto you, whosoever
receives not the kingdom of God as a little child he shall not enter
therein. Of the like matter, read the eighteen Chapter going before. C. By
these words therefore Christ affyrmeth that these little children, and such
like pertain unto him. M. By the kingdom of heaven in this place, is
understood that everlasting felicitye of the elect purchased by Christ: the
which felicity is here felt in the hearts of the elect according to the
measure of faith, and in the world to come shall more plentifully be poured
upon them. He goes not about therefore only to show that those little children
which were the^ brought unto him, pertain to the kingedome of Heaven, but also
that it does so pertain that whosoever is not like unto them, pertayneth not
to the kingdom of Heaven. C. And here let us note ye admonition of S. Paul,
when he says. Let us not be children in understanding, Cor. 14.
but in malice.

15. And when he had put his hands on them he departed thence.

A. Mark says, he laid his hands upon them and blessed them. To bless is
here put for to pray for one, and to wish well unto him. For before in the
thirtene Verse the Euangeliste Mathewe said, that he would put his hands on
them and pray. As concerning the which we have already sufficiently spoken.

16. And behoulde one came and said unto him: good Master what good thing
shall I do that I may have eternal life?

And behold one came and said unto him A. Eue^ as before our savior
propounded an example to his Disciples of simplicity and modesty: even now in
the young man desirous of perfect godliness, but laden with riches, he sets
before their eyes how hard a thing it is for those that give themselves to
riches, to come to the true and everlasting life. Mark has: Mark. 10.
and when he was gone forth into ^^e way, there came one runninge and
kneeled to him, and asked him. etc. Luke says that he was a ruler, that is
one set in auctority among the people, and not one of the common sort.
Although truly that riches do bring honor, yet notwithstanding the estimation
of a grave and honest man seems to be attributed unto him. For the
circumstances wayed and considered it is likely although he were called a
young man yt he was of the number of those me^ which led a godly and honest
life. He came not craftily and deceytfully as the manner of the Scribes was,
but with a mind desirous to learn: the which he well declares as well by
his words, as by the bowinge of his knee, reuerentinge Christ as a faithful
teacher. But again a blind trust of works did stay him that he could not
profit under Christ, at whose hands he was desirous to learn. Euenso at this
day we see diverse which are not evil affectioned, yet notwithstanding because
they have but an outward show of godlynes, they have not a sweet taste of
the Gospel.

Good master what good thing A. By this beginning he declares yt he
would willingly embrace the doctrine of Christ. C. To the end we may the
better judge of the state of the answer let us note the form and manner of
the question. He does not ask how and by what way he may come unto life,
but what good thing he might do to attain the same. He dreameth therefore
that his merits are ye mean to come to everlasting life, Merits are not a
mean to bring us to life everlasting.
as by a just satisfaction and recompense. Wherefore our savior Christ very
aptely charge him with the observation of the Law, the which Law no doubt
is the true way to life, as by and by more plentifullye we will declare.

They are ever of this mind, which know not ye true way to everlasting life:
Such were the Scribes and Phariseyes which sought to get the kingedome of
Heaven by their works.

17. He said unto him why call thou me good? there is none good but one,
and that is God. But if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

He said unto him why calleste E. Some Books have why do thou ask me
as concerning that which is good? The which words answer ye which goes
before, what good thing shall I do? Mathewe, Mark and Luke have: why call
thou me, good? C. The which correction or reprehencio^ is so taken of some of
the interpretors, as though Christ should go about to insinuate and put in
mind his duty. For they think that these words are as much in effect as
if he had said: If thou know nothing to be in me more than in a man, thou
do falsely attribute unto me that littell of good which belongs unto God
only. But these words of our savior Christ are more simplelye to be
understood. We grant truly that men cannot properly be said to be good,
Men improperly are called good.
they deserve not a title of such honor, no not the Angels which have no spark
of goodness of the^ selves, but do borrowe of God: also because the goodness
which is in the^ is imperfect. But the purpose of Christ was nothing else than
to maintain the faith and truth of his doctrine: as if he should have said:
Thou do falsely call me good master, except thou do acknowledge me to be
come from God. Christ therefore does not here reason as concerning the essence
of his duty, but seeks to bring the young man to the faith of his doctrine.
He was already endewed with some affection of obedience, but Christ would
have him assende a little hyer, that he might be persuaded that he did talk
with God himself For it is the common manner of men to make devils Angels, and
to call those good teachers in whom they know nothing that is divine. But these
are prophanations of the gifts of God. It is no marvel therefore if Christ
to the end he might get auctority to his word, calls ye young man to the
remembrance of God.

There is none good but one M. Hereby we learn that what good thing soever
is found in man, God the auctor of all goodness.
it comes from God as from the well of all goodness. Wherefore if thou require
any good thing of a man, first pray unto God that he will give ye unto the
man which cannot otherwise be found in mortal men: and then if thou have
received any good thing at ye hands of a man or by a man, persuade thy self
that thou have received the same of God. It appears also how great the
ingratitude and vnthanckefulnes of mortal men is, in that they have less
trust in none than in God, in who^ only they ought to trust. A. For as God is
only good, so he is only faithful and true: Psalm ^ Roma. ^
and every man a liar.

But and if thou vvilt enter into life C. Many of the fathers have expounded
this place amiss, whom ye Papists have followed: as though Christ should have
said that we may deserve everlasting life by the observation of ye Law. But
truly Christ had not respect what man could do, but he makes answer to the
propounded question, what the righteousness of works is, namely that which the
law defines. And certainly we must thus make account that God has
comprehended ye order and manner of a holy and just life in his law, in the
which law righteousness is contained. Neither did Moses speak thus in vain:
Leuiti^ Deuteronomy. 3^
he that does these things shall live in them. Also: I call heaven and earth
to witness this day that I have showed unto you life. It cannot therefore be
denied but that the observation of the law is righteousness, by the which he
gets eternal life which is a perfect obseruer of the law. But because we
are all destitute of the glory of God, there shall nothing be found in the
Law but a curse: so that we have no other refuge then to fly to the free
gift of righteousness. And therefore Paul the Apostell appointed two kinds of
righteousness: Two (...) of righ^^^nes.
namely the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness that comes of
faith: Romans 3^ and.10.
because the young man seeking for the righteousness of works, ought first
to be taught that no man can be counted just before the Lord, but he only
which satisfyeth and fulfilleth the law: the which thing being impossible to be
done, might be a mean to make him acknowledge his infirmitye and to flee to
the refuge and anchor hold of faith. Therefore the person of ye speaker, and
the question it self moved the Lord, thus to answer, and to send the young
man to the consideration of the law, in the which is the perfect glass of
righteousness, the which must be fulfilled if we will have the reward of
eternal life. But who now shall fulfill ye same? For how should they flee
unto Christ, except they acknowledge themselves to be fallen from the way of
life into the pit of destruction? And how should they have wandered and swarued
from the way of life, except they first know what the way of life is?
Therefore they are admonished and taught that then the sanctuary of recovering
of salvation shall be in Christ, when they behoulde how much difference and
disagrement of their life there is with the ryghteousnes of God, which is
contained in the observation of the laws. To be brief this is the sum: if
salvation be sought for in works, the commandments must be kept, by the
which we are guided to perfect righteousness: but we must not here stay
except we will fainte in the midst of the race. For none of us are able to
fulfill the commandments. And when we had done all that ever we ca^, ^e 17,
yet we remain unprofitable seruau^ts. Because therefore we are excluded by
ye righteousness of the law, we must of necessitye seek another stay, namely
the faith in Christ. Wherefore as the Lord here called the young man to the
consideration of the law whom he knew to swell with a vain confidence of
his works, whereby he might know himself to be a sinner and subject to
judgment: even so he comfort those that are now humbled by this knowledge
of themselves, by the promise of his grace, saying: Come unto me all ye that
travail and are heavy laden and I will ease you, ^eth. 11.
and ye shall find rest unto your souls. We grant therefore because God
has promised the reward of everlasting life unto the obseruers of the law,
that this way were to be followed and kept, were it not ye the infirmitye of
the flesh did stay and hinder us: but the Scripture teaches us that it is
come to pass by our fault that the same must be given unto us freely, which
we cannot obtain by our merits. If any man do obiecte and say that
righteousness in the law is propounded unto us in vain, Roma. 2.
excludes all men. A. The which thing the Prophet David acknowledginge, says
that all flesh shall not be justified in ye sight of the Lord. C. To conclude,
Psalm. 143
this place abolisheth all the tryflinge inuencions of the Papists, which they
made unto themselves to get salvation. Therefore whosoever will frame his life
to the will of Christ, let him wholly apply himself to observe so near as he
can the commandments of the Law.

18. He says unto him, which? Jesus said. Thou shall not commit
manslaughter. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shat not steal. Thou shall
not bear false witness.

He says unto him which? A. This question betokens and is a manifest
sign of foolish confidence.

Thou shall not commit manslaughter M. Here it may be demanded why Christ
forsakinge the commandments of the first table, Answer.
because it may the better be discerned what every ma^s mind is, by the
duties of charity. For the truth of the first table is not so well perceived
in men: the obedience of the which table was for the most part either in the
affection of the heart or else in ceremonies: the affection of the heart did not
appear: hypocrites dailye gave themselves to ceremonies: but the works of
charity are such, that thereby we testifye and declare true and perfect
righteousness. And let no man think, because Christ answers out of the
second table, that therefore the same is more excellent than the first: when
as he speaks not here of the estimation and excellency, but of the knowledge
of righteousness, which cannot be taken by so certain an observation of the
first as of the second. C. Let us understand therefore that those
commandments were chosen of Christ, in the which there is a testimony of
true righteousness: notwtstanding by a figure called Synecdoche, he
understands the whole by part.

M. Some write that Christ propounded here the common commandments which
were best known: not because those principalles in the first table pertayned
not unto this matter, but because these commandments of the second table,
were counted common of ye Jews, of the which every man almost thought himself
a diligente obseruer, when as notwithstanding there were none of the^ almost
which did keep the same, even as Christ himself casts in their teeth saying:
Did not Moses give you a law and none of you does ye same? John. 7.
And S. Paul: Thou which teach a man shall not steal, steals thy
self. Thou that say a man shall not commit adultery, Romans 2.
breakest Wedlock. etc. Christ therefore went about to bring the young man
from the false conceived opinion of keeping these common commandments to the
knowledge of his own imperfection, and to break his exceeding presumption.

19. Honor father and mother: and, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Honor father and mother: C. Whereas he puts this commandment as
concerning the honouringe of father and mother in the last place, there is no
matter in that at all: because he had no such care to keep an exact order.
But by the way this is to be noted, that those things are ascribed to the
second table, least the error of Josephus should deceive any man, Joseph
error.
which thought that they did pertain to the first table.

Two tables of the Law.
M. Therefore we must remember this division of the commaundeme^ts, namelye
that the first table contains only tower co^maudementes and the second,
the other six.

And thou shall love thy neighbor C. This contains nothing disagreeinge
from the former commandments, but is a general exposition of all:

A. As appears also by the Apostell S. Paul.

20. The young man says unto him: Romans 13 Gala. 5
All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?

All these things have I kept C. This young man thought to hear some new
thing of Christ: but when he heard nothing of him but that which is spoken
of in the law, he bosteth with a foolish and vain confidence that he has
kept all these things from his youth. M. As if he should have said: Thou
tellest me nothing but that which I know and which are common unto me, the
observation whereof I may challenge unto me even from my youth hitherto. C
Truly it must needs be that the law was dead unto him, when he dreamed
that he was so just, For except by hypocrisy he had flattered himself, it
was a notable admonition to learn humillity, and to behold his filthiness and
sin in the glass of the law, which our savior Christ gave him. But he
being drunk as it were with a foolish trust and confidence of himself
carelessly bosteth that he has very well done his duty even from a child.
Vaine^
The Apostell Paul says that the like cogitacio^ was sometime in him,
perswadinge himself that he lived, Romans 7
so long as the rygor of the law was hidden from him: but when he knew what
the force of the law mente, he received by and by a deadly wound. Bu.
Therefore in this young man we have an example of the great arrogance and
vanity which rests in mankind. We arrogate unto our selves perfect
righteousness, and persuade our selves that we have exactly fulfilled the whole
law, when as in deed we have scarce gotten a shadow of any righteousness. The
like appears in the Pharisey which Luke makes mention of. For none of us do
narrowly examyne our selves, Luke ^
we search not out the natural corruption that is even in our bosom, and
if we find it, we bewail not the same: we all rather rejoice in our own
vanitye, lookinge for great commendatio^, as though nothing were wantinge in
us, when as we are most worthy of great reprehencion.

21. Jesus said unto him: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou
have and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and come
and follow me.

If thou vvilt be perfect M. In steed of these words the Evangelists Mark
and Luke have: yet thou want one thing. For he is perfect in deed which
wants nothing and which is perfect in all points. C. Christ here requires
nothing of the young man, but the commandments of the law. But because a
simple rehersall of them did move him nothing at all, by other words he
uncovered the disease of covetousness. We grant that the law in no place
commands us to sell all that we have: but saying the end of the law is to
bring men to deny and forsake them selves, and expreslye condemns
concupiscence, we see that Christ had no other respect, tha^ to correct the
false persuasion of the young man. For if he had known himself, so soon as
he had heard mention of the law he would have confessed himself to be
subject to the judgment of God. Now, because the bare words of the law do
not sufficiently convince him of giltines, his internal cogitacion and thought
by other words is expressed. For if Christ had now required any other thing
save the commandments of the law, he would have contended with himself.
^tion.
Even now he thought that perfect righteousness was comprehended in the
commandments of the law: how therefore will it agree to have the law
accused of imperfection? To answer this, admit and grant that ye testimony
which at the first we alleged out of Moses were false. ^were.
Therefore Christ does not mean that the young man wants yet one thing
beside the obseration of the law: but that he wa^teth the same, even in the
very observation of the law. For although the law at no time constrayneth to
sell all that we have, yet notwithstanding because it condemns all our
concupiscences, because it instructs us to bear the Cross, because it would
have us ready to suffer penury and poverty, the young man was far from the
full and perfect observation of the same, so long as he was so inflamed with
concupiscence, and tied to his riches. And he says that one thing is
lackinge: because it was not needful to speak of whoredom and homicide, but
to touch the special disease even as though with his finger he touched the
scare.

Go and sell all that thou haste, and give to the poor C. This is to be noted
that Christ does not only command to sell all that we have, but also to give
unto the poor: because to cast away riches without any regard is not a
virtue, but rather vain ambition. Crates of Thebes is highlye commended of
profane Historiographers, Crates Thebanus.
because he cast his money and all the precious Jewels that he had into
the Sea: because he thought, that without the loss of his riches he could
not be safe. As though in deed it had not been better to distribute that to
others, which he counted superfluous to himself, than so to have done.
Truly, Coloss. 3.
saying that charity is the bond of perfection, he which depriueth himself
and others of the use of money, deserves no commendation at all. Therefore the
sellinge of the goods is not here commended simplely of our savior Christ,
but the liberallity in helpinge the poor.

And thou shall have treasure in Heaven M. That is to say: Then thou shall
receive eternal life which thou declarest thy self so greatly desirous to
have. Least the young man should think himself deprived of goods if he
should give them to the poor, our savior Christ adioyneth this vtillity
and profit to the commandment. But he speaks by immitacion, as if he
should say: Thou think that thou have treasure because thou art rich,
and do couetouslye embrace the same not meaning lightlye to forsake it: but
and if thou will harken unto me thou shall rather seek to have treasure in
heaven and to be rich in heavenly things then in earthly things. Read te
sixth Chapter going before. C. Moreover Christ urges him with the mortification
of the flesh, when he says: And come and follovv me. For he does not command
him only to give his name, but to submit his shoulders to the bearing of the
cross: as the Evangelist Mark more plainly declares: A. Come (says he) and
follow me, and take the cross upon thy shoulders, And certainly, it was
necessary that he should be pricked forward with this spur, because he always
living at home in ease and quietness, had never any taste to know what it was
to crucifye the old man, Perfection.
and to tame the desires of the flesh. M. Therefore perfection consists in
this, not in selling all that we have and giving to the poor only: but in
following Christ in bearing his cross, and in mortifying the perverse and
crooked disposition of the flesh. A. We ought always therefore to bear in
mind this saying of our Savior Christ: If any man will follow me, Matthew. 16.
let him deny him self and take up his cross and follow me. But the moonkes
show them selves very foolish, Moonkishe perfection.
when that under the color of this place, they arrogate unto the^ selves the
state of perfection. First of all, we may gather, that all men are not
commanded without free choice to sell all that they have: for the husband man
should offend, which lives commonly by his labor, and thereby also feeds his
family, if he should sell away his farm being constrained thereunto by no
necessity. To keep therefore in our hand that which God has given unto us
to the bringing up of our familye sparingly, and to give part unto the poor,
is a greater virtue, then to consume all that we have, or to sell it. Gene. 17.
A. Abraham, who received a commaundent to be perfect before the Lord, did not
sell all that he had to give unto the poor. Gene. 6.
Neither did Noe, which was counted a just man sell all that he had and give
unto the poor. Therefore this commandment which Christ gives as concerning
the selling of goods and riches, was but temporal and particular, not
general and necessary for all men. But that place which we cited eue^ now as
concerning the denying of a man's self, and the bearing of the cross is
general. The which thing whosoever does, although he possess the substance of
this world with Abraham and Noe, yet notwithstanding they are ready to forsake
them at the Lords pleesure, whenever need shall require: and not only
their earthly substance, but life it self. So has the Evangelist Luke: Luk^
Except a man forsake all that he has, he cannot be my disciple. C. But what
excellent selling is that which the Moonkes boaste of, when that they come from
poverty for the most part, to a monasterye of great plenty. And being once
there, M^^ man by (...)
every one of them slouthfully eats his bread by the sweat of other men's
brows. A notable permutation and change in deed, that when they are
commanded to distribute that which they justly possess, unto the poor, they,
being not contented with their own, take away that which is other men's. Mark
adds: Mar^
Jesus beheld him and favored him. By ye which place the Papists gather that
all moral good works, or good works pertaining unto manners, which come not by
the instinct of ye holy ghost, but go before regeneration, do deserve: but
this is to childishly gathered. For if merit or desert be brought in, and
grounded of the love of God, then may we say that frogs, lice and fleas do
deserve, because God loves all his creatures without exception. It is
needful therefore that we distinguish and make a difference of the degreesse
of love. As touching this present place, it shall be sufficient, briefly to
note, that God does love none with his fatherly love but his sons only, whom
he has begotten with the spirit of adoption, and that by this love it comes
to pass that they are accepted before his tribunal seat. According to this
sense to be beloved of God, and to be justified before him, are all one. But
sometimes God is said to love those whom he neither accepts nor iustifyeth:
For because the preservation of mankind which consists of righteousness,
equity, moderation, wisdom, faith and temperancy, is acceptable unto him, he
is said to love moral virtues: not that they do deserve salvation or grace
but because they belong to an acceptable end In this se^ce according to diverse
respects, he loved and hated Aristides, and Fabritius. For in respect yt he
beutifyed them with external righteousness, he loved his work in the^.
Notwithstanding because the heart was unclean, ye external show of
righteousness did profit the^ nothing at al to get righteousness. ^ctes. 15.
^ohn. 14 ^om. 8. Question.
For we know yt the hearts are purged by faith only, and yt the spirit of
truth is only given to ye members of Christ But it maybe here demanded how
Christ could love a man yt was proud and an hypocrite, when as there is nothing
more odious unto God then these ii. vices. ^unswere.
Surely it is no absurditye to say yt the good seed which God has sowe^ in
some natures is loved of him, and yet notwtstanding so, that he rejects the
persons, and their works, for the corruption that is in them.

22. But when the young man heard that saying he went away sorry. For he had
great possessions.

But when the M. Here it appears in what thing the young man was not perfect:
he had said before, Al these things have I kept from my youth up, A. as though
nothing had been wanting in him. C. But at the length the end declares how far
he was from that perfection to ye which our savior Christ called him. For how
comes it to pass yt he withdraws himself from ye school of Christ, save
only because it was grievous unto him to be deprived of his riches? But truly,
except we be prepared to poverty and to suffer honger, it is manifest ye
concupiscence will have his rule in us. And this is ye which we said in the
beginning, that ye commandment of Christ to sell all, was not an addition to
the law, but a probation and trial of ye secret sore with lay hid in the man:
for as every man is infected with this vice, or that, even so by the reprehencion
of the same, it is chiefly revealed. M. Mark and Luke have: But he was
discomforted because of ye saying, and went away mourning. That is to say he
being overcome in his conscience as concerning his imperfection, ^arke 10,
^^ke. 18.
which he knew not before the answer of Christ, we^^ away mourninge. And this
sorrow does prove yt he loved his riches more tha^ God or his neighbor: to
the knowledge whereof our savior Christ meant to bring him by these words: Go
and sell all yt thou have. Riches do ^epe us from Christ.
If the young man had loved his neighbor, peradventure he should not have had
so great abundance of riches: and if he had received the^ by his parents,
having ye love he would not have kept them, but would have bestowed upon ye
nedy neigbours. For he had great possessions M. The Evangelist says not, he
loved his riches: but with a great Emphasis and force he says, For he had great
possessions: by ye which words he declared after this sort the nature of this
disease, yt we might understand yt the more we possess the greater is our
disease. For this is a most true saying: Look how much the mass and su^me of
riches does increase: The more we have: The more we crave.

So much does the love of the^, our heart and mind possess.
The Evangelist Luke has: For he was very rich: to conclude, this example
teaches us to persist and abide constantly in ye schole of Christ, and so
renounce the flesh. This young man departed from Christ which at the first
brought with him both a desire to learn, and also great modestye, because it
was bitter unto him to forsake his familiar vice. The like also will happen
unto us, except ye swetnes of ye grace of Christ, do make all ye intissing
des^ers of the flesh unsavory unto us. Whither this temptacion endured but a
time, and whether he repented afterward or no, it is uncertain: but it is
likely that he was withdrawn and could not profit, through covetousness.

23. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples: Verily I say unto you, it shall be
hard for the rich to enter into the kingebome of Heaven.

Then said Jesus Bu. Jesus taking occasion of the young man, Riches pluck us
from the kingdom of heaven.
does show farther how hardly rich men shall enter into the kingdom of heaven:
that is to say there is nothing that does so greatly pluck us back from the
kingdom of Heaven as riches.

M. Mark and Luke have, Jesus lookinge round about him and seeing that he
was sorry, said unto his disciples, with what difficultye shall they that have
money enter into the kingdom of God. C. By the which words he does teach not
only how incurable and deadlye a plague covetousness is, but also how great a let
riches bring unto us Bu. And least Christ might seem to speak this
incide^tly, or beside the purpose, he adds before an earnest asseueration
saying.

Verily I say M. And in Mark these words are pronounced with an admiration:
How hardly shall they yt are rich etc. He is said also to look about him, and
then to speak these words, to the end he might make his Disciples more
attentive, as if they should hear some notable matter. To enter into the
kingdom Here he calls everlasting life ye kingdom of heaven or the
kingdom of God: for he had said before: If thou will enter into life, keep ye
co^maundeme^ts. Mark after these words adds, And ye disciples were afraid
because of these sayings. But Jesus answers again and says unto them:
Children how hard is it for them that trust in money, to enter into ye kingdom
of God? C. By the which words he does seem to mittigate the sharpenes of his
former saying, when he restrayneth it to those only which set their trust in
riches. But in deed he does rather confirm his former sentence than correct
the same: as though he should affirm yt it should not seem wonderful unto
them yt he makes the entrance into the kingdom of Heaven so hard unto rich
men: because it is an evil belonging almost to every man to trust in his
riches. But this doctrine is profitable to all me^: to richme^, because they
being admonished of the danger yt hangs over them, may take heed: to poor
men, that they being contented with their estate, covet not that thing gredely
which in time to come shall bring them more harm than gain. It is most
certain truly ye riches of themselves are not evil neither of their own
nature bring impediments unto us whereby we might be let from the service of
God, Riches of the^ selves are good.
but the impedimentes comes of our own corrupt nature, otherwise we might
blame the auctor. For as the sufferance of the father does often times bring
corruption to the child, even so it cannot almost be avoided, but yt the more
oboundance is given to some* the more they ingurge themselves and take a surfeit
as it were of the same: such is the wickedness of ma^s nature: So yt they to whom
riches do increase, are held as it were bound with chains of Satan, least
they should aspire into heaven. M. Whereupon it is no marvel if our savior
Christ in Luke calls them the riches of iniquity, Luke. 19.
of the effect: otherwise Zachaeus was very rich. Neither does ye Apostle Paul
say, 1. Cor 1. Matthew ^
None are called being rich, but he says, not many being rich are called.
And Joseph of Aramatia, which is said to bury Christ and to be his disciple,
was reported to be rich. Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, David and Job, were very
rich: who, if they had lived in the time of Christ, had not ben excluded at all
from the fellowship of ye Gospel, seeing that they were partakers of ye
kingdom of God in the old testamente. Therefore the hearts of those rich men are
blamed, which set their whole trust and affiance in riches. Whereupon the
Apostel says not, they yt are rich, but they which seek to be rich fall into
diverse temptacions etc. Again he says: the love of money is the root of all
evil, he says not ye money simplely is the cause. And farther he says to
Tymothe in the same Chap. Charge them that are rich in this world that they be
not hye minded, 1. Tym. ^
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in ye living God etc.

24. And again I say unto you: it is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a nedell, then for the rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

Again I say unto you B. Here our savior Christ corrects that which he
spoke before, repeting it more sharply and amplifying the difficulty of the
matter, which before more softly and favorably he expressed C. For he means
that rich me^ do so swell with pride and trust in themselves, that they will in
no wise abide to be brought to those straytes in the which God does hold those
that are his.

For a Camel to go E. The Latin text is: Facillius est Camelum per foramen
acus transire. This word Camelum a Camel in the English translation is
expounded of some to signify in this place the Cabel of a Ship: and truly that
does better agree to the eye of a nedell: and yet Pollux writing of the
instruments pertaining to a Ship makes no mention of this word Camelus, and
Suidas only is found to understand this word in that signification: yet
understanding it so, it is written with i. and not with e. as (...) Camilos not
(...) Camelos. For though there be little difference in the words yet
notwtstanding in sense there is great contrarietye: for the first signifies a
beast called a Camel, and the other signifies ye rope or cable of a ship.
Other some do rather agree to Hierom which followed Origin, which takes this
word Camelum being a greek word (as we sheewed before) for the beast called a
Camel. For Christ would have it seem altogether as impossible for a rich man
trusting in his riches to enter into the kingdom of heaven as for a Camel,
being a mo^sterous beast to go through ye eye of a nedle. But and if this
saying seem to any man obscure, let him remember the man reprehe^ded of ye
Lord which went about to pluck the moate out of his brothers eye, and could not
see the beam in his own eye. What can be more absurd than to say that a man
caryeth a beam in his eye? But this absurdity of his words has a great
Emphasis and force.

25. When the Disciples heard this, they were excedingly amassed: saying who
can be saved?

When the Dis. heard this By these words of Christ the Apostel gathered
generally yt no man could be saved, when as he only spoke of rich men by
name. And very well: for they did soon perceive and see that the same which
should hinder rich men from entering into ye kingdom of heaven, should be a
let also to all mortal men how poor soever they were For rich and poor have
all one disease of mind, ^^nerall case of all (...).
namely to be willinge to forsake those things that are present and to desire
those things which we have not. So yt the hearts of both estates depend upon
the creatures, having no intelligence nor affection in heavenly things. They
knew therefore by the aid of the spirit yt they themselves as yet had not
clean put away these affections: and yt they themselves were tied with the
same chain, and with the same fetters that rich men were tied withal, except
the Lord lifting the^ up from earthly cares did louse them. C. For which way
soever we turn our eyes, a thousand lets appear before us. But let us note
that the Disciples were so stricken with fear, yt notwithstanding they forsook
not the doctrine of Christ. Yet the young man (whom we spoke of eue^ now) did
otherwise: for the straitnes of ye commandment does so terrefye him yt he
does deuorse and utterly separate himself from Christ. But the disciples,
although they fear, and demand who shall then be saved, quail not, neither
do they swerue from the race, but seek to overcome and put away desperacion.
Even so it shall profit us to tremble at the threatenings of the Lord so often
as he pronou^ceth any sorrowful and fearful thing: so yt our minds thereby do
not faint, but rather assende

26. But Jesus beheld them and said unto them: with me^ this is impossible: but
with God all things are possible.

But Jesus beheld them M. Because (as it appears in Mark) they had said
among themselves: who shall then be saved? Christ to whom nothing was hid, by
this beholding of them went about to remedy their fear in mittigating the
trouble of their minds, and in giving the^ a better hope. A. And it may be also
that Christ by this beholding of them sought to prepare their minds to ye end
they might harken more attentively to those things yt should afterward be
spoken, even as though he should set the matter before their eyes. With men
this is impossible C. Christ does not altogether deliver ye minds of his
disciples from care because it was profitable for them to know yt the way to
everlasting life was very strait and narrow. First to the end they might
endeavor themselves says now that it is impossible. Whereby it appears that
they are not discrete teachers which are afraid to speak sharply, yt they
might bear with the sluggishnes of ye flesh. But truly it were more meet to
follow the rule of Christ, which so orders his words, yt he teaches me^ to
fall down in themselves, and yet notwtstanding he encourages them to pray.
For thus the infirmitye of man may be helped, not by attributing any thing
unto men, but by liftinge up their minds to hope for the grace of God. M.
Christ therefore says: This is impossible with men: as if he should have
said: as touching the abillity and strength in man, it is true which ye
gather, yt no man can be saved, wherefore be not troubled in vain.

But with God all things are possible A. Luke has thus: Those things which
are impossible with men, are possible with God. M. As though Christ should have
said: Ye ought not therefore to despair of ye salvation of rich men or of
any other mortal man because those things which are required to the
enteraunce of ye kingdom of God are impossible unto men. For that which man
cannot do, God can do. C. And by this answer of Christ that common axioma or
proposition which the Papists have taken out of S. Hierom is confuted, The
Papists affirm that man is able to observe ye Law.
namelye this. Whosoever shall say that the law is impossible to be kept, be
he accursed. For our savior Christ plainly pronou^ceth yt it is impossible
for man to keep the way of salvation, without the aid of Gods grace. Whervppon
the Apostell Paul says yt he is able to do all things by the power of the
spirit, without the which power we ca^ do nothing.

27. Then answered Peter and said unto him: Behoulde, we have forsaken all
and followed thee: what shall we have therefore?

Then answered Peter, M. It seems that Peter was moved to demand this
question by the occasion of the rich man, and by the words of Christ.
Peradventure he thought yt God had a greater consideration of a rich man, if
he forsook all that he had, and followed Christ, than of a poor man if he
should do the like. C. Or peradventure he compared secretlye himself and the
rest of his Disciples with the rich man who^ the world had alienate and
wtdrawne from Christ. But because they led a poor and wandering kind of life
subject to reproach and grief, neither did there appear any better state of
condition of life in time to come, he does not without good cause demand
whether they leaving al yt they had, gave themselves in vain unto Christ. For
it were not indifferent yt they should be spoiled (as it were) by the Lord,
and not restored to better. But what were all those things that Peter says
here he has forsaken? For they being mean men, and of poor estate, had
scant a house to put in their heads: this great all, and su^me, therefore that
Peter boasts of, might seem ridiculous and great folly in Peter to boast of
the same. And truly experience does teach how liberally men persuade
themselves to have done their duty toward God: The (...) nature^
even as at this day we see that some which were almost beggars in the time of
the Papacy, do proudly brag yt they for the Gospels sake have suffered great
loss. And other some which before the Gospel was known, were reedye to suffer
whatsoever should be laid upon them, after they were delivered from tyranny,
and had left a little (god wot) behind the^, being come to the place where
the Gospel was more freely preached, by and by proudlye and vnthanckefully
they boaste that they have forsaken all: whereas God does more esteem the
affection tha^ all the kingdoms of the world. C. Notwithstanding the Disciples
may be excused, because although they had not abou^dance, yet notwithstanding
they lived at home with their handy labor no less merelye than they yt had great
plenty of riches. And we know that simple men accustomed to a quiet and
competent life, are more hardlye withdrawn from their wives and children, than
they which are rich.

Truly except some reward were in store for the Disciples, they had foolishly
changed the state of their life. But as in this part they are excusable, so
in this notwtstandinge they offend, that having not made an end of ye war
taken in hand, desire to tryumphe. If at any time ye like tediousnes by reason
of delay, do trouble, wearye, and make us impaciente, let us learn first to
consider of the solace and joy which the Lord has in store to mittigate the
sharpenes of the Cross in this life, and to lift us up to the hope of the
everlasting life to come. For in these two parts the answer of Christ is
contained.

What shall we have E. Those words which Jesus spoke to the young man
saying: sell all that thou haste, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and
come and follow me, did not a little kindle the hope of Peter, who although
he were not rich, yet notwithstanding he forsook that which he had (as it
was said before) with a willing mind, as his ship and his nets, and followed
the Lord. Lord (says he) behold we have done yt which thou requiredst of
the young man. What reward therefore shall we have?

28. Jesus said unto them: verelye I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the seat
of his majesty, shall sit also upon twelve seats iudginge the twelve tribes
of Israel.

Jesus said unto them verily I say unto you, ye which Peter had spoken two
things, when he said: We have forsaken all and we have followed. But
Christ aunswering said not: you have forsaken all. For Socrates the Philosopher
did so, and many other which despised riches. Because therefore it is not
sufficient to leave all. Christ says, (ye that have followed me.) For this
belongs to the Apostelles and the faithful.

In the regeneration: shall sit C. Least the Disciples should think yt they
had lost their labor, and least they should repent them as of a foolish
enterprise, Christ admonishes them that the glory of his kingdom which then
as yet lay hid, should be revealed: as if he should say: ^^fort to ^^^dly.
There is no cause why this base estate should discourage you, for I which am
of no reputacion in the world will at the length ascend and sit upon the seat
of my Majesty: abide therefore and content your selves a while, for ye time
will come when ye shall see my glory. And what does he promise them then?
sure he promises that they shall be partakers of the same glory with him. For
in that he attributes unto them thrones or seats out of the which they shall
Judge the twelve tribes of Israel, he compares them unto Legates, or to the
chief counselors and Presidentes which in the presence of the King have ye
chief places. We know that the Apostels were chose^ twelve in number, that
thereby it might be declared that God by the revealing of his son Christ
would gather together the dispersed remnaunts of his people. This was an
excellent dignitye and honor, but as yet, hid: therefore Christ suspendeth
their desyers even until the last time when the glory of his kingdom should
be revealed, yt then at the last they might perceive the fruit of their
election. And although ye kingdom of Christ in ye preaching of ye Gospel in
some point does shine, yet notwtstanding, there is no doubt but yt he speaks
here of ye last day.

In the regeneration M. There are two kinds of regeneration. Two kinds of
regeneration*
The first is of ye minds of men in this present life which Regeneration.
for that is a Christian life, when we consecrate our selves to God and
Christ. The second is of the bodies of men, being the state and Romans ^.
For then ye creature it self shall be delivered from ye bondage of corruption
into the glory of the sons of God. If we well consider the time of the
judgment to come, in the which all things shall be renewed and altered, and that
into another state and condition, how can it be more aptly termed then by the
name of regeneration? Acter. 3.
The Apostel Peter calls this regeneration the restoring of all things. C.
For then shall mortallitye be swallowed up of life. 1. Cor. 5. Philip. 3.


And our vile body shall then be transfigured into the heavenly glory of
Christ. This regeneration notwithstanding ought rather to be referred to the
first coming of Christ, because then the world began to be renewed, and the
Church also arose out of the shadow of death unto life. And this manner of
speech is found often times in the Prophets, and agrees very well to the
circumstance of this place. For the renouation and restoringe of the Church,
being so oftentimes promised, so soon as ye Messiah appeared it brought a
wonderful hope of felicity. Christ therefore that he might stay that error,
makes a difference between the beginning of his kingdom and the finishing of
the same.

When the son of man shall sit in the seat M. He puts into the Disciples
minds his glory to come, being as yet but in a base estate, and in such a
place where he shows that they must bear ye cross and forsake all for his
names sake.

Ye shall sit also upon twelve seats Bu. He speaks according to the
manner of kings which sit in their heighe throne, and have their councellers
sittinge round about them By a human similitude (yet full of magnificence)
he sets forth (as under a shadow) the divine and perfect judgment of his
majesty. This sitting therefore is nothing else but that which the Apostell
speaks of saying: Coloss. 3.
When Christ shall appear which is your life, then shall you also sit with
him in glory. And in another place: And then heirs annexed with Christ: Romans 8.
if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified together with
him. C. And it is the self same thing that Luke says ye Lord spoke to his
Disciples on this manner: Ye are they which have ^idden with me in my
temptacions: and I apoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed unto
me: Luke 22.
yt ye may eat and drink at my table in the kingdom, and sit on seats,
iudginge the twelve tribes of Israel. For, because the Apostels kept him
company all the time of temptacions and did constantlye abide, he pronounces
that they shall be partakers of his glory.

Iudginge the twelve tribes of Israel C. He named the twelve tribes by ye
same reason which moved him to make twelve Apostels, namely because he was
sent to be a minister of the circumsition for ye truth of God to confirm the
promises made unto the fathers: Romans 1^
and (as we said before now) to the end he might gather ye remnaunt of the
twelve tribes of Israel into one. A. But whereas the Lord says in this place
that the Apostels shall be Judges of Israel, it must be referred to the last
day of judgment as we sheewed before. M. For then they shall condemn the
hard hearted and unbelieving Israelites. The which is no otherwise to be
understood, then that the faith of ye Apostels (which were also Israelites,
and unlearned simple men, and yet embraced Christ) shall take away all excuse
from ye Israelits. We do read also before that this condempnatio^ shall
proceed from the Niniuits, Matthew ^
and from the Queen of the Southe. And in another place our saui. Christ
says: He that refuses me and receives not my words, John. ^
has one that Judges him. The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge
him in the last day. Otherwise Christ shall sit a Judge alone in Judgment.
C. But this is not spoken as though the Apostels should have no more excellency
tha^ the Queen of the Southe in the day of Judgment. For this is a great
matter that Christ speaks of here: for what can be greater and more
glorious, than to be so accepted and allowed in the day of Judgment, before
the world and the Angels of God, than that thy faith (O man) shall condemn
whole nations that have been unbelieving? And yet notwithstanding we must not
think that the Apostels shall have no more save this: for the glory of the
kingdom also is promised unto them. As we may gather out of the place which
we cited out of Luke a little before.

29. And every one that forsakes house or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an
hundred foulde, and shall inherit everlasting life.

And every one that forsakes C. After he had listed up their minds to the
hope of the life to come, he does also sustain them with present solace and
joy, and does confirm them to bear the Cross. For God doothe never forsake
those that are his, ^is a pre^ help in ^le.
though he suffer them for a time to be greuouslye afflicted, but sends
aid and help in the midst of trouble. Neither is this here only spoken by
the Apostels, but having occasion he speaks generally to all the godly. M.
To forsake any thing for the name of Christ or for Christ, is to set Christ
before all things, and to love him above all things: and to have him so dear
unto our hearts, that for his sake we are ready to forsake all, be it never
so dear unto us, which allureth, leads, or constrayneth us to do any thing
which is contrary to his glory.

Or brethren, ^secution (...) not be ^ewarded.
or sisters, or father, C. He reherseth our Parents and the rest of our
friends, to the end he might show yt there is nothing so precious which the
reward that he sets before us does not excede. This therefore is the sum
and effect of his words: Whosoever loose all things willingly for Christ's
cause, shall notwithstanding be more happy and blessed in this life than if
they had lost nothing: but their chief reward is laid up for them in heaven.

Shall receive an hundred foulde E. The Greek text signifies thus much, as
if thou should say: Every thing shall be an hundred times doubled, for the
Greek word is a number of moultitude. M. Luke has, shall receive much more,
least we should stand upon this number of a hundred fould. As if he should
have said none shall sustain loss for my sake but shall rather have great
gain both in this life, ^^ke. 10.
and also in the life to come. Mark has: he shall receive an hundred foulde
now in this life, houses, brethren, sisters, mothers, children, and lands.
C. Which promise notwithstanding does not seem to agree with experience.
^iection.
For we see oftentimes, that they which are deprived, and forced to forsake
their Parents, their children and the rest of their kinsfolks, and to leave
their wives wydowes, and to be dispoyled of all their substance for the
testimonye of Christ, are so far from the recovering of their own again with
advantage, that all their life time they are constrained to live in exile and
banishement with great penurye. Answer.
But we answer again to common experience, that if any man rightly consider
and esteem the present grace of God by the which their myseries are helped,
he will confess that it is not in vain preferred before all the riches of ye
world. For although the unbelieving do florishe, yet notwithstanding, The
ungodly are always vncerta^ne of their estate.
because they know not what shall befall them to morrow, it must needs be
that they burn always in great perplexitye and fear, neither can they
without great torment turn the whele of fortune, which to them pertayneth.
But God does make the hearts of those that are his joyful, yt they may
think that little which they possess and the trouble that they suffer,
having the grace and fauore of Christ, to be more pleasant and sweet unto
them, than if they had exceeding abundance, without Christ. In the which
sense the Evangelist Mark adds these words: with persecutions. As if
Christ should have said: Although the Godly all their life time remain in
persecution and though ye Cross do (as it were) cleave unto their backs, Gods
grace in sweet to those that enjoy the same.
yet notwithstanding the sauce of the grace of God is so sweet, that their
condition is more pleasant and desiered then the delights of kings.

M. For they shall be so far from loosing the aid and help of kinsfolks,
that they shall get many more in my kingdom than they had before, and of
greater fidellity and trust. For look how many fellows they shall find and
partakers of their faith, so many brethren, so many sisters so many fathers
and mothers, so many children, so many kinsfolks and friends they shall find.
For they are our Parents, Math. 12.
sisters, bretherene, father and mother which hear the word of God and keep
it. B. When he says therefore: An hundred foulde, he means that we shall
have a more infinite deal of pleasure in vsinge that small quantity in
persecution, which: the Lord has given us for this present life, than we had
with the abundaunce of those things which we enjoyed before we knew the
Gospel. For the children of God esteem so much of the knowledge thereof, that
they will not change the same for the whole world. Furthermore because they
that fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good, Psalm 33. Matthew. 6.
and to them that seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, all
things needful shall be given, although Christians are banished from their
house, and are left destitute of things necessary, yet notwithstanding
nothing shall be wanting unto them, the use whereof might either be profitable
unto them or necessary. In the mean time they have learned of S. Paul to be
content with those things that they have: they know how to be low, and how
to exceed, they know how to be full, and how to be hungrye, both to have
plenty and to suffer need. Philip. 4.
And shall inherit everlasting life. Bu. This truly is the greatest comfort
of al, to be the heir of God and coheyre with Christ, that is, to be partaker
of the graces of God. A So in another place our Savior Christ does call those
that are his to the bearing of the cross manfully, by the consideration of
this exceeding benefit, saying: Be glad and rejoice, for great is your reward
in heaven. Matthew. 5.


30. But many that are first, shall be last, and the last shall be first.

But many that are first BV. This sentence teaches us that modesty becomes
those that are Saints. Z. Because Peter very ambitiously had said: Behold, we
have forsaken all and followed thee, what reward shall we have therefore? the
Lord fore showed that it would come to pass that many in the Church should
conceive a great opinion of the^ selves, by reason of their works and merits,
for the which they think that eternal life is due unto the^, for the which
they should glory, and boast the^ selves to be most acceptable unto God: Such
were the Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's time, Men's merits deserve damnation.
and such are the Scribes and Pharisees in these our days (I mean the Papists)
whom our Savior Christ pronounces here to be last or farthest from the
kingdom of heaven, that is to say, such as shall be excluded and shut out of the
kingdom of heaven. This sentence therefore serves greatly to drive away the
slouthfulnes of the flesh. Perseverance
For our Savior Christ here shows that they which are never so forward in
their race, except they go on still and continue to the end, shall not
obtain: According to S. Paul, 1. Cori^
which says that all which run do not obtain the game. And in another place
he exhorts by his own example to forget those things which are behind,
Philip ^
and to seek to get those things which are before, according to the mark
appointed. But where as he says: And the last shall be first. he takes away all
desperation from the greatest sinner, whom the goodman of the house may call
into his vineyard to be a laborer when he will, and give him eternal life:
Luke ^
as to the thief hanging on the cross, which deserved no such thing Do we not
see that the Jews boasting them selves to be the first in the law, to be made
last and to be rejected? and that the Gentiles which were last are now become
first and most acceptable unto God, Acts ^
to whom he has given repentance unto life? The which thing our Savior
Christ does more largely declare in the Chapter following.

The.xx. Chapter.
FOr the kingdom of
For the kingdom of heaven Bu. Here our Savior Christ according to his manner
to make the matter more evident and plain, takes a parable, by the which he
might make manifest his sentence (which went before:) Many that are first
shall be last, and the last shall be first. C. But we must see how this similitude
may be made apt and applied to the purpose. Certain interpreters conjecture
this to be the sum and effect: Because the heavenly inheritance is not
gotten by the merits of works, but is given freelye, that therefore the glory
of all men shall be alike. But truly, Christ does not here dispute of the
equality of the heavenly glory, or of the state and condition of the godly
that shall be: but he only sheeweth that there is no cause why they should
glory or boast more the^ other, which are first, or excel by reason of time:
because the Lord so often as it shall please him, may call those whom he
might seem to neglecte for a time and so either make them equal, or prefer
the^ before those that were first. If any man go about to discuss exactlye
every part of this parable, he shall show himself to curious. Therefore we
must search no farther then the counsel and purpose of our savior Christ.
But we said a little before, ^thful^ ^oth arise (...) much (...).
that he had no other respect than that he might continually stir up his
Apostels to go forward. We do know that slouthfulnes does arise most
commonly of to much trust: and so it comes to pass that many, as it were in
ye running of a race do faint and fall down in the midst of the way.
Therefore Paul commands us to forget those things that are behind, (...).
3.
that we consideringe what remains unto us, may with a good courage prepare
our selves to run. The kingdom of heaven is like A. To know what the
kingdom of Heaven is, read the four and twentye verce of the thirtene
Chapter going before.

C. The sense and meaning is, that the manner of the divine calling is even as
if a man should hyer workmen early in the morning at a certain price to
dress his Vineyarde: and afterward should send other laborers without
covenant or greement, to whom notwithstanding he should give the same reward.
But he therefore makes mention of ye kingdom of Heaven, because he
compares a spiritual kind of life to that which is earthy: and the reward
also of eternal life to money, by the which men do reward those that work
for them.

Which went out early in the morninge E. Or so soon as it wared day. C. The
day in this place is divided, according to the old manner: for they did begin at
the rysinge of the Sun: and then the other parts of the day were equal or a
like. But the hours of the day were either longer or shorter, according to
the time: for they were longer in Summer than in Winter. Beside that division,
there were four special parts of the day, even as of the night: and
therefore here is mention made of the third, sixth, and ninth hour. Bu. But
one of the clock after midnighte (according to the hours of the Jews) was
correspondent to six of the clock before noone, or in the morninge, and three
of the clock, to nine, six to twelve, nine to three, and a leven to five.
Wherefore Christ said: are there not twelve hours of the day?

To hyer laborers into his vineyarde, C. Here we must note that we are
conducted, called, and sent of God the father, which is the husband man, to
labor in his Vineyarde, and that we are not created to live ydellye and
vnprofitablye in this life without fruit, but that we might labor to the
Lord in honest fruition acceptable unto God, and profitable to our brethren
For there are many which do not think that they are borne to other men, No
ma^n is borne for him self.
thincking it sufficient if they do no injury to any man: but truly we ought
to be such as must seek for the profit of all men. In the mean time let us
know that our whole life is unprofitable, and that we are woorthelye
condemned of sluggishnes, until every one of us do frame our lives
according to the calling, and commandment of God. Whereupon it follows
that their busying of themselves does profit nothing at all, which rashlye
take this or that kind of life in hand, and have no regard to the
commandment of God. B. It is not therefore as S. Paul says, Romans 9
neither in the willer nor in the runner, but in the mercy of God, both that
any man is called to the kingdom of God, and also that he brings forth
fruit in the same. Let us therefore commend our selves unto him, when we go
about to frame our lives, that he may govern us with his counsel.

2. And when the agreement was made with the laborers for a penny a day, he
sent them into his Vineyarde.

And when the agreement was made C. Some very subtillye understand this
place as though Christ should discern or sonder the Jews from the Gentiles.
For they say that the Jews were called the covenant being made at the first
hour, because the Lord had promised everlasting life unto them under a
condition, if they fulfilled the law: but that in calling of the Gentiles
there was no condition made, at the least of works, because salvation was
offered unto them freelye in Christ. But all such subtle expositions are
unsavory, because the Lord did not make any difference in the covenant or
condition, but only in time, because that they which came into the vineyarde
not long before the evening, received the like reward with the first. No man
has at any time gotten salvation by his merits.
For although we know that God in time past promised in the law to the Jews
the reward of works, we know notwithstanding that this wanted effect,
because there was never no man that God gave salvation by his merits. Answer.
Surely he did it to the end he might teach that the last are had in as great
estimation and honor, without injury done to any man, as if they had been
called at the first. For speaking properly, he owes nothing to any man, and by
his right he requires of us, which are bound unto him, whatsoever we are able
to do. But because he does freelye give unto us the reward, he is said to
condition for those works, which are due unto him. Hereupon also it comes,
that under the name of a reward, he vouchsafes to bestow the crown, which
notwithstanding he freely gives unto us. To conclude, that he might show we
have no cause to quarrel or contend with God, if he make them partakers of the
same honor that we have, which came a great while after us, he borrowed a
similitude of the common manner of men, who first condition of the reward,
and then send the workmen to their labor. For a penny a day. The latin text
for a penny has denarius, which is a kind of Roman coin, worth a groate,
that is three french shillinges and six pence, as Guilielmus Budaeus
supposes. And it is likely that this was the reward in those days of a days
labor. That which is contained in the third, fourth and fifth verses,
pertains to the same effect that the other does going before.

6 And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found other standing idle,
and said unto them why stand ye here all the day idle?

And about the eleventh hour.A. We have showed already that by this hour he
understands the end of the day. M. We must here note by ye way that the
workmen do not run of their own volun. tarry will into the vineyard, Idle^
are ^^
but are call- and sent by the goodman of the house. For he sends not nor
calls idle lords and prelates, which fly as ^auens to the carrian: but
laborers: as concerning the which matter, read the ninth Chapter going before.

8. And when even was come, the lord of the vineyarde says unto his
stevvarde: call the laborers, and give them their hire, beginning at the last
until the first.

And when even was come. C. In that the good man of the house commands to
begin at the last, there is no mystery to be sought for, as though God would
crown the first, which by order of time are last. For this interpretation
should be far disagreeing from the doctrine of Paul, which says: We which
shall live and shall remain in the coming of the Lord, 1. T^
shall not come ere they which sleep. But Christ here appointed and contrary
order: because otherwise he could not express that which hereafter he adds,
saying, that the first murmured because more was not given unto them
Moreover, he does not affirm, neither is it his meaning that this murmuring
shall be in the last day, but he only denies that there shall be any cause of
murmuring then. pros^ is a ^sed (...) per^ supp^ fayn^ speak^ man ^ther.
For ye figure called prosopopaeia which he brings in, does not a little
manifest this doctrine, that the liberality of God is not subject to any
complaints and murmuringes of men, when he bestows upon the unworthy without
their merit, great rewards. They therefore had a vain ymagination, which
thought that the Jews were touched in these words, which were malicious and
envious toward the Gentiles. For it were an absurd thing to have such made
equal in reward to the sons of God. But this wickedness does not belong to
the faithful to murmr against God. ^aythful (...) mur^ against
But truly this is the simple sense and meaning of this place, that it is in
the hands and choice of God (seeing that he does defraud no man of his just
reward) to give them an undeserved recompense, which he called late: that the
first might be last and the last first.

15. Is it not lavvfull for me to do as me lists with mine own goods? Is
thine eye evil because mine is good?

Is it not lavvfull. A. By these words he declares, that the gentleness and
liberality of God cannot justly be reproved of any man, although he give rich
rewards to the unworthy and undeserving.

Is thine eye evil? E He put the eye for the mind: for malice pertains to
the mind, and not to the corporal eye. As if he should have said: Art thou
therefore grieved, because thou see me gentle toward those whom it pleases
me?

16. So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be called but
fevve be chosen.

So the last shall be first. C. Christ does not now join the Jews to the
Gentiles as in another place neither the reprobate which swerue from the faith,
to the elect which persevere and continue: so that the sentence which some add
unto this, does in no point agree with the same.

Many are called, but fevve. C. The purpose of Christ is only to show that as
every man is called before another, so he ought more cherefully to run: and
then to exhort all men to modesty, least they prefer them selves before
another, but that they admit and give way one to another to come to the common
reward. The Apostles were seen to take unto them selves some great and
excellent thing, because they were the first fruits of the whole Church:
neither did Christ deny but that they should sit as Judges to judge the
twelve tribes of Israel: but least any ambition or vain trust in them selves
should make them proud, they were also to be admonished that others which
should be called a great while after them, should be fellows and partakers
with them of the same glory, because God is bound to no man, God is bound to
no man.
but calls every one whom it pleases him of his free mercy, and being
called, he gives them what reward seems him good. A. This is the simple and
bare exposition of the parable set before us, the which more safely may be
followed, then standing upon every part to fayn and invent more matters which
are not according to the mind of Christ. So the parable of the steward, in the
sixtene of Luke, is not set before us to be observed and followed in all
points, that we also should deceive and begile our masters: but only the
industrye of the steward is commended unto us to be followed, which so carefully
provided for himself, and that by his masters goods: and because so wittily
he had found out that which was best for him self. If any man now should
curiously search, and go about to teach what the debtors, what the book of
accomptes, the oil, the wheat, and measure signified in that parable: that
man should easyly decline from the purpose of Christ, and should follow his
own inventions and vain comentes, and should also offend the Church and not
teach it. For these similitudes are not set forth before us to the end they
should be observed in all points. For Paul also compares Adam and Christ
together, and says, Romans 5.
that Adam was a tipe and figure of Christ: when as notwithstanding Adam left
unto us, for our inheritance, sin and death, but Christ life and
righteousness.

17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples aside in the
way, and said unto them.

And Jesus going up to Jerusalem. B. Now our Savior Christ does more
plainly preach and speak of his death and passion to his disciples. M. For
now the time of his passion was at hand, the time of darkness and offense: and
this was the last journey that he made to Jerusalem.

But the disciples which followed him were astonished and afraid: Mark. 10.
for he assending to Jerusalem wont before them. Therefore although they were
admonished and told before, what the end of the Lord should be, yet
notwithstanding because that, which he had often spoken, did profit them
nothing at all, he now repeteth the whole sum again from the beginning to
the ending, and exhorts them to constancy, least they should fall so soon as
they were tempted. But he confirms them by two manner of ways: for he
foreshewing that which should come, does not only guard and fortefie them,
least a sudden mischief, and unlooked for should cause them to faynte: but
also by the offense of the cross he sets before them a show of his deity,
least that a sudden onset should discourage them, they being persuaded that
he is the son of God, and therefore the conqueror of death. The second way,
by the which he does confirm them, is of the resurrection which should shortly
follow. A And truly, this exhortation was very necessary for them. C. For,
because they saw by experience before, that he had grievous adversaries at
Jerusalem, they go with Christ, not only afeard, but also greatly
astonished. They therefore rather wisshed that he would seek to be quiet in
some bye way or corner without danger, then willingly to put him self into
the hands of such cruel enemies. But although this fear might by many means
be reprehended as ungodly, yet notwithstanding in that they followed Christ,
they show a sign of great obedience and piety. It had (truly) been far
better, cherefullye, and without sorrow to run and make haste to what soever
the son of God would have led the^: but their reverence deserves great
praise, in that they rather seek to venture them selves then to forsake him.
M. Our Evangelist Mathewe says here that he assended or went up to
Jerusalem, because it stood upon an bye ground.

Took the twelve. C. It might seem strange, seeing fear had invaded them al,
insomuch that they were without consolation, why he makes the twelve only
privy to his secret purpose. It is likely that he did therefore hide his death
and keep it secret, because he would not have it spread abroad before the
time. Furthermore, because he did not look for any fruit or profit of his
admonition out of hand, he thought it better to commit the same to a few,
which afterward might be witnesses of it. For as the seed which is cast into
the earth does not by and by grow and ware grieve, even so we know ye Christ
had spoken many things to his Apostles, which by and by brought not forth
fruit. But and if he had spoken these words generally in the ears of all me^,
it might have come to pass, that many for fear would have fled from him, and
would have made his secrets common to all men. So contemptible was the death
of Christ that he seemed rashly to bring the same upon him Therefore he speaks
to his Apostles in secret, that they afterward (as we showed before) might
be witnesses.

18. Behold we go up to Hierosale^, and the son of man shall be betrayed unto
the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death.

Behold, we go up to Jerusalem. M. Here we see how patiently he bears the
imperfection of his disciples: he had twice before showed them of these
things: and had exhorted them in all points to deny them selves, to the
sufferance of the cross, and to the following of him, and although he finds
them as yet carnal and weak, yet notwithstanding he does not reiecte them,
or more sharply reprove them, but foretells them of that which should
shortly come to pass, saying:

And the son of man shall be. C. Hereby we perceive that Christ was armed with
divine fortitude to ouercom and vanquish the terrors of death, who wittingly
and willingly makes haste to subdue the same. For why does he take his way,
no man compelling him to suffer the most shameful death of the cross, but
only because the invincible power of the spirit, did subdue fear and al
humain affections? A. So he says in another place: The prince of this world
comes, and has naught in me. John
But that the world may know that I love the father. And as the father gave me
a commandment, even so do I. B. Therefore he goes now to take this
punishment willingly upon him, which before he oftentimes fled: because now his
hour was come. After this manner all the children of God behave themselves, In
all things they follow and obey the commandments of God, (...) fortitude
(...) faith^
they abide constant, and their minds do not fainte in the works of God, but
they rather go forward cherefullye and boldly. A. Of the which matter we have
Paul for an example, who, when the brethren did beseech that he would not go
up to Jerusalem, answered after this manner: What do ye weepinge and vexing
mine heart? I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem
for the name of ye Lord Jesus. ^es. 21.
C. The Evangelist Luke adds saying: And all things shall be fulfilled
which were written by the prophets, ^e. 18.
as concerning the son of man. Therefore Christ did not only foreshew
those things that were at hand but he adds also a lesson, namelye, that
those things which the Prophets had written must be fulfilled in the son of
man. For this was an excellent remedy to overcome temptacion, to know the very
marks and token in the ignominy of the Cross, by the which the Prophets did
sign the promised author of salvation. Herevppon also they might know that
nothing came by chance, but that all things were certainlye determined and
appointed before of God. And there is no doubt, but that the Lord did also
declare out of the Prophets what manner of fruit of his death they should look
for. For the Prophets do not only teach that Christ shall suffer: but they
add also the cause, namelye, that he might reconcile ye world unto God. The
Angel brought this fore warninge into ye women's minds after the resurrection,
when he said: He is risen, ^^ke 24.
he is not here: Remember how he spoke unto you when he was yet in Galile,
saying: that the son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified and the third day rise again. And Christ himself
said unto his Disciples: These are the words which I spoke unto you: ^^ke 24.
while I was with you: that all must needs be fulfilled which were written of
me in ye Law of Moses, and in the Prophets and in the Psalms.

19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and to be scourged,
and to be crucified: and the third day he shall rise again.

And shall delliuer him to the Gentiles C. In ye our savior does more nerelye
declare the circumstances, he sets forth a more plain documente and
instruction of his deity. For as he was man he could not conjecture that
after he should be condemned of the hye Priests and Scribes, he should be
delivered to the Gentiles, and be spitted upon, and reprochfullye handeled,
whipped, and at the last hanged on the Cross. M. And it is well known that
ye Roman power did adiudge him that punishmente, and that it did appoint him
that death which at that time was most cruel and ignominious. C. We must
also note, that although the Lord knew the infirmity of his Disciples, yet
notwithstanding he would not hide this grievous stomblinge block of offense.
For there could be nothing worse at that time to strike and overthrow the
minds of the godly, than to see the whole order of the Church against
Christ: yet notwithstanding he does not spare by deceyuinge their
infirmitye, but truly declaringe the matter it self, he sheeweth a mean to
overcome temptacion, namely that they should certainlye look for a
resurrection: for he adds, And the third day he shall rise again But
because it was necessary for death to go before, he places in the mean time
their triumph and reioysinge in hope. A. Read the sixtene Chapter goinge
before. Luke. 18.
The Evangelist Luke adds: And they understood none of these things, and
this saying was hidden from them, and they understood not what was spoken.
What this dulnes was, not to understand those things which were spoken plainly
and familliarlye, not of no mystical or secret matter, our Savior Christ
told them. But it shall be necessary also also here to repete that which we
spoke before namelye, yt they were kept in so gross ignorance, because when
they had feigned to themselves a joyful and happy success, they did count it
for a great absurdity yt Christ should dye so opprobrious a death. Blindness
comes of false persuasion.
Whereby we gather how greatly a false imagination does be witch and deceive
men. Wherefore let us beware least we being entangled by any deceites, and
feigned persuasions, do wax blind in the clear light. We must also note
that although those admonitions did nothing profit the Apostles at the very
instante yet notwithstanding it did profit afterward. For all things being
finished they began to call to mind these things and many other which they
had heard before of their master, insomuche that at the length they were not
unprofitable, although at the first they did profit nothing at all. Even so
when we profit not at the first sight in the word of God, we must not give
over, for the word may have his force in due time. Also there are left many
infirmities in saints that they may know how that salvation comes only from
God.

20. Then came to him the mother of Zebedes children: with her sons,
worshippinge him, and desiringe a certain thing of him.

Then came to him the mother Bu. This historye declares how corrupt the nature
of man is, and what flesh seeks in the Gospel or the kingdom of God. C. It
contains certainly an evident spectacle of the vanity of man. For it teaches
that ambition or some other vice is always wrapped in a right and godly zeal,
in so much that they which follow Christ have respect unto that which they
ought not. For they go far beside the mark, which being not content with
Christ alone, seek for this and that without Christ and his promises. Neither
is it enoughe in the beginning to addicte the mind simplely unto Christ,
Perseuera^ce. Impuritye.
except the same manner of purity continue always: because oftentimes wicked
affections crepe in, in the midst of the race, by the which we are drawn a
part. For it is likely that the two sons of Zebede did give themselves
severely at the first unto Christ: but when they see that they are in so small
favor with him, and hear mention made of the kingdom at hand, they are by
and by carried to a wicked desire. If this thing happened to two of the chief
Disciples, how carefully and circumspectly ought we to walk, if we mean not
to decline from the right way, specially when as any plausible occasion does
offer it self, we must take heed least the desire of honor do infecte the
affection of piety and godliness. The Euangeliste Mathewe says that the wife
of Zebede came and desired that her two sons might sit in the highest seats
of ye kingdom of Christ. Mark says that the two sons themselves made this
petition. His words are these: And James and John the sons of Zebede came
unto him saying, Mar^^
Master we would that thou should do for us whatsoever we desire. He
said unto them, what would ye that I should do for you? They said unto him
grant unto us etc. C. But it is likely yt their mother made this petition,
because they were ashamed to do it. But it may be gathered yt this was their
desire because Christ made ye answer unto them and not unto ye mother.

Worshipping him and desiring C. In that the mother as a suter declares that
she would demand somewhat, before she declares her mind, and the sons
themselves (as appears by Mark) do after a sort condition that he shall
grant whatsoever they ask: they declare by this fearful and doubtinge
insinuation, that their own conscience does accuse them of an unlawful
demand. It is manifest therefore that the Evangelist studiouslye and wyselye
went about to describe the rashness of the two sons of Zebede, not only in
the petition it self, but also in the manner and form of making the petition.
First of all they go about as it were to blind the Lord by making a
promise, saying, we will that thou do for us whatsoever we ask. They show
not what they will demand, but they demand the assente and agreemente of
Christ to their petition, before they make it, because afterward it should not
be lawful for him deny. And because they say not simplely, That which we are
about to demand, but, whatsoever we shall demand: Christ therefore
answers, What will ye have me to do for you? not allowinge their rashness but
biddinge them to declare what they demand. As if he should have said, It
may be unreasonable and not to be granted which ye go about to ask.

21. And he says unto her, what will thou? She said unto him: grant that
these my two sons, may sit, the one on the right hand, and the other on the
left, in thy kingdom.

And he says unto her. A. Namely to the mother of John and James, whom
Mathewe reports to make the petition.

Grant that these C. This was worthy of praise in the sons of Zebede to hope
for the kingdom of Christ, no part whereof as yet appeared. They see that
he is contemptible under the base form of a servant: yea they see that he
is despised of the world, and subject to many reproaches: yet notwithstanding
they persuade themselves that in short time he shall be a king of great power,
because he had so taught them. M. They had heard that the keys of the
kingdom of heaven were promised unto Peter, then that the twelve Apostles
should sit upon twelve seats to judge the twelve tribes of Israel, and that
the resurrection of the Lord should be shortly, after the which they thought
that the majesty of his kingdom should follow: insomuch yt they thought yt
the time was now come to seek for superioritye in the kingdom of heaven: A.
the which kingdom (as they dreamed) should be carnal and of this world. M. To
sit at the right or left hand of Christ in the kingdom, is nothing else
than to have superiority in his kingdom. We have here truly and excellent
example of faith: ^e corrup^ of man's ^t.
but hereby we perceive how cas^y the pure seed, so soon as it is sown in
our hearts, is corrupted: because they imagined to themselves an earthly
kingdom, and were by and by foolishly fallen to covet the chiefest seats in
the same Therefore sei^g this wicked desire did flow of the general beginning
of faith, which of it self deserved not a little praise, we must pray unto
the Lord that he will not only open the eyes of our mind but also yt he will
always direct them, and make them behold the true mark. We must pray also
that he will not only give us says, but also that he will keep the same from
all mirsture.

22. But Jesus answered and said: ye wot not what ye ask. Are ye able to
drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptim,
that I am baptized with? They said unto him we are.

But Jesus answered and said M. Christ here after a sort condemns their
ambition, by the which they desired more then became them: and also their
foolish imagination of a carnal and earthlye kingdom. C. For instead of the
heavenly kingdom of Christ they had conceived a vain opinion. As touching the
first, yt is to say ambition, whosoever, Ambition.
being not content with the free grace of God des^ereth to excel, goes beyond
his bounds, and rashlye intrudeth himself farther than it does become him,
the same is unthankful unto God. It is now to absurd and perverse a thing
to measure the spiritual kingdom of Christ according to our fleshly sense
and imagination. And truly, look how much ye more vain speculations do please
the nature of man, so much the more they ought to be avoided: even as we see
the Books of subtle deceivers to be replenished with such vain and feigned
imaginacions.

B. These two Disciples craved temporal dignitye which lasts but for a time:
to whom a spiritual and everlasting dignity was promised, but not without
the sufferinge of persecution. For it is not meet that the servant should
be in better case than the master: but it is necessary that they which will
reign with Christ that they also dye with him.

Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of B. The Greek text, for
this word (cup) understands all manner of drinkinge vessels, by a more
general word.

E. Now our savior Christ to the end he might reprehende ambition, and
reclayme his Disciples from a wicked desire, sets before them the cross,
and all kind of calamity which all the children of God must suffer:
Affliction pertayneth to all the children of God.
as if he should have said* have ye so much ease, and are ye so free from the
present war, that ye provide already for the glory of the triumph? For if
they had been seriouslye busyed and occupied about the exercises of their
calling, they should never have had this fond ymagination come in their minds.
Affliction is a bridle for ambition.
Wherefore by this sentence our Savior Christ commands them which triumph
before the victory, to be occupied in the exercise and busynes of godlynes.
And certainlye by this bridle ambition is very well stayed: because such is our
condition, so long as we are pilgrims in this world, yt it ought to shake of
all vain delights. We are beset on every side with a thousand dangers: one
while the enemy by subtle and craftye means sets upon us, another while he
sets upon us by open war. Is not he worse then mad, which among so many
deaths, carelessly pleases and delights him self in depainting out the
victory? The Lord commands his Disciples to be certarne and sure of the
victory, and to triumph in the midst of death: because otherwise they should
not be hold enough to fight manfully and boldlye: but it is one thing to
prepare them selves to fight cheerfully, and to endeavor them selves wholly
thereunto, upon hope of the reward set before them, and it is another thing to
be unmindful of the war, to forsake the enemy, to neglect all danger* and
to triumph before the victory, the which should not be looked for before the
battle were fought. Moreover this untimely making of have, does very much
draw men from their vocation. For eue^ as the more cowardly that a man is in
ye war, the more he seeks for the pray and spoil: even so in the kingdom
of Christ, none desire more the superiority then they which seek to avoid all
labor and pain. Our Savior Christ therefore does not without good cause
appoynte those soldiers, their statio^ and abiding place which they shall not
pass, whose minds are elevated and puffed up with vain glory. But this is
the sum of his words, 2. Ty^
yt none has the crown prepared for him, but he which fights lawfully: and
that none shall be partaker of the life and kingdom of Christ, but he which is
a partaker of his passion and death. Romans ^
M. Christ therefore asks them, if they could suffer the cross and punishment
which he should suffer. For so he means by the drinking of the cup which he
should drink of, and by the baptising of the baptime wherewith he should be
baptized. C For we know that by Baptism ye faithful enter into ye denying of
the^ selves, to the crucifying of the old man, and to the bering of the cross.
But it is to be doubted whether ye Lord do draw this word cup, to the mystery
of his supper or no, but because his suppper was not then instituted and in
use, it is better to take it more simply for ye measure of afflictions which ye
Lord appoints to every man. For, because it pertains unto him to lay upon
every man his burden as it seems him best, eue^ as the goodman of the house
deuideth equal portions amongst those that are his, therefore he is said to give
the cup to drink. A. Whereupon our savior Christ says in another place: O my
father, if this cup may not pass from me, Math ^
except I drink of ye same, thy will be don. Also he says to Peter in another
place: John. ^
Shall I not drink of ye cup which my father has given me? B. He calls the
same also Baptism, as we have showed already, for it was even as a washing away
of death, and a purging to everlasting life. The same Metaphor he used also in
another place, Luke. ^
as when he said: I must be baptized with a Baptime: and how am I payned till
it be ended? B. But the metaphor of the cup in the Scriptures is often times
taken in both parts. For certainly God has measured to every man both
adversity and prosperity, and he shall drink his portion whether he will or
no. It is taken in evil part, as when it is said: Psalm ^
storm and tempest shall be their portion to drink. It is taken in good part,
as when it is said: Psalm. ^
The Lord is my portion and my cup.

C. Moreover in the words of Christ there is not a little consolation, to
mittigate and assuage the sharpenes of the cross, when as Christ in the same
joins him self unto us For what can be more excellent then for us to have
all things common with the son of God? for so it comes to pass that those
things which seem deadly unto us, do turn to our salvation and life. But he
which desires to be altogether free from the Cross, how shall he be counted
among the disciples of Christ, which refuses to be subject to his Baptism?
for this is nothing else then to refuse to be instructed in the first
principles. But now let us learn so often as we hear mention made of
Baptism, to remember that we are baptized upon this condition, and to this
end, that we should willingly bear the cross. A. For all they which will
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

They say unto him, we are C. In that James and John do so careleslye boaste
that they are able and ready to drink of the cup, their carnal confidence is
perceived: for when we are out of danger, we think we can do all things.
These two disciples persuade them selves that they are able to do much by
their own strength, and that without God, forgetting their own imbecilitie.
But at the length it came to pass that their rashness was bewrayed. For when
they saw that the Lord was apprehended in the garden, ^h. 26.
all fled away and left him alone. Notwithstanding this was commendable in
them that they offered them selves readyly to bear the cross.

23. He said unto them: ye shall drink in deed of my cup, and be baptized
with the Baptime that I am baptized with. But to sit on my right hand and
on my left, is not mine to give: but it shall chance unto them, that it is
prepared for of my father.

He said unto them: ye shall drink. C. Now he opens unto them and to all
other the state and condition of his kingdom, and shows what shall come to
pass as concerning the same, that they might arm them selves with patience:
because by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. (...).
14.
For this is the kingdom of Christ: and he which is the head in this kingdom
testifyeth by his example, that the same is necessary. He says my cup, as if
he should say, By my example suffer persecution. Or else he says, my cup, to
bring a consolation to them to bear the cross willinglye: as if he should
have said, I am a companion in the cross with you, and you with me. Also
under the person of these two men he speaks unto all his servants
generallye. For although many faithful men do dye naturally, and not a violent
or blouddy death, yet notwithstanding it is common to all men, as S. Paul
teaches, Romans 8. Psalm. 4.4. Romans 8.
to be fashioned according to the image of Christ. So that we are all the day
long as sheep appointed to be slain. But under the name of Cross the
Scripture comprehends all kind of sorrow and affliction, as bonds,
prisonment, scourgings, banishment, ignominye, and such like. These two
disciples were not exercised in these things, which (truly) do tame the
flesh, and the affections of the flesh, and do bridle sin also.

But to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is. A. What he means by
these words read the one and twenty Verse goinge before.

Is not mine to give C. By this answer our savior Christ derogateth nothing
from himself, but only shows that his father has not enjoined unto him this
office, that he should assign to any man his proper seat in the kingedome
of heaven. He is come truly to bring all those that are his into everlasting
life: but it is sufficient unto us, and we ought there with to be content
that the inheritance purchased with his blood abides for us For how much one
shall excel another in glory it is neither our parts to seek, neither was it
the will of God that Christ should reveal ye same unto us, but would have the
same deferred even until the last revelation. Now let us note the purpose of
Christ: for he disputes not here of his own power, but he only shows
wherefore he was sent of the father, and what is agreeable to his calling. And
therefore he makes a difference between the manner of teaching committed unto
him, and the secret purpose of God. Even as when he says in another place,
as concerning the day of Iudgemenr, Mark. 13.
But of that day and hour knows no man no not the Angels which are in
heaven, neither the son himself save the father only. A very profitable
admonition yt we might learn soberlye to be wise, and that we might not go
about to burst out into the secret mysteries of God: and specially that we
should not be to curious in searching out the state of the life to come: for it
has not yet appeared what we shall be, 1. John. 3.
neither shall it appear until such time as God has made us like unto
himself.

But it shall chance unto them that it is M. These two presumed to take the
prerogative of glory unto them selves, because they were a kin unto Christ: but
Christ teaches that it was not meet ye the glory of the kingdom of Heaven
should be given for that cause. He teaches therefore that the glory of the
life to come must be looked for by the only grace of the merciful God, which
choseth his elect without any respect of works or merits. Wherefore in the
day of Judgment he shall say, Matthew. 25.
Come ye blessed of my father possess the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. Ephesi. 1.
And ye Apostell Paul says, Even as he chose us in himself before the
foundation of the world was laid.

So that we must note that there is not an equality appointed among the
sons of God, after that they are received into the heavenly glory: but that
degree of honor is promised to every man, to the which they are ordained by the
eternal counsel and purpose of God.

24. And when the ten heard this, they disdayned at the two brethren.

And when the ten heard this. BV. Truly says the holy Prophet of God, that
the heart of man is wicked and inscrutable. Jeremy. 17.
For we may see even in the disciples a certain bottomless pit of errors, and
yt when one vice is cut of, another is in his place, yea, and even those things
which we thought cut of to florishe again: For even now the Lord had stayed
the ambition of his two disciples: and by and by he is constrained to drive the
same out of the other ten disciples breasts, and not only that, but the
pestilent disease of envy also. M. For whereas the other ten are said to
disdain the two disciples which were brethren, it was not because they did
hate this ambition, A. but because they them selves also being led by ambition,
did seek to excel in the kingdom of Christ. M. So that this disdain did
arise of the ambition which lay secret in their hearts. C. The Evangelist Luke
does seem to refer this contention of the disciples unto another time. But
whosoever does wisely consider that two and twenty Chapter of Luke shall find
that the words which were spoken at diverse times, (ye order being neglected)
were knit together. Therefore the contention for the superiority whereof Luke
makes mention. had his original hereupon, because the sons of Zebede did
covet to have the chief seats in the kingdom of Christ. And yet
notwithstanding the indignation and disdain of the other ten was not to be
allowed: for seeing the ambition in the two brethren was grievously reprehended,
insomuch that they went away from Christ with shame, what did it hurt the other
ten that they had foolishly desired that which they had not gotten? But the
Lord went about by this occasion to have the disease which lurked in them to
be revealed: for there was not one of the^ which willingly would give place to
another, but every man in his heart hoped to excel the rest: and so it came to
pass that one of them enuyed another, and contended one with another. Wherefore
if this vice were in rusticall, rude, and base men, and if it bursted forth in
them upon a light, or almost upon no occasion, how much more ought we to
take heed when there is sufficient matter to kindle the secret fire? We do
see by experience how ambition does burn in the greatness of power and
honor, Am^^stra^ the (...) God.
and it casts out flames far and wide, were it not that the modesty of the
spirit did restrain from heaven the natural pride which cleaves unto man.
M. We do see how great ambition and pride remained in the sons of Jacob,
the twelve patriarchs, Gene^
and how greuouslye they took it to have their brother Iosephe preferred before
them. A. Let us therefore so much as we may turn our selves away from this
pestilent disease ambition.

25. But Jesus called them unto him and said: ye know that the Princes of the
nations have dominion over them. And they that are great men exercise authority
upon them.

But Jesus called them unto him M. Christ ca^ in no wise abide the discord and
disagreement of those that are his: therefore he calling his Apostles unto
him, cutteth of again the root and occasion of the evil seekinge to make
them all of one mind.

C. In that he calls them unto him to the end he might secretly
reprehende them, we gather that saying they were ashamed of their desyer, that
they did not openly complain, but that there was a secret murmuring amongst
them, and that every man privily did prefer himself before another.

Ye know that the Princes C. The Lord according to his accustomed goodness
and mercy does not altogether reiecte and condemn the Disciples striving for
the superiority, but bears with their infirmity so much as might be. The
which example Paul also commends unto us saying, ^^m. 15.
We which are strong ought to bear ye infirmity of those that are weak, and
not to please our selves. But he caryeth them from those base things, to
things more excellent, taking from them both the error, and affection also of
ambition. And the Disciples for their part do very well harken to the counsel
of the Lord: that in them also they might have an example of perfection to
follow, which always allege for their excuse the errors and infirmities of
the Apostles. For so does the infirmity of ye Apostles please some, (...) fall
^th the A^tles, but ^^irse not ^th them a^e.
but let also their aptnes to be taught, and obedience please them in like
manner. Moreover Christ does not in this place generally show how deadlye and
pestiferous a disease ambition is, but does simplely admonish that there is
nothing more foolish than to contend for nothing. For he sheeweth that there
was no superiority (which was the cause of their contencion) in his kingdom.
They are deceived therefore which extend this saying without exception to all
the godly, when as Christ only by the matter it self teaches yt the Apostles
were ridiculous which disputed about the degree and excellency of power and
honor in their order: because the office of teachinge to the which they were
appointed, has no affinitye with the Empyres of the world. We grant truly
that this doctrine does extend it self as well to private men, as to Kings
and Magistrates: because no man is worthy to be counted of the flock of
Christ but he which has so profited under the master of humillitye, that he
will arrogate nothing to himself, but submits himself altogether to
embrace brotherly love. This is certainlye true: but the purpose of Christ (as
we said before) was to make a difference between the spiritual regimente of
his Church, and the Empyres of this world, least the Apostles should bring unto
the^ selves Courtlike graces. For all men as they are peerless, and are loved
of Kings, so they come to wealth and honor. But Christ has put the pastors
of his Church in aucthoritye, Mynisters of Christ.
not they which rule, but they which minister: B. as if Christ should have
said, You which are Apostles are called, that ye might declare and show forth
the kingdom of Heaven: this your state and condition, is not like unto the
state of the Princes of this world. Excellent is the dignitye of kings: but
there is a great difference between my mynisters and kings Kings truly do
serve neither ought they to be of a proud mind, but to submit themselves unto
the Lord. But they differ in condition of life: boothe of them ought to be
humble: but the kingdom must otherwise be governed than yt spiritual
gouernemente of the Church, A. of the which you are made ministers. C. And
thus the opinion of the Anabaptists is confuted, Anabaptists
which abolishe kings and Magistrates from the Church, because Christ says
that his Disciples shall not be like unto them: when as the comparison is not
here made between kings and profane me^, but between their duties. Moreover
Christ had not respect so much to the persons of men, as he had to the state
of the Church. For it might be that he which was Lord and ruler of a town or
Cittye, might also for necessities sake, take upon him ye office of teaching.
But ye purpose of Christ was to declare what the office of the Apostles would
bear, and what was contrary to the same. Ephesi. 4.
And S. Paul describing the gouernmente of the Church, does so rehearse diverse
ministeries, that he makes the dignity of the Apostellship to excel ye office
of a pastor. 1. Timo. 1. Titus..2
And no doubt he commands Tymothe and Titus, by the commandment of God
to govern others with authority. We answer that if every thing be wayed
wholly, Answer.
we shall find that kings do not rain iustlye and lawfullye except they
serve: in this notwithstanding the Apostolical office differs from
woorldlye government, that Kings and Magistrates are not by their servitude
let to rule and govern, or to rain with great pomp and majesty over their
subjects and to excel them. So David, Ezechias, and others like unto these,
being the voluntary servant of all men, yet notwithstanding they were adorned
and beutifyed with ye Scepter, with ye Diadem, and Throne, and with other
excellent things appertayning to kings and Princes. But the government of the
Church will admit no such thing: Lordship pertayneth not to Pastors.
because Christ will have Pastors to do nothing else but minister, and to
abstain altogether from Lordship. Here also we must note that he speaks
more of the matter it self than of the affection. Christ seperateth his
Apostles from the manner and order of kings, because there is a great
difference between the Kingly state, and the Apostolical office. Humility
pertayneth to all estates.
Therefore seeing it becomes both of them to be humble, the Apostles must
always have regard and see what manner of gouerninge of the Church the Lord
has appointed. B. To be short Christ did not here command that there should
be no King or Magistrate (as many falsely have interpreted this place) but he
exhorts those that are the ministers of his word to beware of ambition. C.
As touching the letter, Matthew our Evangelist has, They that are great men
exercise authority over them: and Luke has: They that have authority are
called gracious: yet notwithstanding all in one sense: as if he should have
said that Kings had plenty and abundance of all things, and that they have
great riches, insomuche that they may be gracious and liberal. Whervppon they
are called in the Hebrewe tongue Nediuim, Liberal pertayn^ kings.
of giving liberally to all men: because tribute is paid them to no other end
than to maintain their honor. Certain kings also of Egipte usurped this word,
and were called Euergetes, for they delighted much to be gracious and
beneficial. And the Apostle Paul said, The Magistrate is the mynister of God
for thy wealth. Romans ^
Therefore the Magistrates office is to rule, and in rulinge to do good, namely
to maintain the innocente, and to punish the giltye and malefactor.

26. It shall not be so among you: But whosoever will be great among you, let
him be your minister.

It shall not be so among you, C. There is no doubt but that Christ here
touches ye foolish imagination by the which he saw his Apostles to be
deceived. You do foolishly (says he) and amiss feign unto your selves a
kingdom, the which I abhor. If therefore ye seek to do me faithful
service, ye must meditate and study upon another manner of matter, namely to
serve and love one another.

Whosoever will be great among you, M. Our savior Christ might seem here
to grant unto his Apostles superiority.

C. But he speaks improperlye, commaundinge him to be a minister, which
would be great. For ambition will not suffer that any man should submit
himself to his brethren. We grant truly that they flatter after a servile
manner which aspyre unto honor, ^erers ^claime the^ ^es seruau^ (...) when they
^ue to ho^re.
but their intent is nothing less than to serve. But the meaning and purpose
of Christ is not obscure: for, because every man is given to love himself, he
pronounces that ye affection must be otherwise transposed: as if he should
have said, Let this only be your greatness, excellency, and dignitye, to
submit your selves unto your brethren: let this also be your superioritye, to
be the servants of all men.

M. For the greatest honor in ye Church of Christ is that every man should
mynister and serve. Therefore he which is called in the Church to be a Pastor
and governor of the Church, must know that he has not obtaynde a Lordship but
the office of a minister or servant. Therefore the Apostle Peter prescribing
to ministers the duties of life, ^eter. 5
says: Reign not as Lords over the parishes, but see that ye be an ensample
to the flock.

And the Apostle Paul: Let a man thus wise esteem us as the mynisters of
Christ, ^or. 4.
and dispensators of the mysteries of God. They therefore which are chosen to a
Bishopric have gotten the mynistery and office of a seruante, ^hip per^^h not
to ^ps.
not of Lordship, not of superiority, not of principallity. Therefore Peter
speaking of Judas says, ^^s. 1.
He was numbered with us, and had obtained fellowship in this ministration.

27. And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant.

And whoso will be chief among you A. This is all one in effect with the
sentence goinge before. By these words it is euidente and manifest that the
bishop of Rome is not of Christ, Pope is (...) devil, ^f Christ.
but of the world, and of the devil ye Prince of this world. It is a
counterfeyte humilitye which they feign, calling themselves servant of
servants: for indeed they testify yt they covet to be worshipped as the
kings of all kings: but they have ye Lord their judge.

28. Even as the son of man came, not to be mynistred unto, but to minister,
and to give his life a redemption for many.

Even as the son of man Bu. The Lord to his commandment adds his example
to the end he might the more mightily persuade. We must always remember
that the servant is not greater tha^ his master, Math. 10.
neither the disciple above his teacher. Christ speaks here as concerning
the time of his abasinge, of the which S. Paul writes thus: When he was in
the shape of God, he thought it not robbery to be equal with God.
Nevertheless he made himself of no reputacion, taking on him the shape of a
servant, and became like unto men, and was found in his apparel as a man.
He humbled himself, Philip. 2.
and became obedient to death even to the death of the Cross.

Who will refuse this condition saying yt we have the example of our Lord and
master? He behaved himself no otherwise then it became a servant, Romans 15.
yea a servant of men: for he was made the mynister of circumcision for the
truth of God to confirm the promises. Neither did he only declare himself to
be a minister and servant in death but in ye whole race of his life also.

And to give his life also a redemption for many. C. To the end he might
more plainlye prove how far he was from a hye estate, he puts them in
remembrance of his death: as if he should say, Because I have chosen you to
be next unto me in honor, a wicked ambition does inflame your hearts to
rule: but I, to whose example ye ought to frame your lives, came not to
extol my self, or to usurp unto me any kingly majesty, but I rather took
upon me the ignomynye of the Cross, with the base and conte^ned form of the
flesh also. Bu. I am truly the only son of the living God, by whom all
things were made, your Lord and master, the Prince of life, and the
conqueror of death, and the power of Satan's kingdom: yet notwithsta^dinge I
arrogate and take unto me no dignity. For I came for the commodity of all men,
and that I might give my life for sinners. Let therefore all your counsayles
and studies tend to this end* that you seek the health and profit of all
men, and that you abase your selves to the lowest degree. Philip 2. Objection.
C. If any man do obiecte that Christ was therefore exalted that before him
every knee should bow: Answer.
We may easly answer, that the thing which he now speaks is referred to
the time of his abaseing, as we showed a little before. And therefore the
Evangelist Luke adds that he was so conuersaunt among them, as though he had
been a minister. Not that he was inferior unto them either in form, in name,
or in deed: (for he would be always acknowledged of them their Lord and
master) but because he descended from the throne of ye heavenly glory to so
base an estate to take their infirmities upon him, and not only theires but ye
infirmities of all men. Moreover we must remember that there is here a
comparison made of the more, John. 13.
and of the less, as we may read in John: where he says thus, If I your
Lord and master wash your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet. A
redemption for many E. The Greek word signifies properly a price or ransom
by the which captives are delivered.

C. But the mention of death (as we said before) was made to the end the
Disciples might be brought from the false imagination of an earthye kingdom.
Christ our redemption.
Notwithstanding the force and fruit of the same is very aptly expressed, when
that he affirms that his life is a price of our redemption: Whervppon it
follows that we are freelye reconsiled into the favor of God only by the
ransom of Christ's death. E. The Apostle Paul declares what that redemption
is, Ephesi. 1.
namely the remission of sins, In whom (says he) we have redemption by his
blood, Coloss. 1.
even the remission of our sins. And in another place: By whom we have a
redemption by his blood, even the remission of our sins. And ye Apostell
Peter says: 1. Peter. 1.
for so much as ye know how that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things
(as silver and gold) from your vain conversation, which ye received by the
tradition of the fathers: Popish satisfaction, by the redemption of Christ
ouer^owen.
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled. C. So that by
this only word, redemption, all that the Papists brag and prate of their
satisfactions is overthrown. For those things which Christ affirms here of
himself cannot be true, if we be able to bring in and allege any other
price, or any part of a price, that has been paid for the remission of
sins.

To be short: saying ye Christ by his death has made us a peculiar people unto
him self, this submission, whereof he speaks here does so little derogate
from his glory, that it does rather much more set forth the same. For many E.
The Greek word does some what differ from the Lattine. The lattine text has,
for many: The Greek text, for ye multitude. C. But Christ here puts, many,
not definitely for any certain number, but for a great number: because he
opposes or sets himself against many. Romans ^
And in this sense the Apostle Paul takes it when he says: For if through
the sin of one, many be dead: much more plentious upon many was the grace of
God, and gift by grace: which was of one man Jesus Christ. In the which place
Paul speaks not of any certain number of me^, but co^prehe^deth all
ma^kinde. E. The Lord also by this place teaches yt those that are his ought
so to be the servant of all men, that they do not only bestow all that they
have, but their life also, if time and occasion so require. Bu. Not because
they are able to make satisfaction for other men's sins (for that pertayneth
only to Christ) but because they ought so to love and desire the health
and profit of other men, that they should rather dye than forsake their
calling, by ye which they are after a sort bound to me^. John. ^
For a good Sheepeheard gives his life for his sheep. Whereupon the Apostle
Paul writes thus to the Corinthians: 2. Cor^
I will very gladly bestow, and will be bestowed for your souls, though the
more I loved you, the less I am loved again.

29. And as they departed from Hiericho, much people followed him.

And as they departed from Hiericho Bu. The Lord had said before that he
came to save sinners. This saying he now confirms by a certain benefit.
teaching that the sauinge health and benefits of Christ are perceived and
apprehended by a true faith. For therefore the faith of the blind men is
depainted unto us, that thereby also we might learn what our faith is. Much
people follovved. A. This followinge of Christ is often times declared of the
Evangelist: But the more that the time of Christ's glorification drew nere,
the more it is certain, that the people followed him. Whereupon his enemies
alytell before his passion said, ^n 12.
behold all the woorlde goes after him.

30. And behold two blind men sittinge by the way side, when they heard that
Jesus passed by, they cried saying: O Lord thou son of David, have mercy on
us.

And behold two blind men. C. Mark and Luke make mention of this same
history, even as we may gather by the circonstances which do very well agree.
But the disagrement does offend some, because Mark and Mathewe, say that this
miracle was showed upon one, or two blind men, as Christ was going out of the
City: But Luke says it was done before he came into the City: Further more
because Mark an Luke make mention but of one blind man and our Evangelist
Mathewe makes mencio^ of two But forsomuche as this is oftentimes found in
the Evangelists, that in one history the one passes over and omiteth that
which is spoken and declared of the other, and again that which two omit the
third declares, it ought not to seem a new or unwonted thing in this place.
We may truly thus conjecture, yt when Christ drew nere to the City, the blind
man cried out: But when that he was not heard by reason of the noise, he went
and sat him down in the way that leads out of the town, where at the
last he was called of Christ. So that Luke ye Evangelist began truly and
orderly at the beginning, but does not prosecute ye whole narration to ye end
but omitteth the lodging of Christ in ye City: and the other two Evangelists
do only toutche the time which was nerest to the sheweing of the miracle,
omittyng the beginning. And it is a probable conjecture, that as our savior
Christ always goinge about to try the faith of men, did differ them for a
time, even so at this thme he sought to have a proof and trial of this blind
man. Moreover, of the other doubt (whether there were two or one) we may easily
be resolved: For we do se also in an other place that Mark and Luke do make
mention but of the healeling of one Demoniake, or possessed of a deuell, Mark.
5. Luke. 8. Math. 8.
where as Mathewe says that two were healed, even as in this place: And yet
for all that they do not disagree. But rather we may conjecture that by the
example of the first which in the beginning craved the grace and favor of
Christ, the second was also moved to com, being in ye same necessitye. So that
in the beginning of the miracle (of the which time Mark and Luke make
mention) there was but one, but in the end (of the which Mathewe speaks)
there were two. Again it may be that Mark and Luke do make mention but of
one, because in that one ye power of Christ did as much appear as in the
restoringe of sight to two. And certainlye Mark does seem to speak of him
which he best knew for he describes him not only by his own name but by the
name of his Father also saying: Blind Bartimaeus the son of Timaeus sat by
the hye ways side begginge. Mark 10.


Whereupon it follows that seeing his calamity was commonly known to all men,
the miracle was the more certain and wonderful. The reason why Mathewe makes
mencio^ of both, is, for that he was present at the miracle and saw them both
restored to sight. Sitting by the vvayes side. A. Namelye to beg as Mark
and Luke make mention of one of them. R. M. In that therefore ye Jews suffered
these and such other to beg openly, it is an argument that they neglected
the observation of the law, and gave them selves more to the observing of
ceremonies. For they had a special commandment given unto them: as appears
in the book of Deutronomy where it is said: Deuteronomy. 15
Ye shall not suffer any to beg among you. But where faith is decayed,
godlynes, and integritye can not stand. Cried saying. C. This cry was a sign
of an earnest affection.

O Lord thou son of David. C. We said eue^ now, that but one at the first
cried, but when another being in the like necessity heard him cry for help,
he cried also for the same. But these blind men bring no small fame and honor
unto Christ, in crying to him to have mercy upon them. For it must needs be
that they were persuaded that the help and remedy which they neded was in his
hands.

Thou son of David. C. In this the faith of the blind men does appear, that
they acknowledge Jesus to be the Messiah: for the Jews knew that the Messiah
should come of David. They flee therefore for help unto Christ, not only as to
a Prophet, but as to the only author of health which was promised of God. Even
so ought we to think of Christ, and to judge of him according to the
Scriptures, and not according to our own Imaginatio^s.

31. And the people rebuked them, because they should hold their peace. But
they cried the more, saying: have mercy on us O Lord thou son of

And the people rebuked them. C. The people rebuked the blind men, either
because they thought it unseemly for beggars to set Christ a work, as though
it were against his glory to have to do with men of so base estate: either
because Th^^ Sath^^ ^teth, (...) ought (...) pray.
We have need therefore of constancy which may put away all impediments: Yea
the more stomblinge blocks that Satan does cast in our way, the more we
have occasion to pray, even as we see that the blind men, the more they were
stayed, the more they cried. For it follows. A (...) faith, ^tion ^firme.


But they cried the more saying. C. They persevere and abide howsoever the
multitude forbid them: they had therefore a co^stante faith which never
quayleth in temptations. Yea when they knew that their words were odiouse in
the ears of some, yet notwithstanding a fervent desire overcame fear, in
somuche that they cried with the greater vehemencye. Thou son of David have
mercy on us. Eue^ so we must strive against all stays and lets, and manfully
resist them, neither must we make an end until we have overcome them. Pra^
time (...)
B. So shall every man the^ also by true and earnest prayer call for the mercy of
the Lord, when he being oppressed with the like necessitye feels how much he
stands in need of help

32. And Jesus stood still, and called them and said: what will ye that I shall
do to you?

And Jesus stood still. A. The Euangeliste Mark speakinge of one of them only
wrighteth thus: And Jesus stood still and commanded him to be called, Mar^
and they called him that was blind saying unto him. Arise, be of good chere
he calls thee: and he threw away his cloak, and arose, and came to Jesus.
Therefore the Apostles do obey the commandment of the Lord, they call him
that was blind, and encourage him to hope well saying: Be of good chere,
arise, Jesus calls thee, whose help thou crauest with so loud a voice.

By the which words the blind man conceived such a hope, that he casting
aside his cloak, by the which he was defended from could, ran to Jesus. In
the which we must consider the cherefulnes of this blind man, and diligently
note the same. So often as we are called unto Christ, we neither cast of
our cloak, neither do we leap for Joy, nor run to him, but do rather
turn our backs, differ the time, stand still, make excuse, wallowe still in
darkness, and had rather in our fylthy cloak to beg an Alms of this
world then to receive the blessed light of Jesus, which comprehends the
whole state of felicity. If he cast away his clock for Joy of his corporal
sight, what ought we not to cast of to receive and possess Christ the
most comfortable and blessed light?

What will ye that I shall do. M. Christ was not ignoraunte of their
demand, but because it was not known unto the people, that they craved so
great a thing, somuche excellinge human power, thinkinge rather that they
desired some alms at his hands, he therefore asks them what they would have,
to the end they might make open declaration of the same, that is, how great
faith and trust they had in him, whose help they desyered with so great a
cry. For in the qualitye and largenes of the petition, the qualitye and
largenes of their faith appeared also. C. He does therefore very frendlye and
courteouslye demand what they desyere to have done unto them: because he was
determined to grant their petitions. For there is no doubt, but that by the
special motion of the spirit they made their petitions unto him: because, as
the Lord will not have all men to escape their corporal diseases, so also he
will not suffer them to pray. There is a rule prescribed unto us, what, how,
and to what end, we should crave any thing at the hands of God: from the
which rule we may not decline, except the Lord by the secret motion of his
spirit do make us to wish for some special thing: which comes very
syldome to pass. But Christ (as it was said even now) asks them what they
would have, not so much for their own sakes, as for the people that stood by
For we do see how the world deuoureth the benefits of God without sense,
except they be styrred up by prouocations. Therefore Christ by his voice
makes the people standinge by to give head unto the miracle, even as hereafter
he did by a visible sign, when by touching he opened their eyes.

33. They said unto him: Lord, that our eyes may be opened.

A. The Evangelist Mark says that Bartimaeus, made answer, saying, Lord that
I may receive my sight: Using the Chalde word Rabboni, for the which the
Hebrews have Rab. or Rabbi, that is to say Lord.

34. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes, and immediatlye
their eyes received sight. And they followed him.

Jesus had compassion on them. A. These blind men craved the mercy of Christ to
help their miserye, as appears in the thirty verse going before, and now the
Evangelist shows that Christ was not only led by his free grace and goodness
to heal them, but also by the compassion that he had of their misery. As
concerning this compassion read the ninth chapter going before. And touched
their eyes. A. Mark says that Christ added farther saying, Get thee hence
thy faith has made thee safe. And Luke has, receive thy syghte thy faith has
saved thee. C. Where, Mar. 10. Luke 18.
by ye name of faith, not only the sure trust of the recoueringe of their
sight is understood, but also a farther persuasion, namely, that Jesus was the
Messiah promised of God. For the blind man did not rashely or without good
consideration, add unto Christ the name of ye son of David, Christ
ascribes the receiving of the syghte to the faith of the blind men: because
although the power and glory of Christ does pearce eue^ to the unbelieving
sometimes yet notwithstanding no man does truly and profitably enjoy his
benefits, Infidels have no profit by gods-benefites.
but he which by Faith apprehends the same yea to the unbelieving the use of
Gods gifts is so far from doing them good, that it is very hurteful unto
them. Wherefore the health of ye Christ speaks here, is not restrained to the
external health, but it comprehends a whole and safe mind also: as if
Christ should have said that the blind man obtained by faith his desyere at
the merciful hands of God. Justification comes by faith.
Wherefore if God bestoed his grace upon the blind man for his faith, it
follows that Justification comes by faith.

And by and by they received their sight Bu. In that that they receive their
sight so soon, the power and great verte we of Christ is declared. And they
follovved him. C. This is a sign of great thankefulnes that the blind men
would wait upon Christ. And although it be uncertain whether they
continued with him any long time or no, yet notwithstanding it was a great
argument of their thankefulnes that they followed Christ to set forth his
grace and power, though but for a time. The Evangelist Luke has. And they
followed him glorifying God For to this end we are illuminated of Christ, that
we should follow him the true light and the author of the same. A. And
certainly so many as have truly ^el^e the redemption of Christ, they can not
chose but follow their Savior, and glorify God in all things, which by his
only grace has brought them thereunto. C. Luke also adds that the people
gave the glory unto God, which makes not a littel to prove the certainty of
the miracle.

The xxi. Chapter.
AND when they drew nie to Jerusalem and were com to Bethphage, unto mount
Oliuete: then sent Jesus two of his Disciples.
And, when they drevv nigh to Jerusalem. Bu. Hitherto our Euangeliste
Matthewe has described: What the Lord did in Galilee, and in his Iorneye
coming from Galile to Jerusalem: and now he declares what he did in that
holy and kingly City it self. And the nerer that he approached to his death and
cross, the more liuelye he declares his power, virtue, and strength. For
now he entering into that holy City with a new and ease kind of pomp
declares him self to be the promised king and deliverer, which the Israelits
had long looked for.

C. Our savior Christ therefore does not send his Disciples for an Ass,
because he was werye of his Journey, but to an other end and purpose. For
seeing the time of his death was at hand, he mente to show after a solemn
manner what the nature of his Kingdom was. The which thing treuly he begane
to do even from the time of his Baptism: but this show remains for him to
set for the even in the end of his calling: and (if a man might so speak)
it was the last pageante he had to play. For why did he hitherto abstain
from the name of a King, and now gives liberty to have himself proclaimed
a King, but only because he was not far from the end of his race?
Therefore when his Assention into heaven was at hand, he would have his
Kingdom openly proclaimed in earth. This had been a foolish kind of pomp
and very ridiculouse, had it not been that Zachary had before Prophesyed
of the same. To the end Christ might take unto him self the honor of a
King, he enters into Jerusalem riding upon an Ass, a worthy pomp in
deed to declare a King. Moreover the beast which he rode upon was not so
rude and base as the forniture that belongs unto it was: For the Disciples
for want of a saddell were feign to lay their clothes upon the Asses back:
which was a token of great pouertye and nedines. We grant that he wanted no
waytinge men, for a great multitude followed him: But what surely such as
came out of poor villages in the way as he went. Joyful shoutes and cries
are made: but of whom? surely of poor men, and the contemned sort of the
people. Therefore he might seem to do all that he could to make himself a
Iestinge stock to all men. ^^st ry^ ^f christ ^ou for ^^^es.
But because there were two things adjoined unto him to be done, namely to
show some document or example of his kingdom, and to teach that it was not
like unto terrene or earthlye Empyres, he used this base estat in ryding to
Jerusalem. Howbeit this also might peradventure seem unsavory, and without
reason, were it not that God had long before witnessed the same by his
Prophet, namely, that his King which should come to restore salvation to his
people, should ride after the manner that our Evangelist makes mention here.
Therefore least the contemptible and base estate of Christ do hinder us from
the beholding, in this spectacle, the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, let us
lay before our eyes the word of the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet, by
the which God, under that deformitye of a beggar, does more beautify his son,
than if he should shine in all the maiesticall robes of a King. Without this
sauce, this history will never be sauory or pleasuant unto us. Wherefore the
words of our Evangelist Mathewe are of great force, when he says that in
this, the saying of the Prophet is fulfilled: because, he seeing that men which
are to much addicted unto pomp and glorious shows, could not by the natural
sense and understanding of the flesh gather any profit by the history,
brings them from the bare beholding of the thing, to the consideration of the
Prophesy, as we shall hear anon. And were come to Beth. M. This Bethphage was
a little village at the bottom or foot of the mount of Olives, which was nere
to the City of Jerusalem, being distant from the same not above two miles as
we may read in the first chapter of the Acts. (...) l.


He sent two of his Disciples. A. What the names of these two Disciples were,
none of the Evangelists make mencio^.

2. Saying unto them: Go into the town that lies oueragainst you, and anon, ye
shall find an Ass bound, and a coulte with her: loose them and bring them
unto me.

Go into the town that lies. M. Some very fondly have expounded this place,
saying that by this town he meant the City Jerusalem: the which City (say
they) he called a town in contempt.

C. But the words of Christ ought to be understood of some village that was in
ye Subarbes, being such a one as we see commonly adioyninge to Cities in the
which they used asses for carriage between the City and the town. Again it may
be that Bethanye or some other such town lay so between Bethphage and
Jerusalem, that they which were at Bethphage could not see Jerusalem.

That lies over against you. A. That is, which lies right before your face.
He shows them a place which was in their sight, which could not be
Jerusalem by reason of the hill which lay between. For Bethphage stood of
one side of the hill, and Jerusalem on the other.

And anon ye shall find an Ass. C. Saying that Christ was so nere the City,
it can not be thought that he sent for the Ass to ease him of his Journey: (for
it had been a small matter to walk that two miles on foot) but even as kings
ascend and sit in their charriots, because they will be seen, even so the
lord meant to be seen of all men, and by some token to seem to allow the cries
and shoutes of those that followed him, least they should think that it was
done against his will, and yt without his consent they attributed unto him
the honor of a king.

M. He which was Lord of all men, and of all things else, 2. Cor. 8.
borrows a poor man's beast to ride upon, and has nothing of his own:
being made poor for our sakes although he were the richest of all. C. And
least any thing should stay the Disciples from fulfillinge his will and
commandment, the Lord does prevent certain doubts which might arise in
their minds.

And first of all he declayeth that he sends them not by chance when he
says that even in the enteraunce into the town they shall find an Ass with
her coulte. M. A wonderful foreknowledge treulye it was, which being absente
could tell where and what manner of Ass it was, that he should occupy.

The like of this we read in the Gospel after saint Ihon, where it is thus
written. Nathanaell says unto him: whence know thou me? Ihon. 1.
Jesus answered and said unto him: Before that Philip called thee, when thou
wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. C. Furthermore he says that no man
shall deny them the ass, but will suffer them to lead it away. For it
follows.

3. And if any man say ought unto you, say ye, Mar. 11. Luke. 19.
the Lord has need of them: and straytewaye he will let them go.

And if any man say. B. The Evangelists Mark and Luke add to this, saying,
Why do ye so, why do ye louse him? Thus shall ye say unto him, the Lord has
need thereof. C. By this means the Lord declared a notable argument and
proof of his Godhead: For to know a thing not present, and to bend the
hearts of men to agree to his will, belongs unto God and not to a mortal man.
For although it might be that the owner of the Ass having a good opinion of
Christ might grant willinglye the love of the same: Yet notwithstanding to
know and foreshewe whether he were at home or no, to describe the Ass so
nerely, and to know whether he would credit his Disciples coming as
strangers, it was not in the power of a mortal man. B. By these things
therefore he went about to reveal and make manifest his power and Deity to his
Apostells, least afterward they should doubt or despair of the same when
they should see him hang on the cross with sinners.

Say ye the Lord has need of them. M. The Lord sought not to take away any
man's cattle, although he were the Lord of all creatures, but first showed
his necessity, and then with their consent led and took them away.

And strait way he will let them go. Some translations have. And he lets
them go: But it is better to read it in the futer tence, than in the present
tence.

4. All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, saying.

All this was don. M. The Evangelist here shows a reason, why Christ
commanded the Ass to be brought, that he ^ittinge upon the same might ride
into Jerusalem: namely that those things which were spoken of before by
Zacharias the Prophet might be fulfilled. John ^^ Zach ^
And the Evangelist Ihon alleges ye same place, to the same end and purpose
saying: And Jesus gate a young Ass, and sat thereon, as it is written* Fear
not daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes on an Asses coulte. Moreover the
Evangelist brought in this place of Scripture, to ye end we might see that
Christ came not because we had deserved his coming, We (...) not the ^mig o^
Chris^^ ^rituall
but because he would perform and fulfill the treuth of God: For as much as he
was promised long before were. It was necessary therefore that this portion of
Scripture should be fulfilled in Christ, because it was appointed by God that
before his passion he should ride into Jerusalem upon an Ass. And it was
therefore foreshewed by the holy Ghost, because it should com to pass: and
it should come to pass because it was so appointed by the eternal decree and
purpose of God: and it was appointed by God, because it seemed unto him good by
that means to set forth the quality and quantitye of his Kingdom. The
quality, because it should be full of righteousness, saving health, peace, and
humility: The (...) and (...) of Cr^ kyngd^
the quantity, because it should be ample, large and full of power.

5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion: behold thy King comes unto thee meke,
sitting upon an Ass, and a coulte, the foale of an Ass used to the Yoke.

Tell ye the daughter of Sion. E. This testimonye of Scripture is taken out of
the ninthe chapter of the prophesye of Zacharye, Zach ^
howbeit the Euangeliste does not agree with the Hebrewe texste neither with
the three score and tene interpretors. L. For first of all we must note that
the Evangelists had no special regard to cite every word of the Prophets
but counted it sufficient to allege their meaning, and manifestlye to
declare that those things whereof they prophesyed were fulfilled, and that
specially to this end they might give us occasion to search the Scripture,
to se what they had omitted, and how that nothing was prophesyed of before by
the Prophets which was not fulfilled. This place therefore of the Prophet
Zachary, according to the Hebrewe text is thus written: Rejoice thou
greatelye, O daughter Sion, be glad O daughter Jerusalem. For lo thy thy King
comes unto thee, even the righteouse, and Savior. Lowlye and simple is he,
he rydeth upon an Ass and upon the foale of an Ass. For these words of the
Euangeliste Tell ye the daughter of Sion, are not in Zachary, as touching the
very word: yet notwithstanding the Euangeliste very conninglye and aptly
transferreth that to all the godly teachers, which God commanded one Prophet
only to testify. For this was the only hope, (...) confort ^he faithful
by the which the sons of God ought to erecte and conforte themselves,
namelye that the Redemer at the lenghte should com. And therefore the Prophet
teaches that full and sufficient matter of Joy is brought unto the faithful
by the coming of Christ. For seeing that God can no otherwise be favorable
unto them than by the mean of a Mediator, who delyuereth those that are his
from all evil: What thing can there be without him which can exhillerate and
make glad the hearts of men, who are drowned in their sins, and oppressed
with many miseries? And even as it is necessary, Christ being absent, that
we be sorrowful and heavy, even so again the Prophet admonishes the
faithful that there is good cause why they should rejoice when a Redemer is
com unto them.

C This therefore is an exhortation to Prophets and Preachers, to declare
these glad tidings to the Church of Israel: for by the name of sons the
Prophets did call as well the Cittyes them selves, as the Cittizenes that
dwelte in them. For so often as we hear the Lord speaking, let all
Prophets. Apostels, and Pastors know that they are commanded to speak in
the name of the Lord and to declare their Imbassage. Tell ye (says he) the
daughter of Sion. He commands therefore his Ministers to speak unto the
congregation of Saints and to the Church of Jerusalem, and to declare unto
them the coming of their Christ.

The daughter of Sion, and the daughter of Jerusalem, are both putt for the
Church which was at Jerusalem. For Syon was a part of the Cittye. The
Euangeliste being content^ that he had showed the place of the Prophet,
exhorts the Ministers of the Church to declare that the Prophesy of the
Prophet as concerning the Messiah is fulfilled, when they see Jesus sitting
on an Ass to enter into Jerusalem, as it was Prophesyed before.

Behold. E. By this word he goes about as one having some great and
waightye matter to speak of, to awake us from sleep, and infydellitye, to the
end we might with the greater Joy receive this Joyful tidings.

The King comes. L. That is to say which was promised unto thee, whose
peculiar people thou art, who only ought to govern thee all other set
aside, but in spirit, not in external rule and Empire: of whom thou shalt
and art so governed, that being delivered from sins, from Deuells, from
Hellegates, from the flesh, from the world, may most pleasantly be brought
up and governed of him, in grace, in spirit, in life, in heaven, in God: the
which thing comes to thee only by Faith, by the which thou do believe
him to be such a King, and that he does use no other government, and that he
came to no other end. Christ a spiritual King.
For if thou do not believe these things of him, thou shall never attain the^
by any other thing nor by thine own labor and industry. For such a one as
thou doste deem and esteem, thou have: whatsoever thou do persuade and
promise thy self to be in him, that same shalt thou find in him: and in all
things, as thou beleuest so shall it be unto thee, he for ever abiding, all
one and immutable, which is the King of life, of grace, of felicitye, whether
ye be so tought or no.

Comes unto thee. He it is that comes. Christ comes to us. not we to him.
by thy work or by thy labor: that thou might have nothing to boaste that
thou by thine own merit or deserte hadest purchased him unto thee. He comes
also because he foreshewed the same in the Prophets and promised that he
would com. So that now he has faithfully performed Bu. Thou haste looked for
him a long time O Sion, and haste weryed they self with waiting where and
when thou should behold that King which in all ages

Now therefore he comes, there is no cause why thou should wait for his
coming any more. And he comes treuly, to thee, that is to thy use, for thy
proffite, not for any matter of his own, as commonly Kings do: but to B. He
came also to make thee his peculiar people. For Christ thought it not
sufficient to make us free from tyranny, from the rule of sin, death and
hell, and to be our King: but also to give him self wholely unto us, that
whatsoever pertayned unto him might be our own. Romans 8.
Of the which saint Paul wrighteth saying: 1. Cor. 1.
God spared not his own son, but gave him for us all: how then with him
should he not give us all things?

And again he says: Christ is made unto us of God Sanctification,
righteousness, wisdom, and redemption.

In this therefore that he comes unto thee thou haste a great benefyte above
all other, namelye, that thou might have power over those things that
belong unto him. Even as the wife takes those things for her own which
pertain to her husband, namelye the apparel with the which he adorned and
beautifyed her, so we take those things which pertain to Christ as our own.
The ri^^ousnes (...) Christ ^neth (...)
Beside these words of the Evangelist we may read in the Prophet more,
namely, when he says that he is righteouse and a savior. Christ is here said
to be righteouse, because of the righteousness wherewith he is said to Justify
us, and not of that whereby he judges us.

For all those things which the Scripture attributes to God and Crist our
savior, ought to be referred unto us. He came therefore righteouse unto thee,
that is, he came to justify thee by his grace only: being not ignorant of thy
unrighteousness. And that thou might be made righteouse thou had no need
of any thing that pertained unto thee, but of his grace, of his goodness, and
liberality, that thou might by him alone obtain righteousness. In this
sense the Apostel Paul uses these words when he says, Christ is ye obteyner
of mercy through faith by the means of his blood to declare his righteousness,
in that he forgeueth the sins that are paste, Romans ^
which God did suffer, to show at this time his righteousness, that he might
be counted just, and the Iustifyer of him which believes in Jesus. For he
should not have com a Savior to every one, if he had come with his severe,
strayte, and Iudgeinge justice, but rather a condemner to all men: Forsomuche
as all men are unjust, and sinners. But now he comes not only to make us
Godly and Just, but also to save so many as receive him: that we may
acknowledge him only to be the righteouse, and Savior, which is Just and a
Savior, both iustifyinge and sauinge us, and that by his own mercy and
goodness, and by no deserte or merit of ours, but by his free grace offered
unto us.

Meke. B. In that our Evangelist says that Christ came meke, it is nothing
contrary to that which the Prophets has, when he says that he came poor
and afflicted: for there is none meek but he which willingly suffers
affliction, and so he is also poor. Moreover Christ was not poor but with
mekenes, ^^es (...) co^^ suf^
as we read in the fifte Chapter going before. Furthermore the Hebrewe word
Any, which signifies poor and the which also Zacharias uses in this place,
does not always signifye him to be poor which is destitute of money and
other riches, but which is of a broken heart and humble spirit: who is
altogether free from wrath and arrogance, and full of humillity and mekenes.
Of the which signification and meaning we have an express example in our
savior Christ when Luke describes him to have wept over Jerusalem, (...) 19.
and to bewail the miserye of the same at this his entrance therein. So that
the Hebrew word signifies that which thou read here as concerning the
behauioure of our savior Christ, whether thou interpret it to be poor or
meke. His heart is oppressed as thou see with affliction and compassion over
Jerusalem: here is no show of anger or token of revenge, but a certain sign
of mekenes bewayling the destruction of his enemies. The affliction of the
heart with the which he was disquieted and troubled, had made him so gentle
and meek, that no anger no cruelty, no threatening, nor no revenge, could once
take place in his mind: he could do nothing but suffer, and offer his
inspeakeable goodness to his ennemies. Behold this is the cause why the
Prophet calls him here poor, and the Evangelist meek. Blessed is he to
whom it is given thus to believe and acknowledge Christ.

And sitting upon an Ass, B. The Greek and the Hebrew word also signifies
either the male or female kind. But the other three Evangelists do declare
that it was a male: and the Euangeliste John who brings in the same place of
the Prophet Zachary, writes thus: And Jesus got a young Ass and sat
thereon, (...)
as it is written: Fear not daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes sitting
upon an Asses coulte. And whereas the Prophet writteth that Jesus rode upon
an Ass and the coulte of an Ass: he uses a figure very common to the
Prophets, by the which they double one thing by diverse voices. For according
to the manner of the Scripture he puts ye coulte of an Ass, in steed of an
Ass. And the Hebrewe word, for the which we have this word coulte does
properly signify a beast broken to the saddell and meet to ride upon, and
not a coult: as we may evidently gather by that place where we read these
words: And he had thirtye sons which roode upon thirtye Ass coultes.
Judges. 10. and 12.
C. But very fond is the allegory which many make here in ye Ass and the
coulte. For they make the Ass a figure of the people of the Jews, which a
long time had been subject and accustomed to the yoke of the Law. And by
the coulte they say that the Gentiles are understood: And that Christ did
therefore first sit upon an Ass, because he ought to begin at the Jews: and
that be afterward rode upon the coult, because after that he had done his
office concerning the Jews, he should finishe his work in the Gentiles.
And our Evangelist Matthew truly seems to note the rydinge upon them both.
Synecdoche is a figure where part is used for the whole, and the whole for the
part.
But saying the figure called Synecdoche, is often used in the Scripture, it is
no maruelle if he name two for one. B. But by the other two Evangelists (as it
is said before) it is euidente that Christ used but the coult only. And the
Prophet Zachary takes away all doubt, who according to the familliar use of
the Hebrewe tongue repeteth o^e thing twyse. C. But whereas the Evangelist
says that the foale of the Ass was used to the yoke (that is to say, which
was used daily to carry burdens, and to labor) which words the Prophet has
not, the Euangeliste therefore did it to express of what kind of Ass the
Prophet spoke, as if he should have said: The prophesye is fulfilled in
that Ass, which was brought up, not to iourneye, but to carrye burdens
(according to the manner of that countreye) upon whose coulte, the Lord did
ride. So abiecte and base was the fulfillinge of this prophesye, least any man
should think that the Prophet did forshewe any excellent thing or
pompouse majesty.

C. The Evangelist Matthew therefore went about to show what manner of king
Christ should come, namelye, far unlike to the kings of this world which
excel in gorgious and sumptuouse ornaments.

6. The Disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them.

The Disciplles went and C. Here the redines of ye Disciples in seeking all
means to obey and fulfill their masters will and commandment, is to be
commended, who without delay did that which he bad them. For Christ was not
of so great authority that his name only was sufficient to move strangers and
unacquainted persons: furthermore, the Disciples might have feared the infamy
of theft. Hereby therefore it appears how great a credit they had in their
masters word when that they answer not nor question about the matter, but
bearinge them bold upon his commandment and promise make have to the place
whereunto they were sent, and being come thither they were not deceived of
their expectation. The which thing ought to be a lesson unto us, Gods promises
are sufficient to content the godly.
that we may learn to quiet and content our selves with the promises of God,
and to go forward to the fullfilling of his promises through all manner of
lets that we by our obedience may fulfill those things which he commands.
For he, all impedimentes being removed, will find out the way, and will
not suffer our travail to be void and of none effect. R. Luke says, They
which were sent went their way, and found as he had said unto them.

7. And brought the Ass, and the coult, and put on them their clothes and set
him thereon.

And brought the Ass, A. Our Evangelist Mathewe omitteth certain things
which are red in Luke. For he says yt it was said unto yt Disciples which
loused the coulte: Why louse ye the coulte? which said, Because the Lord has
need there of but all these are included in the verre goinge before: for so
the Disciples made aunsweare as they were commanded of Christ.

And put on them their clothes E. The Greek word does rather signifye, gowns,
and cloakes, than apparel. The Disciples spread therefore their cloakes upon
the Ass in steed of a saddle.

And set him thereon, A. Namely, upon their garments, not upon the Ass and
the coulte, as though he had ridden upon them both. For we have declared
already that Christ sat upon the coulte only. And the Evangelist Mark has
these words: And they brought ye coulte to Jesus, and laid their garments
upon him and he sat thereon. B. Our savior Christ thought good to make this
show of his kingdom unto the people before he should suffer, yt thereby he
might confirm the good in the faith toward him, and might make the wicked
void of excuse. It was a great pomp therefore and very kinglye if we have
respect to the desire of the people and to their reioysinge, and to the virtue
and power also by the which he cast the buyers and sellers out of the temple,
and made himself to be feared of his cruel ennemies.

C. Furthermore the Jews themselves are constrained to expound the Prophesy of
Zacharye, (which was then fulfilled) of the Messiah, notwithstanding they
deride us, iudginge us to be deluded under the shadow of the Ass, because we
attribute the honor of the Messiah to the son of Mary. But our faith is not
only grounded upon this place, of ye Prophet, but upon far greater
testimonies. Moreover, when we say and affirm yt Jesus is Christ we take not
the gr^unde there of upon this that he entered into Jerusalem rydinge upon an
Ass: But herevppon we ground the same because he made the blind to see, the
deaf to here, Romans ^
ye lame to walk, and the dead to rise out of their graves, and because he
raised himself to life (being put to death) the third day. Yet notwtsta^ding
this confirmation of ye base entrance of Christ into Jerusalem must not be
despised, because ye almighty did foreshew by the mouth of ye Prophet Zachary
ye same thing, that men might know that the kingdom of his son was
disagreeing with the pomp, glory, and power of this world, and that it was
also rather spiritual.

8. And many of the people spread their garments in the way: Other cut down
branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way.

And many of the people C. Here the Eua^gelistes do declare that Christ was
known of the people to be a king. M. Surely the counsel and purpose of God in
this was wonderful that he uses the rude, simple, and abiecte sort of
people, and not the great Cittizenes of Jerusalem, the Scribes, Phariseis, and
hye Priests, to receive his son, and to set forth the beginning of his
kingdom, and so styrreth up their minds, and makes them so joyful, that
setting all fear aside of ye hyer powers, and of excommunication, they
proclaim him with open cry to be their king and the Lords anointed, and so
condemned their elders. And that these men were not Cittizenes of Jerusalem
but such as came from far by reason of the feast day, we may gather by
the words of John who says: (...). 12.
On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that
Jesus should come to Jerusalem, took branches of Palm trees, and went
forth to meet him, and cried. It might seem truly a Maygame or jesting
matter for the rude multitude cuttinge down bows, and spreading their
garments in the way, to give unto Christ ye vain title of a king:
notwithstanding as they did this in good earnest, and did faithfullye declare
their minds, even so Christ thought them meet and worthy proclaymers of
his kingdom. Neither is there any cause why we should marvel at any such
beginning, when as he sitting at this day at the right hand of his father,
does send obscure and base men from his heavenly throne, of whom his majesty
is cellebrated in a most contemptible manner.

Other cut down branches C. Many conjecture that the cutting of the
branches of the Palm trees came of an ancient and solemn custom of the
day: as concerning the which matter we may read much in the three and twenty
Chapter of Leuiticus: ^iti. 23.
but it is a great deal more probable that this honor was given unto Christ
at a sudden by the motion of the spirit, first in the Disciples, who had
premeditated of no such thing: than in the multitude which was set one by the
Disciples, as may be gathered by ye words of Luke where he says, And when
he was now come nigh to the goinge down of mount Oliuet, the whole multitude
of the Disciples began to rejoice, and to praise God with a loud voice for all
the miracles that they had seen saying: Blessed be the king that comes in
the name of the Lord. Luke 19.


9. Moreover the people that went before, and they that came after cried
saying: Hosanna to the son of David. Blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest.

Moreover the people B. This acclamation and cry is taken out of the hundredth
and eightene Psalm, where (other things properly aunswering and agreeing to
the present pomp of the Lord) it is thus red. The same stone which the
builders refused is become the head stone in the corner. This was the Lords
doing and it is marvelous in our eyes. Psalm. 11^.
This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad in it.
Help now O Lord: O Lord send us now prosperity. Blessed be he that comes
in the name of the Lord etc. This verce: Help now O Lord: O Lord send us
now prosperitye, was applied of them unto Christ: whereby it is euidente that
the Psalms were then used. C. Also the Evangelist Matthew does not without
good cause resite the Hebrewe words, yt we might know that these acclamations
and joyful cries were not rashely given unto Christ, and that the petitions
and words of the Disciples were not spoken without consideration: but that
they reuerentlye followed the order of prayer which the holy ghost had
committed to the whole Church by the mouth of the Prophet. For although he
do there speak as concerning the kingedome, yet notwithstanding there is no
doubt but that he himself has specially respect and would that others
also should have regard to the eternal and everlasting succession, which
the Lord had promised unto him. For he framed and gave unto the Church a
perpetual law of praying, which, notwithstanding that the riches of the
kingdom were decayed, was in use. And so the custom prevailed and grew that
oftentimes they made their prayers as concerning the promised redemption, in
these words. Also it was the purpose of Mathewe (as we touched even now) to
recite the verse in Hebrewe, to the end he might teach ye Christ was known
to the people to be ye Messiah and redemer. E. This shoute therefore of the
people was a wisshinge of prosperity, and a prosperous cry, eue^ as we in
these days, when any Maiestrate is newlye chosen into his office, shoute and
wish him good success.

After the same manner this people was affectioned toward Christ, they thought
now that his corporal kingdom should begin and prosper, therefore they prayed
and wished that all things might happen unto him luckelye. For this word
Hosiah-na is as much to say as help now, or save and prosper althinges that
this man takes in hand. B. And when they added, to the son of David, it was
as much as if they should have said, Help Lord we beseech thee, and
prosper all things that belong to this son of David, that his kingdom may
prosper luckely and take good success: prosper him thou (we say) which
dwell in the highest. This cry of the people seems to agree with that
whereof mention is made in the tenthe Chapter of the first book of Kings
where the people said, God save king Saul: and in the first Chapter of the
third book of kings, 1. King. 10. 3. King, 1.
where the people cried, God save king Solomon. A. Therefore the Disciples and
the multitude, being moved by the instincte of the spirit, prayed for the
felicitye of the king, and for ye prosperous success also of his kingdom. C.
And truly as the spirit of God did then appoint that people to pray dailye for
the kingdom of Christ, even so also he does now prescribe the same rule
unto us. And seeing that God will reign by no other means than by ye power of
his son, we ought daily to wish and pray for his kingdom, according as
we are taught, Thy kingdom come: under the which sentence ye same is noted
which more plainly in the Psalm is expressed. Psalm. ^


Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord C. The Hebrewe word
(Berach) in the Psalm, out of the which these were taken, signifies to praise
and to increase one with goods, whervppon comes the Hebrewe participle
Baruch, that is praised, blessed, or increasee with goods. By this voice
therefore they wish unto Christ the increase of all goodness, and ye prosperous
success of all things. For repetitio^ seems to be a familiar thing to the
Hebrews and oftentimes used of them. For that which before they wished in
these words Hosanna to the son of David, or God prosper the son of David,
they now wish again in saying, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord: as if they should have said, Hitherto we have been oppressed with
diverse tyrannies, but now our king coming all things shall prosper well
and he shall be happy, which comes unto us in ye name of the Lord, or being
sent or anointed of God: save, prosper, and bless thou him therefore which
dwell in ye highest. The Evangelist says expressly in the name of the Lord,
because the Messiah should come as one sent, and not as one that thrusts in
himself, but should be sent of ye father. For he is said to come in the name
of the Lord, which intrudeth not himself, but takes the kingdom at the will
and commandment of God. The which thing may more certainly be gathered by
the words of Mark when he says, Mark ^
Blessed be the kingdom that comes in the name of him, that is the Lord of
our father David. For they spoke after this manner in respect of the promises,
because the Lord had promised that he would at the length be the deliverer of
that people, and had appointed a mean, namely the renuinge and restoringe of
the kingdom of David. B. The like and the very self same meaning almost had
those prayers of the servants of Solomon, when they said, As God has been
with my Lord the king, even so be he with Solomon also, ^ng. 1.
and make his seat greatter, than the seat of my lord king David's has been.
C. We do see therefore that the honor of a mediator (of whom all good
things, and the benefit of salvation was hoped for) is attributed unto
Christ. But seeing they were rude and ignorante people which called the kingdom
of Christ the kingdom of David, we may hereby learn that this doctrine was
common and well known to the vulgar sort, which doctrine seems to some at
this day very hard, because they are not exercised in the Scriptures.

Hosanna in the hiest. B. This repetition does declare a great feruencye to
be in the people, which heartily and unfeignedly received Christ to be their
king: as if they should have said, Thou O God which dwell in the
heavens, save the king which thou have sent unto us, C. and deliver us by
Christ, which in thy name is come unto us. C. The Evangelist Luke adds
somewhat more, saying, peace in heaven, and glory in the hiest: In the which
there were no obscurity if it were agreeable to the song of the Angel in the
second of Luke. For there the Angels assign glory to God in Heaven, and
peace to men in earth: but here both peace and glory are referred to God. In
sense notwithstanding there is no disagreement: for although the Angels do
more distinctely show the cause why it was necessary that the glory and
praise should be yielded unto God, (namely because by his mercy men enjoy peace
in this world) yet notwithstanding, it means the same thing that the
multitude in this place proclaymeth, namely that there is peace in heaven: ^ted
con^es are ^ed one^ Gods ^liation
because we know that miserable consciences in this world are no other ways
pacified then by the reconciliation of God to them from heaven.

10 And when he was come to Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying: Who
is this?

And when he was come. Bu. It was necessary that the glory of the king
Christ should not be obscure or hidden, but euidente and manifest, and
therefore by the ordinance of God all the cittezens of Jerusalem, are moved at
this unwonted ^ight, that we might know that the coming of Christ in this
order and apperance was not unfruitful and void of profit. C. The matter
was not done in huggermugger, or by stealth in secret without the knowledge of
the hye priests and Scribes, but openly all the people beholdinge the same.
Wherefore in that contemptible state of the flesh, the majesty of the spirit
was euidente: for how could al men have suffered (without their great
peril) that Christ should be brought into the City with kinglike pomp,
except they had been amassed at the sight? A. This sight therefore might
have seemed a laughinge game, had not the power of God ben present.

C. This therefore is the sum, that the enteraunce of Christ into the city
was neither secret, nor his ennemies quiet, because they contempned him: but
rather that they were stayed by secret fear, because God had stricken them
so, that they durst not attempt any thing.

In the mean time the careless securytie of the city is reprehended, and
the zeal and religion of strangers is commended. For when the cittezens (by
reason of the noise) make enquirye, who it was, they plainly declare them
selves to be none of the disciples of Christ. Finally, these words ought to
be extended to all those things which pertayne to the kyngedome of Christ,
the which kingdom seems to the world contemptyble and base, and the
mynisters and servants of this kingdom do feme unto them to be mad and out
of their wits: but in the mean time God blesses their labor, and finisheth
his work begone contrary to the expectation of all men.

Bu. All the world is stricken and amassed at the preachinge of Christ, as the
Acts of the Apostelles do testify: but nevertheless the king of kings is
received of the fainctes, how so ever the world does rage. And here
specially the power of God is perceived in weakness. 2. Cor. 12,
Who is this? M. This is marueylouse that this princelike and excellent
city in the which the worship of God did dwell, and in the which the
authorytie of the priests was great, was so ignorante of Christ promised in
the prophets and declared by so many miracles that now at the last it asks
who this is whom the city sees to enter with so great honor of the
moultitude, and with such publyque consent.

So unknown likewise is the truth of Christ at this day, and that in those
places where the saynctuary of the world, and priestly obstinacy do dwell and
rain, that they say even as these did at the herynge of the word of Christ:
what doctrine is this?

11 And the people said: this is Jesus a prophet of Nazareth a city of Galile.

And the people said. S. Our Evangelist says here that the multitude made
answer to the demand. Confession of Christ is the effect of faith.
This confession is the effect of the word of God wonderfully working in the
multitude: it is also the effect of faith, which is not offended at the
baseness of the person.

This is Jesus a Prophet. S. By this word (Jesus) the people make a
dyfference between him and the other prophets. For all other proclaymers and
preachers of the word among the Jews, No prophet was Jesus but Christ.
were prophets, but not Iesuses, that is to say saviors. Moreover by this
word Jesus, the multitude confess the both that the promised Messiah was now
present, and also his proper office, which is to save. M. The people therefore
understand that prophet of whom Moses wright thus saying. Deuteronomy. 18.
A prophet shall the lord your God raise up unto you of your brethern like
unto me, him shall you hear.

Act. 3. and. 7.
The which place Peter and Steven both do interpret of Christ

Luke. 4.
of Nazareth a City of Galile. A. Where Christ was nourished and brought up.

12 And Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that sold
and bought in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money changers, and
the seats of them that sold dooues.

And Jesus went into the temple. Bu. It was the manner of kings in old time
being received of the people to restore and amend those things which were
deprauid and corrupted, either by the neclygence orels by the malice of other
princes. For so David being settled and establyshed in the kingedome,
exercised, and restored iudegement and righteousenes which had been neglected
in the time of Saules government. After the same manner therefore our king
and lord Jesus Christ, being received of the people, and acknowleged to be
their king, went straight way into the temple,

A, to the end he might correct and amend the great abuse which was there
admitted. B. And trewly these things were done, even the self same day upon
the which he entered into Jerusalem, ryding on an Ass, and the people
shoutinge unto him: as plainly may be gathered both by our Evangelist Matthew
and Luke also, although Mark seem to write otherwise. C. For he says
simplely that Christ the same day of his entrance into the city, beheld al
things: and that he cast the buyers and sellers out of the temple the day
following. But thus these places may be reconciled: Mark, having not spoken
of the purginge of the temple, bringethe in the same at the last, but out of
order and place. He declares that the first day he came into the temple, and
there beheld al things. But to what end did he thus behoulde them, but
only to correct that which was amiss? For saying that he had often times
before beheld and viewed the temple, it cannot be thought that he was moved by
the newenes of the sight, But when Mark should have by order added by and by,
that they which bought and soulde were cast out of the temple, he then says
that Christ went out of the city. But that which he omitted worthy of
mention, he rehearses afterward. Peradventure some man will say that Mark
observed that time which was neglected of the other two: but this which we
have already noted, is more probable a great deal. For it is lykely that this
show of Christ's power was set forth in the presence of the people. But who
so ever does dyligently mark and consider, how little the Euangelystes
observed the notynge of times, this dyuersitie of wrytinge shall not offend.

And cast out all them that soulde. Bu. Here we must acknowledge the office of
Christ, that he was the hye priest of the temple, having power in the temple.
Furthermore, we must acknowledge him to be a king, but spiritual, yea, the
trewthe of the temple, being endewed with great power, to take away offenses
and stombling blocks. C. But for all this, he oftentimes coming into the
temple, and saying these abuses before his face, did but twice only move his
hand to correct them: ^^n. 2.
once in the beginning of his imbassage, and now again, in the end of the
same. But saying there was then an utter confusion of all things, and the
temple with the sacryfices thereof being brought to utter decay, Christ
thought it sufficient openly to reprehende the same twice only. When that
therefore he had declared him self to be a teacher, and a prophet sent of God
to stir up the Jews, and to make the^ more attentive, he took in hand to
purge the temple. And the Euangeliste John only in his second chapter touches
this former history. But now toward the end of his raze, he taking the same
power again to him self, admonyshethe ye Jews as concerning the pollutyng
and defyling the temple, and does also show that there is a new reformation at
hand. In the mean time, notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that he
testified him self to be both a king and also a high priest (as we towched
even now) and the chief governor of the worship of the temple. ^e pertai^ to
the ^y.
But this pertayneth not to every pryuate person: but the zeal with the
which Christ was moved to do these things, belongs to all the godly. For
least any man rashely rushe out beyond his bounds, under the pretense of
Imitation, he must first se how far his vocation will extend it self. If
there be any abuses crepte into the Church of God, it becomes all the sons
of God to be grieved. But because God has not given power and authority to
every man those which are private persons let them sighe, until such time
as it shall please God to send a remedy. We gra^te certainly that they are
worse than ince^sible blocks, which are nothing moved, and not displeased at
the defylynge of the temple: neither is it sufficient that they be sorrowful
in mind, except they withdraw them selves from the corruption and abuse, and
testysie with their tongue, that they desire a reformation, so often as
occasion shall serve: but let them which have not authority publyke, seek
to amend those abuses with their tongue, which they cannot remedy with their
hand: C. and let them pray unto the lord, that he will either pourge his
Church him self, orels suffer those to pourge it, to whom he has committed
power and authority. Answer.
which he let alone. We answer that it was neither the purpose of Christ to
restore all the sacrede ceremonies into their former use, neither that he had
any consideration, which faltes were greter, and which less: but that he had
only this regard, that under one vysible sign, he might teach that the
parts of the temple were committed unto him of God to be purged: and also that
he might show yt the worship of God was corrupted with palpable and sensible
abuse. Notwithstanding this market of bying and selling in the temple wanted
not a cloak: for they said that it was an ease to the people, least they
should be troubled to feke their sacrifyces a far of: and then that every
man which mente to offer, might have money at hand. But these choppers and
changers did not sit in the temple, but in the court or yard of the temple,
which place is oftentimes in the scriptures called the temple But because there
was nothing more unseemly for ye majesty of the temple, then to have a fair
or market erected so nere the same, this profanatio^ was not tolerable. And
our savior Christ did the more earnestly inuey against the same, because it
was openly known yt this abuse was brought in by the couetousenesse of the
pristes, to receive their fylthy luker.

For as a man enteringe into a shop or bowth, in the which diverse fine and
pleasante things are to be soulde, is intysed and allured by the glittering
show thereof to buie somewhat, where as at the first entrance into the same,
he had no such affection: even so the priests of the temple laid their
entisynge snares, that by craft and subtlety they might draw unto them some
gain by oblations of every one. M. God trewely had commanded to offer, but yet
he would not have his institution to serve for the mayntenaunce of the
couetousenes of men: furthermore he could not abide to have his holy temple so
profaned. For what face or show of the temple was this?

Covetousness crept into the temple of Jerusalem.
Christ therefore heinge entered into the temple, first of all purges this
foul spotte and blemishe, to declare how gretlye they did displease, and how
intolerable they were in the Church, which under the show and pretense of
piety, sought after nothing but gain. Hypocrisy most abominable.
There were many other wicked abuses in the temple which he left vntowched,
to teach us that those euylles which do most nerely concern the glory of
God, ought first of all to be pourged, and that there is wickedness more
abominable in the syghte of God then Hypocrisy.

And where as he does not only by his word, but also by his deed abolishe
those things out of the temple of God, which did displease him, although he
knew that in short time, both the city and temple should be destroyed,
theye are taught which have received power from God in the Church, that they
ought not only by their word, but also by their deed pourge the
congregations of Christ, although theye know that their corruption,
superstition, and Idolatrye shall fyrmelye abide still in the hearts of the
reprobate. A. For by this means God has given them power, to seek chiefly
and first of all, for the setting forth of his divine worship.

13 It is written, my house shall be called the house of prayer. But ye have
made it a den of thieves.

It is written. B. Our savior Christ here shows a reason of his doing,
bringynge in the end and use of the house of God.

My house is the house of prayer. C. This place is taken out of the prophecy
of Esaias, Esaias. ^
which very well agreed with the circumstance of the time. For there is
foreshewed the calling of the Gentiles. Esayas therefore promisethe that God
will bring to pass, not only that the temple shall recover the excellency
that it was wont to have, but also that all nations round about shall come
thither, and that all the world shall come into true and sincere godlynes. It
is certain trewely that he speaks metaphorically,: for the prophets do
shaddowe by figures of the law, the spiritual worship of God, which should be
under the kingedome of Christ. This certaynely was never fulfilled that al
people came to Jerusalem to worship.

When as therefore he pronounces that the temple should be a place of prayer
for all nations, it is as much as if he should have said that the Gentiles
should be gathered together into the church of God that with one mouth and
consent together, they might call upon the true God, with the sons of
Abraham. But because he makes mention of the temple, in respect that it was
then the visible and public place of pyetie, Christ does not without good
cause cast the Jews in the teethe, that they have brought the same to an other
use than at the first it was appointed for. The sense and meaning therefore is
this, namely, that God would have the temple stand hitherto as a sign to the
which all the worshippers of him might be tied. How unworthily and wyckedly
therefore do they convert it to a profane markette? Moreover in the time or
age of Christ this temple was in deed the house of prayer, that is to say, so
long as the law with the shadows thereof flourished. For it began to bethe
house of prayer to all nations so soon as the doctrine of the Gospel sounded
by the which the whole world grew into one consent of faith. And although
it were afterward quyghte overthrown, yet notwithstanding, the effect of
this prophesye appears as yet unto this day,

For, because the law went out of Sion, it is necessary that all they which
seek to pray aright have respect to that beginnynge. ^y, 2.
We grant truly that there is no dyfference of places, because the lord
will be called upon in every place: but as the faithful ar said to speak with
the tongue of Canaan, ^y. 19.
which profess that they worship the God of Israel, even so they are said to
come into the temple, because from thence true religion came: and there was
the self same beginning of waters, which in a short space did wonderfully
increase and flow and give life to the drinkers thereof, as testifies the
prophet Ezechiel. In like manner also those waters of life had their
beginning, ^chi. 47
which ran the half part of them toward the east sea, and the other half
to the uttermost sea, as we may read in the prophecy of Zachary. At this day,
^tha. 14.
although we use temples to make holy metinges and co^mynges together, yet
notwithstanding there is a diversity between our temples and that: because
seeing that Christ is now come, the externe and shadowed Image thereof is not
set before us, as it was in times past before the fathers under the law. A.
Therefore the temple of Jerusalem had a special signification. But the truethe
ought to be in us, that we may be the lively temple of the living God. C.
Furthermore we must note that by the name of prayer the prophet notes the
whole worship of God. For although there were many ceremonies at that time,
yet notwithstanding his purpose was to teach the Jews briefly to what end
every one of them ought to be referred, namely that they might worship God
spiritually as it is said in the Psalm more plainly: for there also God
reuoketh al ye exercises of godliness to prayer. ^m. 50,


But ye have made it a de^ of thieves C. Our savior Christ does here declare ye
the co^plainte of Jeremy did very well serve for his time, in the which the
temple was no less abused. Bu. For this place is taken out of the. 7. chapter
of Jeremy, ^rites ^e the (...) of god (...).
where the prophet accuses ye people for the abuse of the temple and
ceremonies, even as Hypocrites abusinge the name of god, whose property is to
tourn yt truth of god into a lie. C The Jews were contented with the vain
pretense of the temple, as though it were sufficient to observe external
ceremonies, and by this trust they gave unto the^ selves liberty to syn. But
the prophet reclaymeth them, declaringe that God is not tied to the temple, or
bound to external ceremonies, and therefore they do falsely brag of the name
of the temple, which they had made a den of thieves. For as thieves do more
boldly sin and offend in their dens, because they hope they shall escape
unpunished: even so Hypocrites wax so bold under the pretense of godliness,
that they are not afraid almost to mock God.

But because this den is metaphorically extended to all corruptions and
abuses, Christ does very well apply this present place of the Prophet to the
present occasion. C. For as thieves lurking in their dens go craftily about to
spoil men, Hypocrisy is a den for a thief,
even so these priests in the temple of God, and under the pretense of the
worship of God, brought men unto their pray. For they which exercise and
seek after gain in the house of God, do cover theymselues with the holy
cloak of Gods worship, that thereuppon, as by deceytes, they might set
upon the simple people and spoil them. For as the obscurenesse of the cave
or den does hyde the thief, even so Hypocrisye and the pretenced show of
Gods worshipp do cover and hyde these couetouse prestes and thieves, that they
be not known. Otherwise who could perceive that the temple at any time werea
den of thieves, being so holy, so excellent and sumptuouse, in the which there
was nothing pretended but the worship of God, and the true worship of God?
The Euangeliste Mark addethe that Christ gave commandment that no man should
carry a vessel through the temple, that is, he would not suffer that any thing
should be seen there contrary to the holy things. To be short, Christ took
away whatsoever did obscure the reverence and majesty of the temple.

14 And the blind and halte came unto him in the temple, and he healed them.

Two special offices belong unto Christ.
S. Two special offices belong unto Christ, one is to louse men's
consciences C. And least that the authority which he had usurped unto him
self contrary to the usual manner and custom, should be suspected of
rashenes, he confirms the same by miracles. He healed therefore the blind
and the lame in the temple, that al men might see that the honor and right of
the Messiah did truly appertain unto him. For the prophets did foreshewe
that he should be known by these marks and excellent tokens. Whereby again
we may behold and se that which we showed a lyttel before, that it pertains
not to every private person to imitate and follow this deed of Christ, and
rashely to exalte him self into the throne of the Messiah.

And this truly we must note, that the blind and the lame which were healed
were witnesses of the deuyne power of Christ, even as though God had made a
proclamation with his own voice from heaven to the multitude. M. For after this
manner God went about to take away all excuse from this people.

15 When the chief priests and Scribes saw the wonders that he did, and the
children crying in the temple saying: Hosanna to the son of David they
disdayned.

When the chief priests. Bu. We have heard how the godly received the king
Christ: in these words it is showed how the wicked do envy his glory: they
disdain that Christ should be glorified, and they hate and calumniate him for
his well doing, and that for no other cause tha^ for that they perceive that
he resisted their evil affections. C. The Evangelist Luke says that the
Pharyseies would have had Christ to rebuke his Disciples: Luke 19.
for then the Disciples cried only, But he answers, that if they should
hold their peace, the stones would cry: because God would sooner make the
stones to speak, than to suffer the kyngedome of his son to be overwhelmed.
The Scribes and Phariseies thought they had bitten Christ shrewdely, when they
obiecte and cast in his teeth that he sought the praise of children: but he
answers their objection as follows.

16 And said unto him: heareste thou what these say? But Jesus says unto
the^, why not? Have ye never red: Out of the mouths of babes and sucklinges
thou have ordained praise?

Hear thou what these say. C. Notable and great was the malice of the
high priests, as concerning the signs which they had seen they say
nothing, but they cavil and calumniate at the acclamation of the children:
when as notwithstanding without all doubt the excellent show of miracles
did more grieve them then the voice of the children. For those miracles gave a
greatter testimony unto Christ, than the crying of the children. A.
Notwithstanding we must se wherefore these priests were so malyciouselye
offended at those prosperouse cries of the children, C. and what thing did
most of all prick them.

We know how earnestly and straitely they strove for their right for zeal
drove them to this pass, that they would have the cruel and straighte law
abide fyrme unto them selves, which they had once usurped. Again this was not
the smallest impayrings and dyminishinge of the Empire, if it had been laweful
for the people to attrybute the name of a king to Christ: yea, in the
smalleste things they would have their decrees to be counted for dyuine
oracles, that it might not be lawefull to allow or to reiecte any thing,
except it had passed by their consent. So that they count it an absurd and
perverse thing to have any man extolled with the title of the Messiah by the
people, whom they with their consent, had not advanced thereunto by sum
decree. And trewelye it had been meet if that they had discharged their office
and calling, that they should have gone before all the people as authors and
captains. For the priests were created and appointed, that all men might
seek for the knowledge of the law at their lyppes: ^alach. 2.
and that they might be the angels and interpreters of the Lord of hosts.
But because they had falsely extinguished the light of the truth, Christ
does very aptely answer, that they profit nothing at all, whileste they
go about to suppress the doctrine of salvation, because rather then they shall
bring that to pass, it shall by violence burste out of the stones.
Notwithstanding under this there is contained a secret grauntinge: for Christ
does not deny but that this is a preposterous order, that the unlearned
multitude and children should be the first that with their voice and cry
should cellebrate the coming of the Messiah: but because they do maliciouslye
choke the truethe, which ought to be the lawful witnesses thereof. he
says it is no marvel if God stir up others, and do chose children in
their steed, to their great ignominy and shame. Hereby there comes to us
no small consolation. For although the wicked will not a little seek to cover
and obscure the kyngedome of Christ, yet notwithstanding here we hear that
all their labors and deuyses are in vain. They hope when they have destroyed
sum, and stayed other some through fear from helpinge forward the
kingedome of Christ, that they have obtained their purpose. But trewly the
lord will frustrate their expectation: ^dts glo^ cannot be ^ered.
because he will rather give mouths and tongues to stones than the kingedome
of his son should want witnesses. C. The priests and scribes speak in
contempt, saying, Doste thou hear what these say? As if they should say, Thou
sekest praise of these children which know not what they say.

But Jesus says unto them: why not? Bu. That is to say, I hear them well
enoughe. The which answer does constantely meintaine it, all doubt being
wholly taken away: but it seems to signify somewhat more, as if he should have
said, The voice which you your selves ought to utter, these children do
express.

Have ye never read: Out of the mouth of babes. C. The priests and Scribes
take occasion to calumniate of that, that he suffers him self to be called a
king of children: according to the manner of the wicked, which always prowdely
despise humillitie in the disciples of Christ. This malice Christ confuteth by
the testimony of the Prophet David, which makes infantes also to be
proclaymers of the glory of God, A. This place which our savior Christ
alleges is taken out of the.viii. Psalm, C where, Psalm. 8.
as towchinge the letter is thus written, Out of the mouth of very babes and
sucklings have thou ordained strength. By the which words the prophet means
yt although tongues hold their peace, yet God has no need of other
retoritians or eloquente persons, to set forth his power, than young
infantes, which as yet hang on their mothers breasts. They trewly are many,
but the wonderful prouydence of God, which shyneth in them, is like unto the
sound of great eloquence.

A. as if the Prophet David should have said. Thy wonderful works (O
Lord) which thou show in infants, (whom thou wonderfully preseruest) do
declare that thou art such a one which haste a care for mankind, by whose
providence all things are governed. There is no great need of eloquence to
extol and set forth thy power, the very infantes which suck their mothers
teates, do preach the same. C. For they which way and consider with them
selves how the child is begotten in the womb of his mother, how the same is
nourished there for the space of nine months, how the same at length is
wonderfully borne, and how it fyndeth food to nourishe it so soon as it
comes into the world: he must of necessity not only feel and confess that
God is the creator of the world, but also he shall wonder and merueyl at ye
same. Even so the Son and the Moon, although they be dombe creatures, yet
not withstanding they are said to preach and set forth the praises of God.
Yea treuly whatsoever is in heaven, and whatsoever is in the earth, although it
want a tongue, yet notwithstanding it sets forth the praise of God. To be
short, seeing in the tongue of infants the glory of God does sound, Christ
does hereby gather that it is no absurditye at all if he receive the praise of
Infants which are endewed with the use of speaking. As if he should say, If
Infants do preach the power of God to all men, why do ye count it an
unseemly thing that children should yield praises unto me at this day? For
these of the twain are more fete thereunto because they have their tongues.

By these words (but covertly) he proves him self to be God. M. There are
certain which say that the Lord usurped this place, not according to the
letter, (saying that they were neither sucklinges nor infants which cried
Hosanna in the temple: but children of more riper age then those of whom ye
Prophet makes mention in the Psalms) but according to the spirit of the
Prophet, whom they say had not respect in this place to infants and
suckelinges in age, but to children in spirit and estimation. Because the
lyttel children did give testimonye in the temple to the power of God, whom
the Scribes and Phariseis being enemies to God and desierouse of revenge and
bloody men did most obstinatly resist: therefore they think that this verse
was objected unto the^ of Christ But the former exposition is more apt, and
agreeable to the sense.

M. Moreover by this example we are taught not to be children in
understanding, but in malice, that we may deliver out of our mouths the praise
of God, to the confusion of wisdom and the power of this world, and that we
may instruct our children with a singular study to the praise of God, all
hypocrisy and dissimulation being set aparte.

17. And he left them and went out of the City unto Bethany and had his
abiding there.

And the left them. M. The Euangeliste Mark has. And when he had looked
round about upon all things, and now the even tide was come, he went out
unto Bethany with the twelve. Mark. 11.
Many show a reason why our Savior Christ did so, namely, because he would
not before the time give occasion to his enemies to lay hands on him. Unto
Bethany. Where he had raised Lazarus from death.

And had his abiding there. Desyring rather to have to do with the godly and
faithful, than to abide in the City which was so much corrupted.

18. In the morning as he returned into the City again, he hongred.

In the morning. M. That is to say retourning from Bethany. For the Evangelist
Mark has. When he went out of Bethany. C. For we must note that between that
sollem enteraunce of Christ into Jerusalem and the day of paseouer, he lodged
at Bethany: and the day time he came into the temple to teach. M. And so
writteth the Euangeliste Luke saying: In the day time he taught in the Temple:
and at night, he went out, and abode in the mount that is called Oliuete.
And all the people came in the morninge to him in the temple for to hear him.
Luke ^^
Mathewe and Mark make mention of the history which happened in the mean
time, namelye, that Christ coming into the City an hu^gered, came unto the
fig tree, and when he found nothing of the same but leaves he did curse it,
and the tree being accursed vanished away by and by. Yet notwithstanding the
narration of Mathewe and Mark seem somewhat to differ For Mathewe says that
this was done, the day after that Christ had professed him self to be a
King: But Mark reports it to be done the day following. Notwithstanding the
solucion is soon made: For in this they agree that Christ when he came into
the City the next day after his solemn enteraunce into the same, cursed the
tree. Only Mark expresses that which Mathewe omitteth, namely, that the
Disciples marked what was done by the witheringe of the tree the day
followinge. Although therefore that Mark more distinctlye noted the order of
the time, yet notwithstanding he does not disagree from Mathewe.

He returned into the City again. M. Let us here learn that Christ preached
the word in that place and time when all things were thought paste all hope
of recovery (as it seemed then to the Cittyzenes of Jerusalem): For all were
not past hope of amendment, but there remained some in whom the truth might
take place. He hongered. C. We doubt not but that all men will grant that
Christ did not feign this honger, but that he did truly feel and suffer ye
same For we know that of his own free will he was subject to our
infirmities: although his nature were freee and at liberty. As concerning the
which matter we may read more in the forth of Ihon.

19. And when he had spyed a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found
nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it: Never fruit grow on
thee henceforwardes. And anon the fig tree withered away.

And when he had espied the fig tree. E. Or a certain fig tree. For the
Hebrews usurp this word (wone) for certain.

He came to it and found nothing thereon. M. The Evangelist Mark adds. For
the time of figs was not yet come. C Therefore some here demand how he was
deceived sekinge fruit on a tree where none was to be found, ^^tion.
specially seeing that the time of bearing fruit was not yet come: then, why he
took such displeasure at the tree in the which there was no falte? But there
is no absurdity at al herein if we say that as he was man the kind of the tree
was unknown unto him: ^^ert.
notwithstanding it may be that he came of purpose knowinge well enoughe what
should come to pass. Certainly as he was man he might seek for meat well
enough. For we must always have this discretion and consideration in the
scriptures, that when mention is made of deuyne matters, we must consider of
God: and when mention is made of human things, then we must have respect
unto man: and in those things that pertain to the office of a Mediator, we
must consider that God is manifested in the flesh. The Godhead gave place so
often as it was necessary that the humanity should either do or suffer. He was
able by his word to provide meat for himself, yet notwithstanding he did it
not. Furthermore as he was God he knew that time of figs was not yet come.

Never fruit grovve on the henceforvvards. C. In that Christ curses the fig
tree, we must not so take it as though it were done in anger, or as though he
poured out his displeasure against the fig tree: as commonly blind rash and
unruly men are wont to do, who curse those things ye have no life, when they
can not frame them to their mind: for if he had thus done, his revenge should
not only have been unjust, but also childishe and rydi, culouse. But saying
that hunger was greuouse unto him by reason of the flesh he sought by a
contrary affection to overcome the same, to the end he might set forth the
glory of the father: Ihon. 4.
according to that which he says in an other place, My meat is to do the
will of my father. For there also he stryueth with werines and thirste. And we
may conjecture very probablye that hunger was an occasion unto him to show
forth a miracle, and to teach his disciples. Therefore when hunger oppressed
him, he having not meat in a readynes, he fedeth and satisfies him self by
an other means, namely by setting forth the glory of God. And he would
declare in the tree, what the end of Hypocrites shall be, and how vain and
friuolouse their oftentation and bragginge is.

And anon the fygtree vvythered away. C. Here by we may learn of what forte
the word of cursinge is, namelye, that the tree might be condemned of
vnfruitefulnes: even as likewise God does bless when by his voice he
inspireth fertillitie and fruitefulnes into any thing what soever

20 And when his Disciples saw it, they meruailed saying. How sone is the
fygtree wythered away?

And when his disciples. C It is evident by the words of Mark, that the
fygtree did not wyther out of hand, or at least that it was not marked of the
Disciples, until they saw the next day followinge that it was void of all
greuenes. And the same Mark also, assigns that to Peter, which Matthewe
attributes to all the disciples: but seeing that Christ does answer in the
plural number, we may easily gather that one demanded the question in the
name of the rest.

21. Jesus answered and said unto the^: verily I say unto you. If ye have
faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this, that is happened unto the fig
tree: but also if ye shall say to this mountain, remove and cast thy self
into the sea it shall be done.

If ye have faith. C. Our Savior Christ does farther extend the use of the
miracle, to the end he might animate his Dsciples to faith and trust. M. And
whereas Christ does answer as concerning the power of faith, and not of
the mystery which he had in hand, it was done by ye wisdom of the spirit,
which frames all things to the proffite of the hearers. It was better by this
deed to admonish the Disciples what the power of faith was, that they might
crave the same, than to expound what this deed did signify mistically, But
these words which we read here are as much in effect as if Christ should
have said: Marvel not without reason at that which was done, but know and
understand ye whereby it was done, namely by the power of God: but and if ye
would have the same to appear unto you, have confidence in God, as says the
Euangeliste Mark. We are said to have confidence in God, Confidence in God.
when we have respect to God alone, C. And do promise unto our selves and look
for those things at the hands of God whereof we have need. Faith therefore
is not a confused opinion of God, but a certain persuasion as concerning the
promises of God.

And doubt not. E. The Euangeliste Mark has. And doubts not in his heart.
And as it were declaring what it is to doubt, he adds by and by saying:
Doubti^g puts away faith.
But shall believe that those things which he says shall come to pass,
whatsoever he says he shall have. Where doubtinge is there faith is wantyng.
And there is no access unto God without faith when we do certainlye determine
to have our prayers heard of God, and do doubt nothing of this matter.

But if ye shall say to this mountain. C. Christ does not here teach that
hills may be removed, but shows only the certainety of faith. They which
cleave unto the Lord by a sure and undoubted faith, are able (the Lord when
he sees good aydinge them) to do that which seems impossible to flesh. A.
Read the seuentene chapter goinge before where Christ teaches the self same
thing.

22. And all things that ye ask in prayer (if ye believe) ye shall receive them.

And all things that ye shall ask in prayer. C. Because faith, (if there be
any at all) bursteth forth into prayers, and pearceth even to the treasurs of
the grace of God, (which are declared by the word) to enjoy them, therefore
Christ joins prayer to faith. For if he should have said that we shall
have whatsoever we wish for, faith might seem to some imperiouse or to
secure. Wherefore Christ does show that they do treuly believe, which bearing
them selves bold of his goodness, and promises, do humblely flee unto him. A.
Therefore the Euangeliste Mark as it were expounding what it is to believe,
wrote saying, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those
things which he says shall come to pass, whatsoever he says he shall have.
Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Mar. ^
C. This place serves very well to express and set forth the force and
nature of faith, namely because the certainty and assurance rests in the
goodness of GOD, which puts away all doubt. For Christ does not
acknowledge any to believe, but those which do undoubtedly persuade them
selves that God is favorable unto them, and doubt not but that he will grant
whatsoever they ask. Whereby we may see how diuelishelye Papists were
bewitched, which affirm that we ought to doubt of our salvation: yea they
say that it is foolish presumption, if we persuading our selves of the
fauore of God toward us, dare present our selves before him.

And yet treuly the Apostell Paul does specially commend this: The (...)
would (...) us do^ saluati^
benefit of Christ because by faith in him we have bouldnes and confidence to
come unto God. Furthermore this place teaches that the true example of faith
is contained in prayers. ^ection.
If any man do obiecte these petitions were never heard of that mountains
should cast themselves into the sea, ^nswere.
we may easily answer that Christ did not give liberty to the fond and
unlawful requests of men, when he joins prayers to the rule of faith. For
so it is necessary that the spirit of God do bring into obedience all our
affections being bridled by the word of God. Our savior Christ does require
and undoubted faith and trust of prayer with out wavering. But how shall the
mind of man conceive the same but by the word of God. We se therefore now,
that our Savior Christ does promise nothing to his Disciples, except they
keep them selves within the limits of his divine will. A. Hereupon the Apostell
Saint Ihon says. ^^n. 5.
This is the trust that we have to Godwardes, that if we ask any thing of him
according to his will he hears us.

23. And when he was come into the temple, the chief Priests and elders of the
people came unto him (as he was teachinge) and said. By what authority doeste
thou these things, and who gave thee this authority?

And when he was come into the Temple. Bu. Christ our Savior before as he
bare the office of a King expulsed and cast out of the Temple all those that
bought and soulde in the same: and now according to his priestly office also,
he teaches the people in the Temple, fulfilling both the office of a priest
and a king, together. This thing did greatly burn and vex the minds of the
chief priests and elders. M. For these men saw the great glory of his
miracle, and the feruente affection of the people toward Christ: they felt
and perceived a certain authority of the teacher, and of him which purged the
temple: by all ye which things they looked for nothing but for the contempt
of his authority and power, and the obscuration of his wanted glory. C. But
because their other counsels and devises had not prospered and taken effect,
and their practices by the which they went about to resist him being
manifest, now they go about to prove if peradventure they might put him from
the office of teachinge.

They seem not to doubt of the doctrine it self whether it were true or
false: the proof whereof they had often times already in vain attempted:
neither durst they reprehende the glory of the miracles, because he always
set forth the divine power of God: but by an other way they go about to
reproach him, namelye by mouinge a controversy or doubt as concerning his
calling, and commandemente. M. They saw that he had neither any principal
or priestly form or show of power, as touching this world, which did these
great and wajghty matters: the which if any man do without authority, he is
worthelye counted rash and seditiouse. They come therefore with a great
appearance and oftentation of power, demaundinge by what authority he does
that which he does. For they thought by this question they might convince
him either as a blasphemer if he said that he did these thindes by the power
of God, seeing he was a man: or else as a seditiouse person, if he answered
that he used his own authority. They dispute not therefore as concerning his
doctrine (as we said eue^ now) but as concerning formalitye (as we term it)
as if they should have said. Although thy doctrine be true, yet
notwithstanding thou ought not to presume to teach without thou be
licenced thereunto by our authority. C. This truly was a special cooler: for
saying it became no man either to intrude him self into the honor of the
priestehoode, or into ye office of a Prophet but should wait for the calling
of God: much less was it mete for any man to take unto him the name of the
Messiah, unless he were certainlye known to be chosen by God: because it was
necessary that he should not only be appointed by ye voice of god, but also by
an oath, as it is written in the Psalm where it is said: The Lord swear and
will not repent: Psalm. 110.
thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech But they deal
wickedly and peruersely, seeing that the divine majesty of Christ by so many
wonders and signs was declared, to ask (as though they were the most ignorant
of al men) from whence he came For what can be more absurd, than when they see
the hand and power of God to be openly declared, as by making the lame to
walk, and the blind to see, to doubt whether any private man can rashely take
unto him this liberty or no? But in deed they could not but confess that
Christ was sent from heaven, and that God was the author of the works that
he did. They stand therefore upon this, that he is not the lawful minister of
God, whom they by their authorite do not license, as though the power
hereunto belonginge did wholly rest in them. But truly although they were the
lawful gouerners of the Church, yet notwithstanding it was a monstrouse thing
in them to bear themselves against God.

Now let us note why Christ does not directly answer unto them: surely
because the thing which they demanded of him without shame, was most manifest
and plain.

The chief priests and elders came unto him. A. The Evangelist Mark says
that as he walked in the temple there came to him the hie priests, and the
Scribes, and the elders, and said unto him: by what authority do thou these
things?

And who gave thee this authority? Repeticion is often times used in the
Scriptures

24. Jesus answered an said unto the^: I also will ask of you a certain
thing which if ye tell me I likewise well tell you by what authority I do these
things.

Jesus ansvvered and said. M. The Lord understanding their craft and
subtiltye does not simplely answer to their demand: (because they did not
demand this question simplely to learn, but to in trappe ye answerer): but
sets one question against an other, that he might take and confound the
crafty in their wylines. Therefore he says.

I also will ask of you a certain thing. Our Savior Christ might seem
here to give an evil example in denyinge to give a reason of his calling. But
it is not so: For in this question there was contained a full and perfect
answer by the which he did satisfye the aduersarys. For when S. Ihon had
witnessed that Jesus was the son of GOD, the Phariseis no doubt being
taught of him, ought to have acknowledged Jesus to be the messenger of God,
whereby they could not doubt, by what authority he did both preach and
show forth miracles: For they held S. Ihon as the Prophet of God, sent of
God, to whom they gave great credit.

The Lord also by his demand would evidently declare how wicked and
maliciouse the hye priests and Phariseys were, not only for resisting him,
but also because they had showed the like malice toward others, namely
toward S. Ihon the Baptiste: in whom when they could find no falte they
rejected his doctrine and ministration of Baptism: that it might be no
marvel if they did the like here to him. For when as all the people believed
Ihon the Baptiste to be a Prophet sent of God, and therefore received his
Baptism, and the hye priests Scribes and elders of the people contemned the
same (as we may read in the seventh of Luke where they are said to contemn
the counsel of God) Our Savior Christ going about to call to mind this
their former obstinacye obiecteth unto them this question to the end he might
detecte and uncover their deceit, by the which they would seem to be led by
a certain zeal of defendinge the people, least by a contrary and false
doctrine they should be seduced by those which had received no power of God.

25. The baptism of Ihon: whence was it? from heaven or of men. And they
thought among them selves saying: if we say from heaven, he will say unto
us: Why did ye not believe him?

The baptism of Ihon. C. He does ask them of the baptism of S. Ihon, not
only that he might show that they were unworthy of al authority, because they
had despised the holy Prophet of God: but also that he might reprove them by
their own answer, that they imprudentlye feigned ignorance in a matter so
well and euidentlye known. S. Ihon was sent to be the fore roonner of Christ
that he might prepare the way before him: he had pointed out Christ with the
finger, and had witnessed that he was the only son of God. Whereupon therefore
will the Scribes now prove unto them selves the new authority of Christ,
when as S. Ihon by his preaching had brought sufficient credit to the same?
Therefore that, whereof we spoke even now, seems to be true: namely that
Christ did not use any subtilty to escape, but did sou^dely in all points
satisfye the question objected against him. For Ihon could not be
acknoweledged to be the servant of God except the Lord him self were
acknowledged also. So that he did not imbolden and encourage troublesome and
perverse persons which rashely without the commandment of God usurp unto
them selves public authority: neither did he also by his example teach any
man subtly to hyde and conceal the truethe, as many crafty persons falsely
Imagine him to be the author. ^th must ^es be ^ed.
It is certainlye true that we must not always answer alike, when the wicked
craftily go about to deceive us: but we must so wisely be ware and take heed of
their malice, that the truth may always have her dew defense. By the
Baptism of S Ihon he understands all that pertained to the office of S.
Ihon, ^. 1. and. 3.
yea his doctrine also. For by and by it follows that the hye priests
gathered of the words of the Lord thus: If we say from heaven: he will say
unto us why do ye not believe it? But we believe his doctrine. For he taught
that Jesus was the son of God, (...). 19.
and that the father had given unto him all power. And it shall not be amiss
if by this word Baptism we understand the Sacrament of Baptism. For Ihon
Baptized with the Baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they
should believe on him, which should come after him: that is on Christ Jesus.

C. To be short Baptism in this place is taken for the whole ministry of
Ihon. For Christ went about to draw out an answer whether Ihon were ye true
and lawful Prophet of God, or whether he were a deceauer. Notwithstanding
this demand does contain a profitable doctrine, namely whether the Baptism
of Ihon were of God, or of men: because thereby we gather that no doctrine, nor
any holy sign ought to be admitted among the Godly, except it be well known
that the sam came from God, and that it is not in the hands of men to inuente
any thing. Mention is made of Ihon, whom the Lord in an other place with a
singular titel and name extolleth above al other Prophets. Yet notwithstanding
his Baptism is denied of our Savior Christ to be received except it had been
commanded of God. Math. 11.
What shall we say then of the feigned and false invented Sacraments which
were foolishelye brought in of men without the conmandements of God. For our
Savior Christ by these words does plainly pronounce that the whole
government of the Church does so depend upon the will and pleasure of God,
that it is not lawful for men to bring in any thing of them selves. Bu. That
is said to be of heaven, which is usurped among men by the appointmente and
ordinance of God. And that is said to be of men, which is invented and
decreed at the will and pleasure of man contrary to the ordinance of God. So
Gamaliell said. For if this consell or this work be of me^ it will come to
naught, but and if it be of God ye can not destroy it, least happily ye be
found to strive against God. He says that to be of men, which is invented by
the wicked affection of man, as by the faction, and sedition of Theudas, and
Judas of Galile. The words of Christ therefore are in effect as if he
should have said, Act. 5.
I demand of you whether the Baptism and doctrine of S. Ihon were invented
of Ihon, or whether it were committed unto him of God.

And they thought within them selves. C. Here we may behold the impiety of
the hye priests. They consider not of the truth neither do they enter into
their conscience, but do rather seek to resist than to confess that which
they know to be true. Even so all the wicked ones, although they feign them
selves to be desirouse to learn, yet notwithstanding they will not give place
to the truth, if they perceive that it is contrary to their desire. Why did
ye not believe him? A. He bearing witness of me, affirming that I was the son
of God, and that all my deeds are directed by she power of God Bu. For if they
had confessed that Ihon had been a Prophet, and that he had received his
office from heaven, they must needs have confessed that Jesus was Christ,
John. 3.
and that he did all those things that he did in the name of his Father.

For Ihon had said unto them that the Father had given all things into the
hands of his son. M. Behold these wicked ones here confess yt he is worthy
to be reprehended which beleuinge the doctrine to be of God, will not embrace
and follow the same.

26. But if we shall say: of men, then fear we the people. For all men held
Ihon as a Prophet.

But if we shall say. M. Instead of these words, the^ fear we the people,
the Evangelist Luke has. The multitude will stone us. By the which we have to
note that the wicked stand in fear of their life. Fear and vain glory are
always Joined with impiety.
For these two vices are always Joined with impiety, the study of vain
glory, and fear, not of God, but of mortal men.

For all men held Ihon as a Prophet. A. That is (according to Luke) the
people were persuaded that Ihon was a Prophet.

27. And they answered Jesus and said: we can not tell. And he said unto
them: neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.

They answered Jesus. Bu. When they would confess neither of them, they
impudently deny them selves to know that, whereof they were not ignorante.
Therefore the wisdom of God makes the wisdom of man ashamed, and dryueth
it to such shifts, that it can not answer. Neither tell I you. M. If he
would have followed the order and manner of their answer he should have said,
Neither do I know in what power I do these things: because they said, we
know not: but he says not so: First because he could not lie. For he knew
by what authority he did those things that he did. Secondly, because he knew
that they did not simplely answer when they said we know not, but fained
ignorance, he thought it better to answer, that he would not than that he
could not. As if he should have said: Seeing ye will not answer to that which
ye know, neither will I answer plainly and directly to that which ye demand.
For after this manner he made as it were a covenant or promise that he would
declare what power he used, if they had told whence the Baptism of Ihon had
been.

C. Howbeit Christ sends them not away without answer but makes the^
confounded and ashamed, sufficientlye declaring by the testimony of Ihon, that
he had power and authority from God.

Bu. Whereupon also we learn to give credit unto Christ, because all his deeds
are done by divine power and authority.

28. What say you to this. A man had two sons, and came to the first and
said: Son go and work to day in my vineyarde.

What say you to this. C. These words do show to what end this parable
tends, when as Christ prefers those before the Scribes and Phariseys,
which were odiouse and detestable among all men. For he takes away the
collored cloak from these hypocrites, to the end they should no more boaste
them selves for the ministers of God, and seem to be studiouse of Godlynes
which they regarded not. For although their ambition, pride, crueltye, and
covetousness were known to all men, yet notwithstanding they would have borne
a face and countenance of other me^. And of late when they came to our Savior
Christ they falsely seemed to be careful for the order of the Church, as though
they had been faithful and honest defenders of the same. Seeing therefore they did
so groselye dally with God and man, Christ refelleth their impudency, showing
that they were nothing less than those manner of men which they boasted
themselves to be, and that they were so far from that dignity in yt which
they pleased them selves, that they were far inferior to the publicans and
harlots. For whereas they boasted them selves to be the best worshippers of God
and the faithfullest obseruers of the law, our Savior Christ says that
this is even as if the son should promise, to fulfill his fathers
commandment, and yet not withstanding discharges the same in no point. For
(says he) how think you of this that I will show unto you? Here he reproves
the of impenitencye because they continue obstinat against God, and turn them
not unto him: when as nevertheless they would seem to be the sons of God
and the doers of his will.

And this is the Scope of the parable, as he himself expounds in the two and
thirty verse following. In that exposition, to the end he might express their
malice and obstinacy he uses a collation, comparinge them not to their
equals, but to their inferiors: for what was more inferior to the hye
Pristes, Scribes, and Phariseys, then publicans and harlots.

29. He answered and said I will not, but afterward he repented and went.

C. Here he sets forth the type of publicanes and harlots, whose life says
nothing less than we will not do the will of God. Such were Mathewe, Zache, and
the sinful woman of whom saint Luke makes mention in the vij. chapt.

30. Then came he to the second and said likewise. And he answered and said:
I will sir, and went not.

Then came he to the second. E. Our Savior Christ goes forward with the
parable bringinge in here the answer of the other which said. (...) ^9.
(...) 19. (...) ^7.


I will sir. These words are read in all Greeks books and in the old Latin
interpretor. It is a kind of speech declaringe a man to be ready and at hand
to do any thing. C. Specially belonging to the Hehrewes. For when the Hebrews
go about to offer their endeavor, and declare that they are in a redynes to
fulfill any thing, they speak after this manner: Behold I am here Lord. Even
so the child Samuel when he thouhgte that he was called of Heli, said I am
here. For the which the Lattines have I am ready or at hand. M. This son
did represente the hye Priests Scribes and Phariseys, 1. King 3.
who in words and profession said. Behold Lord we are here, and are ready
to do what soever thou commaundest, but in deed they did nothing less. C. It
is a virtue deserving great praise to fulfill with all diligence the will of
God so soon as by his word he has commanded the same. But as our Savior
Christ does not here commend the promisinge of that which we fulfill not, so
he does not allow negligence or starknes in the Lords business: for to promise,
and boaste of that which we do not, is mere hypocsyire, an a vice less
tolerable a great deal.

31. Whether of them twain did the will of the father? And they said unto
him: the first. Jesus says unto them: verily I say unto you: the publicans
and harlotes go into the kingdom of God before you.

Whether of them. M. To do the will of the father is (as it follows by and
by) to repent and believe the Gospel: which is to enter into the kingdom of
God.

And they said unto him. M. Here our Savior Christ does by force wreste out
of their mouths their own Judgment against the^ selves: even as Nathan
caused David to do. Bu They could not say before the people, we know not, 2.
King. 12.
to this question without to great impudencye, but they are constrained by
reason of the manifest verity to answer that which was true.

The publicanes and harlots. When he had heard their answer he declares to
what end he propounded the parable, namelye that he might declare that they by
their impenitency and hardness of heart deprived them selves of the kingdom of
God, the which they did not now only show, but also before when John came.

Go into the kingdom of God before you. By those words our Savior Christ
means that the publicanes and harlots were more ready to repent them and to
believe the Gospel than were the hye Priests Scribes and Phariseys. For thus
does the verse followinge teach us to expound it. But we must not
understand this word (go before) as though the hye Priests Scribes and
elders should follow the Publicanes and harlots into the kingdom of heaven.
For the words following do deny that, where it is said. And ye when ye had
seen it were not moved afterward with repentance that ye might have believed him.
Moreover the parable following does sufficiently declare how greatly they were
hardened in their malice For although some of them (as we may read in the
Acts) were afterward converted to the faith: Act. 6.
yet notwithstanding this priestlye corporation, or state of the hye priests,
here Scribes and elders of ye people abode in their unbelief. Also we se here
how hard a thing it is to bring them to repentance, Hypocrite^ are hardlye
brought to repentance.
which being most ungodly, yet hypocritically boaste them selves to be the
true worshipers of God. Yea this is so hard a thing that it is more easy to
bring the vilest sinners to a new and reformed life. Wherefore it is no
merueyle if these kind of hypocrites in our time can by no means be brought
to repentance. There is no doubt but that the Phariseys took it greuouslye at
the last to be compared to publicanes and sinners of most wicked name, when as
they thought scorn to have the holiest sort of men compared unto them. C. Now
let us note the purpose of Christ. He does not only reprehende the Scribes
and Phariseys because they obstinatlye resisted GOD, and because they repented
not being so often admonished, but he spoyleth and takes from them that honor
whereof they were unworthy: because their impiety was more abominable, than the
lasciuiouse wyckednes of harlotes. For the one was hypocrisye, the other
whoredom: Of the which euells the first is most abominable in the sight of
God.

32. For John came unto you by the way of righteousness and ye believed him not:
but publicanes and harlotes believed him. And ye (when ye had seen it) were not
moved afterward to repentance that ye might have believed him.

For John came. C. Saying that John was the faythefull minister of GOD,
whatsoever he taught, Christ attributes it to the person of GOD himself.
It had been a more perfect speech to have said, GOD came shewinge the way
of righteousness by the mouth of Saint John: but because S. John did not speak
in the name of GOD as a private man, he is iustlye as a substitute set in the
place of God.

Also this place brings no small authority to the preaching of the word,
Luke. ^ Ihon. 1^
when they are said to be rebels against the same which despise the Godly
admonitions of the teachers.

A. Whereupon our Savior Christ said not in vain to his Aposteles, he
which hears you hears me, he which despises you despises me.

And in an other place: Desp^ Gode^ ^sters ^bels t^
Whosoever receaueth whom I send receaueth me: and he that receaueth me
receives him that sent me. C. There are some which more subtly expound the
name of righteousness, but here it seems to signifye nothing else, than that
the doctrine of Saint John was pure and true: 1. John
as if he should have said there was no cause why they should reiecte the
same. For whosoever receives not the true minister of GOD he is a rebel to
God. He says therefore that they have no excuse to lay for them selves.

And ye believed him not. Namelye when he testified and declared that I was the
Son of GOD, and the lamb or sacrifice of GOD taking away the sins of the
world. Ye were not moved to repentance. C. He amplifieth their obstinacye
because they were moved and stirred up by no example: the which was a sign of
extreme desperation. As if he should have said. When ye saw that publicanes
and harlotes entered into the Kingdom of heaven before you by the changinge of
their former life, and repentance, being moved by the doctrine of John, (whom
they believed preaching me to be the Messiah,) ye were moved nothing at all to
repent and believe him. M. The hye priests swellinge with arrogance and
disdain, would not receive and embrace any way if they themselves were not
the first that had received it, although it were just and right, leadinge to
life, least these great ones and of hye degree might seem to follow the
Judgment of the lesser and inferior sort. Furthermore, they thinking that it
was not lawful for any man to attempt any thing without their power and
authority, sought rather to persiste and abide by impenitency in their evil,
than to put on the shame and dishonestye of the priestlye state, and so rather
to look for the terrible Judgment of God, and eternal punisheme^t, than to
forgo their former glory. C. Moreover, when Christ says here that the
publicanes believed, he does not only mean yt they agreed to the word, but
also that they with an earnest affection Embraced that which they heard. (...)
const^ hea^ word (...) and in ^his will
Whereby we gather that faith does not only consiste in subscribinge to the
true doctrine, but also in framing our lives according to the will of God, which
will we learn by his word.

33. Harken an other similitude. There was a certain man an householder, which
planted a vineyarde, and hedged it round about and made a wine press in it,
and builte a tower, and let it out to husband men, and went into a strange
country.

There was a certain man. Bu. There was no exhortation to repentance that
could prevail anythyng at all with the adversaries of the Lord were it never
so vehement, neither were the examples of the faithful in any point regarded
with them: for they constantly went forward in their unbelief: wherefore the
Lord in the parable following declares unto them the Judgment of God. C. and
makes them inexcusable, that they might have no occasion to pleate
ignorance. Notwithstanding the words of Luke do seem somewhat to disagree
with the words of our Euangeliste Mathewe, who says that Christ spoke
unto the multitude: Answer.
although he direct his words unto them, yet notwithstanding he detected
and uncovered their ignominy and shame before the whole multitude.

The Euangeliste Mark, when he says that Christ began to speak in parables,
he omitteth that which by order should first have been spoken: even as in
other places, of the whole sum, he toutcheth but part. But the sum of this
parable is, that it is no new thing if the Priests and other Rulers of the
Church wickedly go about to defraude God of his right: For with like cruelty
not long before they raged against the Prophets, and now they are ready to
kill the Son of God him self: But they shall not escape unpunished, because
GOD at the length will revenge his own right. And he uses this parable to
two ends, namely that he might cast the wicked ingratitude of the hye
Priests in their teeth: and that he might take away the offense which
approached by his death at hand. For they had brought to pass by a false
tytell, and had got such credit among, the ignoraunte multitude and simple
people, that Religion did stand at their will and pleasure among the Jews.
Christ therefore does fortify the weak before hand, and teaches that seeinge
so many Prophets before time were slain one upon an other by the hye
Priests, there was no cause why any manne should be troubled now if the
like example also were showed forth in his person. Bu. In the end of the
parable he plainly declares that the Jews must be rejected, and that the
Gentills must be chosen in their place. C. But now let us consider of every
part as it lies in order.

Which planted a vyneyarde. Note here that the vine was planted of God,
whereupon the Prophet Esaias calls it ye flower of the Lords pla^ting.
Moreover Christ himself says.

Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be plucked up by
the roots. Math 15.
Bu. They with whom Christ had to do were not ignorant that this parable was
fet even from the Monuments of the Prophets. C. For this similitude of the
vine is often red in the Scriptures as in Deutronomye, in Esaias, Deuteronomy. 32. Esaias.
5. Jeremy 2. Psalm. 8.
in Jeremy, and in the Psalms. The householder, is God: the vine, is the house
of Israel, as says the Prophet Esaias in his fyfte chap. C. But our Savior
Christ only means in this place, that when he sets the Pastors of his
Church in authority over the same, he does not commit unto them his right,
but does even as if a householder should committ his vine or filde to a
husbandman, Esaias, 5.
which bestowinge his labor in tillinge the same, pays his yerelye fruit
thereof. And as in the places of Esaias and Jeremy before cited he complains
that he has received no fruit, in fillinge whereof he had bestowed great
labor and cost: even so in this place he accuses the vine dressers
themselves, which as violent robbers rake unto themselves the yearly proffite
of the vine. But God planted the vine, when he being mindful of his free
adoption, separated the people. being delivered out of Egipte as peculiar unto
him self, and did promise that he would be their God and Father, calling the^
into the hope of everlasting salvation. Esaias. 60.
This is that planting whereof mention is made in the. 60. chapter of Esaias, and
in other places also.

And hedged it round about. M. The diligence of God toward his people is
expressed: Esaias. 5.
as if he should have said.

What is there more that might have been done to my vineyarde, that I have not
done? And made a wine press in it, and built a tovver. C. By the wynepresse
and tower also, we may understand all those small things and of littell
weight which were adjoined to the doctrine of the law to nourishe and
increase the faith of the people: as Sacrifices and other ceremonies. For God
is like unto a prouidente and careful householder, which is negligente in
nothing, but provides and defends this Church in all things. And let it
out to husband men. C. God truly of him self is able without the aid and
help of man to defend and maintain the well ordered state of his Church:
but he takes unto him men, as ministers, and uses their hands as means.
God (...) not man's help.
Even so in time paste he appointed priests, which should be as it were
trimmers of his vine, But this is to be noted, that when Christ says that
the husbandemen received the vine well ordered and trimmed in all points at the
hands of the householder, he does not a littel set forth their falte. For
the more liberally that they were delte with all, so much the more hatred was
their ingratitude worthy of. This argument the Apostell Paul uses when he
goes about to exhort the pastors boldly to discharge their office,
because they are chosen stewards to govern the house of God, which is the
pillar and ground of truth. 1. Tim^
And he uses it well. For the more excellent and honorable their condition is,
the more they are bound unto God dilligentlie to discharge their work and
office.

So that their ingratitude and wickedness is most detestable, which lightly
regard so great liberality of God and honor also bestowed upon them.

A. As concerning this work in the vineyarde, the Apostel writteth after this
sort saying. M. He made some Apostels, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
shepeheardes, and teachers: Ephe^
to the edifying of the saints, to the work and ministracio^, even to the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of faith, and
knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the full
perfect age of Christ. Except the vine be daily trimmed and cut it can not
bring forth fruit: so that the Lord has appointed that it shall be ordered
as it ought to be. Let the faithful therefore remember that they have need
of his dressinge, and that without it they can not bring forth fruit.

And went into a strange country. Bu. This is spoken according to imitacion
and the manners of men, which after they have committed their possessions or
lands to their tenantes and fermers depart into some other place. But the Lord
never departs, but daily works all in all. S. By these words he only
notes the expectation which the Lord of the house has for the fruit of his
vine. For the Lord speaking of his vine by the mouth of the Prophets says, I
looked that it should have brought forth grapes and it brought forth thorns.
And he declaring in the seventh verse following what he meant by Grapes says,
^y. 5.
he looked for equity, but see there is wrong.

34. And when the time of the fruit drew nere, he sent his servants to the
husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.

And when the time of the fruit. Bu Hitherto he has made mention of the
benefits showed upon this people: now it follows how unjustly they
recompensed so loving and beneficial a Father.

He sent his servants. His servants were the Prophets, by whom the Lord
urged the priests to render frut unto god. But it is merueyle why Christ
compares the Prophets to servants, who, the grape gatheringe time being
paste, are sent to require fruit. ^stion.
For we know also that they were vinedressers, and that the same office that
was enjoined the Priests, belonged unto them.

We answer that it was not necessary that Christ should exactly, ^swere.
or scrupulouslye express, what was like or unlike between these two orders.
The priests certainlye in the beginning were ordained for this cause, that
they with sound doctrine should perfectlye and truly til and instruct the
Church. But when they neglected the work committed unto them by slothful
negligence, the Prophets were sent as extraordinary helpers to purge and take
away al wedes that were hurtefull to the vine and supplied the want of the
Priests. Notwithstanding in the mean time they did sharpelye reprehende the
people, they restored the decayed godlynes, they wakened sleapie minds, and
brought again the worship of God, and a new life.

And what other thing was this than to require the yearly proffite dew unto
God out of the vine? The which thing, Christ both aptly and truly applies to
his purpose.

35. And the husband men caughte his servants, and bet one, killed an other,
and stoned an other.

And the husbandmen caughte. C. Here the Evangelists Mark and Luke differ
somewhat from Mathewe. For our Euangeliste Mathewe says that he sent many
servants, and when those were evil entreated he makes mention of the sending
of a greater number: but the other two say that he sent them one after an
other, and not two or three at once- But we must note that although ye purpose
of the Evangelists was all one, namely, that ye Jews durst deal so with the
son as they had dealte oftentimes with the Prophets before: yet
notwithstanding Mathewe does more exprestye declare the matter it self,
namely, that the Lord by sending so many Prophets did contend with the malice
of ye priests. Whereby it does appear how incurable their madness was, which by
no means could be corrected, and amended.

Beat one, killed an other. S. The priests allowing and upholding the false
Prophets which prophessed lies (as says the Prophet Jeremy) killed the true
Prophets of God. Iere 5.
Some of the Prophets they did beat, as Ieremye and Mycheas: Some of them
they killed, as Esaias and Amos: and some they stoned in the temple* as Zacharias
and Barachias.

36. Again he sent other servants, mo then the first, and they did unto
them likewise.

Again he sent. S. They slew also the Prophets that came in the latter
days, among whom S. John the Baptiste was one. As concerning these we
read thus: Moreover all the Rulers, the Priests, and the people trespassed
more: synning after all the abhominacions of the heathen, and polluted the
house of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the Lord GOD of
their fathers sent to them by his messengers, risyng up betimes and sending,
for he had compassion on his people, and one his dwellinge place. 2. Cron. 36.
But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused
his Prophets until the wrath of the Lord arose against this people, and
till there was no remedy. And Christ himself says. Behold I send unto you
Prophets, and wise men and Scribes and some of them ye shall kill and crucify,
and some of them ye shall scourge in your Synagoges, Math. 23.
and persecute from City to City. And again he says: Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
which killest the Prophets, and stoniest them which are sent unto thee. Luke
13.


37. But last of all he sent unto them his own Son, saying: they will
stand in awe of my son.

But last of all he sent his. A. The goodness of God (as we said before)
contendeth with the malice of the Priests. For although certain of the Jews
did not believe yet notwithstanding their unbelief could not make the faith of
God of none effect. Christ was that immaculate lamb, which was ordained of
God to be a sacrifice before the foundation of the world: Romans 3.
it was necessary therefore that he should be made manifest in these latter
days, and that he should be sent into this world for the truth of God to
confirm the promises made unto the fathers. Romans 15.
Moreover God in times paste diversely and many ways spoke unto the fathers by
Prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his own Son,
Heb. 1.
whom he has made heir of al things. They vvil stand in awe of my Son.
E. The Evangelist Luke has: Peradventure they will stand in awe of my Son.
But this (peradventure) is not found neither in the Greek books, nether in
the old Lattine books. C. The which cogitatio^ truly does not properly
belong unto God. For he knew what would come to pass without all
peradventure: so that he was not deceived by hope of better chance. But in
parables, we do often times see that human affections are attributed unto him.

Notwithstanding this sentence was not without cause added of our Savior
Christ, because he would thereby declare as in a glass how far pass all
recouerye their wickedness was grown, the which they, to evidently declared in
risynge with deuelishe fury against the son of God which came to bring them
to perfect health.

38. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among them selves: this
is the heir: come let us kill him, and let us inioye his inheritance.

But when the husbandmen. A. Now he declares how his son was received of
them. They said among them selves. E. The Greek word is somewhat doubtefull,
whether it signify, within themselves, or among the^ selves, howbeit ye most
fete se^ce is, among them selves yt thereby we may understand that they had
secret talk among them selves of this conspiracye. But they spoke these
words within the^ selves, when (in spite of their teeth) they were
constrained to think him to be the Messiah: and when they said, If we let him
escape thus, all men will believe in him, and the Romans shall come, John. 1^.
and take away both our room and the people. Come let us kill him. They spoke
this when Cayphas said. It is expedient for you that one man dye, for the
people, and not that all the people perish. Also, away with him, crucify him.

And let us inioye his inheritance. John. 11.
Bu. As if they should have said: John. 1^
This man challenges the vineyarde for his inheritance making him self the
King of the people of God: He arrogateth to himself equal with the Father:
come hither therefore and let us kill this blasphemouse person, whereby we
may in safety enjoy his inheritance. The inheritance of the Lord is the power
of all things, the people of God, the holy City, the dignity of the
priestehode, and the government among saints. To the end therefore (say
they) it may be lawful for us to retain and keep the dignitye of the
priestehode, and the government over the people let us kill him, least
peradventure the Romans hearing that a king and savior is come unto us,
set upon us with battle, spoil our city, lead our people into captivity,
and burn our temple. A. This was the wicked madness of the priests.

C For as they by their cruel murder of the prophets, did thruste and
deprive God (so much as in them lay) from his inheritance: even so this was
the heap of all mischiefs, to kill the son, that they might raygne as in an
house without an heir. For this was the cause that the adversaries did so rage
against Christ least they should forgo and loose their tyranny as a pray.
For he it is by whom God the father will rule, and to whom he has given all
empire, Therefore the ambition and covetousness of the prestes is noted, which
went about to usurp unto them selves the gouernemente of the vyneyarde, they
them selves being but servants. This is an exaumple worthy to be noted of
the ministers of the Church, ^rs of ^rche ^des ^es.
to the end they may remember that they are Gods servants, and how that
they ought not challenge and take to them selves his authority and rule, but
so to labor in the vyneyarde, that the fruit thereof may remain to God, and
that they may only seek for his glory. A. For so the lord said unto his
Apostelles, (...) ^5.
I have chosen you and ordained you to go and bring forth fruit, and that
your fruit should remain.

39 And they caught him and thrust him out of the vineyarde and slew him.

And they caught him. A. That wicked and cruel decree of the Phariseies
against the professors of Christ is well enough known, (...) ^9.
by the which they conspired that if any confessed him to be Christ he
should be cast out of the synagogge.

Moreover when they rated the blind man they said. Be thou his disciple, for
we are Moses disciples.

And slevve him. Bu. For the Lord Jesus being taken, and being condemned as
ablasphemer, and an excommunicate person, was delivered to Pilate to be
crucified. But the rulers of the people were in this point chiefly to be
blamed, which persuaded foolish and common people, (...) 27.
that they should ask to have Christ given them to be crucified, and Barrabas
to be loused.

40 When the lord therefore of the vineyarde comes, what will he do unto
those husband men?

Bu. Here the Judgment of God is showed, which is prepared for all
rebellyouse, obstinate and unthankful persons. For God the father cannot
leave such horrible and crewell contempt of his only begotten son
unpunished.

A. For he had also spoken to them by Moses, saying: Deuteronomy. 18.
Whosoever will not harken unto the words of the prophet which he shall
speak in my name, I will require it of him. But those men durst not only
reiecte the son of God, teachinge and speakinge unto them, but also they
presumed with vyolence to put him to death, yea even to the most shameful
death of the cross. Wherefore they being worthy of the crewell vengeance of
God, have felt at the length the hand of the lord and the just punishments
of their rebellion.

41 They said unto him. For as much as they be evil, he will trewely destroy
them, and will let out his vineyarde to other husbandemen, which shall deliver
him the fruit in dew seasons.

He will truly destroy them. Bu. Our savior Christ by his former question
caused the unwise to confess the truth. For they are constrained openly and
with their own mouths to grante that which he would him self. C.
Notwithstanding the Euangelystes do here varry and dyffer a little. Our
Evangelist Matthew says that they were forced to confess this them selves.
Mark says that Christ did symplelye pronounce what the ponishement of such
wicked servants should be. And Luke more evidently as it might seem
dysagreeth from them both: Mar. 12. Luke. 20.
for when Christ had pronounced the ponishment against these wicked servants,
they did dislike of it saying, God forbid. But if we do more depely way and
search for the sense and meaning, we shall find no repugnance or disagrement at
all.

For these priests not perceiving at the first, that this parable pertayneth
unto them: but thinkinge that Christ spoke in deed of such wicked and
unthankful housebandemen, they by and by said, Such evil and unjust
persons are worthy of destruction. But when they understood that this parable
was spoken against them, they retracted and denied their former sentence,
saying. God forbid that the wicked should be destroyed, and that we should
kill the Messiah.

The wicked are ready to condemn other men, but no^ them selves, how much
so ever they deserve it.
And this is always the manner of the wicked, when other men's matters are in
hand, they will straight way define and give Judgment against them: but if
the case toutche the^ selves, they are soon changed into an other mind.

And will let out his vineyarde. C. They did not only give sentence against
them selves, being deceived by the parable, but also they pronounced that the
Gentyles should justly in their steed be received into the grace and favor
of the Gospel, and that they should by Faith a great deal better order the
vyneyarde, then they them selves did. The which thing Christ a lyttel after
confirms saying. The kingedome of God shall be taken from you and given to a
nation that shall bring forth more fruit. M. This therefore is to be noted,
that the lord of the house will let out his vineyarde to other husebande men.
God has always a care for his church
For although he shall destroy the wicked, yet notwithstanding he will not
neglecte his vineyard, but will always have a regard to his Church, and will
not suffer it to lie waste: but will commit it to the charge of other men,
who also stand in the like danger and peril of destruction, if they follow
the stepps of their predecessors. A. As touching the yeldinge of fruit indewe
time, that pertayneth to stewardes and dispensatours, 1. Cor. 4.
that they may be found faithful

42 Jesus says unto them: did ye never read in the Scriptures, The stone
which the builders refused, the same is become the headde of the corner: this
is the lords doing. and it is meruaylouse in our eyes.

Did ye never read. M. Because they would not admit the parable, in that the
wicked should be destroyed, and in that the son of God, the lord of the
vineyarde should be destroyed of them (for they would not be counted such,
which should kill Christ promised of the prophets, and coming into his
vineyarde) he brings in a most euidente place of Scripture out of the
prophet which evidently teaches that Christ shall be rejected of his own:
and that he being rejected, shall be by the wonderful counsel and power of the
Lord, the prince and head of the house of God: and that with the great
admiration of al men. C, But this interrogation has a great Emphasis and
force in it: as if he had said: You count it a very absurd thing, that it
should come to pass that the laborers of the vineyarde should wickedly
conspyre against the son of God. But I pray you, Does the scripture make
mention that he should be received favorably with gladness: or does it not
rather declare that the chyefe rulers shall be his ennemies?

The stone which the buylders refused. M. As before, the Church was compared
to a vineyarde, euenso now it is also compared to a buildinge. Christ is the
stone: the priests, maiestrates, and seniours of the people, are the builders.
For so says the Apostel Peter. This is the stone which was cast aside of you
buylders, Act. 4
which is now become the head stone in the corner. To build in the Scripture
is oftentimes usurped for to teach. But this place which our savior Christ
here alleges is taken out of the same psalm, out of the which the
prosperouse cry that the people made to Christ, when they cried Hosanna, was
taken. And that it is a prophecy of the kingdom of the Messiah, it is hereby
euidente, that David was made king upon this condition, that his seat should
stand for ever, so long as the son and Moon endured, and that the decayed
kingedome should come again, by the grace of God, into his former state.
Seeing therefore that psalm does contain a description of Dauiddes kingedome,
there is a perpetuity and a restitution also annexed to the same.

If the Prophet had spoken there of any temporal kingedome, Christ should
very improperly have drawn the same to him self: but we must always note what
kingedome God erected and set up in the person of David: surely that which he
mente to stablishe in the true Messiah, even to the end of the world. For
that ancient custom of anointing was but a shaddowe. Whereby it is gathered
that that which was done in the person of David was a foreshewing, and
figure of Christ. M. The priests and Scribes therefore could not deny this
Scripture, and say unto it, God forbid. For they confessed that this Psalm was
made of the Messiah, and at that time also the cry of the people, and the cry
of the children shoutinge and saying Hosiah-na, blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord, etc. did declare what understanding and knoweledge the
common sort of people had of the Messiah. the which cries and shoutes (as we
said before) were taken out of this psalm. C. Now let us com to the words of
the psalm. The priests and Scribes thought it incredible that Christ should
be rejected of the chief rulers of the Church. But he proves by the psalm
that he must be placed in his seat by the wonderful power of God in despite
of men, the which thing was prefygured in David, who, being rejected of the
rulers of the people, was received of God, to the end he might declare what he
would do at length in his Christ. And the prophet takes the metaphor of
building. For seeing the church was the holy place of God, Christ (in who^ the
same was builded) was worthily called the corner stone, that is to say, that
part which holds up the whole buildinge. For the similitude should agree
in all points, if any man would apply every part thereof unto Christ: but
in this it does excellently well agree, because the sauinge health of the
whole Church rests in him, and he houldeth up the state thereof. And
therefore other prophets also took herevppon occasion to follow the same
manner of speech, as Esaias, and Daniell. But Esa^as comes nerer to this
place, speaking in the person of almighty God thus: Behold, I lay in Sion for
a foundation a stone, (...) 28.
even a tried stone, a preciouse corner stone, a sure foundation, at the which
both the houses of Israel shall stomble. Also this self same manner of
speaking is often times found in the new testament. Therefore the sum of
this place is that the kingdom of God must be built upon that stone, which the
builders them selves reiecte as a cast away, and good for nothing: and the
sense and meaning is this: that the Messiah shall not be chosen by the common
consent of men: but when God will wonderfully advance him by his secret
power, and unlooked for, then shall the princes set them selves against him, to
whom the charge of buildinge was committed. Bu. It is manifest therefore by this
testimony of scripture, and by the judgment of Dauyd that these housbande
men and dressers of the vyneyarde, which are said to be the builders of this
spiritual buildinge, were the greattest ennemies, and wickedst murderers of
the redemer sent unto them, Two things to be considered.
C. But here we must consider two things. For God before the time come has
told us that it shall thus be, least, the wicked indeuoures and behauioure

Against such absurd furor and vnwo^ted madness of men, our faith must be
fortifyed, least that it quayle at the newness of the thing. Now we se how
profitable the forewarnyng is, which puts away fear from the minds of
the godly, which else they might have at so sorrowful a syghte. For there
is nothing more unmeet, than for the members to rise against the head, the
housbande men and farmers against their lord, the counsailers against their
king, and for the buylders to cast down the foundation from the buildinge.

Is become the head stone in the corner. There is such efficacy in this
sentence (when God pronounces that the wicked in rejecting Christ shall so
little profit, that his dignity shall remain whole and sound to him) that
the faithful bearing them selves boulde upon this promise, may laugh and
deryde the foolish pride of me^ in despifynge Christ. Christ's kingdom shall
stand in despighte of the wicked.
For when they have done all that ever they can, yet notwithstanding Christ
maugre their heads shall hold that place which the father has given him.
And although they stamp and storm as though they were mad, which seem to
excel in honor, yet nevertheless he shall stand in his degree, and shall not
lose any thing by their wicked contempt. To be short, the authority of God
shall prevail, that the stone may be chosen and preciouse, which holds up
the Church, the kingdom and temple of God. For he is not said to be the head
corner stone only because he is a part of the foundation, when as it is
evident by other places, that in him alone the Church is founded and builded:
but the prophet symplyment, that he should be the chief sta^e of the
buildinge. Many do subtillye stand upon these words, (of the corner)
saying that Christ is placed in the corner, because he joins together two
contrary gates, namely the Jews and the Gentiles: yet notwithstanding the
prophet David seems to have no further respect, than that the corner stoone
should bear the chief weight of the building. A. Even as also the Apostell
Paul testifies saying, And are builte upon the foundation of the Apostels
and prophets Jesus Christ him self being the head corner stoone, Ephe. 2.
in whom what buildinge so ever is coupled together, it grows to an holy
temple in the lord. C. But it may be demanded how the spirit calls them
builders, 1. Cor. 3
because he builte the Church upon Christ only. Answer.
It may easily be answered that although theye do wickedly execute the office
committed unto them, yet notwithstanding the holy ghost granted unto them
this titell in respect of their calling. Dest^ a^ of^ called ^ders.
Even so the name of a prophet, is oftentimes given in the Scriptures to
seducers, and they are called pastors and shepeheardes which oftentimes
devour the flock like unto wulues. But this is not so honorable unto them, as
it makes them detestable, when they utterly overthrow and destroy the temple
of God, for the buildinge whereof they were appointed helpers, and overseers.
Hereupon may be gathered a profitable admonition, Lawe^ ^linge ^neth to r^ne^^
Chrys^
namely that the lawefull calling does not let or hinder, but that the wicked
may be ungodly and perniciouse ennemies of Christ, which ought to be his
mynisters. The Legal priesthode trewely was ordained by God: and the lord of
the Levites, the power and authority to govern his church, does it follow
therefore that they faithfully discharged their office? Did it become therefore
the godly to obey them to the denying of Christ?

Let the Pope go now with his horned bishops, and boaste that they are
credited in all things, because they are set in place of pastores. For
although they be rightely called to the rule and gouernemente of the Church,
yet notwithstanding in vain do they arrogate unto them selves more, than to
be called governors of the Church. But this comes not alwais to pass, that
they which are called shepherdes are ravening wulues, and that they which bear
the name of prophets are seducers, or that theye which profess Christ, and
have the government of his church, should reject Christ: (for under ye law
there were many godly priests, and under the kingdom of Christ diverse
faithful Shepeherdes and professors which have paynefully and trewly
labored in buylding the church) but for all that, because this must be
fulfilled, that the buylder shall reiecte the stoone, it is meet that we have
a discretion wisely to discern the one from the other: and the holy ghost
has admonished with great diligence, that the vain tytell and dignity of
the calling deceive no man, This is the lords doing. B, Namely both that
this stoone should be rejected and cast aside of the builders, and also that
it should be made the head of the corner. C. Because the common judgment and
understanding of men is not able to co^prehende this that the pastors
themselves of the Church should reject the son of God their Prince, the
Prophet does put us in mind of the secret counsel and purpose of God: the
which, although we cannot comprehend with our sense and understanding yet
notwithstanding we may suspecte and wonder at the same. Let us know therefore
that here al occasion is cut of from all questions, and that here it is
forbidden plainlye that no man Judge or deem of ye nature of Christ's kingdom
according to the flesh. For what foolishnes is it for us to go about to
comprehend that miracle with our slender capascity, which the Prophet
exhorts us to adore and reverence? Thou will admit nothing as concerning
the kingdom of Christ, but only that which seems probable unto thee: the
beginning whereof the holy ghost pronounces to be a mystery worthy of great
admyration, because it is hidden from men's eyes. Let us remember therefore that
so often as we hear mention to be made of the original, restitution, state,
and safegarde of the Church, we must not go about to comprehe^de it with our
sense: but we must give the honor to the power of God, that we may marvel
at his secret work. Here is also a secret Antithesis or comparison between
God and men. For we are not only commanded to embrace the wonderful manner
of the gouernemente of ye Church, because it is the work of God: but also we
are revoked from the foolish reverence of men, which oftentimes obscureth the
glory of God: as if the Prophet should have said, Although men have
excellent titles, yet notwithstanding they do amiss if they set them same
against God. (...) pre^ own ^^nati^e the ^f God
By the which the deuilishe impiety of the Papists is refelled, who doubt to
prefer their own determinacion before the word of God. For where upon (as
they deal) does the auctoritye of the word of God depend, but only of the
will and pleasure of men, insomuche that there remains no more right unto God
than that which he receives of the Church? But the holy ghost has taught us
another manner of lesson in this place, namely that so sone as yt majesty of God
does declare it self all the world ought to be sylent. B. Moreover the
words of Peter do confirm this place of David when he says thus: Him have
ye taken by the hands of unrighteous persons, Act. 2,
after he was delivered by the determinate counsel and fore knowledge of
God, and have crucified and slain him. A. And again: Of a truth against thy
holy child Jesus (whom thou haste anointed) both Herod and also Poncius
Pilate, Act. 4.
with the Gentiles gathered themselves together (in this cittye) for to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. B, We see
therefore how it comes to pass ye the works of God are known. He does
not work only wonderfullye, but by means also far distant from ye judgment
of our reason: the which means do bring unto his works (so soon as they are
finished) both a mark by the which they are known not to be of men but of
God, and also a certain admiration. This is declared both by the example of
David and of Christ. For the exaltacion of them both appeared to be specially
of God, and obtained admiration because both of them were rejected of the
builders and Princes of the people. Whereupon it came to pass that ye more
wickedlye they were rejected, the more their exaltacion obtained glory, and
admiration.

43 Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken from you and
given to a nation, which shall bring forth the fruits thereof.

The kingedome of God shall be taken from you. B. This is the conclusion of the
parable, and it is such that it contains a most severe threatening pertaining
to al those which have neglected to bring forth fruit in ye kingdom of
Christ. C. For hitherto Christ directed his talk to the guides and chief
rulers of the people, but before the multitude: but now he touches the
multitude themselves, and that not without cause saying that they were
companions and helpers of the hie priests and Scribes in hynderinge the grace
of God. The mischief trewely began of the priests: but the people had
deserved this by their sins, to have such corrupt and degenerate pastors:
and the whole sort of them almost were infected with like malice to rebel
against God. And this is the cause that Christ pronounces a general
vengeance without exception to light upon them all. For as the priests
desired superiority, and were ambicyousely puffed up, even so the rest of the
people swelled with pride, under the show of their adoption. But now our
savior Christ plainly says that God is not bound unto them, and that
therefore it will come to pass that he shall give the honor to others,
whereof they made them selves unworthy.

And given to a nation. A. By this word (given) he declares that this is a
free benefyte* that the Gospel shall be preached ^o the Gentiles.

Which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. The Gospel is not without
fruit.
The Gospel is not therefore preached to the end it might lie barren and
unfruitful, but to the end it might fructify. For God does require fruit
of his vyneyarde, Math. 9.
namely the righteousness of his kyngedome. According to that which our
savior Christ says: First seek the kingedome of God, and the
righteousenes thereof. And in this place he does not only say bringing
forth fruit: but bringinge forth fruit thereof: because he will not have al
manner of fruit, but such fruit only as is peculyar and belonginge to his
kingdom. The fruits of the kingedome of God are such as the spirit of God
works in the hearts of his children, Galathi. 5. Ephe. 5.
of the which the Apostell Paul wrytethe in the fyfet chapter to the
Galathians.

A. This threteninge therefore is greuouse and fearful, which was once
pronounced and executed upon the Jews, and is written for our sakes, that if
God have chose^ us to be his people, we ought to beware that we do not
lasciuiouselye stand upon the vain confidence, and wicked trust of the
flesh, and that we show our selves to be such sons toward him, as both
his clemency, and our dewtie requires. For if God spared not the natural
branches, Romans ^
what will he do to those that are but ingraffed and not natural? The Jews
thought that the kyngedome of God did belong unto them as an inheritance, and
therefore they were carelessly obstinate in their sins. We are now set in their
place, but contrary to nature: the kyngedome of God is much less tied unto us,
except it take deep root amongst us of true godliness. And as the greuouse
threatnynge of our savior Christ, conteyninge the deprivation of such from
the kyngedome of God, wh^che profane the same, ought to terrify us: even so
the perpetuity and everlasting contynuaunce thereof, which is here noted,
ought to comfort the minds of the godly. For by these words our sauyoure
Christ declarethe, that although the wicked do set at naught the true
worshypp of God, yet notwithstanding they shall never bring to pass that the
name of Christ shall be abolished, and that true religion shall peryshe: because
God, in whose hands are all the ends of the world, will find a mantion
place, and seat for his kingdom some where else. A. Wherefore seeing he has
placed us by his grace and favor in his kyngedome, let us bring forth
condign fruits of our calling, and let us largely extol and magnifye (as our
duty is) the mercy of God.

44 And whosoever falls on this stone shall be broken in pieces: but on whom
soever it falls, it shall all to grind him.

And whosoever falls on this stoone. C. Our savior Christ more plainly
confyrmeth that which went before. Bu. and euydently declares, as well to
the priests, as to the whole world, how frivolous, vain, and perniciouse
their practices are, which bend them selves against Christ and his kingedome,
C. Christ trewely for his part can leese nothing, when he is rejected of the
wicked: because as their obstinacy is stony, and no less hard than steel,
even so he will break them in their hardenes, and so their destruction shall be
more manifest. He did perceive great stubbernenesse to be in the Jews: it
was necessary therefore that this kind of ponishement and vengeance should
severely be set before them, that they might not so securelye kycke against
the same. This doctrine does partly teach us to commytte our selves quietly
to be tamed of Christ with a gentle and flexible heart: partelye also he
confirms the godly against the obstinacy and furiouse madness of the wicked,
for whom there remains horrible destruction. M. To fall vpbn the stone, and
to stomble at the stone Christ signifies all one thing, namely to reiecte
Christ, and not to believe him.

C. Therefore they are said to fall upon Christ, which rushe upon him to
oppress him: not that they clyme above him, but because their madness does so
bewitche and carye them an end, that they go about to throw down Christ,
as it were from an hye. But he teaches that this is only their gain, even
in the middeste of the conflicte to be broken and bruised. But when they do so
prowdely exalte them selves, he shows that an other thing shall befall
them, that is to say, they shall be broken under the stoone, upon the which
they so boldly rushed. Bu. These men do as they which in climbing pluck from
a lofte, some great stone or other upon their own heads, by the which they
are broken to pieces. For when they think that they have overcome the followers
of Christ, and that they have brought their purpose to pass, and that they
are in safety void of all danger, then are they most near to destruction,
and sudden vengeance hangs over their heads. A. These things are more
plentifully declared by the Apostelles: And namely by the Apostel Peter when he
says: ^ri. 2
Unto you therefore which believe, he is preciouse: but unto the^ which believe
not, the stone which the buylders refused, the same is begone to be the head of
the corner, and a stone that men stomble at, and a rock whereat they be
offended which stombled at the word, and believe not that, whereon they were
set. Also the Apostel Paul says: Behold, I put in Syon a stone to stomble
at, and a rock that men shall be offended at. And who so ever believes on him
shall not be confounded. Romans 9.


45 And when the chief priests and Phariseies had heard his parables theye
perceived that he spoke of them.

And when the chief priests. C. The Evangelist shows, how littell Christ
profyted, least we should marvel that the doctrine of the gospel at this
day constrains not al me^ to obey God. They know (says the Evangelist) that
they spoke of him. M. For their conscience was an interpreter to them of the
parables of Christ. For they knew who they were, how they were affectioned,
and what they went about. Even so at this day, when ye ministers of ye word do
speak against hypocrites, against fornicators against ydolators, against
Simoniakes, and against false teachers, by and by, the Pope, ye bishop, the
sacrificing priests, and the monks, think yt they are spoken of. And how
comes this to pass? Surely every one of them know their own deeds.

46 And they went about to lay hands on him, but they feared the people,
because they took him as a prophet,

And they went about to lay hands. Bu. They being ouercom by the scriptures
and perfect reason, give not place to the truth: and although they had herd
the divine judgment of God, Thretchings do make the wiked to rage more and
more.
yet notwithstanding they fear nothing, but goinge forward in their wonted
malice and envy, they go about and take counsel how they might destroy the
lord Jesus. C. Let us therefore learn that it cannot otherwise com to pass,
but that threatenynges should more and more kendell the outragiousnes of the
wicked. For as God does seal our hearts by his word, so also he does wou^d
wicked consciences with his whose iron: whereby it comes to pass that
wickedness does the more increase, We must pray therefore that he will
vouchsafe to bring us to a voluntary fear, least that the bare knowledge of
vengeance do more exasperate us and provoke us to wrath.

But they feared the people. M. Bu. Here the Scribes and Pharyseyes according
to their manner, are more and more inflamed against Christ: but because his
honor was not yet come, they are able to do nothing, being stricken once
again with vain fear.

Delyuerance comes to the godly in time of need.
Herevppon we have a synguler comfort and consolation, namelye that the Lord
will take and deliver those that are his, even from the mouths and chawes of
the Lions. For he restrayneth his enemies, even as it were with a brydell, in
so much that they are able to do nothing without he grant them leave: to
the end he might prove their patience.

Because they take him as a Prophet. M. The multitude and common sort of
people thyncke a great deal better of Christ, than the wise, holy, and chief
heads of the people. The like whereof also we see at this day. A. For as
towchynge those things that pertayne to the exact knoweledge of the kingedome
of God, Math. 11.
God has hidden them from the wise and prudent of this world, and has
revealed them to babes, to base and simple men.

The xxii. Chapter.
ANd Jesus answered and spoke unto them again by parables and said:
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that was a king, which made a marriage
for his son.

And Jesus answered and spoke again. Luke. 14.
A. The Euangelyste Luke rehearses the same parable, the which (as it may
seem) was propounded of our Savior, not by and by after the parable going
before, but before, when he satte at the table, of a certain Pharyseye: as it
appears by the words of Luke.

C. But because it was the purpose of Matthewe, to show for what cause the
Scrybes were so provoked to madness, he put this sermon also in conuenyente
time, and united it to the terte, (neglecting the order of time) amongeste his
sermones, that were so hated and detested of the Scrybes and Phariseyes. And
we must note the narration of Luke, that when one of the gestes had said,
that theye were blessed which ear bread in the kyngedome of heaven, Christ
therevppon took occasion to cast the ingratitude of the Jews in their teethe.
And although it be scarce credyble, that the geste and friend of the
Pharyseye burste forth into these words by an earneste affection of
godliness, yet notwithstanding he should not seem to scoff or mock by
these words: but as men of a mean faith, and not openly known to be
wicked, do in the midst of their cups prate and talk of everlasting life:
even so it is lykely that this manne cast forth these words, to the end
that he in like case might have some talk with Christ. And his words do
declare that he mente nothing, but that which was gross and terrestrial
for he did not speak of eating breadde metaphorically, for the fruition of
the glory eternal, but he seems to dream of a certain state, replenyshed
with the happy store and plenty of all things. Notwithstanding the sense is,
that they are blessed which do eat the bread of God, after that he has
chosen and gathered them into his kyngedome, to be his sons. But let us
come to the explycation or exposition of the simylitude.

The kingedome of heaven is like to a man that was a king. B. This same
similitude pertayneth to the same effect that the other did which went
before, although it were propounded and put forth at an other time. For our
savior Christ goes not only about to cast the ingratitude of the Jews in
their tethe, but also their froward obstinacye: which did not only make them
selves unworthy of the grace of God, but also furiouselye rejected the same
from them. C. And as that excellent man of Sparta, said sometime, that the men
of Athenes knew that which was right and good, but would not do it: even so
here our savior Christ casts the Jews in the teethe, saying, that they
could talk well of the kingdom of God: but when the almyghtye went about
louingely and gentlely to call them unto him, they disdaynefullye rejected his
grace. And there is no doubt but that he did touch the Jews by name as here
after it shall more evidently appear.

Which made a marriage for his son In this our Euangeliste Matthewe
dyffereth from Luke, that he expresses many circumstances, and Luke in a
short sum touches the matter only. For Matthewe says, that the king
made a marriage for his son: where as Luke symplely makes mention of a
feast. Luke also speaks but of one seruante, and this our Evangelist makes
mention of many. Luke notes but one sendinge only: Matthewe notes more.

Luke affyrmeth that they which were bydden, only contemned and despised the
Supper, doing nothing else: but Matthewe says that they evil entreated
some of the servants, and killed other some. To be short, our Euangeliste
Matthewe says, that he which came to the feast without his weddinge
garmente, was cast forth, of the which the Evangelist Luke makes no mention
at all. But in an other place also we noted the like difference, where as
Mathewe in teaching one thing, is more plentiful and large than the other.

Yet in sum they do very well agree, that when God vouchesafed to make the
Jews to excel all other nations in honor, making unto them as it were a
weddinge dynner, they despised the honor offered unto them. Bu. Therefore the
king, is the omnipotent father, the well and fullness of all good things.

This king and father prepared a marriage for his son. By the marriage we may
understand the fellowshypp of the son of God, the unity of the Church, but
specially the eternal joy and heavenly felicity. C. For Christ is the end of
the law: neither had God any other respect in his promise than to make him
the headde and ruler of his people, and to conioyne him to the Church, with
the holy bond of spyrituall wedlock.

3 And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the
weddinge, and they would not come.

And sent forth his seruauntee. C. Our sauyoure Christ by these words mente
to note the twoofolde grace of God: namely in that he preferred the Jews
before other nations: also because he revealed to them his adoption by his
prophets.

For he applies it to the common custom of men, which, when they go about
to make a marriage, make a scrol or byll, in the which they wryghte the names
of those, whom they mean to make their guestes, and then afterward they
send for them by their servants: Even so God chose the Jews before all
other, as though they had been his familiar friends: then he called the^ by
his prophets, to the end they might be partakers of the promised redemption.
And although they which were first called, lived not till the coming of
Christ, yet notwithstanding we know that all had salvation a like set forth
unto them, from the which they were depryued by their own ingratitude and
mallyce. For from the beginning that people wyckedlye despised the calling of
God. B. Therefore so often as we hear the Prophets and servants of God
let us understand that we are called, and that the grace of God is offered
unto us. The first calling of the Jews.
The first calling was in the couenaunte that was made with Abraham: when it
was said unto him. I will be thy God, and the God of thye seed after thee.
Gene. 17.
Look now how many were of the seed, so many were called. the same calling
abode until the coming of Christ in the flesh.

And they would not come. This negligence has a double ingratitude: first
because they did resyste God: and secondely because they rejected the dayntie
fare of the word, by the which the souls of men are refreshed. A. This
thing notwithstanding must not be understood of all the Jews, but of the
greater part. Even as this also is to be understand: John. 1.
He came into his own, and his own received him not. That is, Many of his
own did not receive him. And the greattest part of the Jews would not comme.

4 Again he sent forth other servants, saying: tell them which are
bidden: Behold I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlynges are killed.
and all things are ready, come unto the marriage.

Again he sent forth, other servants. C. He speaks as though he had
sent still to wone sort of men, because the body of the people was wone.
But the sense and meaning is, that when the happy and joyful day of the
redemption drew near, theye were admonyshed to come betyme: for the time was
promised unto them long before.

But now our Savior Christ says, that they are urged by new messengers, at
the very instaunte to make haste to come. For the first calling, whereof he
speakethe, comprehends all the former prophesies, even until the time that
the Gospel was publyshed.

Tell them that were bydden. A. To the end the Jews might require nothing
at the hands of God, which he showed not upon them, this gentle and loving
immitation and calling does declare to what great honor he had promooted
them. Bu. Come (says he) not to labor, or sorrow, but to the wedding.
Behold all things are prepared for you, the deinties and delicates are set on
the table, and there wants nothing, but that ye sytte down thereat, and
refreshe your selves. A. But our savior Christ here by earthly things
vnderstandethe heavenly things, and by carnal things spiritual things:
according to the manner of parables. And these things here mentioned do
signify the innumerable benefytes bestowed upon the people of the Jews, by
whose wicked contempt, their obstinacy and ingratitude was increased, of the
which it follows.

5 But they made light of it and went their ways: one to his farm place, an
other to his marchaundise.

But they made light of it. Bu. Here the obstinacy of the Jews and cruel
ingratytude is condemned. For when they were called to be partakers of the
heavenly glory, and to the fellowshippe of the son of God, they rather desired
the earthely and corruptible things.

And went one to his farm. E. or to his own land or fyelde. A. The
Euangelyste Luke says. And they began all at once to make excuse. The first
said unto him I have bought a farm. etc. C, By the which words our savior
Christ declarethe that the Jews were so addicted to the world and earthly
things, that no man had any leisure to come unto God. It is a foul and
unseemly thing, that men which are created to the heavenly life, should all
together be carried and enclyned like brute beasts, to earthely things. Man
i^ incline^ carthly^ges the the scry^ of God.
But this dissease is general, so that there is scarce one among a hundred,
which prefers the kyngedome of God before transytorye and corruptible
richesse. And although all men have not one kind of dissease, yet
notwithstanding every one is dyuersely led by his own desire: and so it
comes to pass, that men faule into diverse vices. Further we must note that
profane men do allege honest excuses to reiecte the grace offered unto
them, as though their negligence and ingratytude were excusable, when they
goinge about the business of this present life, do little regard or set at
naught the heavenly inherytaunce.

But trewely we do see here that our savior Christ does put away al such
excuses from us, least any man should thyncke that he did somewhat profit in
alleaginge that he was stayed and let by earthly business: nay rather the
faltes of men are doubled when theye stay them selves by things laweful,
by the which they rather ought to be helped.

For to what end does God grant unto us the commodities of this present
life, but only to allure and win us to him self? but trewely every man is
so little helped by the benefytes of God, to reach unto heaven, that they are
rather snares to tie him fast to the earth.

A. To the which end pertayneth the sentence of our savior Christ in an
other place, where he says: He also that received the seed into the thorns,
^h. 13.
He also is he that hears the word: and the cares of this world, and the
deceytefulnesse of richesse choke up the word, and so is he made unfruitful.

6 And the remnante took his servants and entreated them shamefully, and slew
them.

And the rest took his servants. A. We said a little before, that the
first calling did comprehend all the former prophesies, even till the time
that the Gospel was published. C. And although this cruelty was showed long
ago upon the Prophets: yet notwithstanding because the furiouse madness
increased in time, which at the length with all the rygoure that might be,
was showed toward Christ and his Apostelles, he accusethe the people that
were of old time, of contempt and of pride only.

But the last servants which were sent about the supper time, even when
supper was ready, were (as says our Souyoure Christ) evil entreated and
killed: into such extreme myschyefe fell this people, when that mad crewelty
had caused them prowdely to reiecte the grace offered unto them.

Yet for all that, he does not lay this falte to all men's charge: because
even in the last calling, which was made by the Gospel, the grace of God
was derided partly of careless contemners, and partly it was furiousely
rejected of Hypocrites. And thus it was wont to come to pass, that the more
God did call the wicked to salvation, the more theye swelled and raged against
him.

M. Here also we may note that there are two sorts of men, Two sorts of me^
despise the heavenly marriage.
which despise the heavenly marriage. The first sort are they which neglecte
and care not to come, such are the Atheistes and contempners Math. 23.
and shall persecute them from city to city.

7 But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth his men
of war, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City.

But when the king heard thereof. Bu. Here the ponishemente which should
be executed upon the vnthanckeful and murtherynge Jews is showed: Ponishmente
of ingratitude
and therewith is also declared that they should be oppressed by no
frowardenesse, which should remain in God, but by their own insuperable
malice.

C. Of this ponyshemente only our Euangeliste Matthewe makeeh mention:
because in Luke there is no mention made of the iniurye done unto the
servants. Both of them say this, that they were excluded and depryued of
the honor of the feast, which came not at the time appointed.

Christ therefore does foreshewe unto the Jews their destruction, because they
had oftentimes rejected the grace of God, and furiousely rebelled against him,

And burnt up their City. C, This was brought to pass by the army of
the Romans, which destroyed Jerusalem, and slew and utterly destroyed
above a leven hundred thousand men: and then they burned the city, and made
it even with the ground. Iere. 25
M. We must also note, that the host of the Romans is called Gods host.
Even so the king of Babylon is called Gods servant, as we may read in
the prophecy of Jeremy: because the lord by him chastened his people. So the
lord is oftentimes in the scripture called the lord of hosts. C. This doctrine
also belongs unto us for the like ponishemente that Christ here threateneth
to the Jews, with the same destruction, also remains to all wicked persons
which violently rise against the mynisters of the Gospel.

But whosoever they be that are so careful for earthly things, that they
regard not the calling of God, all these in the end shall perish miserably
with pining hunger. Therefore so often as he calls us, let us be prepared
and ready to follow. Esaias. 55.
A. Let us seek the lord while he may be found, let us call upon him while he
is nigh. For the Lord will not always suffer the contempners of his word,
neither will he sleep for ever, but will at the length be revenged of
ingratiude.

8 Then said he to his servants: the marriage in deed is prepared, but they
which were bidden were not worthy,

The marriage in deed is prepared. Bu. This sentence shows, that the
unbelieving Jews perysshed through their own fault, For being called, they
would not answer: they being bydden, refused to come, and they malyciously
despised the grace of God offered unto them: therefore they made them selves
unworthy of celestial benefytes. M. Even as Paul also casts them in the
teethe, saying, It was mete that the kingdom of God should first be
preached unto you: but because ye put the same from you, Act. 13.
and count your selves unworthy of everlasting life: behold, we go unto
the Gentiles. As concerning those that were unworthy, read the tenthe chapter
goinge before.

9 Go ye therefore out into the hiewaies: and as many as ye find bid them to
the marriage.

Go ye therefore out. M. After that the Jews despised the Gospel, the
Apostelles were sent to the Gentyles. For God in any wise would have this
marriage fulfilled. Wherefore if any refuse to receive the grace of God, he does
justly forsake them and pass to other.

Into the hye ways. M. That is to say, into public and common places, where
passengers and strangers use to walk: As if he should have said, get you
forth to all foot paths, and hiewayes. Get you out into the whole world,
Mark^
and preach the Gospel to every creature.

And as many as yefynde. C. Here the calling of the Gentiles is described,
which makes the Jews to be Gelouse, even as it is said in the Canticle or
song of Moses: They have angered me with that which is no God, and provoked
me with their vanities, And I also will provoke them with those which are no
people. Deuteronomy. ^
I will anger them with a foolish nation. Because they were chosen before all
other nations, they immagined and persuaded the^ selves that his grace was tied
unto them, and that he could not want them. And how prowdely they despised
all other nations, it is well enoughe known. Therefore he compares the
Gentiles to beggars, to blind, and to lame men. A. According as it said in
Luke: Luke. ^
Go out quickly into the streets and quarters of the city, and bring in
hither the poor, the feeble, and the lame, and the blind. C. He says that
these are called out of the streets and hye ways, as strangers and unknown
men: notwithstanding in the mean time he affyrmethe that they must be putt
in the place which was neglected of the friends and famyliar sort. And so he
plainly expresses that which was obscurelye preached of the Prophets. And
truly this wickedness of the Jews brought to pass that God heaped his
vengeance upon them, ^. 11.
and cut them of and planted the wild Olive branches into ye true Olyue tree:
and they being banished he received the filthy and polluted Gentiles into his
house. Wherefore if he did not then spare the natural branches, he will no
more spare us at this day but will show the like vengeance upon us, if we
answer not our calling. But the Supper shall not be lost, that is prepared
for us: For if we come not God will prepare other gestes for the same. Bu. He
shall always find where to bestow his grace: Yea, and he shall be found true
in his promises. (...) Gospel (...) general (...).


Bid them to the marriage. M. This is that general calling by the which,
through the external preachinge of the word, God calls all men at once unto
him. A. The Euangeliste Luke adds that the servant made answer to his
master saying. Lord it is done as thou have commanded and there is yet room.
And the Lord said to the servant: Go out unto the hye ways and hedges and
compel them to come, that my house may be filled. By the which words our
Savior Christ declares that God will rather scrape together all the refuse
and of scouring of the world than he will admit such unthankful persons
hereafter to his table. Notwithstanding he does seem to apply it to the
manner of of the calling of the Gospel: because the grace of God is not
simplelye set forth unto us, but with doctrine exhortations are adjoined. In
the which we may behold the wonderful goodness of God, who when he sees us,
being called, to wax negligente, he does seek to drive away our
sluggishnes: and that, not only by exhortacion, but also by threateninges he
forces us to come unto him. ^t ca^^er ^a^^e the (...)
This constrainte therefore is spiritual: and the violence by the which the
servants of Christ do constrain their auditory to come to the feast of the
Gospel is the preachinge of the law, and the declaringe of sins, whereby it
comes to pass that men's consciences being terrefyed with the fear of
damnation, are constrained to look for the true salvation in Christ. So John
the Baptist foreced his hearers to repentance, that is, to seek Christ, when
he said: Now is the axe laid unto the root of the tree. Every tree which
brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. Math. 3.
And the Apostell Paul writtyng to Timothe says thus: Preach thou the word,
be fervent in season, and out of season. Improve, rebuke, exhort, 2. Tim. 4.
with all long suffringe and doctrine.

10. And the servants went out into the hye ways: and gathered together
all, as many as they could find, both good and bad, and the wedding was
fornished with ghestes. Mar. 19.


And the servants went. A. As concerning the sending forth of the Apostles
we read thus. And they went and preached every where. And this was the
gathering together of al such as they found in the hye ways. Math. 13.


Both good and bad. M. That is, they gathered without respect of persons
every one, refusinge none but the hard hearted and such as were scorners. Our
Savior Christ here seems to speak of the same which he did in the parable
of the tares and of the net cast into the Sea. E. There are some which by the
good, understand the Jews (who even at this day think themselves the good)
and by the euel the Gentiles: and that Christ spoke by the affection of the
Jews, when as both of them were evil. But he speaks here of the calling of
the Gentiles only: and before of the calling of Jews.

And the wedding was fornished with ghestes. E. To come unto the marriage, is
to receive ye Gospel without any respect, yea though all men do despise the
same, notwithstanding to give our name to Christ, and to desire to be counted
of his Church. But this profession belongs also to hypocrites: And therefore
it follows.

11. The^ the king came i^ to see the ghests, and when he spyed there a man
which had not on a wedding garmente, he said unto him: Friend how came thou
in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was even speacheles.

Then the king came in. M. Now follows the Judgment of these men, which are
mingled among the Christians without deserte: Judgment of hipocrits.
not as Christians in deed, but in name only. For he does not here now cast
the Jews in the teeth with their wicked co^tempte of the grace and calling of
God: but he forewarneth them which should be appointed and placed in their
room, that they defyle not the marriage with their filthy spots, saying that
God had voutchsafed to make them partakers of his heavenly table.

Therefore hitherto he has taught that the Jews must be deprived of a
singular privilege of honor, by reason of their wicked disdain and contempt,
and that there should be called out of the Profane and outcaste Gentiles those
that should succeed them.

But now he declares that such must be banished out of this number also, as
do bring reproach unto ye Church. For, because God calls all without exception
by the Gospel, many unclean and filthye persons do rushe in among the
rest: who, although they have place for a time among the rest, yet
notwithstanding at the length when God does discern and behold his ghestes,
they are cast out of the doors and punished. The sum of this place is that
not all which once enter into the Church shall be partakers of everlasting
life, but such only which are found to have on apparel worthy and mete for
the heavenly Palace. M. Therefore it is not sufficient to be nombered among
those Christians that are called to everlasting life: But the hypocrites
shall be discerned from the just, and ye wicked shall be separated from the good.
It is a most certain sign of perdition to despise the profession of the
Christian faith, Righteousness. consists in the sinceritye of profession.
and it is necessary to salvation to Embrace the same. But the sincerite and
truth thereof is required also, which only pertains to the elect, without
the which no man is saved, although he be nombred among those that are
called. And this ingression or entrance of the king among his ghestes: The
general Judgment.
of the which there is mencio^ made here, shall be in the day of Judgment, in
the which the reprobate shall be separated from the elect, even as Christ
himself declares in the parable of the tares, and of the net cast into the
the Sea. Also when he speaks of the goats and of the sheep.

Which had not on a wedding gar. C. Many do in vain here co^tende about the
wedding garment, whether it be faith, or a holy and godly life: Math^ Mat^
saying that faith can neither be separated from good works, neither can good
works proceed but from faith. But the only meaning of our Savior Christ was
this, that we are called of the Lord upon this condition, that we should by
the spirit be made like unto him, and therefore that we might continually
abide in his house we must put of the old man with all his pollucions and
defiling spots of sin, and must frame and give our selves to a new life,
that our apparel may answer so honorable a calling. They therefore are
clothed with this wedding garmente which have put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the new man, Rom^ Ephe^
which after God is shapen in righteousness and true holiness. And as the
weddinge garmente does declare the mind to be Joyful affected toward the
weddinge dinner, and to reverence the same: euenso also by this weddinge
garmente there is required, that the ghestes be such, which with Joy, with
reverence of the divine Majesty, and with geuinge of thanks should obtain
and enjoy the heavenly benefits.

Friend how came thou in. A. This is a sharp reprehe^sion of him, which
defyleth to honest a table of the father with his filthiness.

And he was even speachlesse. M. Condemnation here procedethe from the giltye
conscience. Euenso shall they be speachlesse which are now full of tongue, and
do glory of their fained holiness, when the king comes in the end of the
world.

13. Then said the king to the ministers: Take and bind him hand and foot
and cast him into utter darkness there shall be weepinge and gnashing of teeth.

Take and bind him hand and foot A. These words do partaine to the
describinge and settinge forth the punishment of the reprobate and damned. C.
But it may be demanded how it was mete or Just that the beggar should be so
grievously punished for not coming with his weddinge garmente: ^estion.
as though truly it were a new and unwonted thing to see the miserable
which get their living by begginge by the hye ways, to go deformed and torn
with uncomely apparel. (...). 16.
We may answer, that there is no entreaty here, how or whence apparel must
begotten: for the Lord apparelleth those whom he calls whatsoever they be,
and that whereof the Prophet Ezechiell speaks is fulfilled in all things,
seeing that when God finds nothing in us but miserable nakedness, and filthy
uncleanness, he does apparel us with excellent and costly garments. For we
know that we are not changed into the Image and likeness of God except we put
on Christ. For Christ does not affirm that miserable men which bring not
preciouse apparel out of their cheste, shall be cast out: but they which are
found in their filthiness, when God comes to have an ouersighte and trial of
his faith.

And cast him into utter darkness. For this matter read the eight chapter
going before.

14. For many are called but few are chosen.

Many are called. C. This conclusion does declare that few are chosen
although many are called. Whereby we gather that every particular member of
this parable is not to be discussed. For Christ even now affirmed not that the
greater part should be cast out, but he makes mention of one man only:
and here we hear that a few of a great number shall be retained. And truly
when as at this day more are gathered together into the Church by the voice
of the Gospel, than there were in time paste by the preachinge of the law,
yet the least part do approve their faith by newnes of life. Wherefore lest
we should flatter our selves with a vain tytell of faith, let every man
seriouslye examine himself, that in the first election we may be thought
mete and convenient ghestes for the Lord. For (as the Apostell Paul teaches)
there are many kinds of vessels in the house of the Lord: 2. Tymo 2.
Therefore let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord depart from
iniquityy. Three kinds of calling.
M. Therefore Christ speaks of the external and general calling by the
preachinge of the Gospel: of the which there are three degrees. All men are
called, yea, even they

The second sort enter in and promise that they will serve God: Nevertheless
their own conscience condemns them, Act. 8.
because they have not the true root. As Simon Magus, which did not feign
himself to be one of the faithful, being convicted in his conscience by the
truth of the Gospel professed the same: but he had not root, as Peter
casts him in the teeth. Such are they truly to whom the Lord sends his
holy spirit, and whom for a time only he illuminateth: but at the length by
the Just deserte of their ingratitude he forsakes them and strikes them with
greater blindness.

The third calling is special and of great A. Notwithstanding by signs there
may be some conjecture had: Rash Judgment ought to be avoided.
but we must always beware of rash Judgment. M. Every one that is the
elect and chosen of God, is fully certifyed in himself of his calling: the
which thing we may daily behold, For many are brought into the Church which
afterward fall away from the same, either being terrifyed by persecution, or
else being overcome, with some other temptation. Such truly are of the number
of them that are called, but are not elected: For hereby our election is
proved, Perseuera^ce proved our election.
if we persevere to the last end. C. To be short, our Savior Christ by
this place teaches that ye external profession of faith profits little and
suffiseth not that GOD should acknowledge every one for his so^n which seem to
have obeyed his calling M. And the name of election does only signifye a
separation: because the elect are so discerned that they have a peculiar lot,
as we see often times in Judges. Bu. We have hard now in these two parables
that the Jews shall be grievously punished which so oftentimes have rejected God
their caller. And again that the Gentiles shall not be spared which succeed and
come into the place of the rejected Jews, if they go forward in hypocrisye,
and defile their Euangelical profession with filthy and wickedness.

Therefore let every on of us in all things fear the Lord, which loves faith
and righteousness, and hates hardness of heart, and wickedness.

15. Then went the Phariseys, and took counsel how they might tangle him in
his words.

Then went the Phariseys and took. C. When the Pharisees had oftentimes and
many ways sought how they might hurt Christ, at the last, they thought this
ready way, and excellent mean to bring their purpose to pass, if they
might deliver him to the deputy as a seditiouse person, and an inuentor of
new things. As concerning tribute, there was at that time (as we may see in
an other place) great contencion among the Jews. For when the Romans had
transported to them selves the tribute which God in the law of Moses
commanded to be paid unto him ye Jews oftentimes fretted and said that it
was very unmeet and a horrible thing not tolerable, that Profane men should
rake unto them selves after this sort, the right which pertained unto God.

Moreover it may be, that seeing that legal appointing of tribute, was a
witness unto them of their adoption, they thought them selves to be spoiled of
their dew honor. Now the more poor that any man among them was, the more
bold he was to make a tumulte. The Phariseys therefore devise this snare to
take our Savior Christ: because how so ever he should answer to this
question of payinge tribute he should (as they thought) snare himself: if he
should deny tribute to be paid, he should be gilty of sedition: but and if
he should confess it to be dew by right, then should he be counted an
enemy to his nation and a betrayer of the liberty of his countreye. Man
But their whole intent was in deed to draw away the people from him. Luk^
This snare the Euangeliste notes when he says

How they might tangle him in his words. B. So great was their blindenes
that they could not be quiet although they had tried this matter so often
before in vain. To entangle or entrap one in his words is to propounde a
doubtefull or daungerouse question, out of the which a man has no less
trouble to unfold himself, than out of a snare or net. The Euangeliste Mark
has: to take him in his words. And so has the Euangeliste Luke also.

16. And they sent out unto him their Disciples, with Herodes servants
saying: master we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God
truly, neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the outward
appearance of men.

And they sent out to him. C. Because the Phariseys were the sworn enemis of
Christ, and therefore knew that they should be suspected, they suborned and
craftily set forth certain of their Disciples. B. Of whom they thought him
to have no knowledge or consideration. Luke says, that they sent forth spies,
which should feign themselves rightouse men: that is which should
deceitfully pretend a simple affection to learn that which is true. For the
fayninge of righteousness in this place is not taken generally but it is
restrained to the present cause except they had borne a pretense of docillity
and sincere study, they had not been admitted.

With Herodes servants. M. E. He calls those Herodians or Herodes
servants which defended Cesars cause. When Judah began now to be tributary to
the Romans, King Herod the son of Antipater was by Augustus Caesar, put in
authority to gather the tribut.

C They join therefore unto themselves the Herodians, which did more fauore
the Empire of Rome: whereby they were more feet to accuse. But this is worthy
to be noted, that although there was great dissension among themselves, yet
notwithstanding such was their hatred against Christ, (...) enemies ^rist al^h
they ^e among ^elues, ^cy a ree^ to hu^t (...).
that they could conspire in one against him. As concerning the sect of the
Herodians this is to be noted. Saying that Herod Antipas was only half a
Jew, or unlike to his ^unceters, and a counterfeyte professor of the law,
whosoever would exactly and in every point observe ye law, him they condemned
with their impure worship and counterfeite holiness: for he had flatterers about
him which brought in a cooller to his false and perverse doctrine. So that
beside other sects at that time there was spronge up a courtelyke religion.
Master. M. This is a deceitful dissimulation. E. They are not ashamed of
inconsta^cy, by the which they now call him master, whereas before, they
blasphemed him saying that he had the spirit of Beelzebub. A. Even so in an
other place the Phariseys, (...). 12. (...) ^.
which were the masters of these imbassators, said unto Christ, master we
would see a sign of thee. And again, Master this woman was taken in
adultery. But they called him master whose disciples they would not be, For
they said unto that beggar to whom Christ restored his sight: Be thou his
dissiple, for we are Moses Disciples. Here the proverb is fullfilled, such
lyppes such lettice. The Phariseis were dissemblers and hypocrites and their
Disciples follow them in all points:

We know that thou art true. C. This is the righteousness which they feigned,
when they flatteringlye submitted themselves unto Christ, as though they were
desyrouse to learn, and not only indewed with godlynes, but also thoroughly
persuaded of his doctrine.

For if they had spoken without dissimulation, this was the true and right
way. M. They praise him for ye study of truth, because he was free from all
dissimulation, because he regarded no man, and because he feigned nothing.

And teach the way of God truly. By these words they declare what they
mente when they said, thou art true, that is to say, thou teach faithfully
and truly the will of God, and that which is acceptable unto him and not unto
men. They feign and bear a show as though they sought God, and that they
were not of the Phariseis mind which said, in what power do thou these
things? Math. 21.
but rather to be truly persuaded of the doctrine of Christ, and to believe
that he was a teacher of the truth sent of God.

Neither carest thou for any man. As if they should have said: By thy dealing
with our Scribes, by Priests, and elders o the people, thou have declared, and
thoroughly persuaded us, that thou art no accepter af persons, and that thou
carest for no man, neither for the people, neither for the nobles and
Potentates, neither for Caesar, nor Herod, but only haste regard unto God. Bu.
showing unto us with great liberty those things which thou know to be
acceptable unto us. C. But by the words of these slye and subtle deceivers, a
difinition of a true and faithful teacher, such a one as they seemed to persuade
the^ selves that Christ was, may be gathered. They say that he is a true
teacher, which teaches the way of God, that is to say, A true teacher.
which is a true interpretour of God, and that in veritye, that is without
any corruption. The way of God is opposed or set against the inuencione or
strange doctrines of men: and truth against ambition, covetousness, and other
wicked affections which are wont to vitiate and defile the pure order of
teachinge. Therefore we must count him a true teacher which thrusts not in
the inuencions of men and departs not from the true and proper sense of Gods
word: but does as it were dispense and deliver that with his hands which he
has received at the mouth of God. Furthermore he applies his doctrine by a
singular study of edifiynge to the proffite and salvation of the people, and he
falcefieth not the same by any tradition. As touching that which pertains to
this latter se^ce, the Apostel Paul when he says that he does not choppe
and change the word of God, 2. Cor. 2
he means that he is not like unto those which either being couetouse,
ambiciouse, or inconstante do falsefy and corrupt the purity of doctrine. So
that he compares them to choppers and cha^gers or mingelers of wine, because
they do deprave and viciate the pure and right use of Gods word. This is also
worthy to be noted which these hypocrites do add, saying that Christ does
rightly and truly teach, because he regarded not the persons of men.
Galathi. 1.
For there is nothing that does more withdraw the teachers from the faithful
and perfect dispensation of Gods word, than the regard and respect of
persons. For it is impossible that he should addict and wholly give himself to
serve and please God, which seeks to please men. It cannot be denied truly
but that we ought to have a certain care and regard of men: yet not so that
we should seek to wine their fauore by flattery. To conclude, let all
acceptance and respect of persons cease that we may be perfect, Deuteronomy. 1.
Deuteronomy. 16.
I mean such regard and respect as does obscure and darken the true light,
and does peruerte and overthrow true judgment even as God does often times
inculcate in the law, John 7.
and experience shows the same. Therefore Christ does compare together (...),
that is respect of persons, and true judgment, in the seventh of John.

C. And the person is taken, for every consideration, which is beside the cause
and matter: as kindred, riches, commendacions of men, age, form or comelines,
and whatsoever wins favor toward men. For if in iudgemtnt we discern
between a good man and an evil man, we have not respect unto the person, but
to the matter and cause it self.

17. Tell us therefore how think thou Is it lawful that tribute be given to
Caesar or not?

How think thou. A. The hypocritical Disciples of the Phariseys those
hypocrites beginning after this manner do at length propound the question to
Christ.

Is it lavvfull that tribute be given to Caesar or not? M. This deceit has not
one snare alone but two. It was great danger to be silente, for so he should
have seemed to have regard to the persons of men, and to be stayed and held
with human fear, and so to hyde the truth in a matter of so great waighte.
Again to answer it was dangerouse: for they thought that he would either
say that tribute ought to be given to Caesar and so incur the hatred of the
people, that they might afterward with less fear of the people kill him: or
else that he would deny tribute to be given to Caesar, and so might fall as a
seditiouse person into the hands of Cesars power: And this is that which Luke
says: They watched him and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves
righteouse me^ to take him in his words and to deliver him unto the power and
authority of the deputy, to the end they might put him to death, as a traitor
and seditiouse person, the matter nothing appartaining to the Phariseis. For
how dangerouse a matter it was openly to deny tribute to be given to Caesar,
Theudas and Judas, taught by their example of whom we may read in the
acts of the Apostels and in Josephus. aso. Mark adds that they said, shall
we give or shall we not give?

18. But Jesus perceiuinge their wickedness said: why tempte ye me ye hypocrites?

But Jesus perceiving. E. Not only their wickedness and malice, but also their
subtilty, as says the Euangeliste Luke. C. These hypocrites seemed as though
they had been after the best manner desirouse to learn. How then does our
Savior Christ know what they were, but only because his sprite was the
searcher of the heart. For he did was the searcher of the heart. For he did not
epsy and find out their crafty and double dealing by humane conjecture, but
because he was God he pierced even to the hearts of them: in so much yt they
covered themselves in vain with flattery and the cloak of rigeteousnes.
Therefore before he answered the^, he made a plain declaration of his
divinity, detecting, and revealing their secret malice and spighte.

Now seeing the like sleightes and deceits are daily set and laid for us of
the wicked to entrap us, and seeing their malice lies secret and hidden from
us, let us pray unto god, that he will instruct and arm us with the spirit
of discretion, and give unto us freelye that which he had by nature and his
own proper right. And how necessary this wisdom and discretion is for us,
it is hereby evident, that if we do not take heed of the snares of the wicked,
we shall make the doctrine of God to be subject to their reproaches.

Why te^pteye me ye hypocrites. Bu. He plainlye declares that he does
understand their crafts and deceites. M. As if he should have said: It is
not the part of a good man to deceive, and to demand any thing, to the end
he might te^pte, and lay a snare to destroy. He calls them hipocrites, that
is to say dissemblers. For they fained themselves to be just, and for that
cause to desyer to know the truth and the will of God, when as in deed they
sought for none of this with all their heart, but far otherwise. But they did
very well ressemble their masters the Scribes and Phariseis. First of al
therefore we must here learn to preuente such false deceyuers, by bewrayring
and publishing their hypocrisy (if it may be) and then afterward they shall be
able to do the less harm.

19. Show me the tribute money. And they took him a penny.

Shevve me the tribute money. C. To the end our Savior might declare yt he
was not deceived by their deceauable flattery he so te^pered his answer by his
wonderful wisdom yt he enda^gered him self to nether part. In yt he
commands the^ to show him the tribute money, although it seem not at ye first
sight of any great weight, notwitsta^ding it is sufficient to louse and break
ye snares which they laid for him For by this part was expressed unto the^ a
confession of subjection: ye Christ might not be constrained to co^mande unto
them any new thing. The money was coined and sta^ped with the picture of
Caesar: therefore the authority of the Roman empire was by general and common
use allowed and received: whereby it was evident that ye Jews the^ selves had
al ready by their own accord put a law or yoke upon their own neck of paying
tribute, because they had granted the power of the sword to the Romans.

And they brought to him a penny. Bu. This pe^ny was a kind of Roman coin,
of the which we have spoken in the 20 chap. going before. It was the manner and
custom of ye Romans when they had vanquished and overcome the Gentiles, to
make the^ tributary in silver, Plinius lib..33. chap. 3.
not in gold, as writteth Plini. This pe^ny was paid by every one of the Jews
to the Romans yearly for tribute As concerning the which matter read the
seuentene chapter going before.

20. And he said ynto them: Whose is this image and superscription.

Whose is this Image. M. He does not simplely answer yt they must give unto
Caesar those things that are Cesars, but first of al he dema^deth a question, to
the end he might force the^ to answer yt which pertained to the purpose. Bu.
Therefore eue^ as when he was asked by what authority he taught he so te^pered
his answer by ye question opposed, Math. 21.
yt if they would have confessed ye truth, they themselves had aptlye and
truly answered to their own question: eue^ so in this place also desiring to
have the tribute money given unto him, and dema^ding whose the Image and
inscription of the penny was, he makes the^ of force to absolve the question
them selves.

M. So that he was not ignorante what he demanded, but because he had to do
with those which went about to catch him in his words, he therefore makes
their own words to catch themselves.

21. They said unto him Cesars. Then said he unto the^ give therefore unto
Caesar, the things which are Cesars: and unto God those things that are Gods.

They said unto him Cesars. Bu. The Emperors of Rome were wont to titell and
writ them selves upon their coin and money Parthians, Asians, and Syrians,
and such like, of the Gentiles which they had subdued This penny therefore had
the image of Augustus, or else of Tiberius Caesar, and peradventure the
inscription containing much of the Empire of Caesar, over the Jews, the which
was sufficient to confound them and their subtility. Give therefore unto Caesar.
C. Our Savior Christ here declares that seeing the subjection of the whole
nation is plainly published by the money, they ought not of their part to
strive: as if he should have said: if it seem an absurd thing unto you to
pay tribut then be ye not subject to the Romans. But truly the money which
goes amongst you from man to man, does testifye that Caesar has the
government of you, that by your secret approbation and likening also, the
liberty, which ye pretend, perished and decay. But the answer of Christ is
not so indifferent but that it contains a full and sufficient doctrine as
concerning the question propounded. For there is here put a plain and evident
distinction between spiritual and polliticall government to the end we might
know that the external subjection does hinder nothing at all, whereby our
conscience might be at the less liberty before God. For Christ went about
to confute their error, which thought that they were not the people of God,
except they were free from all subjection of humane power. Even as in this
part. the Apostell Paul diligently endeavors himself, least the Romans
should think that they served the only God the less, if they obeyed humane
laws, if they paid tribute, and were subject to other burdens. Romans 3.
To be short he pronounces that the law of God is not violated and that his
worship is not hurt if the Jews in respect of external policy and
pollitike government obeyed the Romans. Bu. And he also shows that they are
made subject to the Romans by the will of God when he commands the^ to
give unto Caesar those things that belong unto Caesar. As if he should say,
Caesar is your King, pay therefore unto your King the rightes that belong
unto a King. C. Moreover he seems to touch their hypocrisye, because they
carelessly suffered the worship of God in many things to be violated, yea
because they did wickedly defraude God of his power, only bearing a show of
great zeal in a matter of no wayght: as if he had said, You take great care
of tribute to be paid to the Romans, least that God should loose any part
of his honor. But truly ye ought rather to seek that ye give the honor and
worship unto God which he requires of you, and in the mean season give ye
that unto men which belongs unto men: and unto God the things that belong
unto God.

M. Here also we do see how far we ought to obey magistrates, How^
trates^ to be (...)
and how we must make a difference between God and Caesar. For although he be
the minister of GOD yet notwithstanding it is one manner of thing that
belongs unto God, and an other manner of thing that belongs unto him.

C. This partition truly does not seem to agree: because in speakinge
properly, when we do our duty unto men, we do also our duty toward God.

But Christ applying his words to the capascity of the people, thought it
sufficient to make a difference between the spiritual kingdom of God, and
pollitique order, and the state of this present life. Wherefore this
difference must be had, that saying the Lord will be the only ruler and lawmaker
to govern the souls of me^, we must not seek for a rule of worshipping him
from any other thing. than from his word and we must abide in ye only and pure
worship which he has there prescribed, and that ye power of the sword, laws
and judgments, do hinder nothing at all, but that the worship of God may
remain whole and sound amongst us. M. Therefore yt which partaineth to the
earth belongs as right unto Caesar, and that which pertains to religion
belongs unto God. In earth we have the image of Caesar in money, which
teaches what we owe unto Caesar. Again in our mind we bear the seal of
Christ and of the holy ghost, Caesar must have his dew and God his ^ighte.
being sealed by baptism, and ingraued also by the name of Christ: whereby
we are taught what we owe unto god. God does not co^mande us to withholde
from Caesar those things yt are dew to Caesar: it were amost wicked and ungodly
act if Caesar would not suffer those things to be given to God which are dew
unto him, but take them to him self. C Now this doctrine may serve for a
general admonition, yt every man according to his calling may give that deuty
which is dew to all men, as the children honor to their parents, servants
submission to their masters, subjects obedience to the hyer powers, that all
men may live according to the rule of charity, and that God may have yt which
belongs unto him. Therefore the sum of this place is, because they are
rebels unto God which despise pollitique order and government we must note
that obedience toward princes and magistrates is joined with the worship and
fear of God, but again, if princes usurp unto them selves the right which
belongs unto God, we must not obey them, but submit our necks rather to the
block. Bu. Wherefore if a heathen and wicked magistrate must not be resisted
much less ought we to resist a godly and Christian magistrate. Subjects
(...) obey (...) prince.
Let therefore all wicked Anabaptists take heed, ^baptistes (...) politic
^^^^ement.
and al such also which overthrow pollitike government, what they teach and
go about.

22. When they had heard these words, they merueiled and left him, and went
their way.

When they had heard these words they merueiled. B. The enemies of the
truth do here merueyle at the great wisdom and experience of Christ, but
they are nothing at all moved, to turn themselves unto God by faith.

And left him, and went their way. C Here also it appears how God does
frustrate and bring to naught the wicked practices and devises of his enemis:
neither does he only deceive their expectation and hope, but does also give
them the repulse with shame. It comes to pass some times that the wicked,
although they be overcome, yet notwithstanding they cease not to make
exclamation: but although their wantonness be unbridled which resist the
word of God, yet for all that, God has so many victories in his hand, that he
will triumph over them, and over Satan their head also. But in this answer,
Christ goes about specially to manifest and set forth his glory, when he
constrained his enemis to depart with ignominy and shame. A. Let us therefore
acknowledge this sentence of Solomon to be most true when he says: There is
no wisdom, Proverb. 21.
nor prudence, nor counsel against the Lord,

23. The same day came to him the Saduceis (which say that there is no
resurrection) and asked him saying.

The same day came to him. C. We do see here, how Satan gathers together
all the wicked which else are at contencio^ among themselves, to resist the
truth of God. For although there were dedly disagreement between these two
sects, yet notwithstanding they conspire together against Christ, yt it might
not displease ye Pharisees to have their doctrine resisted in the person of
Christ. Euenso at this day we see all the armies of Satan, although at all
other times they be one contrary to an other, yet notwithstanding to arise on
every side against Christ. And ye Papists also do burn with such mortal
hatred against Christ and his Gospel, Papists join themselves with
heretics to destroy the Gospel.
yt they will willingly suffer Libertines, Epicures, and such kind of
monstrouse Heretics, so that to destroy the Gospel they may use their
helps To be short we see that they went out on every side such as sought to
be^de their force against Christ: and they did this, because every one of the
hated ye light of sound and perfect doctrine. But the Saduces propounde a
question unto Christ, yt by the show of absurdity they might either make him
partaker of ye error. or else yt if he did disagree, they might defame him, and
make him a mocking stock among ye rude and unlearned multitude. And it may be
(truly) that they were wont with the same cavil to vex and moleste the
Pharisees, but now they lay the same grinne or snare for Christ. M After
therefore that the Phariseys had done nothing against Christ, the Saduces
come to assaye if they could bring that to pass which the Scribes and
Phariseis before them had sought for.

Which say that there is no resurrection. A. As concerning this sect of
Saduces read the chapter going before. C. But the Euangeliste Luke witnesses
that they denied not only the last resurrection of the flesh, but the
immortalitye also of the soul. And certainly if the doctrine of the Scripture
be well wayed, the life of the soul without the hope of resurrection is but a
mere dream. God does not so pronounce the souls to be free from death, Act.
3.
as though alredye they were in possession of the present glory and
beatitude: but he suspendeth their hope until the last day. We grant truly
that the Philosophers, to whom the resurrection of the flesh was unknown,
disputed much about the immortal essence of ye soul, but they speak, so
rashly and unadvisedly of the state of the life to come, that their writtings
are of no waighte. But saying the holy scripture does declare that the
spiritual life does depend upon the hope of the resurrection, and that the
souls being dissolved from the bodies do thither depart: whosoever takes
away the resurrection, he does also spoil the souls of immortallity. Moreover
hereby we may perceive the horrible confusion of the Jewish Church, in that
the chief heads and professors of religion took away the hope of ye life to
come, that men after the death of the body differ nothing from brute beasts.
They did not for all this deny but ye men ought to live justly and godly:
neither were they so profane and heathenishe, that they accounted the worship
of God to be profane and superfluouse: but they rather affirmed that God was
the judge of the whole world, and that humane things were governed by his
power: but saying they did restrain as well the reward of the godly, as the
condign punishments dew to the wicked, although they had said truth, that
every man now in this life is delte with all according to us desert, yet
notwithstanding this was to preposterous and out of order, to include the
promises of God into so straight bounds. Now experience does declare
euidentlye that there dulnes and incensiblenes was to gross, seeing that it is
manifest that the reward which is laid up in store for the godly is suspended
until the life to come, and that the wicked have not their punishment in this
life. To conclude, there is nothing to be imagined more absurd than this
error, ye men, being created after the Image and likeness of God, should be
extinguished and clean put out by death eue^ as the brute beasts. But how
filthye monstrouse was this opinion when as there was no nation whether they
were heathenish or profane Idolaters, or wrapped in blind ignorance, which had
not some hope of the life to come, whereas this seed of godliness was quight
abolished among ye Jews being the peculiar people of god. But first of all this
there reward was just which divided the Church of God into sects: Moreover
by this means God was revenged of ye wicked contempt of his doctrine.

24. Master: Moses said, that if a man die having no child his brother
should mary his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.

Master, Moses said. A. By the same subtility and deceit they call Christ
master, which the Disciples of the Phariseis and Herodians used before. All
these made a ieste and mock at ye doctrine of Christ, yet notwithstanding they
feigned them selves to be very desyrouse to learn. C. The Saduces do here
propounde a question unto Christ that by the show of absurdity they might
co^de^ne the doctrine of the resurrection.

That if a man dye having no children. C. Seeing that it was sufficient to
propound ye matter without any circo^stance, why do they begin after this
manner? Surely they do craftly allege for themselves ye name of Moses to the
end they might ^roue those marriages to be lawful which were contracted not by
the will and pleasure of men, but by the commandment and ordinance of GOD
himself. For it was necessary that he should agree with himself. Therefore
the snare which they laid for him was such, if God shall gather in time to
come the faithful into his Kingdom he will also restore unto them that which
he gave unto them in the world: What shall then become of the woman which God
gave unto seven men? After this manner al wicked ones and heretics do
calumniate and quarrel to the end they might deprave the true doctrine of
Godliness, and make the servants of Christ ashamed: yea the Papists are let
by no shame openly to ieste at God and his word, when they go about to
entangle us. ^itus. 1.
Therefore the Apostell Paul not without cause would have the teacher
sufficiently appointed with weapons by the which he may repel and put to flight
the aduersaris of the truth. As touching the law by the which God commanded
that the kinsmen should succeed the dead in matrimony, which were next of
blood, if the first departed without children, this was the reason, that the
woman which married into any stock or kindred, should thereby receive sede. But
and if children were brought forth in the first state of wedlock, it was
incestiouse wedlock which was between the degrees forbidden by the law

His brother should mary his wise. M. In the name of brother other degrees
also more nere are contained, as the cosyne germans and such like of the same
kynred.

And raise up sede unto his brother. B. This law was made as all other
pollitique laws were, for public tranquillitys sake, the which was not a
littel established, if the inherita^ces abode with out mixture, and every
stock and kindred possessed his own inheritance. Wherefore, the Lord did
diligently provide as well by other laws as by this (which the Saduces
objected) for the co^tinua^ce and perpetuity of stocks and kinredes, and for
the lawful succession of inherita^ces, th t one brother being dead without
sede, the other brother by maryinge his wife should go about to stir up his
posterity, and should make the first begotten son of his brothers wife to
possess the name and inheritance, even as though he were adopted to the dead
brother.

25. There were with us seven brethren, and the first married a wife and
disceassed without issue, and left his

26. wife to her brother: Likewise the second and the third, unto the se-

27. uenth: Last of all the woman dyed also.

A. This example they bring in to make their mind and meaning more plain and
euidente, being agreeable to the law.

28. Therefore in the resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven? For
they all had her.

Therefore in the resurrection. M. That is to say, in the everlasting life to
come, which we shall enjoy after the resurrection from death. They thought
if there were any resurrection to come, that the state of that world whereunto
they rose should be like unto this which is now: but hereof there came an
infinite sort of absurdities and things incredible.

29. Jesus answered and said unto them: ye do err not knowing the scriptures,
nor the power of God.

ye do err M. He says that they err generally because they denied the
resurrection. Ignorauce is the cause of error.


Not knovving the scriptures. C. Although our Savior Christ does only touch
the Saduces, yet notwithstanding this reprehe^cion does belong generally to al
ye inuentors of false opinions. For seeing that God does brightly shine unto us
in the scriptures, it must needs be that the ignorance of them is the welspring
and cause of all error. Mar. 12.
M. As more plainly appears by the words of Mark, where it is thus written:
Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures neither the power
of God? They erred therefore because they knew not the scripture, wresting the
sense thereof amiss.

C. But this is no small consolation to ye godly, in that they shall be safe from
ye danger of erringe so long as by humble and modest docillity they do seek and
search for yt which is right and true out of the Scriptures. Psalm. 119.
For the word of God is a light unto our feet and a lantern to our
paths: and it shyneth in this world as a candell in the darkness. Whereupon
the Apostel Paul says Al Scripture given by divine inspiracion is profitable
to teach, 2. Timo. 3,
to improve, to correct, and to amend that the man of God may be perfect
and given to all good works.

Neither the power of God. C. Whereas Christ joins the power of God to the
word, it is referred to the circomstance of the present cause. For, because
the resurrection does far exceed the capacitye of humane sense, it shall be
incredible unto us, until our minds do arise to the beholdinge of the
inspeakable power of God, Philip. 3.
by the which he can bring all things in subjection to him self as says the
Apostell Paul. M. Therefore the Saduces denying the resurrection, were ignorant
of the power of God, Romans 8. Philip 3. Colos. 3.
which is specially declared in the resurrection, the which power also Paul
sets before us to consider of in the resurrection of Christ. C. More over
it was necessary that the Saduces should be deceived because they measured
amiss the glory of the heavenly life by the present state and condition of
this transitory life. Notwithstanding in the mean time we are taught that
they do truly and wisely judge and speak of the mysteries of the heavenly
kingdom, which do join the power of God with the Scriptures.

30. For in the resurrection they neither mary nor are married, but are as the
angels in heaven.

For in the resurrection. M. He shows unto us the state of those which
shall be happy and blessed after the resurrection. taking away the opinion of
absurdity as concerning the state of the world to come. And he uses a
distinction of the times present and to come, the which the Euangeliste Luke
more plentifully and plainelye expresses saying. The children of this world
marye wives and are married: but they which shall be counted worthy of that
world and the resurrection from the dead, do not mary wives neither are
married. He calls all those the children of this world, which live in the
world.

And he calls those worthy of the world to come which apprehende the
felicity and happiness that is to come.

But are as the Angels of God in heaven. C. He does not mean that the sons
of GOD when they arise shall be like to the Angels in all things, but in respect
of this, that they shall be free from all the infirmity of this present life:
even as if he should deny them to be any more subject to the transitory and
corruptible necessities of this life.

The Evangelist Luke does more plainlye express the order and manner of the
lykenes that Christ here speaks of saying that they can dye no more, Luke
20.
for that they are equal to the Angels, and are the sons of God. But he
speaks of the faithful only: because the end of his talk does not tend
to the reprobate. As the Angels therefore cannot dye, Death^ our res^tion ha^
more (...)
euenso they which are raised from the dead, can dye no more, but shall live
with the Angels eternallye: and because they are the sons of God, to whom
the inheritance of Gods riches does pertayne, they cannot perish: and because
they are called the sons of ye resurrection, therefore they shall enjoy the
everlasting benefits of the resurrection to come: which benefits are,
perpetual joy, and continual felicity.

C. But it may be demanded why he says that they shall be then the sons of
God, because they shall be the sons of the resurrection: when as the Lord does
give this titell of honor to the faithful although they be included and shut
up in the frail prison of the body. And how should we be heirs of
everlasting life after death, except God did now acknowledge us for his sons.
Aunsw^ Romans 8. Galat. ^
We answer that so soon as we are by faith ingraffed into the body of
Christ, we are made the adopted sons of God, and yt this spirit of adoption
is a witness, seal, earnest, and pledge, that by this trust we may boldly
cry, Abba Father.

But although we know that we are the sons of God: yet for all that, because
it has not as yet appeared what we shall be, until we be transfigured into his
glory, (when we shall see him what he is) we are not as yet in the effect it
self said to be his sons,

And although we be regenerated by the spirit of God, yet notwithstanding
because our life is hid as yet, the revealing thereof does in perfect wise
make a difference between us and strangers. And in this sense the Apostell
Paul dyfferreth our adoption, ^n. 8.
even until the last day. M. We must therefore note how great the felicity
of the life to come shall be. For that which is now full of infirmity,
Mortallitie, and corruption, yea that which is now heavy, troublesome, slow,
miserable, and base, shall be, by the resurrection, made strong, immortal,
incorruptible, light, pleasant, quick happy, and gloriouse And the soul shall
be free from ignorance, blyndenesse, false opinions, wicked affections, anger,
envy, fear, pride, and such like.

Wherefore, whosoever he be that is oppressed and afflicted in this present
life, either by the wicked affections of the mind, either by corruption and
trouble: let him have respect to this Angelycall state of the life to come,
and there solace him self.

31 But as towchinge the resurrection of the dead: have ye not red that which
is spoken unto you of God, which

32 says: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? God is not a God of dead, but of living.

But as tovvchinge the resurrection of the dead Bu. The Lord being not
contented that he confuted the absurdity of the Saduces, and showed the causes
of their error proves very strongely the contrary part, that it might be
euydent that the faith of the resurrection of the body and of the immortality
of the sowles, is sure and confyrmed. C. After therefore Christ had confuted
the absurdity objected against him, he confirms the doctrine of the last
resurrection, by the testimony of Scripture. ^re ^er^ Gods ^es.
And trewely this order is to be noted of us, that when we have overcome the
enemies of the truth with all their cauilles, we must give them to
understand that they have resisted the word of God: for until they be
convinced by the testimony of Scripture. they shall ever have liberty to
exclayme.

Have ye not read B. The Euangelyste Mark has: As towchynge the deadde that
they rise again, have ye not redd in the book of Moses. etc. And the
Evangelist Luke has: And that the dead shall rise again. Moses also shows
besides the busshe, when he calls the Lord. etc. The words of Mark make
the words of Luke more plain. He does as it were note with the finger this
place of Moses, when he says: Exodus. 5.
How in the bushe God spoke unto him saying:

I am the God of Abraham. C. Our savior Christ cites this place here out of
Moses, because he had to do with the Saduces, who gave no great credit unto
the Prophets, for they made no more accounte of them, than we do of the book
of Ecclesiasticus, or of the book of the Machabees. And because they alleged
Moses for their author, he thought it better to repel them with their own
authority, than to set before them the testimony of any one of the Prophets.

Moreover it may be that he endeavored not him self to gather all the places
of Scriptures together: as the Apostelles, who do use as we se diverse
testimonies of Scripture in one cause. And yet for all that Christ took not this
place before others without cause, but he chose it with an excellent judgment,
although at a blushe it might seem more obscure: because first of all it was
mete that this place should be known above al others, among the Jews,
namelye, that they were redeemed of the Lord, because they were the children of
Abraham. For there God does pronounce that he came to help the afflicted
people: and adds also that he does acknowledge that people for his own, in
respect of the adoption, for the covenant that he made with Abraham. How
comes it to pass that God has more respect to the lyuinge than to the
dead, but only because he attrybuteth the first degree of honor to the
fathers, with whom he made his couenaunte?

And how should they excel if they were extinguished by death? This also is
very well expressed by the relation. For as no man can be said to be a father
without children, neither a king withoute-people: even so the lord cannot
properly be called God, except he be the God of such as live. Howebeit Christ
does not reason so much of the common order of speech, as he does of the
promise which is included in these words. For ye Lord does offer himself unto
us to be our God upon this condition, that he might in like manner make us to
be his people: the which one thing is sufficient to the trust of full and
perfect beatitude. Whereupon the Church cried after this manner (as appears
by the Prophet,) Thou art our God from the beginning, Habac. 1.
we shall not dye. Seeing therefore he promises salvation to all those whose
God he says he is, and seeing he publishes the same of Abraham, Isaac. and
Jacob after their death: God is a god of the living.
it follows that there is hope of life left to those that be dead B. We see
therefore how conningly our savior Christ has gathered this, that to whom
soever the Lord is a God, to him also he is a savior, and quickener for ever:
the which he cannot be altogether to ye dead: that is, to those from whom all
hope of life is taken away. For to whom soever God is a God, him he blesses,
that is he declares himself to him to be a God.

But if the dead were wholly void of life (as the Saduces thought) and should
never return to the same, how should God bless them, or bestow any
benefits upon them? The saints therefore are not void of participation of
life. And least the Saduces should say, no man denies God to be the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he therefore adds,

God is not the God of the dead But Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were dead. It
is true, they were and are. But to God they were not dead, they are only dead
to ye world and to the flesh, and live unto God. For all live unto him as
says the Euangeliste Luke. C. The which saying in ye Scriptures is taken
diversely. M. For we live unto God, when we live unto him, and not to the
flesh. We are said also to live unto God, when our life depends upon his
power, and not of our selves.

C. But our savior Christ means here that the faithful, after they dye
unto the world, live a heavenly life with God: Romans ^
according to that which the Apostle Paul writes, saying that Christ after
he was received into the heavenly glory, lives unto God, because he was
exempte from the infirmities and troubles of this transitory life. But our
savior Christ does here with good aduisement declare, that we ought not to
judge of the life of the Godly, according to fleshly sense: because it is laid
up in the secret power of God. For if they be almost like unto dead men,
while they walk in the world, much less any show of life shall appear in
them after ye death of the flesh. But God is faithful, and will preserve them
alive before him, beyond the reason of man. If any man do obiecte and say
that the souls may remain alive without any resurrection of ye flesh: We
answered them alittle before where we said that these two were so knit and
linked together that there could not be any separation: Auns^
because the souls do aspyre and come to the heritage laid up for them that
as yet they might not obtain their state. M. After these things the
Evangelist Mark writes that Christ said again: you therefore greatly err.
And the Evangelist Luke adds saying: Then certain of the Phariseis answered
and said: Master thou have well said. C. When as it is probable that al of
them were evil affectioned, God by his secret power did as it were eitorte
and wringe this confession out of their mouths. Peradventure it might be, that
although the Phariseis wished that Christ might be overthrown and put to
silence in this conflict with the Saduces, yet notwithstanding because they see
that they are armed by his answer against the contrary faction of the
Saduces their enemies, ambition brought to pass that they yield the victory
unto Christ. Perchance also they were inflamed with envy, least the Saduces
should bring that to pass (namely by putting Christ to syle^ce) which they
nor other for them could do. But how soever it was it came to pass by the
providence of God, that the most deadly enemies that he had, subscribed and
yielded also to his doctrine.

33. And when the people heard this, they were astonyed at his doctrine.

And when the people h^^rde this Bu. The people are justly amazed at the
answers of God, so excellent and full of wisdom. For in them all there is
wholesome profit and a certain deuyne majesty.

C. Notwithstanding we must note ye the doctrine of Godlynes was at ye time so
infected with so many wicked and false co^ments, that it was not without cause
counted as a miracle to have the hope of the resurrection so truly and aptly
proved out of the law. The people therefore are amazed at the wonderful grace:
but obstinacy is mad, and never in quiet: and impiety is led by furious
violence, specially when the power of God appears.

34. But when the Phariseis had heard that he had put the Saduces to silence,
they came together, M. Here again the nature and propertye of malice
appears. For although the Phariseis had been twice before put to silence and
made ashamed, yet notwithstanding they assaye again.

They came together Because the Saduces were inferior in learning to ye
Phariseis (as our savior Christ objected against them) the Phariseis thought
it no marvel if they could prevail nothing at all against Christ. Therefore
they themselves boastinge of the knowledge of the Law do determine once again
more bouldlye to set upon Christ. They do now therefore suborne and
coollerablelye set forth a Doctor of the Law, whom Mark calls a Scribe,
which might object a question of the law, not to learn, but rather to tempte.

35. And one of them which was a Doctor of law, asked him a question temptinge
him and saying.

C. This lawyer, was a pickte, and chosen fellow among the whole sects (as it
is said before) which seemed to excel others in wit and learning. This
good fellow being sufficiently instructed before, came unto Christ saying:

36. Master: which is the greatest commandment in the Law?

C. Because this man was an interpretor of the Law, he is offended at the
doctrine of the Gospel, by the which he thought that the auctoritye of
Moses was demynished. Howbeit he is not so much affected through the zeal
of the law, as he takes disdain ye any thing should depart from the
honor of his Mastership. Christ thefore demands of him whether he would
profess any thing more perfect then the law. For although the lawyer do
not express this in words, yet notwithstanding his question is very captions,
seekinge thereby to make Christ hated of the people.

The greatest commandment B. The Evangelist Mark has: which is the first of
all the commandments. The greatest, first, and chiefest, signify all one
thing, as that, to the which all the rest may be referred.

37. Jesus said unto him: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

Thou shals love thy Lord, Bu. The Lord answers to the question, even out
of the profoundnes and depthe of the Law, that by these few words, all men
might gather and know, that the Lord was most skillful and cunninge in the
Law.

M^. Notwithstanding the Evangelist Mark says that Christ spoke more
words, namely these followinge: The first of all the commandments is, Hear
O Israel: The Lord our God is Lord only: and thou shall love thy Lord thy
God with all thy heart etc. C. By the which words God gets auctoritye to
his law for two causes. For this also ought to be unto us a most sharp prick
and provocation to the worship of God, when that we are certainly persuaded ye
we worship the true creator of heaven and earth: (because doubtinge does
naturally engender sluggishnes:) and a pleasant intisement also to love him,
seeing that he has adopted us freely to be his sons. Therefore least the
Jews should be afraid (as commonly men are in doubtful matters) they bear a
true rule of life prescribed unto them by the true and only God. And lest
distrust should stay them, God comes familliarlye unto them, and comitteth
unto them his free covenant.

In the mean time notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that he seperateth
himself from all Idols, least the Jews should be led amiss, but might keep
themselves in the true worship of him only. Now truly if uncertainty and
doubting do stay nothing at all the miserable worshippers of Idols from being
carried by folish zeal to the love of them, what excuse is left to the hearers
of the law, if they forsake God? M. Further* more by these words: The Lord
our God is one God: he does not only go about to prove the Lord to be one
only God, but also to have us so to esteem and believe of him. But truly, to
believe yt there is one God it does profit us nothing: but to account him for one
only God, and for our God, is salvation and life, and the fulness of all the
commandments. Even so said the holy patriarcke Jacob: Gene. 28.
the Lord shall be my God: as though be were not his God before: but he means
that he does fully determyne with true worship to account the Lord only for
his God. He says therefore that we must account the Lord our God for one God
only and no mo, that is, that we ought not to worship him with diverse
worshippes invented of us, but with ye only worship which he himself has
appointed. And this is done by faith. For no man can have one God except he
depend only upon him, and believe only in him: otherwise he shall be earyed
into the variety of works, and shall feign unto him self diverse Gods. C.
That which follows Thou shall love the Lord is the epitome or brief
compendium of the law, the which is also to be seen in the sixtene Chapter of
Deutronomye. For saying the law is divided in two tables, Two tables of the
Law.
whereof the first is referred to the Moses did very well and wisely gather
this short sum that the Jews might know what God required in every
commandment. Moreover, although it be meet that we love God far otherwise
than men, yet notwithstanding God does not without cause required of us love,
Voluntarye service is most acceptable to God.
for his honor and worship: because by this means he declares that no
worship is so acceptable unto him as that which is voluntarye. For he does
truly at the length give himself to the obedience of God, which loves him.
But because the vicious and wicked affections of the flesh do withdraw us
from the right way, Moses shows that our way and life is framed aright, if
that all our senses be replenished with the love of God. Let us therefore
learn that the beginning of godliness is the love of God: because God
rejects the coacted and constrained obedience of men, and will be worshipped
liberally and willingly. And by the way let us learn that the reverence
which is due unto him is noted under the love of God. In the Book of Moses
this word mind, is not added, but only mention is made, of the heart, mind,
and strength. And although yt the participacion of these sower members is
more full and perfect, yet notwithstanding it alters not the sense. For
Moses goinge about brefely to teach ye God ought to have our love in whole
and sum, he thought it sufficient to add strength to the soul and heart,
least he should leave any part of man void of the love of God. B. As if he
should have said, thou shalt so unfeignedly love thy God, that the love of him
shall invade and possess thy whole nature, and senses every one: whatsoever is
in thee apply it to the love of him, let thy mind always think upon him,
let thy will delight in him before all things, and let all thy strength and
endeuoures be to the fulfilling of his pleasure. The which love is the first
fruit of faith. C. Furthermore we must note that the Hebrews under this
word heart) do sometimes note the mind, specially where it is joined to the
mind For what does the mind differ from the heart in this place? surely
nothing but in this that it seems to signifye a more hye seat of reason,
from whence all counsayles and cogitacions do spring. B. C. Moreover, these
things are not so spoken, as though we ought to love no other thing but God
only, when as all the things that he made are exceeding good and to be
beloved: We^^ all th^res (...)
but because nothing ought to be made equal in love with him, or to be
preferred before the love of God

C. Also it does appear by this compendium and short sum, that God had not
respect in the commandments of the law what men could do, but what they
ought to do. For in this infirmity of the flesh it cannot be that the perfect
love of God should obtain the kingdom: for we know how prone all the
senses of our mind are to vanity. B. C. Whereby we gather that all mortal men
were far from perfect righteousness, and that there was no sinful man neither
shall be which has not offended in either of both namelye, either in making
account of one only God, or in louinge of him, or else in both: when as there
is none which at some time has not wauered in the faith, and joined other
things in equal love with God. C. Lastly here we learn that god cares not
for the outward show of works, but specially requires the inward affection,
that good fruits may spring from ye root.

38. This is the first and greatest commandment.

A. He means that all the commandments of the first table are
comprehended in this commandment.

39. And the second is like unto it. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self.

And the second is like to it M. He calls it second in order, because to
love God before our neighbor is first in order. C. For the worship of God
has the first place. He says that it is like to the first, because it has
some affinity and agreement with the first: or rather because it depends of
that. For seeing every man is addicted and given to himself, true charity shall
never abide between neighbor and neighbor, but whereas the love of God
abides. It is a counterfeit love, with the which the children of this world
love one another, because every one has care for his own profit. Again, it
is impossible for the love of God to raygne, but the same shall breed and
engender brotherly love between man and man. B C. Othersome will say that it
is therefore like to ye first, both because in each of them the true and
perfect affection of love is commanded: and also because, as love is head of
all those things which are due unto God, which are shortly comprehended in
that commandment, that we love God with all our heart: etc. Even so also
the love of our neighbor is the head of all those things which are due and
belonginge to our neighbor: which are comprehended in this commandment,
Love thy neighbor as thy self. And this is that which they say the Apostle
writ in the thirtene to the Romans, Romans 13. Galat. 5.
and fifth to the Galathians. Thou shall love thy neighbor This word
neighbor does not only signifye kinsmenne and friends, or such which are
joined to us by some affinity: but those also which are unknown to us, and our
ennemies: Math. 5.
whom Christ commands us to love in another place. C. For we come all of
one, Love of our neighbor.
being made after the Image and likeness of God: neither is there any man so
barbarous or base, but he is joined unto us in this knot, which is inviolable
and holy, and cannot be abolished by the wickedness of any man. All mankind
must be embraced by one affection of love: there ought to be no difference
between the barbarous and Scithian, between the worthy and unworthy,
between the friend and ennemy, because all are one in Christ Jesus, and they
are to be considered in God, not in themselves. From the which way if we
decline, it is no marvel if we be entangled in many errors. Neither can we
herevppon deny but the more a man is near unto us, ye more we ought to help
him. For this the nature of man it self brings to pass yt the more they are
knit together either by the bond of kindred, familiarity, or affinity, the more
they are pressed and ready to do them good. A. Also we are bound according to
the rule of S Paul, to love those saints and faith full men, in whom the
repaired Image of God shyneth, more, than such as bear the image of the devil
ye Prince of this world, though they be our nigh kinsmen. For he says: Let not
to do good to all men, but specially to them of the househould of faith. Even
as thy self C. When Moses the man of God commanded us to love our
neighbors as our selves, he mente not to set the love of our selves in the
first place, as though every man should love himself first and then his
neighbor, as the Sorbonicall Sophisters do cavil. But, saying we are to
much addicted to our selves, Moses going about to reform this vice,
commands us to geeue the like and same love to our neighbors that we
geeue to our selves: even as if he had forbidden al men to neglect others, and
to have a care for themselves, because love joins all men into one body. And
goinge about also to correct Philautian, or self-love, which seperateth one
man from another, he reduces all men to common society and mutual love.
Therefore we are not here taught how to love our selves. But he teaches us
this, As every man is wont to love himself, so let him love also his
neighbor. And whereas the affection of love was wo^t to remain in us by a
natural corruption, he shows now that it must be otherwise: that we
might have no less desire and care to benefit our neighbors than our
selves. Colos. 3. Romans 13.
Whereby we gather that Paul does not without good cause call love the bond
of perfection, and in another place the fulfilling of the law because all the
commandments of the second table are referred to the same. Bu. The
Evangelist Mark adds that to love a man's neighbor as himself is a greater
thing then all burnt offeringes and sacrifices. For these things were never
acceptable to the true, lyuinge, and eternal God without faith, and love: as
we have already declared in the fifthe chapter goinge before. Now, if we
gather al these things into a compendium and short sum, we shall see that
the lord has taught us that, in few words, which ye whole scripture
discourses of at large, namelye that there is one God only in substance:
that this God is our God, which would us well, which loves us, and seeks
to save us. And that this God ought to be loved and worshipped of us for him
self, as the father, lord and chief felicity: and that every man also must
be loved for Gods sake, and that so unfeignedly, as we love our selves, and
as Christ has loved us.

40 In these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

C. How the law and the prophets do depend upon these two commandments
read the seventh chapter going before. What so ever is taught in the law and
the prophets as concerning the doctrine of life, is fulfilled of them which
love God and their neighbor. A, Mar. 12.
After these things the Euangelyst Mark adds that a Scribe answered Christ
saying: Well master, thou have said the truethe, for there is one God, and
there is none but he.

41 While the Phariseies were gathered together. Jesus asked them saying.

While the Phariseis were gathered together. M. The Phariseies were now
gathered together to suborne, and craftelye to set forth some one, which by
putting forth a question, might tempte and entangle Christ: the which
thing they went about a littell before to bring to pass by the Lawyer (of
whom we spoke even now) but in vain. When as therefore the Phariseies were
gathered together, which took unto them selves the knoweledge of the law and
the prophets, and yet were ignorante of the coming of Christ, because they
did not greatly desyer the same, neither understood his majesty and glory, it
is not without cause if Christ demand of them saying.

42 What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he? They said unto him the son
of David?

What think ye of Christ? B. This is thought to be the last talk that our
Sauyoure Christ had with the Phariseies, and his adversaries, by the which he
went about to provoke them to know him, except those things which he
answered them to, when he was taken of them. By these words therefore he
went about to stir up their minds, and to admonish them of his kingedome,
if so be that there were any amongst them which were curable, ye they might
look for Christ to be greater than the carnal king, yea and more excellent
than David his father. For those that were carnal hoped for nothing but carnal
things.

Whose son is he. C. The Evangelists Mark, and Luke, do more plainly
express, why Christ demanded this question: namely because a wicked opinion
preuayleth among the Scribes, that ye promised redemer should be one of the
sons and successors of David, which should bring nothing with him more
excelent than the human nature. For by and by at the beginning Satan by all
means possible, went about to supplante some false feigned Christ, which
should not be the true mediator of God and man. And because God had so often
times promised, that Christ should come of the seed and spring out of the
loins of David, this persuasion was so depely rooted in the hearts of al men
among the Jews, that they could in no wise abide to have him deprived of the
human nature. Satan therefore suffered Christ to be acknowledged to be a true
man, and the son of David, because he should in vain have gone about to take
away this part of faith, being so evident and common among al men: but that
which was worse, he spoiled him of his deity, as though he should be some one
of the sons of Ada^. And after this sort the hope of the everlasting life to
come, and spiritual righteousness was abolished. But so sone as Christ was
declared unto the world, the Heretics went about by many subtle means and
deceites to overthrow, one while his human nature, and an other while his
divine nature, least that he should either have full power to save us, or else
least we should have familiar access unto him. But because the hour of his
death was at hand, the lord him self thought good to make his deity and
Godhed known, that the trust of all the godly might be reposed in him without
all fear or doubting. For if he were only a man, it were neither lawefull for
us to glory in him, nor yet to hope for salvation by him. Now let us note that
his purpose and intent was not so much for his own sake to declare him self
to be the son of God, as it was to ground our faith upon his heavenly power.
For as the infirmity of the flesh, by the which he made him self nere of
kynne unto us, does encourage us that we should not doubt to come unto him:
even so if we should have only respect unto the same, we shall be rather
filled with fear and desperation, than with any god trust and confidence.
Notwithstanding we must note that the Scribes are not reprehe^ded because they
did teach Christ to be the son of David: but because they immagined him to be
a mere man which should come from heaven to put upon him the nature and person
of a man. Neither does the Lord altogether speak of himself, but simplely
shows, that the Scribes do wickedlye err, in yt they looked that the redemer
should come only of the earth and human progeny. And although it was an
old opinion among them, yet notwithstanding we gather by this our
Evangelist Mathewe that they were asked before the people what they thought.

They said unto him the son of David Bu. It was evident by many promises of
Scripture that Christ should come of the seed of David: A. but they which
daily read these promises and interpreted them to ye people, looked for
nothing to be more in the person of Christ then a man. Therefore they make
answer unto Christ which was most common and usual amongst them, namely,
that the Messiah, was the son of David.

43 He said unto them: how then does David in spirit, call him Lord
saying:

How then does David, M. Christ our savior, does not reprehende the
Phariseis (as we said eue^ now) because they confessed him to be the son of
David: but because men commonly denied him which should be the Messiah, to
be nothing else but an earthlye king, which should bring the people of God
into a certain earthly liberty, and that he should so enlarge the tereene and
transitory kingdom that it should exte^d it self even to the ends of the
world, and that he should be of the tribe of David: for this cause (I say)
he thought good in ye presence of some to give them occasion to have a farther
consideration of his glory, and majesty: namely, yt he was not the son of
David according to ye flesh, but also the son of David and David's Lord. For
in respect yt he took flesh of ye virgin Mary, Christ the son of David and
the son of God.
his is the son of David: and in respect yt he was conceived by the holy
ghost, he is the son of God, and David's lord. Therefore this is no new, or
late invented error. For this impiety reigned among the phariseis long before
be came into the world. So that the devil has sought from the beginning (as
it is said already) to take away the deity and godheade from Christ: that by
that means all the salvation of mankind might be utterly and quite overthrown.
In spirit. The Evangelist Mark has: Inspired with the holy ghost: And the
Evangelist Luke instead of both these has: In his book of Psalms. C. But
Christ declares that Dauiddyd speak in the spirit, expressly and with great
emphasis and force. For he opposes and sets the prophecy of the thing to
com, against the testimony of the thing present And the cavil by the which the
Jews at this day excuse the^ selves, is this. They say yt by this prophesye
the kingedome of David is celebrated, as though he apointing God to be the
author of his raygne, would rise against the mad enterprises and beastly
practices of his enemies, and should deny the^ to profit any thing at al,
without the permission of God. Least that the Scribes should obiecte some such
thing, Christ foresheweth that the psalm was not made of the person of David,
but that he was inspired with the spirit of Prophecy, to describe ye kingdom
of Christ to come: (even as also we may gather easily by the text) that those
things which are there red, do neither belong to David, nor to no earthly
king else. For there it brings in David the king to be adorned with a new
priesthode, by ye which it was necessary that the old figures and shadows of
the law should be abrogated. Now we must se how he proves that Christ should
be of more excelencie, tha^ if he sprang only of ye sede of David: namely
because he calls him self the lord which was the king and head of the
people. Whereupon it follows that there was in him somewhat more tha^ in a man.
Notwtstanding it seems to be a weke and slender reason: because it may be
objected, that when he gave the psalm to the people to be song, not having
respect to his person be attributed the rule and gouernemente to Christ over
others: but we answer on the contrary part, that seeing he was one of the
members of the church, there was nothing more unmeet, tha^ that he should
deprive him self of the common doctrine. Here he commands all the sons of
the God of heaven, and of the invincible king, to glory (as it were) and
rejoice with one voice, that they, by his help and aid, are in safegarde. If
he be separated from the body of the church, he shall not be partaker of the
promised salvation in Christ: if this were the voice of a few, the rule and
lordship of Christ would not extend it self even till David. But now neither
he, nor any other can make himself free from his subjection, but he must fall
from the hope of eternal salvation. Therefore seeing there was nothing better to
the prophet David, than to be comprehended in the Church: he applied this
Psalm no less to him self, than to the rest of the people. In fine, by this
titell Christ is made the chief and only king, by the which he may excel
among the faithful. Neither ought there any exception to be admitted, but so
sone as the redemer is made head of the church, all me^ ought to submit the^
selves unto him. Wherefore there is no doubt but that David submits him self
to his domination and rule, that he might be reckened among the people of God.
But here another question may be demanded, Q^
whether god could not extol some one man which should be the redemer, to be
David's lord, although he were his son. For here the substancial name of God is
not put, but the name of lord only, which oftentimes pertains to men also, We
answer that Christ takes this for a grant, Au^
that he which is taken from among men, and is so exalted to honor that he is
the head of the Church, is not a mere man, but endued also with the majesty
of God. Esaias. ^
For the eternal God which challenges this thing to him self with an oath,
that every kne should bow before him, Esaias. ^
does also swear that he will not give his glory to another But trewly as the
Apostell Paul witnesses, when Christ was ascended into heaven and
established in the kingdom, Phili. ^
he had a name given to him above al names, that before him every knee should
bow. And although Paul had never spoken this, yet notwithstanding the
matter stands so, that Christ was therefore made David's lord, and the head
of other kings also, because he excels angels, the which thing cannot
belong to a mortal man, except the same were God manifested in the flesh. We
grant truly that his divine essence is not here expressed according to the
word, but a man may easily thereuppon gather, that the same is God, which is
exalted above all other creatures. (...) natu^ Christ.
M. Whereupon we may note that there are two natures in Christ Jesus: For he
is perfect God, and perfect man: as he is God, he is like unto the father, and
equal unto him in all things: and as he is man, he is inferyour to the
father. He which judges not of Christ according to both natures, affirmethe
him either to be God only, or man only, the which many heretics do, and
have done.

44 The lord said unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
ennemies thy footestoole.

The Lord said to my lord. B. The Hebrew text for this word (Lord) in the
first place has Jehovah, and for Lord in the second place Adonai. As if it
had been said, The eternal God said unto my Christ. Our savior Christ
would be known to be more excellent than David in this, that David him self
calls him his Lord. For the father would not have called the son Lord,
except he had known him to be greater than him self. C. Therefore here the
holy ghost, has set down and committed to all the children of God a verse of
triumph, that they might boldly scorn at Satan, and all his mynisters, and
deryde their furor, because they go about to cast down Christ from his
throne. Least therefore men beholdinge great business and trouble in the earth,
should quake and fear, they are commanded to set against all the practices
of men, the holy and inviolable decree of God. The sense therefore and meaning
of the place is this. That although men do rage and swell, yet notwithstanding
whatsoever they shall take in hand to destroy the kingdom of Christ shall be
void, because the same being erected and set up by the power of God, and not
by the will of man, is stayed and vpholden of him for ever. So often therefore
as we se this kingdom assalted with violence, let us remember this heavenly
and divine sentence of the holy ghost. For certainly this promise was put
into the hands of Christ, that all the faithefull might apply the same to
their use. For God is neither inconstant nor deceitful that he should alter the
thing that is gone out of his lyppes,

Sit thou on my right hand. C. The sittinge at the right hand of God is here
taken metaphorically, for the second or next degree which belongs to the
vicar of God. Wherefore it is even as much as to obtain his rule and power in
the name of God, even as we know ye God committed to his only begotten son, his
parts and portions, that by his hand he might govern his Church. B. Therefore
to sit at the right hand of God, is to reign in his name, so that he might
be thought justly to hold the same power: that wherefore so ever he did reign
he might be thought to sustain the power of God. For as the legate and
embassadoure does represent and sustain the person of the king: even so God
governs all things by the hands of his Christ. C. So that this manner of
speaking does not apointe any certain place, but it does rather include heaven
and earth, Ephe. 1.
under the rule and government of Christ. A. How Christ does sit at the right
hand of God, read in the first chapter of s. Paul's epistell to the
Ephesians, Heb. 1.
and in the first chapter of his epistell to the Hebrews.

Until I make thine ennemies. C. This word (until) does not signify somewhat
to come or not to come, but it signifies the time which goes before, B. We
must also note ye Christ uses the testimony of this psalm, to declare that
he is not only David's lord, but also to set forth the invincible power and
victory of his kingdom against his enemies. As if he should have said: ye
shall be so far from resisting me that ere it be long, my father will set me at
his right hand, and give me full possession of all power, the which power I
will exercise, until such time as you and all my ennemies are made my
footestoole.

C. The holy ghost therefore does pronounce that Christ shall sytte until
his enemies are laid prostrate and brought into subjection, that we might
know that his kingedome shall ever remain invincible: not because his enemies
being overcome, his power shall be taken from him again, but because all the
rabble of his ennemies being overthrown, it shall stand whole and sound for
ever. In the mean season, the state and condition of his kingdom at this day
is noted unto us, to the end it should not be greuouse unto us, when we se
the same resisted on all hands. For it will come to pass, that whosoever
rashely rysethe to rebel against the kingdom of Christ, shall utterly be
destroyed and cast down. As concerning the which matter read the fyftene
chapter of the first epistell of S. Paul to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 15.


Thy foot stool. B. M. By these words he understands absolute
subjection: even such subjection as that which the Apostell Paul speakethe
of, Phili. 2,
when he says, that in the name of Jesus every knee shall bow. These
words do contain severe threateninges against the ennemies of Christ. The
holy martyr S Steven had the like meaning also, when he said: Behold I sethe
heavens open, Act. 7.
and the son of man standing at the right hand of the power of God.

45 If David then called him lord, how is he then his son?

A. Our savior Christ concludes with great boldness, that there should be
somewhat more in the Messiah, than the Humanity. M. Yet notwithstanding he
does not this to prove that he is the son of David, but to reprove the
ignorance and blindness of the hie priests, scribes, and Phariseyes, by the
which they judged nothing else of Christ, than that which might also
appertain to the son of a man. A. They did so assign unto him the terrene
and transytorye kingdom, that they never remembered the heavenly and
everlasting power with the which the father endewed his son. He seeks
therefore to bring them to the consyderation of this heavenly kingedome.

46 And no man was able to answer him any thing, neither durst any man (from
that day forth) ask him any mo questions.

C. They did perceive the power of God in his aunsweres, the which they were
not able to resist, except they should seem to contend and strive against
God: and that in vain. M. These words are added of the Evangelists, partly
to declare the light of the trewthe, which cannot be extinguished, and
partelye to declare how hardely the mallyce of the wicked may be overthrown.
For although they be not able to make any answer, nor dare any more ask him
questions to prove him, yet notwithstanding they cease not to hate. But this
profit comes by the confusion of the ennemies of the trewthe, namely, that
their impudency is revealed: And this is the cause that the Apostel Paul
commanded Tytus to reprove sharply the obstinate, Titu^
with wholesome doctrine.

The xxiii. Chapter.
THEN spoke Jesus to
The Scribes and the

Then spoke Jesus to the. Bu. When our savior Christ had tried and assaied all
the ways and means he could, and seeing there was now no hope left to
convert the hie priests, and rulers of the people at any time unto the lord
(for they were fully determined to persevere in their errors, and obstinatly to
peryshe in their sins) least they should bring the people with them selves
into the same ruin and destruction, he teaches them at the last to beware
and take heed. C. This admonition above al other was necessary and profitable,
that among the discordes, dissentions, and burliburlies in matters troblesome
and confused, in the dissipatio^ of the right and lawful order, the authority
notwithstanding of ye word of God should remain safe and sound. For to this
end did the purpose of Christ tend least the people being offended at the
wickedness of the Scribes should cast from the^ the reverence of the law. For
we know how easily the minds of men are inclyned to disdain the same:
specially when the life of the pastor or teacher is dissolute and louse, and
not agreeable to his doctrine. ^senesse of (...) in the pa^ cause the ^h wicked^
in the. (...).
For then al men for the most part by their exaumple think that they may
do the like without danger of ponishement. The like, yea, a great deal worse
comes to pass by discord, discention, and strife. For the greater part,
the yoke being cast of, give them selves to pleasure, and burste forth into
extreme contempt. But at that time the Scribes were exceeding couetouse, they
swelled with pride and ambition, and their rapyne, gredynesse and terrible
cruelty was so well known, with the corruption of their manners, that they
might seem to have conspyred the utter destruction of the law.

Beside this, they had perverted the true and natural sense of the law, with
their false commentes and interpretations: in so much that Christ was
constrained sharply to contend with them: because that a wonderful outrageous
madness carried them headlonge, to extynguyshe the light of the trewthe.

Therefore, because it was daungerouse least that many, partly by such
corruptions, and partly by the tumulte of contentions, should wholly
contempne and despise true godliness, Christ in good time meets with the
same, and pronounces it to be done amiss, if that true religion, and
reverence of the law run into contempt, through the wickedness of men.
Saying the Scrybes were altogether obstynate ennemies of the trewthe, because
through their tyranny, they held the Church in oppression, Christ was
constrained to de^ecte and dysclose their wyckednes. For except that good and
simple men had been drawn from their seruytude and ho^dage, the passage and
way had been shut and stopped against the Gospel. There was also an other
reason: namely, because the people thought that to be lawefull for them which
they saw their guides and ringeleaders do, and feigned unto them selves a law
of their vicious and corrupt manners. Moreover, lest any man should
misconstrue that which he was about to speak, he foresheweth that what soever
the teachers be, yet not withstandyng it is mete, either by their fylthynesse,
to defyle the word of God, or by their wicked examples, to take liberty to
sin. And this wise consyderation must diligently be noted: for many when they
get this one thing, that they may hate and defame the wicked and ungodly,
they do myngle and confound all things with their rash and unadvised zeal.
For all discipline is co^tempned, shame trodden under foot: to be short, there
remains no regard of honesty, yea, many thereby wax bold and seek by all
means to bewraye the sins of the priests, that they them selves under that
color may have more liberty to sin. But Christ does so inuey against
the scrybes, that first of all he brings the law of God from contempt. We
therefore must use the same caution and dyligence, if we desire to have our
reprehentions profit.

Again, it shall be profitable for us to note that for all this, Christ was
not terrefyed by fear of the offendynge of any, whereby he might be stayed
from reprehendynge these wicked teachers: according to their deserts: He
only observed this moderation, least the doctrine of God should wax vile
for the wickedness of men. Mark. 12.
The Euangelyste Marcke says, that he spoke unto them in his doctrine, to
the end we might hear that he preached against vice and not to bread envy
toward any person: How be it the Evangelist Luke seems to restrain it to
the dysciples, but it is more probable, that he spoke without exception, to
the whole multitude: as more plainly appears by the words of this our
Euangelyste: and the matter it self required also, that Christ should have
respect to all in general.

In Moses seat. 1 M. Because the lord Jesus went about to reprehende those
things for the most part, which did make and appertain both to error, by
false doctrine, and also to seducinge of people, by false immitation, he goes
about before all other things to bring to pass, that they should not
reiecte that good which they had, with that which was evil. They did good in
that they administered Moses chaier or seat, that is, because they taught the
people the law, and the prophets. C. He exhorts therefore the faithful,
saying the Scribes lived so ungodly, not to frame their lives after their
manners, but to live rather according to the rule of the law, which they
hear out of the Scribes mouths. For it was necessary for him (as we showed
even now) to reprehend many corruptions in them least they should infecte
the whole multitude. Therefore lest their wicked abhominatio^s, the doctrine
whereof they were ministers, and preachers should be brought into contempt, he
commands the faithful to give ear unto their words, and not to have
regard unto their works: as if he had said that there was no cause why the
wicked examples of the pastors should stay the faithful from leadinge a godly
life.

M. Christ also takes away that suspytion, by the which he was thought to be
an ennemie unto the law of Moses, because he did so earnestly inueye against
the priests: as though he were by and by, an ennemie unto the law of God,
which reprehended the ministers of the law, Scribes, and hie priests, in any
matter. For as at this day also they are counted for adversaries and ennemies
unto Christ and of the Church, which do speak against the wickedness of the
priests, of religion and of the church: even so at that time, they which
understood not the purpose and scope of Christ, did easelye fall into this
suspision, ye they thoughto this yt Jesus did impugn and resist the hie
pristes scribes, and Phariseis, because he hated the law of Moses. To take
away therefore this error, he does first geeue them an admonition, by the
which he goethe about to establishe in them the authorytie of Moses law,
that men might know that he did not resist or gainesaye the mynistery of
Moses law, but those things only, which they loved and taught against
Moses,

Sit the Scribes and the Phariseies. C. By the name of Scribes we may note
well enoughe the doctors and interpreters of the law, and that by the Hebrewe
phrase: The which the Evangelist Luke calls Lawyers. But the Lord does
specially towche the Phariseyes, which were of the number of the Scrybes,
because then this sect hadd the prerogative and pre-eminence in the government
of the Church, and in the interpretation of the Scripture. What the Scrybes,
Saduces, and Phariseies were, we have showed before. Moses Chair.
B The Chair of the which our Savior Christ makes mention here, does not
signify the authority of Moses, which the Scribes abused, but it signifies
the place out of the which they purely read and interpreted the law of
Moses. C, To sit therefore in Moses Chair, is nothing else than to show
out of the law of God, how men ought to live. And although it be not
certain out of what place they did speak or preach yet notwithstanding, their
conjecture is probable, 1. Esr. ^
which refer it to the pulpet which Esras made, to have the law taught in
He therefore sits in Moses Chair, which preaches not of his own brain,
but by the authority and word of God. E. G. The Scribes and Phariseies were
wont to read and interpret the law of Moses and the prophets also, on the
Saboth days. Whereupon the Evangelist Luke has these words: After the lecture
of the law and the prophets, ye rulers of ye sinagogges sent unto the^ etc

3 All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: Act. ^
but do not ye after their works: for they say and do not.

All therefore whatsoever. C. This sentence ought thus to be understood. The
phariseies and rest of the Scrybes (or the Scribes, among whom the Phariseyes
do most excel) when theye speak unto you, are good masters and teachers of
an honest and godly life: but they lead you far wide by their wicked
works: Wherefore se that ye have more regard to their words than to their
hands.

B. For I will not that any man conte^ne and despise the sacred and holy
ministry and office of teaching, for the corrupt manners of the Scribes. C.
Now here it may be demanded whether that all whatsoever the doctors do
command ought to be followed without exception. ^estion.
For it is well inoughe known that the Scribes of that age did wickedlye
corrupt the law with their own inuencions, that they oppressed the miserable
consciences of men with unjust laws, and that they polluted the service and
worshipp of God with many superstitions: But truly Christ would have their
doctrine observed and kept, although it were not lawful to resist their
tyranny. The answer may easily be made, ^nswere.
that all kind of doctrine is not simplely compared with the life, but that
this was the purpose of Christ, to put a difference between the holy law of
God, and their profane works.

For to sit in Moses seat (as it was said before) signifies to teach out of
the law of God how men ought to frame their lives. Here also is noted the
lawful calling: because Christ therefore commands the Scribes to be
heard, because they were the public teachers of the Church. The Papists
count it sufficient to have a titell and to occupy the place of such as
should execute the law. For to this effect they wrest the words of Christ,
as though it were necessary obedie^tly to receive whatsoever the ordinary
gouerners of the Church do command. But truly this their cauil is
sufficiently confuted by the other edicte of Christ, (...). 16.
where he commands to beware of the leven of the Pharisees. If it be not only
lawful before GOD (as our Savior Christ says) but also necessary to
reiecte whatsoever the Scribes of their own brain do mingle with the law, it
shall not be mete truly without great choice, deliberation, and judgment to
receive whatsoever it shall please them to command.

Furthermore if Christ should here tie the consciences of those that are his
to the precepts of men, he should falselye say in an other place: that they
worship God in vain with the commandments of men. Mat^ (...)
C. G, By these it appears that Christ does not here speak generally: But so
long as they sat in Moses seat, and continued in the pure and simple
interpretation of the law, teaching those things which the Lord had
commanded Moses to be done, he would have the people to hear them, and those
things kept also which they commanded and taught in the name of God. For
Saint Augustine very well and according to the mind of Christ, Austin.
(...) in Ioha^. ^.
expounds that the Scribes sytting upon Moses seat taught the law of God,
and that therefore the sheep ought to hear the shepeherds voice: by them as by
hyerelings. John 10.
To the which words he adds by and by saying: God therefore teaches by
them: But if they go about to teach their own inuencions, neither here them
nor follow them, To the which sentence agrees that which ye same father has
in his fourth book De doctrina Christiana saying: Because the good and
faithful do not hear every man, but obediently hear God himself, Aust.
lib. 4. de doctrina Christiana,
therefore they are heard proffitablelye, which also live not proffitablely.
Therefore the seat, not of the Scribes, but of Moses constrained them to teach
that which was good, although they did not that which was good. For in their
lyse they did what them list, but the seat being none of theirs suffered them
not to teach what them lysted.

That observe and do. A. For blessed are they which hear the word of God and
keep it. And Saint James says, be ye doers of the word and not hearers only
deceyuing your selves.

But do not ye after their works. M He therefore uttered these words because
he knew that the life of the teachers was more followed, tha^ their doctrine
obeyed. But he speaks specially of their hypocrisy, Luke 11.
by the which they did contaminate and destroy all their works, James. 1.
yea even those which were good. Whervppon he adds, as hereafter follows,
saying: All that they do is to be seen of men.

For they say and do not. They said or taught (truly) out of Moses, that all
things should be done by a true faith and just fear of the Lord, that
truth and equitye should be embraced, that every man should so do unto his
neighbor as he would be done unto, that they should have a steadfast heart
given to the glory of God in the ceremonies of the law, that they would at no
time follow their own will, and such like. These things they spoke, but these
things they observed not For whether they gave alms, prayed, or fasted, or
fulfilled any of the ceremonys, they did it to be seen of men, not to be
accepted of God: as it is said before. They sought every wheare for their
own, but in the mean time they wanted mercy and compassion, judgment, and
faith: even as the Lord him self (as follows) casts in their teeth. But to
work and do after this manner is as auayleable with God: as to do nothing at
all And this is the cause that our Savior Christ says: They say and do not.

4. Ye they bind together heavy burdens, and greuouse to be borne, and lay
them on men's shoulders: but they themselves will not heave at the^ with one of
their fingars.

Ye they bind together heavy burdens. C. Our Savior Christ does not here
accuse the Scribes as though they did tyrannically oppress men's minds with
unjust laws. For although they had brought in many superfluouse rites (as
may appear by other places) yet notwithstanding Christ does not now touch
that falte: because he does compare the true doctrine with a wicked and
dissolut life. So that the greuouse burdens, and hard to be borne which being
bound together, they laid on men's shoulders, were the lively and express
commandments of God, the which (as Peter also witnesses) neither they nor
their fathers could bear. For who ever at any time was endewed with that
spirit, that he was able to observe without any tra^sgression so many rytes and
ceremonies as the law prescribes? Who also fulfilled at any time those
things which properly are contained in the law, Christ only excepted? C. It
is no merueile therefore if the law be called a burden heavy and greuouse to
be borne, and specially in respect of our infirmitye. But although the
Scribes did require nothing more than that which was commanded of God, yet
notwithstanding Christ does here reprove that which was to straight and
austere an order of teachinge, which was common to these proud ypocrits namely
in that they imperiously exacted, and cruelly demanded of others whatsoever
was dew unto God, and were inexorable and severe in vrginge and requiringe of
deuties whereas they favored themselves in those things which they so severely
enjoined to others. In the which sense the prophet reprocheth them, Eze. 3. ^
when he says that they ruled the people of God cruelly and churlishly. For
they which fear GOD in deed although they study to frame disciples according
to his will, yet notwithstanding because they are more severe toward themselves
than toward others, they are not such severe exactors and vrgers of deutie.
Furthermore because they know their own infirmity they do willingly bear
with the weak. But there is nothing more bold and cruel to command then
the wicked contemners of God: because they have no regard to the difficulty,
from the which they exempte themselves. Wherefore there is no man that shall
moderately command others, but he which is first a master to himself.

But they themselves vvil not heave at them with one of their fingars. M. G.
The Euangeliste Luke has these words: Luk^
Ye lade men with burdens which they are not able to bear, and ye your
selves toutche not the packes with one of your fingars.

But by those commandments of the law and by those hard precepts of the
rites and ceremonys thereof, the Lord would have his people made humble, and
constrained as it were to crave and seek for his mercy, by the which only,
salvation happens to men.

5. All these works do they for the intent that they may be seen of men.
They set abroad their philateries, and make large the borders of their
garments.

All these works do they to be seen of men. C He said alitell before that
the Scribes taught far otherwise than they lived: and now he adds that if
they have any show of goodness, it is feigned, hipocritical, and vain because
they did seek for nothing else but to please men, and to show forth
themselves. Bu. C The Phariseis therefore did either transgress the law of God
openly, or else they so fained and dissembled that they might seem honest when
as in deed they were otherwise. He detected also their ambition before as
appears in the sixte chapter.

C. But here the painted show of their works, which only served to
ostentation, is opposed and set against the true study of piety and godliness
of life. For the true and sound worshiper of god shall never be given to these
vain gloriouse shows with the which hypocrites are puffed up. So that ambition
in the Scribes and Phariseis is not only reprehended: but also when the Lord
had condemned the transgression and contempt of the divine law in their whole
life, least they should defend themselves with their fained sanctimony as
with a buckeler, he answers by occupation (that is, by a subtle preventing)
that they are but friuolouse and vain trifels, and not to be accounted of, in
the which they boaste them selves: because there reigned among them nothing
but mere ostentation.

They set abroad their Philateries. He names here one particular order of
their pride, by the which such ambition might be easily known. E. This word
Phylatery is a Greek word taken of Phylacterion, which signifies a
preservative, because in them the remembrance of the law was kept. ^lacte^
Phylacteries also were (if S Hierome be to be credited) parchement skins in
yt which the ten commandments of the law was written, from.
the which they foulded and ware upon their heads in manner of a crown, to
the end they might always be seen of men. And the same S Hierom, witnesses
that this manner and custom continued even until his time through out all
Iudaea. Persia and Babylon, and that he which had this thing upon his head
was counted religiouse. But some think that this manner was taken out of Moses,
for he writteth thus: Deuteronomy. 6.
Let these words which I command the be in thy heart etc. And thou shall
bind them for a sign to thy hand, and they shall be a remembrance between
thine eyes: thou shalt writ them also upon the posts of thy houses, and
upon thy doors. C. For, because flesh and blood will easily forget the law,
the Lord hereby went about to bring his people in remembrance of him. For
therefore also such sentences were commanded to be written out of the law
upon the posts of their houses, that on which side soever they should look,
they might by and by behold some godly admonition. But what did the Scribes?
Surely they to the end they might differ from the rest of the people, carried
the commandments of God more beautifullye written on their garments. But in
this vain show their filthye ambition bewrayed it self. For they also which
would seem among the Scribes and Phariseis to excel the rest in the
diligent obseruinge of the law, were wont to make their Philacteries most
broad, to the end they might have more sentences of the law than others
written therein.

And make large the borders of their gar. M. The making large of the borders
of their garments, and the settinge abroad their Philacteries were done to
one end. For the more that they did extend the borders of their garments,
the more religiouse were they counted among the superstitiouse and simple. As
concerning the borders and gardes of garments there is a commandment in
Moses, where it is said: And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Speak
unto the children of Israel and bid the^, that they make the^ gardes in the
quarters of their garments throughoute their generations, and put upon the
guard of the quarters a rybande of yellowe silk. And the guard shall be unto to
you to look upon, that ye may remember all the commandments of the Lord
and do them, and be holy unto to your God. C. Let us also hereby learn how
ready wise men be to mingle vain toys with the commandments of GOD, Number.
15.
that they may cover their vices and wickedness under some cooller and cloak of
virtue: when as in deed they wreste the exercises of Godlynes which God has
commanded, to their own hypocrisy. There was nothing more profitable than to
exercise all the senses in the meditacion of the law, neither was the same
also commanded of the Lord in vain. But they were so far from profitynge
in these rudymentes and rules, that they placinge perfect righteousness in
apparel, despise the law all their life time. For the law of the Lord could
not be more contumeliously decided and contemned, than by this, that they
feigned the same to be kept by wearinge a maskyng and playing kind of
apparel. M. Here also we may take occasion to condemn the superstition of
certain women, which wear about their necks certain short sentences of
the Gospel, Superstitius wearinge of the Gospel about the neck
and the sign of the cross, when as indede they are altogether ignorante of
the force of the Gospel.

Yea truly the Priests and monks the^ selves, have followed, many triffells
like unto these, all the which things are nothing else but a hawkinge after
the estimation of men: and therefore they are here severely condemned of
Christ, who specially requires the integrity of the heart, and a mind void
of all dissimulation.

6. And love the vppermoste seats at feasts, and to sit in the chief place of
counsels, and gretings in the market, and to be called of men Rabbi.

And love the uppermost seats. M. These things do declare what the hypocrites
do seek for by their ostentation and bragging. The end of their bragginge is
to obtain glory and praise of men. For it is a gloriouse thing, in all places
to have the superiority. C. But to seek for the vppermoste seats and highest
places pertains only to those, who rather desyer to be exalted among men,
Pride pertains to the wicked.
than to be allowed of God. At feasts. A. For so signifies the Greek word,
and so has our common English translation: but the Lattin text has: At
suppers.

And to sit in the chief place of councels. M. Or synagoges (for so has the
Lattine translation) that is to say, Ecclesiastical metings. But what of this?
Is it not lawful for some to sytt in the highest seats at feasts, and
counselles? Is it not mete that they which excel others in virtue, should
also have honor among men? Auns^
Yes truly, for Christ goes not about to take away the honor and reverence
dew to the elders and superiors, but he only reproves ambition and the
affection of vain glory. Therefore he says not: they are placed in the
vppermoste seats at feasts and counsels, but he says: they love to sit in
the uppermost seats: the which thing pertains only to the proud. After
the same manner also the admonition which Christ gave in the fourtene chapter
of Luke is to be understand. Luke^
For there he reproves the same that he does in this place. And as it is not
of it self evil to sytt in the hiest room, even so it is not good of it
self to sytt in the hindemost seat. For it may be that a man being set in
the highest place, may be of a modest and humble mind: and that an other
being placed in the lowest seat may be of a proud lofty stomach.

And gretings in the market. M. The Scribes and the Pharisees did not only love
to be saluted, but to be saluted before all others: and that in the market,
that is, in a public place where many should behold it.

And to be called of men Rabbi By this name, Judas saluted our Savior when he
betrayed him saying Rabbi Rabbi. Mar. ^
E. In alll our Greek books this word, is doubled, as Rabbi, Rabbi.

For the doublinge of this word seems to have some honor among the Hebreues.
A. Wheruppon our Savior Christ expressing this manner says: Not every one
that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. Matth^
This word Rabbi is a Chalde word, which signifies, master, the which word
our Savior Christ as it were expounding, when he says: Be not ye called of
men Rabbi, adds by and by: for ye have one master. Christ therefore does
condemn this thing specially in the Scribes, because they desired to be
called masters. For although this word Rabbi of it self signifies excelency
(as we said before) yet notwithstanding such was the custom among the
Jews that they so called the masters and doctors of the law. But Christ
denies this honor to appertain to any man saving to him self only: whereupon
it follows that the same cannot be attributed unto men without iniurye done
unto him. For thus he says.

8. But be not ye called Rabbi. For one is your master even Christ and all ye
are brethren.

But be not ye called Rabbi. C. This saying at the first sight seems to
hard, and absurd, that they should be deprived of the titell of honor, to
whom Christ has given and enjoined his office, and has made and ordained
them to be our masters, he himself having left of any more to teach us in
his own person: yea when he was conuersante in earth he appointed Apostels
which should take upon them the office of teaching in his name. But and if
the matter be as concerning the tytel, Paul truly, would not glory with
the iniurye of Christ in any usurped honor, when he affirmed himself to be a
teacher of the Gentiles. But because our Savior Christ went about nothing
else than to bring all men from the hyeste to the loest into subjection, (...).
2,
that his own right might remain whole to himself, there is no cause why
any man should curiously stand upon the word. Christ therefore does not care
by what tytell or name they are called which have the office of teachinge
committed unto them: But he seeks to keep them within their Just limittes and
bounds, least they should rule the faith and reign in the conscience of
their brethren. For we must always hold this distinction, that Christ only
ought to be obeyed, because the voice of the father did concern him only
when it sounded from heaven: (...). 17.
hear him: But that the teachers, are his ministers so, that he in them ought
to be heard, and that they are masters under him, in that they take upon
them his person. C. But in the Pharisaical ambition this falte was found, that
they took unto them selves the thing that appertained unto Christ by right:
For they would so be called Rabbi or masters that they might be thought to
teach of them selves, as though the Scriptures were in their hands to
expound and understand as they thought good, which thing belongs only
unto Christ, whom the father has appointed unto us to be our only teacher
in that respect. For what good and wholesome things soever are taught of men,
they proceed from his spirit. So many therefore as teach the people ought to be
subject unto this, and of him alone they ought to receive their doctrine, and
it is mete for them to teach the same doctrine that he taught, eue^ as though
they were sent of him, and to show nothing unto the people contrary unto that
which he has prescribed. This Christ alone should the Scribes and Pharisees
have preached to the people of Israel to be the Savior, shadowed in yt
ceremonies at ye time: promised in the law, Prophets, and psalms: to yt which
thing it was necessary that they were led and taught by the spirit of
Christ: with the which spirit they being inspired, had never propounded and
set forth to the people their own dreams and traditions instead of the
word of God, by the which they boasted them selves as though they had been
masters alone, not taught by the spirit of God, but of them selves.

Hereupon, they being proud and ambitiouse, would be called Rabbi. But they
which are led and guided by the spirit of God, they acknowledge themselves to
be his ministers, and they attribute al things unto him which says thus.

For one is your master even Christ. As if he should have said: Seek not to
persuade men to call you masters because I send you forth to preach my
Gospel and to teach all nations, as though the words of doctrine proceeded
from you, and from your spirit, and so wax proud as rulers in the
inheritance of God. C. Christ is the head, that his authority might remain
whole unto him self, and that no mortal man might diminishe any part of
the same. After this manner he his the only pastor: but notwithstanding he
suffers many shepeherdes to be under him, so that he may be above them all,
Act. 20.
and may only by them govern his Church. A. Even as he alone bought the
same with his preciouse blood. And all ye are brethren. C. This member or
part which is opposed or set against the other, must be noted.

For, because we are brethren, no man desires to be a master over others:
whereupon it follows, that mastership, by the which the brotherlye
communicatio^ and fellowship of the godly is not broken, is not condemned.

And truly saying we have one father and are all brethren among whom
Christ is the first begotten, it is meet that there be so great concord
among us, Romans 8.
that no man prefer and exalte himself above an other, although he be
endewed of God with great gifts for the use and proffite of his brethren. C.
To be short, there is nothing else here commanded, but that all men do
depend only of the words of Christ. The Apostell Paul speaks almost in
the same sense, Rom.. 14.
when he teaches that men do rashely judge one of an other: because all men
are brethren, and must all be brought before the tribunal seat of Christ.

9. And call no man your father upon the earth, for one is your father
which is in heaven.

And call no man your father. B. Christ does not here prohibit or take away
the bare appellation of father, saying he voutchsafeth himself to give that
name to our carnal progenitors, commanding us to do good unto our father and
mothers, Math. 15.
for he seeks to take away from us the faith and trust no the bare
appellacion. C. So that he challenges to GOD the honor of a father in ye same
sense almost by the which even now he affirmed him self to be the only
master. For men did not take this name of father unto them selves, but it was
given unto them by God. Wherefore it is not only me^te that we call those that
begot us our fathers in earth, but it is also a wickedness to deprive the^ of
this honor. Neither is that distinction which some bring of any force or to be
esteemed that those men which beget children are fathers after the flesh, Heb.
^ 1. Co^ Galat^ Phili^
and that God is only ye father after ye spirit. We grant truly that God is
thus distinguished from me^, as appears in the twelueth chapt. of S. Paul to
the Hebrews. But saying that S. Paul calls himself a spiritual father, we
must see how the same agrees with the words of Christ. Therefore the true
sense of this place is, that the honor of a father is falselye attributed unto
men, if it do obscure the glory of God: and this is done so often as a mortal
man is thought to be of himself a father alone, God set aperte, when as all
the degrees of kynred do depend upon God alon by Christ, and do so agree
together, that God alone is properly the father of all. B. Christ therefore
would have us all to acknowledge one God our father in heaven, at whose hands
only we should look for all care and providence of food, and also the true
inheritance of everlasting life, being assured that he does acknowledge us
for his sons and heirs.

10. Neither be ye called masters, for one is your master even Christ.

Neither be ye called masters. C. This sentence, as concerning the mastership
of Christ is therefore repeted twyse, that we might know that this is the
lawefull order, if God be ruler of all men, and have the fatherlyke right and
government: and if Christ make all men subject to his doctrine, and to be his
Disciples: eue^ as it is said in an other place that Christ is the only head
of the Church: Ephe^
because it is mete that the whole body be subject and obedient unto him. B.
This sentence is also repeated because the desyer of honor and excellency has
taken to deep root in the hearts of men. For so soon as God has brought any
indifferent thing to pass by us, or if he have endewed us with a small gift,
we are by and by proud thereof, and exalte our selves above other men. A.
Wherefore he does exhort us again and again that we seek with all our might
to put away this pestiferous and deadly disease ambition. ^ation is ^adlye
dis^.


To the which effect also the sentence following appertains.

11. He that is greatest among you shall be your servant.

C. This short sentence declares ye Christ did not Sophistically contend
about words, but that he had rather respect unto the matter, least that any
man forgettinge his order and state, should usurp more unto himself than
were meet. He pronounces therefore that the greatest dignitye in the Church
is not rule and empire but ministry and service. Whosoever keeps himself in
this measure, takes nothing neither from God, nor from Christ, what title or
name soever he be adorned with.

Even as also power is in vain counterfeyted with the title of a servant
which derogateth from the maistership and honor of Christ. For what does it
profit that the Pope oppressinge the miserable minds of men with cruel and
tyrannical laws calls himself the servant of the servant of God? ^he
Pope vn^ the cooller ^humility is ^bitions.
But as Christ stands not upon callinges and voices, even so he commands
this thing precisely to his Disciples, that they aspyre not hyer than yt they
may equally maintain brotherly fellowshippe under their heavenly father: and
that they which are in honor might humble themselves to serve others. And
although this doctrine of Christ does specially belong to the Apostles of
Christ, yet notwithstanding it appertains to al estates, yea to those also
which are in public matters: that every one which is in office might know,
that he is a servant and mynister. He which desyereth only an office, or
name, or glory or gain, is not led by the spirit of God.

^odly magi^ates either ^rituall or ^poral may ^ue the name (...) Lords.
But he which takes an office with great faith and diligence, and serves
others in love, if honor and praise follow this man let no man condemn him:
yet notwythstandynge he must not seek for glory, A. but geeue all glory to
GOD alone.

12. But whosoever exalts himself shall be brought low, but he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

Z. He exalts himself, which either attributes to much to himself, or
which would appear, or else which usurps somewhat to himself by a secret
opinion.

And contrary wise he humbles himself which reputeth himself as nothing
before God, Humillitye.
which acknowledges that he has nothing of his own but all things of
God, and which sheeweth himself gentle and louinge toward all men.

For whereupon comes arrogancye, crueltye, and contempt of our brethren,
but only by a wrong and false opinion that we have conceived of our selves.

Submit your selves (says Saint. 1. Petri. 5
Peter) one to another, knit your selves together in lowlynes of mind. For God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

And S. James says, James. 4.
Humble your selves before God, and he will exalt you. C. The Scripture is full
of such testimonies, that God is an enemy unto them which desire to exalte
themselves. For this is pride to glory in the gifts of God, as though there
were in our selves a worthynes which might for our own deserte extol us:
even as humillitye also ought not only to be thought an outward lowlines,
but a true and inward emptyinge and abasinge of the mind acknowledginge our
own infirmitye, and knowinge that we do excel only by the grace of God.
The Evangelist Luke makes mention that the Lord repeted this sentence twice at
other places, as in the fourtene Chapter, where he teaches them modestye
which preased to the highest rooms at the feast, and in the eighteen Chapter,
where he corrects the arrogancye of certain which seemed unto themselves
just and despised others: to whom also he propounded the parable of the
Pharisey and the Publicane. By these it appears that this sentence was much
used of Christ, and objected to the common sort of people as a proverb.

13. VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis, ye ypocrites for ye shut up the
kingdom of heaven before me^ ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye
them that come to enter in.

VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis C. Our savior Christ as yet does earnestly
inueye against the Scribes and Phariseis, ye which he does not so much for
their sakes, as he did it to revoke the people and simple sort from their
sect. For although we see that the vengeance of God is oftentimes in the
Scriptures pronounced against the reprobate, to the end they might be made
the more void of excuse: yet notwithstanding under their person the children
of God are profitablely admonished that they wrap not themselves in the same
snares of wickedness, but that they beware of ye like destruction. Truly when
the Scribes, the worship of God being overthrown, and the doctrine of
godliness being corrupted, would bear no correction, and set themselves
against the redemption offered unto them, by desperate madness, to the
destruction both of themselves and of the people, it was necessary that they
should be hated and detested of all men. Howbeit, Christ had not respect so
much what they deserved, as he had what was profitable to the rude and
ignoraunte. For he mente about the end of his life, to leave some solemn
testimonye, least that any man, except willinglye and wittinglye might be
deceived by those wicked varlates. For we know how great a let to the simple,
the foolish reverence of false teathers is, least they should be delivered
from errors. The Jews at yt time were endued with false doctrine, yea from
their infancye they had sucked in many superstitions. How difficult and hard a
thing should it be then of it self, to bring them into the way? for the
preposterous and wrong opinion which they had conceived of the false teachers,
did greatly hinder them, because in deed they thought them to be the lawful
gouerners of the Church, the prelates of divine worship, and the pillars of
pietye. Moreover we may deem that they were so bewitched that they could not
well be drawn from the same except it were by violent fear. Christ therefore
does not pronounce ye horrible vengeance of God against them, that he might
cure the Scribes, but that he might fear the rest from their deceites and
snares. In like manner at this day we are constrained to thunder more
vehementlye against the Popish clergy, for no other cause but this, that
they which are tractable, and easy to be taught, Gods ^ninges prono^ against
^ probate^ form th^lecte.
and not altogether rejected and cast of, of the Lord, may attend and geeue
ear to their salvation, and being stricken and astonyed, at the judgment of
God, may break the deadlye snares of superstition with the which they were
held captive. Whereby we may gather how cruel their tender softnes is to
whom our vehemencye is grievous. It displeases them that the wolves are
sharpelye vexed and punished, which dailye seek and gape to spoil and
devour the sheep: and yet notwithstanding they see that the sillye sheep
being deceived by a vain and counterfeite show, do willingly cast themselves
into the mouths of the raueninge wolves, except the sheepeheard which
desiereth to have them saved, and goes about to deliver them from
destruction, do drive them away with the cry of his voice. We must note
therefore the purpose of Christ, that we by his example may severely threaten
the wolves and wicked deceivers, and may bouldly cry against them, that
whosoever are cureable, may flee from them for fear of destruction.

For although this profits nothing with the ennemies of the truth, yet
notwithstanding they must be cited to the tribunal seat of God, and others
admonished, that they may know that the same curse ha^geth over their heads,
except they depart be times from their wicked purpose.

Ye hypocrites M. Christ pronounces this malediction or curse against these
ypocrites eight times in this Chapter, and that truly with such vehemencye of
the spirit, as he is read never to do the like to any man, at any other
time. We are therefore admonished and taught by this place that no sort of
men how pestilent and hurtful soever they be, can be subject to a greater
curse than these ypocrites, and not only these, but all such of like
condition.

For ye shut up the kingdom of Heaven C. Christ does denounce a curse
against them, because they pervert their office to ye destruction of the whole
multitude.

For seeing that the regiment of the Church was in their hands, they should
have been as porters of the kingdom of Heaven.

^ligion is ye ^ye of the ^gdome of ^en.
For to what end pertayneth Religion and holy doctrine, but only to open the
kingdom of Heaven unto us? For we know that all mankind is banished from
God, and excluded from the inheritance of everlasting life and salvation. But
the doctrine of Godlynes is as it were the way by the which we enter into
life.

Therefore the Scripture says metaphoricallye that the keys of the kingdom
of Heaven are given to the pastors, ^th 16.
as we have more largelye declared in the sixtene Chapter goinge before. And
this definition must be observed, which more evidently also may be gathered by
the words of S. Luke, ^ke. 11.
where Christ reproves the Lawyears and casts in their teethe that they
took away the keye of knowledge: and that because they being the keepers of
the divine law, defrauded the people of the true understanding thereof. Even
as therefore at this day the keys of the kingdom of Heaven are committed
unto the pastors that they may admit the faithful into everlasting life, and
deprive the faithful of all hope of the same, even so in times paste the same
office was enjoined and committed to the hye Priests and Scribes under the
law. M. The door of the kingdom of Heaven was opened by the coming of the
preachinge of the Gospel: the which the Scribes did shut up before men, when
they drove them from the entrance thereof, that is to say, from the faith of
the Gospel, condemninge the doctrine of Christ least the people should
receive the same. C. Furthermore by this word (knowledge) whereof Luke makes
mention, we gather how folishly the Papists feign and imagine to themselves
keys, as though there were a certain magical power without the word of God.
For Christ declares that no other use these keys than they which are the
ministers of doctrine. ^ction.
If any man object that the Phariseis although they were perverse interpretors
of the law, yet that they had nevertheless the keys, ^weare.
we answe are that although they were committed unto them in respect of their
office yet notwithstanding that they were suppressed by malice and fraud,
insomuch that no use of them remained.

Therefore Christ says that they took away or stale that keye of knowledge by
ye which they should have opened Heaven door: even as it is seen in the
Papacy at this day, Papists shut up the way to heaven against us.
for they shut and close up the way to heaven against the miserable people,
being the door keepers themselves (or at least to who^ this charge is
committed) and that by their tyranny. But except we be to secure and
careless, we will not give our hand to wicked tirantes, which cruellye
stay us from the entrance into everlasting life. Two ways to shut up the
kingdom of heaven.


Ye neither go in your selves M. By two means they did shut up the kingdom
of Heaven before men. Firstlye, because they themselves would not enter in: for
the simple people did greatly stand upon their John 7.
Do any of the rulers or Phariseis believe in him? but this multitude which
knows not the law are accursed. Therefore to believe in Christ is as much as
to enter into ye kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, John. 9.
For they had already conspired in this that they would cast the confessors of
Christ out of the temple: the which truly, did not only bring corporal
griefs, but also the consciences of the people of God being tied with Religion
it seemed to heavy and grievous. Bu. Therefore while they desired to have their
pray of the common sort of people which were subject unto them, they neither
entered into the kingdom of Heaven themselves, neither did they suffer those
which would enter.

14. VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis ye ypocrites, for ye devour widows
houses, and that under a pretense of long prayer: therefore shall ye be the
sorer punished.

VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis Bu. Our savior Christ in all the
beginninges of his accusations calls the Scribes and Phariseis, hypocrites,
strikinge their consciences, and declaringe yt whatsoever they do in religion
is but feigned cou^terfeyte and false.

For ye devour E. The most ancient and best lattine and Greek books have:
Because ye devour:

VVydovves houses C. Now he proceeds farther, accusinge not only their
feasts, which were worthy to be hated and abhorred before all men, but he
wypeth away also the feigned and counterfaite shows of virtue by the which ye
common sort of people were deceived. If any man allege and say that those
things were not needeful to be reprehended which could not hurt by example, we
must remember this, that they could not otherwise be saved which were tied
unto the errors of ye Scribes, except they did whollye forsake them. This was
the reason therefore that constrained Christ to bewraye and uncover the vain
show of virtue which was the foam of superstition. So that in some and
effect he says that when they seem to do very well they do falselye abuse
under the pretense of religion. In their long prayers there was some sign of
virtue sildome seen: For the more holy that every man is the more he gives
himself to prayer.

But our savior Christ says yt the Scribes and Phariseis were so impare, yt
they usurped not truly the principal part of the worship of God, without
sin: because the dailye custom of prayinge was to them a subtle mean to
get filthy gain. Neither did they sell their prayers otherwise, than do
hierlings their daily labors. B. He does reprove therefore their religion set
out to sale: for when he names prayers, he understands also all other
things pertayninge to external worship. C. Whereby also we gather that long
prayers are not preciselye reprehended, Long prayers are not precisel^e
reprehended.
as though the fault consisted in the length, specially saying it behooves
the pastors of the Church above all others to be occupied in prayer: but this
corruption is condemned, that a thing laudable of it self should be drawn to
so evil an end. For when gain is made of hyered prayers: the more that the
show of fervent devotion increases, the more is the name of God profaned. B.
Our savior Christ names here the houses for the goods and substance. By the
name of wydowes, he understands such as are poor and needye and set out to
the preye, good and simple men, and the meanest sort among the people which
wanted patrones and defenders: notwithstanding he specially understands
wydowes, which are more inclined to superstition, and may more easelye be
deceived by the pretense of sanctimonye and holiness. Prayer is a holy thing
which they defiled, abusinge the same to filthy gain. For it is the duty of
all men to pray one for another, and not to make merchandise of prayer. For
they which sell prayers what do they else than by and sell, make a market and
exercise sacrilege in the temple of God? Christ therefore touches the
Phariseis, because under the pretense and cooller of long prayers they allured
and enticed wydowes and other simple persons to this that they should bring
their houses, or else truly the price of their houses, soulde, to Corban. And
because a false persuasion was already entered into the hearts of the common
people, Corb^ a box (...) sure ch^ the wh^ people^ for the
therefore our savior Christ does more sharpelye threaten the Scribes and
Phariseis saying:

Therefore shall ye be the sorer punished E. The Greek text has ye shall
receive the greater judgment. Bu. He uses the comparatiue degree, because
they did not only fill their bellies with the riches and substance of
wydowes, whose need they should rather have helped: but also because they did
a wicked thing under the pretense of Godlynes: or else because they did not
only oppress the nedier sort, deuouringe their substance, but also because
they had therewith long prayers, taking to themselves sa^ctimony, and
coueringe their crueltye. A. Therefore there remained unto them no small
punishmente, because the pollution of so holy a thing was no small or light
offense. Bu. The Popish clergy also greuouslye offend in the like pretense of
Godlynes. In time past in the holy or Ecclesiastical company the Psalms
himnes, and sacrede lessons were read: the sollemne action of the Lords
supper was cellebrated, according to the institution prescribed of Christ: for
these things no man paid any thing, all things were received freely.

^she pre^s are ^el^ of pray^.
But at this day by the covetousness of sacrifycinge priests the matter is come
to this pass yt all things are set out to sale. Canonical hours, masses,
and watches are read, and other canticles of sufficient length are song: all
things are done under the pretense of souls health, when as by this means
they are enriched and made fat, but the poor are made lean. C. Neither is it
any marvel if widows were intangeled with these false persuasions: because
(as we said before) women being prone to superstition, it was always the
manner of the leude persons to rob and despoile them clean, by craft, of
their money. Tymo. 3
So Paul obiecteth to the false teachers of his time that they bring into
bondage women laden with sin. Bu. Wherefore most grievous punishment does hang
over the heads of such deceivers, except they convert and forsake their
sins. And it is not to be omitted that the Evangelist Luke does rather use
this word of deuouringe than of eatinge. For so he noted the excessive and
insatiable desyer of these hypocrites to the end all men might beware of the
like deuouringe.

15. VVo be unto you Scribes and Phariseis, ye ypocrites, for ye compass sea
and land to make one proselyte: and when he is become one, ye make him two
foulde more the child of hell, then ye your selves are.

VVo be unto you, M. Here our savior Christ touches another kind of
ypocrits. C. For by this zeal also the Scribes had got unto themselves
favor, by the which they sought to bring forreners and the uncircumcised to
ye Iewishe Religion. Therefore if they had deceived any man by their
intisementes or by any other deceit, they triumphed wonderfullye as though
their Church had been increased. Herevppon also it came to pass that ye
common sort of people did so highly esteem of them, namelye because by their
industry and virtue they did inserte and join strangers to ye Church of God.
But Christ on the contrary part pronounces that the same their study and
industry, ought so little to be attributed unto them for their praise, that they
rather thereby provoke the wrath of God: because they are drawn into more
grievous destruction which geeue themselves to their sect. For we must note
how corrupt the state of things was then, and how religion was dissipated and
decayed. For as it was a godly and excellent work to bring Disciples unto
God: even so to allure and entice the Gentiles to the Iewishe worship, which
was then corrupted, and filled with wicked prophanacions, was nothing else then
to bring them from Scilla and to carye them to Charibdis, or to bring them
from one mischief, and to cast them into a greater. Christ therefore does not
condemn the study and diligence in drawinge of strangers, but he declares
by the end it self that they do not the same upon a good affection, saying
they made those worse by two foulde than they themselves were. For when the
Ethnike or heathen man was led upon hoope of learning religion, they made him
such a one by their superstitious doctrine and corrupt manners, that he should
not only forsake the pure and true worship of God and the inheritance of
Heaven, but also that he should be a more wicked Jew than he was an
Ethnicke, and in more danger also of hell fire than the Jews themselves were.
For it comes almost to pass that the Dysciples do overcome their evil
masters in mallyce.

Ye compass sea and land E. The latayne text has, (the sea and dry)
calling the land dry after ye manner of the Hebrews. Genesis. ^


To make one proselyte The Greek word signifies a stranger. They which
came from Ethnicisme to Iudaisme, (that is, which having denied and forsaken
the religion of the Gentiles, received the religion appertayninge to the Jews,
and were circumcised) these were called proselytes and strangers.

And when he is become one ye make him the child This is spoken in the
Hebrewe phrase, according to that which is written in the twenty Chapter of
the first Book of Samuel where Saul calls David ye child of death, for the
man deserving death, 1. Samu. 20
or worthy to dye. So he calls that man the child of hell which deserved to
be cast into hell and to dye with everlasting death.

Two foulde more then ye your selves are The Greek text has, ye make them
more double the children of hell, then ye your selves are, as though both of
them were two foulde the children of hell: but in this place the strangers are
said to be in greater peril of damption than they. For by the wicked abuse of
Gods name they provoked greater vengeance upon themselves: seeing that
Religion gave unto them a more groose liberty to sin. The like example at
this day we may behoulde in the Monks: for they gather from all places
proselites: but such as they make of wicked me^ wikced devils. For such is the
corruption of these idle bellyes and filthye lechers, Monks are makers of
proselytes.
that they deprave even the Angels of Heaven.

Notwithstanding their monkishe apparel is a most fit veale to cover all kind
of wickedness.

16. VVo be unto you ye blind guides, for ye say whosoever does swear by the
temple it is nothing: but whosoever swears by the gould of the temple, he is
gilty.

VVo be unto you ye blind guides, C. Even as ambition is always almost joined
to hypocrisye, so the covetousness and greedy raking of the pastors does
commonly suffer and maintain the superstition of the people.

The world truly of his own accord falls into errors, and does as it were
of purpose bring unto it self deceits and al kind of seduringes: but then at
the last they obtain wicked worshippings, when the chief guides themselves
do confirm them: but truly oftentimes it comes to pass that they which are
ye chief do not only by their winking suffer errors because they see that they
are gainful unto them, but also by their means they do more increase them. So
we see in the Papacy that superstitions were increased by infinite practices,
when the Sacrifycers inhaunced the preye: who also daily devise many things by
the which they may the more deceive the folishe multitude: For when men's minds
are once darkened by the inchauntmentes and delucions of Satan there is
nothing so absurd or monsterous, but they will receive it.

Hereupon it came to pass, that the Jews gave more reverence to the gould of
ye temple and to the holy oblations than to the temple and to the altar. But
truly the holiness of the oblations, did depend upon the temple and the Altar.
Also it is credible that this error came from the Scribes and hye Priests,
because it was an apt and fit hu^tinge to get preyes: but this error was no
less pernicious than folishe, because it led the people to groose inventions.
There is nothing more prove and inclyned to fall from the pure worship of God
than men: it was therefore the purpose of Satan by this veale to draw those a
far of from ye beholdinge of God, which already leaned to much to foolish
imaginations. This is the reason why Christ so sharpelye reprehendeth this
error. And yet notwithstanding the Papists are not ashamed to set forth the
holy name of God to a more filthy ieste. For they make more account to toutche
a piece of filthy carreyen than ye holy volume of the Bible, or to lift up
their hands to Heaven. And by this means the carnal worship of God is brought
in, which by little and little defaceth ye true end and scope thereof,

Ye blind guides, for ye say whosoever A. In the fiftene Chapter also going
before he calls them blind guides.

It is nothing That is to say he does not offend against the commandment
of an oath: to the which that which follows by and by is quight contrary,
when it is said he is gilty, that is, he offends against the
commandment of swearinge. And Christ himself in the twentye verce
followinge expounds it saying: He ye swears by the Altar, swears by it
and by all things that are thereon. C. Wherefore by this particle or clause
(it is nothing) Christ means not that all honor is abrogated from the
temple, but he speaks co^paratiuelye. For when the oblations were
hyperbolically or out of measure extolled for their reverence, the common sort
of me^ were so ravished that the majesty of the temple and the Altar waxed vile
and of no reputacion among them, and to violate the same with perjury was
less religion than to have sworn with less reverence by the holy oblations.

But whosoever svveareth A. He calls that the gould of the temple which was
added to the temple to beutify the same, and fell to the priests gain: also
money is understood by the name of goulde. It was a wonderful madness truly
to count it a greater matter to swear by the goulde of the temple, than by the
temple and Altar it self. Into the which superstition they therefore had
brought the people that the more the people esteemed of the gifts and
oblations, as more holy and acceptable unto God, then the temple and Altar it
self, the more they might bring them into the temple, by the which the
covetousness of the Scribes was the more increased. ^th. 15.
So also for gaynes sake they taught that the gift offered to the temple was
greater than the duty toward the parents. Covetousness always found out
ways by the which it might help and sustain it self. And whereas some do
take this word (to swear) in this place for to appoint somewhat by an oath
to the temple, we are taught that it ought not to be so taken by the words of
Christ which he adds in the two and twenty verce following: And he which
swears by heaven etc.

For in swearing by Heaven nothing could be appointed to the temple: and yet
notwithstanding Christ makes it all one to swear by the temple, and by the
gould of the temple, or by the Alter or the gift on the Altar.

But we must note that Christ by these words went about to withdraw the
people from the admiration of the Phariseis and from the false opinion which
they had conceived of them: else what should the doctrine of Christ have
profyted? We must show therefore what the ennemies of the truth be, least
they be an impediment and hinderance to others. For the people will always
depend upon such Idols, except the counterfeite show be taken away from
them. He is giltye E. The Greek has, (He is a dettar) that is to say, he
is gilty or a deseruer of punishment and sin, as is said before, M. Our
savior Christ corrects this error and false interpretacion of the law: in
the fifth Chapter goinge before. The which place may easlye be understood by
this.

17. Ye fools and blind: for whether is

18. greater, the goulde or the temple that

19. sanctifyeth the goulde?

Ye fools nnd blind, for whether is greater Bu. He calls them so both for
their want of Judgment, and ignorance of Scriptures, and also for their
covetousness and exceeding malice.

Or the temple that sanctifyeth the gold That which is excellent and separated
from other things is said to be holy: and that is said to sanctifye which
is holy and separated from profane uses to a holy use. So that the temple does
sanctifye, and the Altar does sanctifye, not by touching it self, but by the
use: For he speaks of that outward holiness, which was set in this, that
these things being brought into the temple of God, were consecrated to divine
uses according to the word of God. For at yt time also that external worship
flourished.

20. Whoso therefore swears by the Altar, swears by it and by all things
that are thereon.

Whoso therefore svveareth C. The Lord does that thing which ought to be
done in correctinge and reprouinge errors, when he calls us to the
welspringe, and teaches of the nature it self of an oath that ye temple does
far excel the gifts of ye temple. He takes therefore this beginning that
it is not meet to swear, but by the name of God only. Whereupon it
follows, that what manner and form of oaths soever men take to swear by, the
honor due unto God must be kept. B. Because therefore they did teach that
they did not sin against ye commandment of swearinge, which swear by the
temple, Altar, and Heaven, because the name of God was not mentioned or put
between: he teaches them that they swear by God not only which swear by ye
gift of the Altar (the which they counted more holy being as superstiouse as
their teachers) but they also which swear by the Altar it self. For when men
swear by any thing, ye oath does pertain to all those things which are
joined, or consecrated unto it: as if any man do rashely or falsely swear by
any thing, let him know and understand that he offe^deth and dishonors
God to whom the thing yt he swears by, is dedicated and appointed.

21. And whosoever swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells
therein.

And whoso svveareth C. By that which goes before, it may also be gathered
how and to what end a man may swear by the temple: namelye because it is the
seat and sanctuary of God. even as also by Heaven, because there the brightness
of Gods glory shyneth. For God does suffer himself to be called upon for a
witness and judge in such external shows of his presence, so that he may lose
none of his right. For to tie yt deity to ye heaven, is heavenly Idolatry. Now,
by how much the more ye Lord does set forth a more manifest show of his glory
in ye temple, than in oblations by so much ye more the name of the temple
deserves reverence and holiness. Now therefore let us note in what sense Christ
says that a man swears by him that dwells in the temple, when he swears
by the temple: namely to the end he might direct al kind of others to their
lawful end and scope.

Svvereth by him that dwells in the temple B. It ought to offend no man
that the Lord here seems to grant that God dwells in ye temple. For God
did truly dwell in ye temple of Jerusalem, John. 4.
before that the hour came, that he would be worshipped neither in it, nor
in any other place but in spirit and truth. For he would be specially called
upon there and worshipped and give aunsweare of his grace, 3 Kings. 9.
as he promised to Solomon. But this proves nothing that our Churches should
have Images in the^: we our selves must be the temple of God, 1. Cor. 3.
For this dwellinge of God was nothing else, than his singular grace, by the
which he chose the people to himself whose God he was, and that benevolence
also, by the which he was always ready to be their safegarde and defense.
But it is spoken according to the manner of a Prince, who, to the end he may
always defend his people, dwells in ye midst of them. Otherwise there ca^
be no house builded unto God which fulfilleth and comprehends all things.
Esaias. 66. Act. 7.


22. And he that swears by heaven swears by the seat of God, and by him
that sits thereon.

A. This sentence is expounded in the former verce. Read also in the fifth
Chapter goinge before.

23. VVo be unto you Scribes and Phariseis ye ypocrites. For ye tyeth mine, and
any se, and commyn and have left the waightier matters of the law: Judgment,
mercy and faith.

VVo be unto you Scribes M. Now he teaches another part of their ypocrisy,
namely the fayning and outward apperaunce of keeping the law in those things
which were of less weight. Al ypocrites have this falt, being uerye diligente
and careful in tryfelinge things, but neglect ye principal parts of the
law. This disease has reigned in all ages, and among all nations, Hypo^
genera^ s^ase.
insomuche that the greatest part of men, has sought studiously to please God
with light observations. For, because they cannot exempte themselves from all
obedience of God, they flee unto this second remedy, namely to the redeminge
of great offenses for nothing, by satisfactions. So we see yt the Papists at
this day, when they transgress the chiefest commandments of God, they
fervently busy themselves in could ceremonies. Such fayninge and outward show
of holiness therefore is now reprehended of Christ in the Scribes, who were
very diligent and scrupulouse in payinge of tenthes, but little regarded the
principal parts of the law. And to ye end he might the better point out
their filthye ostentacio^ and glorious show, he says not generallye, they
paid their tenthes, but that they tythed Anyse, mint, commyn, and (as the
Euangeliste Luke has) all manner of herbs, that by the least expense, they
might show a rare and singular study of Godlynes. Notwithstanding, because
Christ appointed the special righteousness of the law, to consist in mercy,
judgment and faith, we must first of all see what he means by these words:
and then, wherefore he omitted the commandments of the first table, which
pertain properlye to the worship of God: as though that godliness or the
worship of God were inferioure to ye duties of charity or love. These two
things shall be spoken of in order.

For ye tithe mynte B. To tithe in this place signifies to geeue tenthe, not
to receive tenthe: howbeit the Greek word signifies both: in the which sense
also it is taken when the Phariseye, among many other things that he
bragged of rehearsed this saying: I pay tithe of all that I possess. Luke. ^
So commonly it fares with human judgment, when it cannot attain to true
righteousness by reason of self love, it choseth to it self certain things
by the which it may falsely brag of righteousness.

And have left the vvaightier matters of the law B. He calls those things
the waightier matters of the law which do more show forth the piety of a
mind that loves God, and which do come more near to a divine disposition,
according to ye which we ought to be reformed: such are faith, judgment,
mercy, love of our neighbor hope, patience in adversity, and such others as
are of like weight. But he calls them waightye by estimation and judgment,
and also weighty to be done, because none can show forth any of these, but the
just and godly, by the spirit of God. They are light things which are
fulfilled by external works: Such was tithinge, of which we have mention
here: and such were the typical seremonyes of the law, as the precepts of
the saboth, of the new moons, of purgations, of meats, and of circumcision.

Judgment, mercy, and faith. C. Judgment is here taken for equity and right,
^ente.
whereby it comes to pass that to every man is given that which is his own,
and that no man defraude or hurt another. B. Whervppon to do judgment and
righteousness in the Scriptures, is to live rightly and with equity among al men,
or else to frame such a life by gouerninge, among others. But mercy does more
largelye extend it self, (...).
namely yt every man should study to help his brethren, of his own, to ease
the miserable by counsel or goods, to defend those that are unjustly
oppressed, and with compassion to bestow those goods and riches where with all
he is endued.

Faith, is nothing else but a sincere integritye, to see that nothing be done
craftelye, maliciously, or by deceit: but that mutual simplicity be embraced
among all men, in the which all men would be dealt withal. So that, the sum
of the law is referred to love. We know that some do otherwise interpret the
name of faith, as though by a figure called Synecdoche, he should co^prehende
the whole worship of God under this name: but Christ according to his manner
makes a sure and certain trial of holiness by conferring it with brotherly
love, Holiness without brotherly love is hipocrisye.
as with a tutchestone and therefore he touches not the first table. It makes
no matter that the Euangeliste Luke, in steed of faith places the love of
God. For it was the purpose of Christ to show what ye Lord does specially
require of us in the law.

But it is well anoughe known yt the law was divided into two tables, that
first of all it might show what was due unto God, and then, what belonged unto
men. In Luke either part is expressed: as if Christ should have said, that the
law did specially tend to this end, that we should love God, and that we
should be just and merciful toward our neighbors. The Evangelist Mathewe
held himself content with one part only. Neither is it any absurditye to
call the duties of charity, the special points of the law, Romans 13.
whereas Paul calls love it self the fulfillinge of the law: even as he
says in another place that the law is fulfilled if we love our neighbor.
Galathi. 5.
And Christ being before demanded as concerning the commandments of the
law, Math. 19.
he rehearsed none but those that were in the second table. If any man obiecte
and say that by this means men are preferred before God, Aunsweare.
yt here the second table is not opposed or compared with the first, but
rather that by the observation of the second, a proof or trial is made to see
if God be worshipped truly and unfeignedly. Because piety is an inward thing,
and because God is not amongst us to try and prove our love, (for he stands
not in need of our duties) it is an easy matter for hypocrites to lie, to
deceive, and falsely to pretend the love of God. But because the duties of
brotherly love are felt and perceived of all men, in these things their
impudency is ye better reproved. Christ therefore in this place went not
subtly about to entreat of all the parts of righteousness, or of their order,
but he taught simplelye so far as ye common capassity of men would bear,
that ye law is then kept when me^ deal justly, gently and truly one with
another: because in so doing they declare that they love God, that they
reverence him yea they show forth a lawful and meet testimonye of sincere
godlynes, not that it is sufficient to do our duty toward men, except first
of all, God have his right, given unto him: but because it is necessary that
he be a true worshipper of Godwhich frames his life according to his prescript
law.

Tithe was a part of Gods worship.
Yet notwithstanding the objection is not fully answered: for ye tenthes, which
Christ sets after equity and mercy, were a part of the worship of God: and
some part thereof was wont to be distributed to the poor. And so they
contained in themselves a double sacrifice. We answer that tenthes are not
simplelye compared here with alms deeds, faith, and Judgment, but ye feigned
holiness of the Scribes is conferred with sincere and perfect love. For, why
were they so willing and ready to pay their tenthes, but only that they might
please God with the least expense, and grefe? For they were not so ready to
the whole: and therefore it ought not to be nombered among ye duties of love,
because they sought to deceive both God and men with small trifles of little
price.

These things ought ye to have done This is a figure in Rhetorique called
occupatio, by the which Christ preuenteth ye cavil of his adversaries. For
they might have cauilled and construed his words amiss, as though he had
made no account of that which was written in ye law of God. He grants
therefore that whatsoever God has commanded ought to be kept and nothing
thereof to be omitted: but yet yt the love of the whole law does not let men
to stand upon the special points thereof. Whereupon he gathers yt they do
amiss and preposterously which busye themselves in the smalest things, when as
they should rather begin at the greatest matters. Christ therefore denies it
to be his purpose to derogate even the least thing from any of the
comaundements, although he commend and require an order in the observation of
ye law. Let therefore the universal law abide sound and whole, which can be
broken in no part without the contempt of the author. For he which forbad to
commit adultery, to kill, and to steal, the same condemned also all
concupiscence. Whereby we gather that all the commandments are so linked and
knit together, that it is not meet to disseauer them one from another.
Wherefore it is also written: De^
Cursed be every one which does not those things that are written. By the
which words the universal righteousness of the law is ratifyed without
exception: but this reverence (as we said before) takes not away the
difference between the commandments, neither yet the scope of the law, to the
which ye true embracers thereof direct their mind, least they should only
bear an outward show. B. Therefore the Scribes and Phariseis are not blamed
of our savior Christ because they gave exactly tyeth of all their fruit, (for
this was meet also to be done) but because they did neglect those greater
things, without the which there could no piety at all consist. Herevppon
certain do boast that the right of tithe is confirmed of the Lord: Ty^
when as we must put a greater difference between those of our time which
receive tithes, and those to whom tithes were due by the law. The whole tribe
of Leuy received no possessions in the land of Chanaan, because the Lord had
appointed the same to the ministry of the tabernacle: wherefore he appointed
also yt tithes should be paid unto them by the rest of the Isralites, N^ De^
as appears in Numerye and Deutronomye. Therefore so long as the mynisterye
of these men and external worship of the tabarnacle continued, the Isralites
ought to have paid their tithes according to the law: but the priesthode
being removed, the law is removed also. Christ is our hye priest, and that in
heavenly things, to who^ it is not needful that we give part of our
oblations, and tithes: but it is meet yt we offer our selves wholly unto him,
for the continual meditacion of a heavenly life.

Notwithstanding we must give those things yt are necessary to such as stand
in need of them: yea and those ministers also are worthy of double honor
which rule well, 1. T^
and labor truly in word and doctrine

But whether we do these things in geuinge of tithe, or by any other portion
of substance with the which the Lord has blessed us, it shall be all one before
God, if so be we seek not thereby vain glory, but give the same with a pure
affection to those that be in need.

24. Ye blind guides which strain out a gnat and swallow a Camel.

Ye blind guides, A. Again he calls these ypocrites blind guides, to the
end he might the more move the people to forsake them. For if the blind lead
the blind, both shall fall into the ditche. (...) 15.


Which strain out a gnat and swallow C. This is a prouerbiall sentence, by
the which ye precise care of ypocrites in small trifles is noted, for they are
so horribly affrayed at ye least offenses, as though one only transgressio^
should be more sharp unto them, than a hundred deaths: but in the most
grievous sins they swetelye lull themselves and others a sleep. They do
therefore even as if a man should strain at a small crumme of bread, and
swallow a whole loaf. We know that a gnat is a small creature, and a Camel,
a huge beast: there is nothing therefore more rydiculous, than to strain in,
wine and water, least in swallowinge a gnat thou hurt thy Jaws, but
careleslye to suppe up a Camel. But truly it is evident that ypocrites do this
dallye: because they lettinge pass Judgment, mercy, and faith, are to severe
and strayte in matters of no great importance. A. Moreover in this place the
participle of the presenttence is put for the indicative mood. As if he
should say: ye are like unto them, who if it chance unto them to have a gnat
fall into their wine, they suck and strain in their wine hardely through
their lips and teethe, least in swallowinge the little gnat they should be
strangled: in the mean time they do not only eat a Camel being a
monsterous beast but also swallowe him down without fear: all you Scribes and
Phariseis, ye ypocrites, are like to these, I say, who will not omit ye
smallest point of the law: but those things which are the waightiest points
of the Law, ye altogether neglecte without any prick of conscience. Such
manner of men are they which are diligent abstayners from flesh, obseruers of
confession, and such like trifels: but in charity, and in a good conscience,
they have no consideration of God at all.

A. Nay truly, these men are worse far in this point than the Phariseis,
because they carelessly observed those things which were commanded in the law:
but these men dare presume to prefer their filthye traditions before the word
of God.

C. Wherefore, when after this manner they would seem to kiss Gods feet they
do proudelye and arrogantlye spitte in his face.

25. VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis, ye ypocrites, for ye make clean the
outward side of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of
briberye and excess.

VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis, C. The Lord does prosecute the same
matter still: and figuratiuelye he reprocheth the Scribes and casts in their
teeth that they only seek for this one thing carefullye, that they may shine
and seem excellent before men. For by the outward side of the platter, he
understands metaphoricallye ye external show: as if he should say: Ye
have no care of cleanenes, but only of that which appears to the face of
men: even as if a man should wipe away the spots upon the outward side of the
cuppe^, but should leave it all foul and filthy within.

M. Therefore he reproves their ypocrisye, because they only sought to
reform their lives according to the outward appearaunce and sight of men,
yt they might get unto themselves a vain fame of holiness, So that he reduces
them in the verse followinge to the pure and sincere affection of living well.

But within they are full of briberye C. G. He makes mention only of two
vices, by the which he notes other wicked and corrupt affections also. Hereby
let us learn that inward cleanenes has been and is always acceptable unto
God. He calls intemperancy a certain impotency of the mind, by the which
it comes to pass that it gives place to pleasure, and is excessive in
doing, speakinge or eatinge. This we may call incontinency, or excess. When
Christ condemns the same here of uncleanness, and joins the same to rapyne
and bryberye, he euidentlye declares that they are void of excuse which
think it sufficient to innocensye, if they have not gotten their goods by
rapyne and injury of their neighbors: as though it were lawful to spend that
in excess which is truly gotten. Some Greek Books have, rapine and
unrighteousness. Bu. To these the Lord adds ye true purgation comes from the
cleanenes of the mind: saying with a moved mind and holy indignation thus.

26. Thou blind Phariseye, cleanse first that which is within the cup and
platter, that the out side of them may be clean also.

Thou blind Phariseye cleanse first Bu. Out of a pure mind, both clean
thoughts, words and deeds do come: but to an impure mind those things that
are without bring no cleanenes at all. This is a figurative kind of speech.
For the right order of clensing is to begin at the inward part first, that
afterward ye external cleanenes may follow, the which is nothing else then
the effect of the internal cleanenes.

C. We must therefore first of all pourge that which is within: because in
deed it were a rydiculous thing to feed the eyes with cleanenes, and to
drink of an unclean and poisoned cup. B. The Evangelist Luke adds
saying: Ye fools, did not he (which made that which is without) make that
which is within also? Luke 11.
Why therefore do ye not seek to make both clean?

27. VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis ye ypocrites: for ye are like unto
painted Sepulchers, which in deed appear beutifull outward, but are within
full of dead men's bones and of all filthynes.

28. Even so ye all, outwardlye appear righteous unto men, but within ye are
full of faynednes and iniquity.

VVo be unto you Scribes C. Here is another similitude, but appertayninge to
the same end that the other did which went before. For he compares them to
Sepulchars, which men of this world ambitiously build after a fine and trim
fashion for themselves. Even as therefore in Sepulchars the picture or caruing
draws the eyes of men unto it, when as within them the putrifyed and
corrupted carcases are laid up: euenso Christ says that hypocrites do
deceive by the external show, because they are filled with fraud and
iniquity.

For ye are like to painted Sepulchars, E. That is to say to pargeted
Sepulchars, which is said to be a whyted work. For they are pargeted with
lyme and plaster. A more proper and fit comparison could not be brought.
For there was always great ambition in Sepulchars: whereupon Sepulchars are
more often seen than Palaces. M. Those things which our savior Christ
casts in ye Phariseis teethe in this Chapter were like unto paintinge, as the
making of their broad gardes the amplifyinge of their Philacteries and such
like. For by reason of these they seemed unto me^ to be just and upright
persons.

But within ye are full of hypocrisye Now he expounds his comparison. He
always pearceth even to the inward parts, and teaches to purge the
conscience. For it is a most easy matter to change and alter the outward
person. He obiecteth unto them their ypocrisye, and counterfeited holiness,
because chey would seem unto men to be just: when as they were altogether
unjust shyning by a false cooller only of Religion. C. The words of Luke
seem to signifye some other matter, namelye, that they deceive the eyes of men
even as Sepulchars or graves do, the which are not oftentimes seen of those
that walk upon them, but ye sense and effect of them agrees in all points
with the words of our Evangelist Matthew, that under the pretense of feigned
holiness there lies hid a secret corruption and stincke, which they foster in
their hearts: even as a marble Sepulchar, (because it is fair and pleasant to
look upon) encloseth the stink and noisome air of the Carcas, least it
should offend and anoye ye passers bye. Whereupon we gather that, whereof we
spoke before, that Christ to the end he might help the rude and ignorant and
instruct them (whom ye Scribes held in bondage through their falsehoode and
deceit) did pluck of their visarde of ypocrisy and set them forth, as they
were, for all me^ to behold. For this admonition did very much profit the
simple, that they might in due time deliver themselves from the mouths of the
wolves. Notwithstanding this place does contain a general doctrine. yt the
children of God might not so much seek to seem, as to be perfect and pure
in deed.

29. VVo unto you Scribes and Phariseis, ye hypocrites: ye build the tombs of
the Prophets, and garnishe the sepulchers of the righteouse, and say.

VVo unto you Scribes. C. Some do falsely think that superstition is
reprehended in the Scribes, because they did preposterouselye beautifye the
dead Prophets with costly sepulchers: ^pists give (...) Glory of (...) to
saints.
Even as at this day the Papists transfer and give the glory of GOD to dead
saints, yea they do wyckedly worship their pictures. They were not as yet come
to such blindenes and madness. Wherefore the purpose of Christ was otherwise.
By this deceit the Scribes got fauore to them selves among the unlearned
multitude, yea among all the Jews, because they did reverently embrace the
memory of the Prophets.

For they faining by this means, that they allowed and maintained their
doctrine, every man thought that they were faithful imitators, and the best
folowers of the worship of God. The matter therefore at the first sight was
plausible and commendable to build the monuments of the Prophets: because by
this means religion rose as it were out of darkness, that it might stand in her
dew honor. But truly they minded nothing less tha^ to restore doctrine,
which might seem to be extinguished by the death of ye Prophets. But when as
they themselves were not only alienate from the prophetical doctrine, but also
most dedly enemis thereof, yet for all that they adorned ye dead Prophets with
sepulchers, as though they were in all points agreing with the Prophets. And
this is always ye manner of hypocrite to honor the ministers of God and true
teachers after their death, whom they could in no wise abide when they were
alive. Neither comes this only to pass by a common faite: but because ye
dead ashes are no more, greuouse and troublesome by sharp and severe
reprehencions, they do not think it much to set forth a vain shadow of
religion in worshipping of the^, whose lively voices they could never abide to
hear, but were thereby provoked to madness. For this fained show costeth and
stands them not in much, to profess and show reverence toward those that
are dombbe. Euenso all the Prophets among the Jews in their time, were
co^tumeliously rejected and vexed, yea often times they were cruelly killed:
and the posterity which were littel better, nay rather worse than their
fathers, did rather reverence their shadowed memory, than embrace their
doctrine: for somuche as they also were as dedly ennemis to their teachers
also, in their age. For as the world, because it dare not altogether despise
God, or at least openly resist him, it inuenteth this practice, namelye to
worship the shadow of God for God: even so in the Prophets it exercises the
like valliance, of the which matter we have to evident an example in the
papecy. For they being not contented with the lawful worshipping of the
Apostels and martyrs, do worship them with divine worship, and in what manner,
and how much soever they honor them they think that they excede not: howbeit
in raging against the faithful they declare what their piety shall be toward
the Apostels and martirs, if they which are alive at this day might have the
same office and authority that they had in time paste. For why are they so mad
and fearce against us, but only because we desire to have that doctrine
florishe and received which the Apostels and martyrs have scaled with their
blood?

And saying that the same doctrine was more preciouse to the servants of God
then their own lives, think you that they should spare this which so cruelly
persecute the same? Let them therefore honor the Images of saints with
scankensence, with candels, with flowers, and other kinds of pomp at their
pleasure, if Peter were now alive they would tear him in pieces, if Paul, they
would stone him, yea if Christ himself were in the world they would torment
him in the flaminge fire. But because the Lord saw that the Scribes and
sacrificers of his time sought to get praise herebye, because they were godly
honorers of the Prophets, he reproves them of deceitful hypocrisy, because
they would not only reiecte the Prophets if they were present with the^, and
sent unto them but also cruelly afflicte them. For in this, their hypocrisy and
gross impudency be wrayeth it self, that they desired to some religiouse in
the worshipping of the dead, when as they went about to extinguishe and
utterly to destroy them when they were alive.

A. Christ therefore detecteth this hypocrisye in this place, least they
should please the^ selves any longer in ye vanity.

30. If we had been in the days of our fathers. We would not have been
partners with them in the blood of the Prophets.

If we had been in the days. B. Because they boasted themselves to be the
sons of Abraham, Christ by their own words ouercometh them and proves that
they are not the sons of Abraham, but rather the sons of murderers which
slew the Prophets: tourning the glory which they so desired, into ignominy
and reproach. For natural children do commonly resemble their parents.

We vvoulde not have been partners. According to the sense of the Hebrewe it
is thus: We would not have agreed to their death.

31. And so ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the children of them
which killed the Prophets.

And so ye be vvitneses. Although he does not accuse them in the person of
their fathers, and does not principallye lay it to their charge and put
them in the falte, because they are the children of murderers: yet
notwithstanding by the way he toutcheth their foolish boasting, because they
were wont to brag and glory in their stock and of spring who
notwithstannynge were the progeny of the bloody enemis of GOD.

Thus much therefore his words signify in effect. The worship which ye give
to the dead Prophets, is thought to be a certain satisfaction of your part
for your fathers iniquity. Now therefore ye must needs grant me this, that ye
do in vain brag of your holy stock, seeing that ye take your original of
wicked and ungodly parents. Go ye now and pretend their piety with your own
wickedness, whose hands ye grant were poluted with innocent blood. But truly a
far greater fair approaches, because ye follow and imitate the execrable
furor and madness of your fathers, (which ye condemn in the sepulchers of the
dead) in the slaughter of the living. Wherefore at the length he concludes that
they do not degenerat from their fathers: as if he should have said. This is
not the first beginning of the cruelty of this nation against the Prophets of
God: for this is the ancient and wonted discipline: this was the custom of
your fathers: finally, this manner of behavior is as it were natural in you.
A. The same words almost in effect the blessed martyr s. Steven uttered when
his death approached, Act. 7.
saying: Ye styfnecked, and vncircomsised hertes and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy ghost as your fathers did, so do ye, which of the Prophets
have not your fathers persecuted? And they have slain them which showed
before of the coming of the Just, whom ye have now betrayed and murdered.

B. In the Gospel after Saint Luke we read that the Lord said unto them.
Truly ye bare witness, Luke. 11
that ye allow the deeds of your fathers for they killed the^, and ye build
their sepulchers. As if he should say. You: in building the sepulchers of the
Prophets would seem to worship the Prophets, and to allow their doctrine, and
to condemn your fathers which slew them: but if any man would judge of your
heart, (with the which in deed ye rage and swell against the Prophets as
much as did your fathers) he might more truly say that ye do allow the
crueltye of your fathers, and do brag as it were by these monumentes, but do
condemn the Saints whom your fathers killed. A. There is no doubt here, but
that Christ speaking these things did grievously prick and gaalle his
enemies: specially he speaking so boldly in the presence of the people.

Thus al hipocrites must be dealt withal and by force driven out of their
lurking dens.

32. Fulfill ye likewise the measure of your fathers.

B. All this oration of Christ does declare a moved mind. For they which are
augrye do commonly speak sharpelye, obruptly and obscurely. C. He does not
here bed them do that which they do, that they might kill the holy teachers:
but he figuratively declares that they do as it were by byrthrighte and
inheritance rise against the Prophets of God, and yt they must have liberty
to resist godliness: because by this means they should finishe the wickedness
with their fathers had begone, and make an end of the web which their fathers
had spoone By these words he does not only declare that they are desperate and
such as can not be brought into a right mind: but also he admonishes the
simple that it is no merueile if the Prophets of God, be euel entreated by the
children of homicides and murderers. Bu. To fill the measure is prouerbially
spoken to finishe impietye, and to add that to impiety and wyckednes which
seemed to be wantinge.

33. Ye serpents ye generation of vipers, how will ye escape the damnation of
hell?

Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers. Bu. He does suddenly as it were leauinge
his former talk, rushe upon these manslears, shewinge unto them that they can
not shun or avoid the judgment of god, that they shall be grievously punished,
and cast into hell. C. For after he had showed that the Scribes were not only
wicked enemies of godly doctrine, and false cor, rupters of divine worship, but
also mortiferouse and dedly plages of the Church: he goinge about to make an
end of his oration and sermon and sermon, does in more sharp manner wax
angery with them: saying,

How vvil ye escape the da^natio^ Bu. He uses an interrogation, because
thereby his words might be the more vehement. The like oration did S. John
the Baptiste use against the same men saying. O ye generation of vipers, who
has taught you to flee from the vengeance to come? For because they were
obstinate, and because his doctrine took li^e^ place among them, he speaks
unto the^ after this manner to terrify him.

C. Howbeit Christ had not only respect unto the Scribes and Phariseis, but
also to the whole multitude that he might make them affrayed, and to beware of
the like destruction.

The damnatirn of hell? He understands by these words the judgment of God,
by ye which he would adiudge them to everlasting death. As concerning hell,
read in the fifte chapter going before. But how hard and intolerable this
sharpnes of words was to these reverend masters, we may hereby gather,
because they had kept a long time their mastership and authority in such
peace that no man durst once mutter against them. There is no doubt but that
many were offended and grieved at the severe liberty of Christ, yea he was
counted of some perverse and childishe that he durst be so bold to speak so
oprobriously of the order of the Scribes: (even as at this day also many
dantye and tender eared persons can not abide to here the popish clergy
seuerelye spoken against) but because Christ had to do with hypocrites, and
that of the worste sort which being not only puffed up with a proud conte^pte
of God and dronken with a vain and false trust, but also having be witched
the people in their steps of superstition, it was necessary for him to inuey
the more earnestly against them. He calls them therefore Serpents, as well in
respette of their nature as manners: then he pronounces unto them vengeance
the which they should seek in vain to avoid, except they repented in time.

34. Wherefore behold I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and Scribes,
and some of them ye shall kill and crucify: and some of the shall ye scourge in
your synagoges, and persecute them from Ci^ty to City.

Wherefore behold. M. These words pertain to that which went before, by
the which he called the Scribes and Phariseis a generation of vipers, that is
a most wicked posterity of wicked homicides and murderers, showing forth the
like malice that their forefathers did and greater also, who, could not
possiblely escape the judgment of hell.

I send unto you Prophets. C. The Euangeliste Luke adds somewhat more
expreslye in these words: Therefore said the wisdom of God. The which
saying some interpreters conster thus, I which am the eternal wisdom of God,
do pronounce of you. Notwithstanding it is more probable, according to the
wonted manner of the Scripture, that the Euangeliste here brings in God,
speking under the person of his wisdom so that the sense and meaning of
these words is this, It is not long since the Almighty God by the spirit of
Prophesy, pronounced what should come to pass of you

We grant that this se^te^ce (as touching the letter or very word) is read
no where: Prosopopoeia is a figur used where as personages are fained or
presupposed to speak, as one man to an other.
but because God does in diverse places touch and reprehende the untamed and
obstinate contumacy of this people, Christ does gather an epitome, or short
some, and by this Prosopopoeia, does more plainly express what the judgment
of GOD shall be upon the incurable wickedness of that people. For it might seem
wonderful and strange, if the Prophets and teachers went about to do
nothing profitable or worthy of regard, why the Lord would have them
without cause to be vexed and weryed. For some men affirm that God does lose
his labor and work, when he appoints his word to be preached to ye
reprobat, whom he knows to be obstinat. But hipocrits, as though this one
thing were sufficient, namely, to have amongst them daily preachers of the
heavenly doctrine, although they show themselves unwilling to be taught, do
trust that God will be merciful and favorable unto them, if so be that the
external word do sound among them.

So the Jews did stoutlye boaste that they always excelled all other nations,
Prophets and teachers, and that they had as it were deseru^d so great honor,
that this was unto them an undoubted badge and token of their dignity. Our
Savior Christ seekinge to beat down this vain arrogance, does not only deny
them to excel all other nations, although they had amongst them, by the
exceeding love of GOD, his Prophets, and excelent interpreters of his
wisdom: but also he says that his grace being evil bestowed upon them,
should be a greater reproach unto them, and work them greater destruction:
because in deed the purpose of God was otherwise than they imagined: For he
meant thereby to make them the more inexcusable, and also to bring their wicked
malice, even to the full. As if he had said, although heavenly Propheres were
sent unto you of God, and ordained for you only, yet do ye folishly allege
for your selves and brag of this honor: For God by his secret counsel and
judgment determined an other matter, namely, that by continual and gentel
inuitacion and calling, he might openly detecte and bewraye, your wicked
obstinacy, the which being conuicte and overcome, he might bring both upon
the fathers and the children a like horrible destruction.

I send unto you Prophets. Bu. Hereby it appears that ministers of
salvation come not except they be sent of God. Rom^
How shall they preach (says S. Paul) except they be sent? Whereupon our
Savior Christ also said, Mat^
Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that he would thruste out laborers into
his harvest.

It declares also the fatherlye affection of God in sendynge Prophets to save
Israel.

And wise men, and Scribes. C. In that he reckeneth wysemen and Scribes with
the Prophets he does it to amplify the grace of God: whereby their ingratitude
does the more appear, because, although the Lord omitted nothing to teach
them by, yet notwithstanding they did not proffite at all. M. in so much that
they cruelly slew the Prophets and wise men that were sent unto them for
their salvation. C. Instead of wise men and Scribes, the Euangeliste Luke
puts down, Apostels, in the same sense. B. These are they which by the
instincte and motion of gods spirit, brought and preached to the whole world,
the word of life, the true wisdom of God and the proper and natural sense
of the Scriptures.

This place pertains to the truth of the gifts of ye spirit, among which
not only the prophesis, showing of things to come, and declaring the will of
God, and also the wisdom of those which speak by the spirit of God, ^tth. 2.
without the knowledge of the Scriptures, have place: but also the knowledge of
the Scriptures which the Scribes have. Of whom read the second chapter going
before.

And some of them ye shall kill and crucify. M. Here the wonderful malice of the
Scribes and Phariseis is described. It is a small matter not to receive a
minister of grace, if it be compared to this cruelty, by the which he is
contumeliously handeled, afflicted, scourged and killed. This crueltye
pertains to those that swel and are puffed up by the name of holiness and
righteousness, and which can not abide the preaching of the truth, but do
resist the same all that they can with fire and sword, and do persecute it,
as though it were heresi. But they perish not unto ye Lord which are slain,
and the found sheep are brought unto the pastor, and all excuse is taken from
the wicked, when yt their malice (which otherwise would lie hid) is made
manifest to all men. Even so in an other place he says: For a testimony unto
them and the Gentiles. ^ath. 10.
C. So that this place teaches, that God does not work the salvation of men
always, so often as he sends unto the^ his word: but that he would have the
same some times declared unto the reprobate, (who he knows notwithstanding
will be obstinate) that it may be unto them the sauore of death unto death. ^ds
word ^ached to ^reprobate, ^eth them ^de of excu^
The word of God certeinlye of his own nature is of power to save, and
calls all men without exception to the hope of everlasting life, ^ Cor. 2.
but because al men are not inwardlye drawn, because God does not open their
ears, and because all men are not renewed to repentance, or framed to
obedience: whosoever do reiecte the word of GOD, do make the same to be unto
them selves death and destruction.

Saying therefore God knew that this should come to pass, that the reprobate
should be drawn into greater damnation, he by his secret counsel sent
unto them his Prophets, as more plainly the Prophet Esaias declares. Esaias. 6.


We grant truly that this is far contrary to carnal sense and reason:
even as we see the impure and vnreuerent contemners of God to take hereby
special occasion to bark and murmr against the secret counsels of God,
because yt like a tyraunte (as they say) he delights in the greater
punishemente and destruction of men, whom he does more and more indurate and
make blind in their sins without all hope of profit. But God by such
documentes as these, does exercise and try the modesty of the faithful. Let
this therefore be our sobriety, namely to reverence that, with trembling
fear, which excedeth our reason and capassity. They which say that the
foreknowledge of God is no let at all wherebye the unbelieving should not be
saved, do by vain defense foolishly excuse God himself. We grant certainly
that the reprobat do not therefore bring death unto them selves, because God
has so provided that it shall come to pass, and therefore it can not be
ascribed to his foreknowledge that they perish: but we deny the righteousness
of God to be lawfullye and truly defended by this cavil: because a man may
strait way obiecte, that it is in Gods power to stay them from repentance,
because the gift of faith and repentance is in his hands.

This also may be objected: Answer.
that we give this glory to the Iudmentes of GOD, and to cry with Saint
Paul and say, O the deepenes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of GOD: Romans 11.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past findinge out? For
who has known the mind of the lord.

But it may be demanded how the Lord pronounces by his Prophet Esaias that
the Prophesies should turn to the destruction of the Jews, Esaias, 6.
Answer.
that seeing a very littel and small portion only, received and embraced the
word by faith, mention is made here of the greater number as of the universal
body: Esaias. 8.
Even as Esayas, who, when he preached the common destruction of the people,
was commanded to seal ye law of god with his disciples. Let us understand
therefore that so often as the Scripture does adiudge the Jews to everlasting
death, the remnaunts are excepted, in whom the Lord preserves some sede, for
his free elections sake.

35. That upon you may come all the righteouse blood, which has been shed
upon the earth, from the blood of righteouse Abel, unto the blood of
Zacharye the son of Barachias, whom he slew between the temple and the
altar.

That upon you may come B. Bu. To have the just blood come upon any man, is
to be gilty of blood and to have blood required at his hands, that is to be
punished, and to have vengeance recompe^ced for the blood which was shed. C.
Christ does not only detracte and pluck away from the Scribes and Phariseis,
that which they falselye arrogated to them selves, but also teaches that they
were adorned with the Prophets to a quight contrary end, that no age might be
free from the mischife of wicked rebellion. For the pronoune (you) does
generally comprehend the whole people from their first original or beginning.

Answer.
we may easelye answer that saying they also by wicked conspiracy wrapped
them selves in the same ungodliness, it ought not to seem absurd, if God,
punishinge every one of them alike, do lay the punishemente, dew to the
fathers, upon the heads of the children. Therefore justly a count is to be
made, and punishment also to be had of the whole people for the continual
contempt, at the lenghte, in whose time or in what age soever it comes. For^
as God, by the long continuance, of his patience, did constantly contend with
the malice of the whole people: even so all of them by their just deserte werr
made giltye of the inflexible obstinacy, which continued even until ye last
hour, and as every age by compacte and consent murdered their Prophets,
even so it is mete that they be called to common and general judgment, and all
the slaughters which were committed by one consented to be revenged upon al B.
Bu. The Lord therefore does not only threaten the revenge of those whom they
should kill, but also the revenge of those whom their elders had slain:
signifiyng the beseginge and utter destruction of this people. For these men
did kill Christ the head of all Saints, and his Apostles also greater than
all Saints (as they which brought the more perfect knowledge of God, to the
world) and therefore they did not only finishe, but also exceed the crueltye
of all their forefathers, Christ head of (...) godly.
which had shed the innocent blood of the Prophets. So that, even as they had
the crueltye of them al finished to the full, so they made themselves gylty of
all the just blood which they at any time had shed. For as all the saints,
from the first to the last are all one body, having Christ their head and
what benefits the Lord gives to their posteritye, he says that he gives
them to their fathers: even so, all the wicked do consiste of one body,
having Satan their head: and we say that vengeance is rewarded them, and
that they are punished with such punishments, which are not felt of the^ in
this life, with ye which they are afflicted in deed, Satan head of the wicked.
but first of all are taken upon their posterity. So ye Amalachites, fought
against Israel, when they came out of Egipte. The which thing ye Lord
commanded to be written in a book for a remembrance, and to be committed to
the ears of Iosue, Exodus 17*
promisinge that he would utterly root out that people, in so much that no
remnaunte of the^ should remain for a memorial. But the lord performed that
thing first of al by Saul within forty years after, or thereabout, that this
people ye Amalachites had offended, and so the vengeance or revenge of that
falte fell upon them, which never committed the same by external falte.

Notwithstanding this, God was not unjust in revenging upon them that which
their fathers had committed. For these at the last, had fulfilled and whollye
rynyshed the wickedness of their fathers, so that the same wickedness did
specially deserve to be ponished externally, in them. After this manner
therefore the cruelty also of all those which have shed at any time just
blood, and the impiety of these Jews at the last, which were destroyed by
Titus came to the full and fulfilled the same measure, which deserved extreme
vengeance. It was revenged therefore and ponished in them by right, and they
were justly plagued for an example to the whole world. Notwithsta^dinge in the
mean time also they which were before these men, were no less ponished for
their offense, but priuatelye: but they received the more public and greatter
ponishement, which were destroyed by Titus. This is a horrible malediction and
curse, if we communicate and take part in the wickedness of the ungodly, we
shall not only bear the ponishemente of our own sins, but of their sins
also.

From the blood of the righteouse Abell. C. Although Abell were not slain of
the Jews, yet notwithstanding Christ imputes his death unto them, because
even among those there was a certain affinity of the wickedness of Cayne:
otherwise it would not agree that he says, that the just blood was shedd from
the beginning of the world by this generation. Cayne therefore is appointed
the headde, the prince, and author, of the Iewishe people, because in that
they began to kill the prophets, they succeeded and came into his place, whose
followers they were. A. He calls Abell just, because by a lively faith in
the promised redemer, he offered up sacrifice acceptable to God.

As concerning the which matter read the leuenth chapter to the Hebrews.

Until the bloudde of Zachary. C. He names Zachary not as though he were the
last martyr (for the Jews had not then made an end of killing the
Prophets: Read this or the like sentence, omyttynge that which is enclosed
between these two marks () and ye shall the better perceive the sentence.
but rather hereupon their boldenes and mad fury increased: and they which came
after did ingurge and fyl them selves with the bloudde which their fathers
only had lycked) neither yet because his death was the more commonly known,
although the holy Scripture does celebrate the same: but there is an other
cause, the which being worthy to be noted, was unknown to the
interpretours. Whereby also it came to pass that they were not only deceived,
but the readers also were brought into great doubt. For Christ might seem to
be forgetful, when he rehersynge an old slaughter, omitteth an innumerable
heap of murders, which were afterward committed under Manasses. For the
Jews did not cease to persecute wickedly the saints and holy men of God,
even unto the time of transmigration or departure into Babylon: yea, when the
affliction of the Jews was come, we know how cruelly they dealt with the
prophet Jeremy. Iere. 32
But trewely the Lord did not seek to cast in their teethe those lately
done murders, but he rather chose this old and ancient slaughter, which was
the beginning and original of mischeuouse liberty, that they might
afterward burste forth into unbridled cruelty, because this was more meet
for his purpose. For we declared even now that this was the effect of his
counsel and purpose, that seeing that nation did not cease and leave of their
wicked impiety, he made the^ gilty of al those murders, which were committed
long before. Therefore he does not denounce unto them the revenge of their
present cruelty only, but says also, that they must give account and
answer for the murder of Zacharias, as though their hands were imbrewed
with his bloudde. For their opinion is not probable or likely which refer
this to Zachary which exhorted the people that returned from the exile of
Babylon to build the temple, whose prophesies remain with us to be seen at
this day. For although the inscription or titell of the book declarethe that
he was the son of Barachias, yet notwithstanding we read in no place that
he was killed. Furthermore it is a plain exposition, that he was killed between
the building of the aultare and the temple. As concerning the other Zachary,
the son of Ioiada, the holy Scripture makes mention that he agrees very
well with this place: For when that after the death of his father, by the
wicked defection of the king and people, true religion decayed, he was
indewed with the holy ghost seuerelye to reprove open Idolatry, ^ Para 24
and therefore he was slain in the court of the temple. And it is no
absurdity at all to say that the surname of Barachias was given to the father
of Ioiada, for honors sake: because, seeing he was a worshipper of God, and a
maintayner of the same, all his life time, he ought worthily to be counted
blessed of god. But whether Ioiada had two names or whether there were a falt
in the word (as S. Hierome estemeth of the matter) trewely there is no doubt,
but ye Christ noted that execrable stoninge of Zacharias, which is written in
the place before cited. Between the temple and the aultare A. He does
express the place, The cruelty of the Jews
that he might increase and amplify the cruelty and brutishe madness of the
Jews, which were not moved by the holiness of the place, nor stayed from
layinge hands violently upon the holy prophet of God.

C. Furthermore the temple is here taken for the court, as in other places
also, to this adjoined the altar of burnte offerynges, that the priest in the
sight of the people might offer up sacrifyce. It appears therefore that their
cruelty was to tyrannical, in that neither the respect of the altar, nor the
temple could pacifye them, but they must needs defyle the holy place with
horrible murder.

36 Verily I say unto you: all these things shall come upon this generation.

Verily I say unto you. B. Bu. He adds this earnest affirmatio^ to terrefie
the Jews. As if he should say, There is no cause why any man should thinck
that he may escape the judgment of God. For certaynely all those euylles
shall be heaped from heaven, upon that vyperouse progeny, which the lord
does thretten to power upon those horrible murderers. And let all those
thyncke also, that these sayings pertayne unto them which think it a godly
thing at this day, to persecute the truethe of the Gospel, and the
professors thereof. For the bloudde shall be never ye less unrevenged, Gene^
which cries unto God for vengeance.

37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest the^
that are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as the hen gathers her chickins under her, and ye would not.

O Jerusalem Jerusalem. C. By these words our savior Christ does more
plainly declare how just occasion he has to be angrye, because Jerusalem
(which God had chosen to be a holy and heavenly house, as it were to him self)
did not only show it self to be unworthy of such honor, but as though it were
a den of thieves, it had used and accustomed a long time to drink the
bloudde of the prophets. Christ therefore cries out pytifully against so
monstruouse behauioure, because the holy city of God was fallen into such
madness, that it went about daily to extinguishe the wholesome doctrine of God,
by the blood of the prophets B This bewaylinge therefore of Christ was a token
of his great and exceeding love toward this people. It is a token of great
affection, that he names the city it self, and that he does double the
appellation or name of the same, saying Jerusalem, Jerusalem. Thou which
killest the Prophets. Because the Evangelist Mathewe uses the participle of
the present te^ce, and the words of Christ seem to have respect unto both
times, the deed may be taken or understood without any certain lymitting of
time: as if thou should say, Thou killer of the prophets, which have
killed, do kill, and wilt kill.

C. Thou I say which should be the faithful keeper of Gods word, the
mistress of heavenly wisdom, the light of the world, the welspringe of
true doctrine, the place of the sincere worship of God, and the example of
faith and obedience, art the killer of the prophets, in so much that thou
haste gotten now a habit and custom of drinking bloudde. Herby therefore it
apereth that they were worthy of all kind of reproach, which had so filthely
profaned the sainctuarye of God. E. Many think that by the name of
Jerusalem, which was the head of Iewry, is understand the whole country or
region of the Jews.

And stonest them which are sent unto thee. A. Namely to bring thee from the
error and obstinacy. He says that prophets are sent, as he did before,
saying, behold I send unto you Prophets, and Scribes, and wise men. etc.. C
It was also the purpose of Christ, to prevent the offense which was nie at
hand: least the faythefull saying him to be slain so unworthily at
Jerusalem, should be troubled at this new and strange sight.

For they were admonished by these words, that it was no marvel if the
city, being accustomed in killynge and stonynge the prophets, did kill also
the redemer. But hereby it apereth how much it is meet to attribute unto
places.

There was no city in the whole world truly, which God adorned and
beutyfyed with such excellent titles, or which he exalted to such honor:
yet notwithstanding we see how it cast it self down headlonge through
ingratitude. Now let the Pope compare the seat of robbery and theft, ^bbery
hol^ up the ^es seat.
in the which he sytteth, with that holy city, and what shall he find
therein worthy of the like honor? His hiered flatterers boaste unto us, that
faith once floryshed there. The which thing let us grant unto them, yet if
it be well known at this day, that the same is alienate and fallen from Christ
and filled with abominations, how folishelye do they contend to have the
honor of the supremacy tied to the same? But let us rather learn by this
worthy example, that the more any place is extolled, and set aloft by the
benefytes of God, and exempte from the common state of other places, if the
same do degenerate, or decline, it shall not only be despoyled of the
ornaments appertayninge to it, but also so much the more shall it be odiouse,
opprobiouse, and execrable, because fylthyly it defiled the glroy of God, in
polutinge the honor of his grace. Math. 11.
A. To the which end also those horrible thretninges do pertain, the which
the lord used against Chorazin, Bethsaida. and Capernaum. How often times
would I have. C. This is rather a displeasure taken, than a putting. He does
as yet (trewely) show mercy on that city, over the which he wept a little
before, but he is more sharp and severe against the Scrybes, the authors of
destruction, even as theye deserved. Howebeit he does not spare the rest, all
the which were gyltie, accessaries, and fellows of the same falte: but
drawinge all into like gyltynesse of the fact, he does specially inuey
against the captains them selves, which were the cause of all evil. Now let
us note the vehemency of the speech, If the grace of God had been symply
forsaken at Jerusalem, the ingratitude was now in no point to be excused:
but seeing that God did seek to win the Jews to him self louingely and
getlely, and did profit nothing at all by so great clemency, the falte of
so proud consumely and contempt was a great deal the more hainouse. To this
also was adjoined wilful and unruly obstinacy: because God did not seek to
gather them once or twice only, but he sent continually from time to time,
one prophet after an other, which were reiectted for the most part every of
them, and of the greatter part.

A. For thus it is written in the sacred hystorye: Moreover all the rulers, the
priests, and the people trespassed more: synninge after all manner of
abominations of the heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord, which he
had hollowed in Jerusalem. And the Lord of their fathers sent unto them by
his messengers, rysinge up betymes and sendynge, for he had compassion on his
people, and on his dwellinge place. But they mocked the messengers of God, 2.
Paral. 36.
and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of God
rose against his people, and til there was no remedy. Bu. Christ therefore
does not speak of his time only: but he signifies that he woolde have
brought this thing to pass oftentimes before he was man. We must note this
word, together, for they are all dispersed which are alienate from God. But
the son of God came to gather those together in one, John. 11.
which were dispersed.

God did this thing also from the beginnynge of the world, and does it at
this day also. This thing he does always, that when his are dispersed
through syn, he bringethe them unto him again by Christ, to be ingrafted in
his body.

Thy children together. He compares Jerusalem to a mother, according to the
manner of the Scripture, which commonly calls the cittezens children.

Even as the hen gathers her chickens. Consider and weye these words, and
this symilitude more diligently, with how earnest affection and burning heart,
he propounded the same, and thou shalt know and see in this, how to behave
thy self toward Christ, how thou may use him, and what profit he shall
bring thee. Only behold and consider the hen and her chyckins. Thou see
that Christ is here connyngly depaynted, and more expressly set forth, than
any paynter by art can bring to pass. There is scarce any other creature to
be found, that is so careful, Christ is the defender of man's soul
diligent, and louinge to their young ones, and that seeks with such industry
and constancy, in peril to defend them. It is most certain that our souls
are the chickins of Christ: the kytes in the air, that seek to set upon
them to destroy them, are the deuilles, which are much more crafty to catch
our souls, than are the kytes, to take the young chickins from the hen. We
are under the wings and protection of Christ, when as with true faith we
clean not to our selves, or to any other thing, but only to Christ, when we
commit our selves wholly unto him, and get us under his righteousenes, which
we count our protection and safeguard: even as the chickins, who are neither
defended by their own strength, nor by running a way, but by hidinge them
selves under the body and wings of the hen. A. For he which will stand in
the judgment of God, let him not say, I am of sufficyente force, I perfectly
fulfill the law, I am void of care, I trust to my works: Christ ^
righteou^ is our d^
but let him obiecte the righteousenesse of Christ to the father, let him
suffer the same to be examined by the judgment of God, and so it shall depart
away alone with victory. Let every man thereefore get and hyde him self under
this, which is ordained to salvation, let him trust and believe, that he
shall be safe by the same: the which also he shall obtain by this faith, and
not by his own merit, or by the deserte of faith, but for Christ and his
righteousenes sake. For it is no true faith which is otherwise gotten. So
Dauyd speakinge of this trust, says: Who so dwells under the defense of the
most higheste, Psalm. ^
shall abide under the shaddowe of the almighty. The same shall say unto the
Lord: Thou art my hope and my strong hold, my God in whom I will trust.
For he shall deliver me from the snare of the hunter. etc. all the which
things are spoken of the faith of Christ, how the same consists and
abides safe from all peril and destruction of humayne doctrine and
temptations of the devil, as well spiritual as carnal. C. Now let us note
wherefore Christ compares him self in the person of God to a hen: A. For
this cause surely. that he might declare the exceeding affection of his
mind toward our salvation, C. and also that he might bring more ignominy
to this wicked nation, which rejected his sweet and motherly inuitations.
This surely was a wonderful and unspeakable documente of his love, that he
dysdayned not to humble him self to speak fair, to the end he might win
the rebelliouse and obstynate into his obedience and love. The like
reprehention with reproach is to be read in Moses, where it is said, that
God as an Egel spreads forth his wings, to embrace the people. Deuteronomy. 32.
And although God in one manner does not extend and spread out his wings to
cheryshe and defend that people, yet notwithstanding Christ does apply
specially this form of speaking to one kind, because the prophets were
sent to gather the wanderinge and dispersed, into the bosom of God. By the
which he declares that the word of God is at no time set forth unto us, but
he by his motherlike lou^ opens his lap unto us: and being not content
therewith, he humbles him self in desendinge to the simple study and care of
a hen to defend her chickins. Wheruppon it follows that our ingratitude
were to monsterouse, if we would not suffer our selves to be gathered of him.
Certeinelye if the fearful majesty of God came into our remembrance of the
one part, and our filthy and base condition on the other part, we shall be
abashed and constrained to shame at so great a miracle of his goodness. For
what a thing is this that God should so much abase him self for our sakes.
When he put upon him the person of a mother, he abased him self a great
deal beneath his glory: but how much more in this that he taking upon him
the form of a hen, vouchesafeth to account of us as his chickins? Moreover if
this thing were worthily offered to the ancient people which lived under the
law, it does a great deal more belong unto us. For although it was always
true which we cited even now out of Moses, and that the co^playntes ate
true, which are read in Esaias, that God does daily stretche out his arms
to an unfaithful people, ^ ^5.
that went not the right way, but after their own immaginations: yet not
withstandinge at this day he does a great deal more familiarly, and swetely
inuit and call us to him by his son. Wherefore horrible revenge abides for
us, so often as he offers unto us the doctrine of the Gospel, except we
quietlye cover our selves under his wings, with the which he is always ready
to receive us. And where as we said before, that Christ speaks in the
person of God, it must be thus understood, that those words do properly
belong to his eternal deity.

For he does not reason here what he began to do so soon as he was
manifested in the flesh, but he declares how careful he has been, from
the beginning, for the salvation of this people.

And we know that God has so governed his Church, that Christ has been
the head of the same, in respect that he was the eternal wisdom of God.
In the which sense S. Paul does not say that God the father was in the
desert, 1. Cor. ^.
but that Christ was tempted in the deserte. But where as the Papists abuse
this place, to prove freewill, and to abolyshe the secret predestination of
God, they do greatly err, and may easelye be answered. They make their
argument thus: The Lord (say they) will gather all: Answer.
whereof mention is made here, is to be considered of the effect. For seeing he
calls all men without exception, by his word to salvation, and this is the
end of preaching, that all men might seek to believe and keep the same) it is
justly said of him, that he desires to gather all men unto him. Therefore the
secret council of God is not here described unto us, but the will which is
perceived by the nature of the word. For certainly, those whom he means
effectually to gather, he draws inwardly by his holy spirit, and does not
call them only by the external voice of men. Answer.
but because our minds do not pearce to the profounde depth of his secret
election, therefore, for our infirmities sake, a double will of God is
propounded unto us. And we marvel that sum have so feeble a brain, and
slender judgment, that the Anthropopatheian or human affection which is
often found in the Scriptures, Anthropopatheion. is the affection of Man.
offendethe them nothing at all, only they will not admit it in this part.
This therefore we say, that so sone as doctrine, which is the banner and en^igne
of unity, is displayed, and openly published, God straight way seeks to
gather all men, that whosoever comes not, might be void of excuse. And ye
vvoulde not. Bu. He casts ingratitude in their tethe. As if he should say.
In that ye will peryshe, ye can not blame me: for I would gather you, but ye
are so obstinate, Psalm. 115.
For all things that he would, he did. Furthermore we can not be otherwise
gathered, than by his spirit, the which when it is present, it does
effectuallye move the minds of men. To the which again, we answer, that
the secreate judgment of God is not to be sought out, Aunsweare.
or curiousely searched for: but his work is to be considered He would have us
gathered together so often as he displayethe his banner, Free will confuted.
as the captain of the battle: let us have respect unto that, and not
enter into his secret judgment. He does only work effectually by his
spirit in the elect. Yet notwithstanding he calls all men generallye:
neither does he say that he did what he could, but what so ever was
necessary, and so much as was needful. C. Furthermore, where as Christ says
here. And ye would not. it may be referred as well to the whole nation, as to
the Scribes: notwithstanding it ought rather to be understood of those, by
whom the gatheringe was chiefly hyndered. For Christ altogether inueyed
against them. and now he having spoken to Jerusalem in the synguler number,
seems not without cause by and by to alter the number. For there is an
opposition or contrariety of great force. between the will of God, and their
vnwillingenesse: because the deuyllishe furor and madness of men is expressed:
who are not afraid to contend with God.

38. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.

M. It is read in the present tence (notwithstanding, for the future tence)
in the auncienst latten books that are written. C. For he by these words
speakethe of the spoylinge of the temple, and of the destruction of polytique
gouernemente. For although they were deformed, and out of order, by reason of
impiety, wicked acts, and all manner of infamy, yet notwithstanding theye
were so blinded with false trust of external worship, and of the temple,
that they thought God to be bound unto them. And always they had this
buckeler at hand to defend them selves with: What? should God depart out of
this place, which be chose unto him self alone above al other places of the
earth? But if he dwell in the midst of us, it is mete and necessary, that we
be restored at the length. Furthermore they took the temple to be unto them as
a sure bulwark and defense, as though they had sit in Gods lap. But
Christ says that they glory in vain in the present of God, whom they had
driven away by their wyckednes: and calling it their house, he does thereby
plainly show, that it is not the house of God any more. The temple trewelye
was builded for this cause, and to this end, that by the coming of Christ,
it should cease to be the seat and station of God: notwithstanding it had
stood, as an excellent monumente of the perpetual grace of God, if it had
not been destroyed by the wickedness of the people. This therefore was the
horrible vengeance of God, that he did not only forsake and utterly overthrow
that place, which he him self had so magnificentely adorned and bewtified,
but also that he has made the same subject to the end of the world, to
extreme ignominy and reproach.

M. So long, and so many Prophets they killed, that God never sent them any
more. The Lord has suffered them already this thousand and fifty years, to
be without prophet or preacher: He has taken from them his word: therefore
their house remaynethe unto them desolate, no man edefyeth their sowles. God
dwells no more amongst them, That which they would is now come to pass, as
says the Prophet David:

They loved not blessing, P^
therefore shall it be far from them: they desired cursynge, therefore shall
it come upon them. The like we may read in the prophet Esaias, where thus
says the Lord of hosts: I will show unto you what I mean to do unto my
vyneyarde: I will take the hedge from it, that it may perish, and break down
the waule, ^ 5.
that it may be trodden under foot. I will lay it wast that it shall neither
be dug nor cut, but bear thorns and briars, I will also forbid the clouds
that they shall not rain upon it. A. O horrible vengeance that the Lord has
taken on the Jews. C. Now let our men of Rome go their ways, and let them
extol their Babilonicall tower in despite of God, saying they see the Temple,
which was builded by the furtherance, aid, and commandment of God, to have a
fall for the wickedness of the people.

39. For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till that ye say,
blessed is he, that comes in the name of the Lord.

For I say unto you, C. Here our savior Christ confirms ye which he spoke
as concerning the vengeance of God which was at hand: because the only
remedy of escapinge danger was taken away from them. For that was the
accepted time, that was the day of salvation, so long as he which came to be
their redeemer, was a witness and proclaymer of the redemption which he
himself brought. ^^^te the ^hte son ^ghteous^.
But by his departure, ye light vanished away, even as it does at the son
settinge. Wherefore it was necessary that this miserable destruction, whereof
he speaks should succeed and take place. Now it may be demanded, what time
he means when he says, ^estion.
Until ye say B. Some interpret this place of ye judgment to come: other
some think it to be a Prophesy, which within a little while after was
fulfilled, namely, when as certain well disposed persons among the Jews
worshipped Christ. But neither of these interpretacions do serve for this
place. C. And truly it is marvel that so little a scruple and doubt,
^nsweare.
should be a let unto learned men, when they carefully seek to know how the
unbelieving should speak of Christ and say: Blessed be he that comes in
the name of the Lord, For he does not declare what they shall be, but what he
himself would do. And the aduerbe of time (until) is not farther extended
than unto the time which goes before. So it is said in another place, And
Iosephe knew her not until she had brought forth her first begotten son:
^th. 1.
the Euangeliste means not by these words that he knew her after her
deliuerau^ce: but he only shows yt Mary was a pure and chaste virgin, and
untouched of her husband before the birthe of her son. Therefore the true
and apt sense of this place is this, Hitherto I have been conuersaunt among
you after a most gentle and human manner, and have done the duty of a teacher:
now ye end of my calling being finished I will depart, neither can ye have ye
fruition of me hereafter: but ye shall see him, whom ye have contemned (being
the redemer and minister of salvation) come to be your Judge. So this place
agrees with that of Zachary where he says: Zacha. 12. John. 19.
They shall see him whom they pierced. Moreover Christ seems to toutch
figuratively their vain hypocrisy: because they song dailye (as though they
were greatly destrous of the promised salvation) this, out of the Psalm,
Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord: and yet nevertheless
despised and made a ieste at the redemer offered unto them. Furthermore he
says that he will not come unto them until they being affrayed at the sight
of his horrible majesty, do cry to late that he is in deed the son of God.
And this commination and threatninge does appertain to all the contemners of
the Gospel, specially to such as would seem to favor the same, when in no
point they can abide ye doctrine thereof: because at the length they shall
know yt they cannot escape his hands with who^ they now disse^ble in their
feigned hipocrisye. For ye Papists at this day sing the same song, with whom
notwithstanding Christ is nothing regarded, until he sit upon his
tribunal seat, armed with revenge. Also we are admonished that so long as
Christ appears unto us to be the interpreter of salvation in the name of his
father, and the mediator, we ought not only with our lyppes to worship him,
but also to wish and pray syncerelye that he may subdue us, and the whole
world to himself.

The xxiiii. Chapter.
AND Jesus went out, and departed from the temple, and his Discyples came unto
him, for to show him the buildings of the temple.
And Jesus went out M. Two things specially are declared in this Chapter.
Two things in this chapter.
The first is the beseginge of Jerusalem, and the signs of ye destruction C.
No doubt ye Disciples thought that Christ spoke this to the Temple as his last
farewell. It rested therefore that he should erecte a new Temple much more
beutifull, and kinglye estate more florishinge, as it was foreshewed of ye
Prophets. For he had nothing to do with that temple in the which all things
were against him. But now the Dysciples could not believe that the magnifycent
and excellent pomp of the temple should give place unto Christ. And this is
diligently to be noted, yt the superficial show and outward face of ye
temple being so wonderful sumptuouse and costlye the Disciples eyes were so
held and ravished with the present sight thereof, that they had almost no hope
of the prosperity and flourishing of Christ's kingdom. They do not plainlye
confess their doubting, but do secretly and covertly utter the same, when
they show Christ the stoneworke, which must be overcome and brought into
nothing if he would reign. A. Master (say they) see what stones, and what
bulidings are here. B. This Temple was not builded of ye fathers which returned
out of Babylon (of the which mention is made in the fifth Book of Esdras) but
it was builded of Herod the king, Mark. 13
as Josephus declares, in his fyftene book of the Antiquities of the Jews:
Esdras. 5.
The aunciente foundacions (says he) being taken up, new were laid by
Herod, upon ye which, he erected a temple, a hundred Cubits long, Iosep^ de A^^
and in height a hundred and twenty. And this temple was builded of very hard
white stoone, the which stones were in greatness five and twenty Cubits long,
eight Cubits thick, and twelve Cubits broad. It was such a piece of work,
that it deserved to be spoken of throughout the whole world. There were set a
work to build this temple above ten thousand cunninge crafts men, which did
work upon the same duringe the time of eight years. Hegesippus also in his
first book, makes mention of this temple. Heges^ 1. Cha^
C. And this temple also was had in such reverence as well among foreign
nations as among the Jews, that no man durst suspecte that the same should
ever be destroyed. After this manner also the Papacy makes simple me^ at this
day, to marvel: for when they see the same to be adorned and beautifyed with
great riches, and fortefyed with power, they are forthwith amazed, in somuche
that the Church of Christ seems unto them filthye and base. Many also do
think that we are deceived and out of our wits when they go about to
seek the destruction thereof, thinkinge that we may as sone pluck the Sun
out of Heaven as the Pope out of his chair. M. Therefore that noble sight of
the Temple did make the Dysciples of Christ astonished, insomuch that they
thought it impossible, that the Temple being so sumptuouse, should so sone be
destroyed, as Christ had said.

2. Jesus said unto them: See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto
you, there shall not here be left one stone upon another, that shall not be
destroyed.

Jesus said unto them M. Christ was so far from pleasing the mynds of his
Disciples, that he does exaggerate and more earnestly inuey against that, of
which they seemed to take so much pity, and does confirm the same with an
earnest affirmation, saying that it shall certainly come to pass. See ye not
all these things, As if he should say, Behold all these things diligently
and wonder at them also: but all these things shall fade away, how sumptuouse
and beutifull soever they be.

Verelye I say unto you He uses an oath. C. For because the greatness and
pomp of the temple, being as a veale set before their eyes, did not suffer
their faith to reach to the kingdom of Christ to come, therefore he
affirms by an oath that those things should shortly perish, which did so
greatly stay them, ^ection ^emple.
This foreshewinge therefore of the destruction of the temple, did much prepare
the way, to the ignorant and weak. For although it was necessary and
profitable for the temple to be destroyed, least that the Jews being to much
adicted to earthly elements and creatures, should be held thereby in the
shadowed worship: yet notwithstanding this was the special cause, that God
would have the repulse of his son, and the contempt of the grace which he
offered unto them, to be revenged of ye nation by a horrible example. Wherefore
it was necessary that the Disciples by this declaration should forsake the
societye of this rebellious people. Even as at this day, those things which
the Scripture foretells as concerning the punishment of the wicked, ought to
drive us from those sins which provoke the wrath of God.

Also whatsoever teaches as concerning the short, and tra^sitory figure of
this world, ought to correct the vanitye of our senses, which to gredely
follows pomp, luxury and other vain delights. But specially that which
the Scripture pronounces as concerning the fearful destruction of
Antechriste and his sect ought to take from us all lettes and hinderaunces,
which do stay us in the right race of faith.

There shall not here be left one stone that shall not E. This word (here) is an
aduerbe of place, and signifies thus much: In this buildinge. The Euangeliste
Luke has: ^e 21.
The days will come, in the which (of these things which ye see) there shall
not be left one stone upon another. The which thing notwithstanding as yet
seemed impossible to the rude Dysciples. And truly it appears hereby that ye
buildinge of this temple was in most strongest manner, because when Jerusalem
was taken, the Roman soldiers had much ado to enter the same, as we may
see in the seventh Book of Josephus de bello Iudaico and the nynthe Chapter.

3. And as he sat upon mount Oliuet, his Disciples came unto him secretelye
saying: Tell us when shall these things be: and what shall be the token of thy
coming and of the end of the world?

And as he sat upon mount Oliuet, B. The Evangelist Mark adds saying,
that he sat over against the Temple. It is said in Luke that the Lord was
wont in those days at night to go forth of Jerusalem to mount Oliuet, Luke.
21.
the which he observed this third day also, after ye which there is none of
the Evangelists that makes mention that he returned again until the day
of sweet bread: that is to say the fifth day after that in the which he
entered into ye Cittye with pomp and majesty, when they cried unto him
Hosiah-na. Herevppon many of the aunciente fathers held opinion that he
tarried the fourth day at Bethany.

His Disciples came unto him C. B. M. The Euangeliste Mark names four of his
Dysciples that is to say, Peter, James, John, and Andrewe, to whom he revealed
other mysteries. Peradventure they thought that he would open these things and
many other to them alone.

Secretly saying M. Or they came unto him a part, or priuatelye, that is to
say the people being away: because it was very dangerous to speak any
thing openly of this matter as appears by the historye of Stephen. Acts. 6.
Tell us when shall these things be? A. Christ had openly and plainly sheewed
them of the destruction of ye temple, but he had not in like manner declared
the time, yt the same might be known to ye Dysciples. Therefore they being
persuaded that the matter should come to pass as the Lord had spoken, do
inquire of the time.

And what shall be the token of thy coming? C. The Evangelists, Mark and
Luke do not so plainly speak of this matter as does Mathewe. For they only
say that these four Disciples came and enquired of the time, when the Temple
should be destroyed: and because the matter was incredible, they also demanded
what sign the Lord would show thereof from Heaven. But here they inquyre of
the time of Christ his coming, and of the end of the world.

Yet we must note also, that seeing they had imagined even from their
childhoode the state of the temple to be perpetual, and saying their minds
were wholly fixed upon the same, they though while the world stood, the
temple could not be destroyed. Therefore so sone as Christ said yt the temple
should perish they of their own accord call to mind the consumation and
end of the world. And as one error begets another: even so they being
persuaded, that by and by, even at the beginning of Christ his kingdom, they
should be blessed in all respecces, yt war and battle being forsaken, make
have to have the triumph out of hand. Therefore they join the coming of
Christ, and the end of the world with the overthrow of the temple, as things
inseparable, and by the end of ye world they mean the instauration and
renuinge of all things, least any thing should be wa^tinge to the perfect
felicitye of the godly. Now we see, that therefore they lept from one question
to another, because they were tangeled in these imaginations, namelye, that the
temple could not fall without the whole world were destroyed: that the shadows
of the law and the world should end at one time: that immediatlye after
this, the glory of Christ's kingdom should be revealed, which should make the
children of God blessed in all points: and that the visible renuinge of the
world was at hand, which in a momente should set all those things in order
that were before confounded. But specially they presuming folishly upon the
hope of Christ's kingdom which was present, are driven thereby out of time to
seek in have for the blessed quietness and rest. Even as in another place,
when they saw that Christ was risen from death, Acts. 1.
they were carried hedlonge to the felicitye which is laid up for us in Heaven,
to the which we must aspyre and come by patience and hope. And although we
differ from them in diverse respects, because we are not trained up in the
shadows of the law, that the same superstition, as concerning the earthly
kingdom of Christ, cannot deceive us: yet notwithstanding there is scarce one
of us among a hundred found, which is not infected with the like disease,
For, saying all men do abhor by nature, griefs, contencions, and all parts
of the Cross, the tediousnes of these things does urge them to make have,
without moderation and temperaunce without hope, to get before the time, the
fruit of hope. And so it comes to pass yt no man would sow, and yet all
men would reap before the time. But to return to the Disciples: they had
conceived truly in their minds, the good seed of faith, but they tarried not
till the same was ripe: and being endued with evil affections, they do mingle
the perfection of Christ's kingdom with the beginning: and that which they
should have sought for in heaven, they seek to obtain in eath.

4, And Jesus answered and said unto them, take heed that no man deceive you.

Take heed that no man deceive you Z. Or beware that no man deceive you. A.
The like word uses the Apostle Paul when he says. Colo^
Take heed least any man spoil you through Philosophy, and deceitful vanity,
after the tradition of men, and after the ordinances of the world. M. B.
Christ does not answer to that, which the Disciples sought curiously to know,
but to yt which did more pertain to their profit: whereby they might be made
more ware and circumspect, either to avoid, or else constantlye to bear, the
perilous things that were to come. C. For saying they sought for tryumphe
before the victory was had, Christ exhorts them to long sufferaunce. A.
Therefore these words must be taken as if he had said, C. ye would have the
game or reward, before ye run, but first it is meet that ye finishe your
race. Ye pluck down the kingdom of Heaven to ye earth, the which no man can
obtain, except he ascend into Heaven. The (...) error ^ insi^^
But saying that this principal rule does contain special admonitions very
profitable to govern the whole race of our life, we do see brought to pass
by the wonderful wisdom and counsel of God, that the error of the Apostles
should be profitable unto us.

This is the effect and sum, that ye Preachinge of the Gospel is like unto
the sowinge of corn: and therefore we must wait patiently for the time of
Harvest: and that they are to tender and effeminate, which are so dyscouraged
by the could of winter, by snow, by wind and rain, or by any other
aduersitye. But Christ does specially command unto his Disciples two
things, namelye that they take heed of false doetrine, and that they be not
troubled at offenses. By the which words he declares, that his Church, so
long as it is in the world, shall be subject to these evils. But this might
seem nothing so, saying yt ye Prophets had described the kingdom of Christ
to be far otherwise. ^y 54.
Esaye promises, that al men at that time shall be taught from above. (...) 2
And the Prophet Ioell says: I will power out of my spirit upon all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall Prophesye, your young men
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. More plentiful light
also of understanding is promised by Ieremye, when he says: ^my 31.
No man from henceforth shall teach his neighbor, saying: know the Lord:
because all men shall know me from the least to the most. Therefore the son
of righteousness being risen (as Malachy Prophesyed that it should) it is no
marvel if the Jews did hope that they should be free and clean from all
the obscure and dark clouds. ^lachi 4.
Whereupon the woman of Samaria said: (...). 4.
The Messiah when he comes, will teach us all things.

Now truly, we see and know how many great promises are to be found in
diverse places of the Scripture, of peace, of righteousness, of joy, and of the
plentye of all good things. Wherefore it is no marvel if they believed that
they should be exempte and delivered from troubles of wars, from rapine, from
all injury, from honger and from pestilence, by the coming of Christ. But
Christ admonishes and declares that false teachers should be hereafter no
less troublesome to the godly, than false Prophets were in time tofore to the
people that were long ago: and yt there should be no less perturbations and
troubles under the Gospel, than there were in time past under the Law. Not
because those prophesies want effect, which we recited even now: but because
the perfect fulfilling of them, is not to be seen at the firist day. For it
is sufficient that a taste of those blessings is given now to the faithful,
that they might ever after have a hope of ye fulfruition. And therefore they
were much deceived which look to enjoy all those things at the beginning of
the Gospel, which we see daily to be fulfilled. Moreover the wickedness of men,
although it does not all together frustrate and make void that felicitye
which the Prophets attributed to the kingdom of Christ, yet notwithstanding
it does greatly trouble and hinder ye same. For the Lord brings to pass in
stryuinge with the mallyce of men, that his blessings may find away through
all lettes and stays: and truly it were an absurd thing, that the same should
be abbolished by their fault, which is grounded upon the merciful goodness of
God, and not upon their will. Notwithstanding, that they might receive some
recompense of their ingratitude, he does only distill by drops, as it
were, his graces and benefits, which otherwise, would power out themselves in
most plentiful manner. Herevppon comes the Laberinth or mase of so many
evils by yt which ye faithful do err all their life time, howbeit, Christ
being their captain, and carrying before them the light of his Gospel, they
keep the sure and certain way of salvation. Herevppon comes the heap of so
many contencions, that they ca^ hardely fight, although without danger.
Herevppon come so sudden perturbations, that they are troubled with miserable
disquietnes, howbeit they cleauinge unto Christ, do very well persist and abide
to the end. Furthermore, when Christ commands his Disciples to beware of
deceites, let us know that there be ways anowe to escape them, if so be we
be circumspecte. Wherefore let us not doubt, if every one of us walk
dilligentlye in our calling, what deceites soever Satan practices, but that
we are in safety from them. A. Ephe. 5.


Therefore let us not be unwise, but let us understand and know what the will
of God is. For Christ says, if any man will obey his will, John. 7.
he shall know of ye doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my
self.

5. For many shall come in my name, saying: I am Christ, and shall deceive
many.

For many shall come C. Christ does not as yet speak generallye of perverse
and false doctrines, but touches only one particular kind, which is as a
certain preface or declaration of all those errors, by the which Satan
diversely goes about to destroy the pure doctrine of the Gospel. For shortly
after the resurrection of Christ, there arose false teachers, among which,
every man professed him self to be Christ. But because the true redemer was
not only quyte taken away from the people, but also oppressed with the
ignominy of the cross, and because the minds of all men were erected and
lift up by the hope of redemption, and set on fire with a desire thereof, they
had a plausible and fit occasion at hand, to deceive withal. And there is
no doubt but ye God suffered those to be seduced, by such enchauntementes and
deceites, which had so disdainfully rejected his son. For the Lord also
said unto them before, John. 5.
I came in my fathers name, and ye receive not me: If an other come in his own
name him ye receive. For so God has appointed, that they which reiecte the
truth of God, should afterward believe a lie. Deutro. 13 Esaias. 29. 2. These. 2
As we may read in the thirtene chapter of Deutronomie, in the nine and
twenty of Esaias, and in many other places of Scripture. And because it is the
office of Christ to deliver from the tyranny of the wicked and to govern
prosperously, they did insinuate and craftily convey them selves into the
favor of the Jews, which promised that they would be the deliuerers and
saviors of the people. Of the which deceivers truly there were many before
the destruction of Jerusalem: who, although they persuaded not all the people
of this matter, yet notwithstanding they seduced many, as Christ foreshewed in
this place. Iosep. li. 20 cap. 4. De Antiqui.
Among these, Theudas was one, of whom Josephus in his.xx. book and.iiii.
chap. of the Antiquities of the Jews, makes mention. Judas the Galilaean was
before this Theudas, of who^ also Josephus makes mention. Iosep. lib. 1 cap.
18. De Antiqui.
And Gamaliel, makes mention of them both in the Acts of the Apostles. And
further, the same Josephus writes that the province was replenished with
thieves and witches, Act. 5.
which seduced the people. Iosep. li. 20 cap. 11,
By the witches he means those which did insinuate the^ selves by the name
of Prophets. Again, he makes mention of a certain Aegiptian, which was a
false Prophet, Chap ^
who in his own opinion thinking him self to be a Prophet, gathered almost
thirty thousand together, False ^phetes.
whom when he brought out of the wilderness to the mou^te of Olives or Oliuet,
he went about to take Jerusalem: but they were oppressed of Felix the
president at that time: Act. 2^
of the which Felix there is mention made in the one and twenty of the Acts.
Lastly, Chap* ^
the same Josephus writes of an other also which promised the people quietness
and rest from all euels, if they would follow him into the desert. By many
such were the people of the Jews mocked and deceived, all which, as they
promised liberty and salvation to the people, so they affirmed that they were
Christ's. And under this name they boasted them selves also for the true and
promised Messiah, of whom the Prophets and Scriptures testifies. Such a one
was Simon Magus, Act. ^
which persuaded the Samaritanes that he was the power of God which was called
great. C. And although all these toys were discipated and brought to nothing
in a short time: yet notwithstanding, it was the will of God that the Jews
should be so troubled among them selves: first, that they might make them
selves infamouse, and odious: and secondly, that they being so often deceived
of their expectation, might run headlo^g like brute beasts into their own
destruction. For seeing the world forsook the son of God, whose office is, to
gather us into an holy unity, it is mete that the same should be carried to and
fro, as it were with the uncertain waves of the sea. And by the same just
judgment of God it is brought to pass, that foolish credulity and light
belief, did seduce more, than the true faith brought unto God: even as
Christ says in this place. And shall seduce many. Christ added this
circumstaunce, least the people in beholding the multitude of madmen, should
quayle or fall away. For we know how the nature of man is inclined to
multitude, specially when as we are a few in number. 2. Pet^
So saint Peter writes of false teachers, saying. There shall be false
teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnable sects, even denying
the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon them selves swifte damnation,
and many shall follow their damnable ways, by whom the way of truth shall
be evil spoken of.

6. Ye shall hear of wars and tidinges of war, be not troubled. For all
those things must first come to pass, but the end is not yet.

Ye shall hear of vvarres. B. Now least they should be to much troubled by
the manifold and horrible tumultes of wars and seditions, (with the which
the Iewishe nation before their destruction should be afflicted) he does also
forewarne them of those, least they should receive any hurt thereby. To the
end also he might revoke them from that false opinion, by the which they
promised to them selves a quiet kingdom, in the which all things should
florishe, he gives them this admonition. C. Even as therefore at the first,
he commanded them to beware, least any man deceived them, so now he
commands them to stand with a boulde mind, against the wars and rumors
of wars: For it was dangerous, least they should quayle being overwhelmed
with euels, specially if they had promised unto them selves quiet ease. But he
speaks not here symplely, but by a comparison: that there were always wars,
but never such greuouse wars. For about the beginning of Christ's coming, or
about the beginning of the Gospel, they prevailed more and more.

B. Furthermore, these rumors of wars, and wars, that is to say tumultes,
seditions, and murders, began specially and chiefly to be in the time of
Cumanus lieftenaunt, ^e. lib 2. ^ 11. de ^o Iudai.
which succeeded Tyberius Alexander, of whom Josephus makes mention.

Within a while after, there insued an other tumulte between the Jews and the
Samaritanes, with great slaughter of men, and spoylyng of towns. After that
there followed an other tumulte at Caesaria. But when P. Festus had succeeded
Felix, (of which succesion mention is made in the four and twenty chapter of
the Acts) he went about to deliver that Province form thieves, (...). 24.
but the vengeance of God stayinge the same, he could not. The said Festus
being succeeded by Albinus, and Albinus by C. Florus, all kind of wyckednes
ouerflowed.

For as these two, (but specially Florus) left nothing undone pertaining to
tyranny, extreme and open injury, and rapine: even so therewith, the
bouldenes of those that were seditious among the Jews, did daily more and
more increase: where upon immediately came tumultes, hurly-burlys, roberies,
open violence, and by little and little cruel murders, and the people were
vexed daily with unspeakable euels and calamities, till that they were driven
to just rebellion: with such unwonted force, and violent cruelty, not heard
of before, he raged against them. But king Agrippa went many ways about to
diswade and dehorte them from rebellion, yet all in vain. At the length
therefore, when they had prevailed, which sought to renew things, the Roman
power, and the garryson of king Agrippa, did assault the city of Jerusalem
with open war, and being forced to yield, after they had given hands, and
promised life with an oath, they slew ouery one of them saving only Mutilius
the lieftenaunt. After that, Cestius the president of Syria, did bid ye
citizens of Jerusalem, battle. But he being forced to raise his siege, and
to avoid the force of the Jews by flight, the authors of the rebellion were
made more boulde: and having gotten all power, they brought unto them selves,
and to theires, much evil, until such time as they were altogether banyshed
by Titus. Of all the which things Josephus writes at large form the eleventh
chapter of the second book of the war of the Jews, unto the end of the
seventh book.

Be not troubled. S. To be troubled by reason of wars in this place, is to
doubt of the truth of the word, the which thing we do, when we judge of
the word by uncertain things. B. as at this day it happens with them,
which for the present hap and chance, do either begin to doubt of the
Gospel, or to have the same in suspicion, or else altogether to condemn it.
For all these things must first come. This word Must, contains in it, no
small consolation. For what wise man will be afflicted for the thing which
cannot otherwise be. But what man that trusts in God will be troubled, when
that comes to pass, which must needs happen by the ordinance of God, the
which thing must needs be best, and most wholesome for the saynctes of God?
God truly will not have those that are his to be troubled in these necessary
and continual tormoyles of things, but to be of a stout mind, as those
that know it to be the decree and ordinance of God. He says that it must
needs be, and yet notwithstanding, he shows not the cause, but declares
that none of all these things come to pass by chance, or without the
providence of God, least we should in vain kycke against the prick. For
there is nothing more effectual to bring us under, than when we do
acknowledge that those things which seem most confused, are moderated by the
will and pleasure of God. For to God him self just causes and true reasons why
he suffers the world to be troubled, are never wantinge: but because it is
mete that the faithful do areste in the mere and good pleasure of God,
Christ thought it sufficient to exhort the disciples to have their minds
armed with constancy to bear and suffer, The ki^gdom of heaven does not
bring worldly delights.
because so it pleased God.

By these words also he does show unto us that his kingdom does not
bring us pleasant delights, and such other like commodities of this
world, but that it is spiritual: and he does as it were demonstrate with the
finger, that we must have respect to somewhat else than to the earth, and the
commodities of this present life. Neither does this word Must signify any
thing that is fatal or belonging to desteny (as certain fanaticall or mad men
do deem.) For it has always one cause or other, and it is profitable to be
done for those causes before mentioned.

But the end is not yet. Christ here more plainly utters that which we
spoke of before, namely that those things which were grievous of the^ selves,
were notwithstanding only certain enteraunces and beginninges of greater
calamities: because when the flame of wars had corrupted Jury, it would
burste out further. For in that the doctrine of the Gospel was spread abroad,
the like ingratitude among other nations did kyndle the wrath of God.

Hereupon it came to pass that they which had broken the bond of peace with
God, did now tear one an other with mutual debate: that they which refused
before to obey God, are now glad to submit them sleues to the violence of
their ennemies: that they which before would not abide to be reconciled unto
God, are now together by the ears one with an other: and that they which
depryued them selves of heavenly salvation, have now filled the earth with
murder in sleying one an other. M. Therefore by these words he shows that
these sedicions shall be of long continuance. And it is a very proffitable
admonition, least men should think that they have done enough if they have
escaped two or three dangers, but rather that they should always be ready
to a new fight. For seeing the life of man is a continual warrefare upon
earth, Job. 7^
we ought not to promise unto our selves a quiet state while we are in this
world.

7 Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, there
shall be pestilence, and hunger, and earthquakes in all places.

Nation shall rise against nation. B. This proved to true, to Caesarea,
Scythopolis, Ascalon, Ptolmaida, Alexandria, and afterward to Damasi, where
ten thousand were slain, Iosep^ De b^ dai.
finally to the kingdom of Agrippa, and to all Syria, and the kingdoms there
aboutes: of the which Josephus makes mention.

And there shall be pestilence. M. In the third place he puts those signs of
the wrath of God, and of the destruction to come, which should be from
heaven. As concerning these plagues, how they were foreshewed to this people
by Moses, Leuit^ Deuteronomy. ^
read the six and twenty chapter of Leuiticus. And hongar. B. As concerning
the hongar which prevailed at Jerusalem, in so much that many were consumed
by the same, Iosep^ cap. ^ Ant^
read the second chapter of the twenty book of the Antiquities of the
Jews. We do read also that great hongar wa prohecied by Agabus, to come
throughout the whole earth, which happened in Claudius Caesar's time. Whereupon
Paul and Barnabas took alms and relief of the Gentyles, ^i. 11.
to carry to the brethren that dwelte in Iewry. Hereby every man may see that
Judea or Jury was specially afflicted wih hongar, peradventure by reason of
other calamities, with the which it was almost destroyed. So we must
understand also, that many other euels, as wars, pestilence, earthquakes,
and great signs from heaven, were specially showed upon this country:
because the Lord showed by this place specially the calamities of this nation,
to come. C. The Euangeliste Luke adds: earthequakes and signs from heaven.
Of the which things, ^e 11.
although there be no certain history to be seen, yet notwithstanding it is
sufficient that the same were foreshewed of Christ.

(...) lib 7. ^ello su ^ap. 12
A. Josephus truly does show of certain things which do agree with these
words (as it should seem) of our Savior Christ. B. For a whole years
space, before the destruction came, the men of the city saw a sign in the
heaven over the city, like to a swearde, at nine of the clock in the night,
there shyned a light in the temple, more bryghte and clear then the day. In
the air, were seen men fighting together, and in the temple a voice was
heard, saying: let us gooe hence, and such like.

6 All these are the beginninges of sorrows. C. Because Christ knew how
obstinate the mallyce of the world should be. He adds again that these
things are but the beginninges of sorrows: not that the faithful should
kill them selves with sorrow and grief, who always have consolation in
adversity and trouble, but rather that they might prepare them selves to the
patience of long time. B. As if he should say, let no man think that the
wrath and vengeance of God is satisfied by these plagues, which in deed are
grievous: and although they be horrible and fearful, yet notwithstanding they
shall seem light, if they be compared with those that shall follow:
wherefore, when ye see these things begin, ye ought to be far from trouble
of mind, that ye may be armed and thoroughly prepared against greater miseries
and calamities. These things specially pertayne to the Jews, which looked for
their Messiah, by whom they might be delivered from all euel: whom he would
have to think, that these grievous calamities, are beginninges only to the^ of
more grievous plages.

9 Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kill you, and ye shall be
hated of all nations for my names sake.

Then shall they put you to trouble. C. Now Christ admonishes his disciples
of an other kind of temptation, by the which, beside the common and general
afflictions, their faith should be tried: and the temptation is this, that they
should be hated and detested of the whole world. Bu. Of these persecutions
he spoke before in the.x. chap. but because that time was at hand, Math. 10.
he thought good to rippe up this thing again unto them: A. to the end they
might prepare them selves in due time to bear those persecutions. C. This
thing, of it self, is soroweful and heavy to the sons of God, to suffer like
affliction with the wicked reprobate, and contemners of God, and to be subject
to the same punishementes, which are laid upon them for their wickedness. But
this seems to be farther a great deal from justice, namely, to be sore
oppressed with grievous euels, from the which the wicked are free. Punishments
are more severely laid on the faithful than on the wicked.
But even as the wheat with the chafe being first threasshed with the
steal, is brought afterward to the myll and is there beaten and ground to
meal: even so God, does not only afflicte his children with the wicked, but
does also chasten them more tha^ others, with the cross, that they may seem
more miserable than other sort of men. But Christ properly speaks here of
afflictions, Romans 8.
which ye Apostels should suffer for the Gospel. For although it be true
that the Apostell Paul says, that those whom God has chosen, he has
ordained also to bear the cross, yt they should be like fashioned to the
shape of his son, yet notwithstanding, he has not marked al those with this
singular mark, that they should suffer persecution of the enemies of the
Gospel. As concerning this kind of cross Christ now speaks, affirming
it to be necessary that the faithful suffer them selves gladly to be hated of
the wicked, to be reproched, and despised for the testimony of the Gospel. For
he would have his disciples admonished that the doctrine of the Gospel whereof
they should be messengers and witnesses, should never be plausible or
acceptable to the world: even as he had declared unto them before. M. Therefore
Christ makes answer to his Apostles of an other matter than that which
they demanded. For they asked him of the kingdom and glory: but he speaks
unto them of persecution, of cross, of ignomini, and of grievous offenses of
many which should fall from the faith received, and of the dangers of false
Apostles and false Prophets. The Euangeliste Luke, as it were expounding the
words of Matthew, has. But before all these things they shall lay hands on
you, and (as Mark says) shall persecute you. As if he should say, But before
all the said calamities do afflicte the Jews, even then, when ye preach the
Gospel, shall they persecute you. This persecution they felt, immediately after
the death of Steven: the which Paul preferred, as appears in the Acts of
the Apostles. Act. 8.
Afterward Herod the king, went about to afflicte ye church and killed James,
Acts. 9.
and put Peter in prison. The which persecutions, Paul felt, as well of the
Jews as of ye Gentiles, as may appear by his own testimony, Act. 12.
both in the Acts of the Apostles, and also in his epistles. Our Savior
Christ truly in this place, spoke of nothing to this disciples whereof they
have not felt. And shall kill you. A. The world (such is the ingratitude and
blyndenes thereof) can not abide the faithful preachers of the truth: 2. Cor.
11.
of the which matter there is a reason rendered unto us in the seventh of
John. John. 7.
And ye shall be hated of al nations. C. He showed that they must not contend
only with a few enemies, but he says that whethersoeuer they shall come, all
nations shall hate and abhor them. But this was an incredible and strange
thing, that the name of the son of God which was able to strike and pearce,
of his own force the strongest and stoutest minds of me^, should be so
infamous and odious, that it should make all the professors and worshippers
thereof to be hated. Therefore the Euangeliste Mark has: Take heed to your
selves, by the which words he notes the end and use of the admonition, namely
that they ought to be ready to suffer, least yt temptation should oppress them
unawares. B. Furthermore the cause of this hate, was the scourge of God, with
the which both the Jews and the Gentiles resistinge the grace of God, were
scourged, as we may se if we read Tertullian. For they assigned and imputed
the causes of wars, of pestilence, of honger, of earthquakes, and such like
to the Christians, as though the divine majesty of God were offended, and
angry with the^. After the same manner the ministers of the Gospel, and the
receivers of the Evangelical grace at this day, are hated. A. according to
these sayings: The time will come, John. 1^
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God good service. Also, we are
made the filthiness, as it were of the world, 1. Cor. ^
the ofscouringe of all things, even unto this day.

10 And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall
hate one an other.

And then shall many. C. Now he rehearses certain temptations, which shall
come of evil examples. But this te^ptatio^ above al others is most violent,
and hard to overcome, Christ^ stone o^
seeing yt Christ him self is the stone of offense to many, at the which some
stomble, some when they se it before them, go backwarde, and other some fall
thereat. B. For it was mete that the disciples should be exercised with this
adversity, which oftentimes brings more trouble, and does more afflicte the
true ministers of Christ than persecution it self. Least therefore they
should be troubled out of measure, in seeing many to fall (for always the number
of the elect is small) he thought it good also to forwarne the^ of these things
For they should not only fall, which were offended, but there should also be
enemies even of the brethren: of the which matter Paul had experience, as he
writes in his Epistle to Timothe. 1. Tim^
This is a most dangerous temptation or trial, when we see those that
professed Christ to fall from him. Two^ of off^^
But this offense is of two sorts: for they which fall suffer offense: and
then they bring offense to those that see their fall. This last of second, is
very dangerous, therefore they had great need of this forewarninge. But this
place may very well be expounded of those which seemed to be domestical members
of the church. Howebeit, Chirste seems here to comprehend many kind of
perturbations: because they do not only fall which had once entered into ye
right race, But also many are exasperated and moved against Christ: other some
having quyte forgotten modesty and equite, do cast them selves into brutishe
madness: others become as Heaten men, and put of all sense of piety: and others
in confused matters, do usurp unto them selves liberty to do that which is
evil. And shall hate one an other. A. This must be referred to the hatred with
ye which the unbelieving hate those that preach the word of the Gospoell.
Christ declares the cause of hatred to his brethren by these words: (...).
7.
The world can not hate you: but me it hates, because I testify of it, that
the works thereof are evil. But he which hates Christ, (...). 15.
hates his ministers also. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me
first. And a little after he says: the servant is not greater than his
Lord. If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they have kept
my saying, they will keep yours also. To this saying also agrees that which
went before in the.x. chapter of Mathewe: (...). 10.
And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. The infidel shall hate the
faithful man.

11 And many false prophets shall arise and deceive many.

And many false prophets. This admonition differs from that which went
before, when Christ said that many should come in his name, for there he
spoke only of false Christ's, which within a while after the beginning of the
Gospel, did falsely boaste them selves to be Christ's: but now he says that
false teachers shall come after them, which should corrupt ye sound and true
doctrine with their errors: even as Peter teaches that the church should be
no less subject to this euel, ^^i. 2.
than it was in time past under the law: wherefore there is no cause why
errors, and every deceit of Satan, and the corruptions of piety should
appaire or hurt the godly minds: because there is no man truly founded and
buylte upon Christ, but he which has learned to know that he must stand
against such assaltes. (...) trial of ^yth.
For this is the true trial of our faith, when the same is not overwhelmed by
the rising of false prophets. Furthermore, a false Prophet, signifies as
much, to say as a lying Prophet, and which is called a Prophet by a false
name: as, 2. Cor. 11. Romans 16 Gala. 4.
a false Apostle he, which falsely takes unto him the name of an Apostle. B.
Against such Paul has ever great contention. These served their bellies, and
not Jesus Christ. Philip. 3
They are such as were gelous over the Galathians amiss These are dogs slow
bellies, evil workers, 1. Cor, 2.
ennemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their
belly, and glory to their shame, which are worldly minded. These are deceyuers
through Philosoply and vain deceit, having in their mouths a show of
wisdom. And deceive many. C. He does not only say that false Prophets
shall come, but he says also that they being indewed with craft and deceyte
to deceive, shall draw sects after them. In this point therefore we have
great need to beware, because the multitude of those that err causes to
declyne from our race no less than a violent wave of the Sea, except we be
surely grounded upon God.

Bu. Of these deceauers also Peter spoke, 2. Epi. 1.2, 2.
the chief of the which were these: Praxeas, Vale^tinus, Nouatus, Arrius,
Manicheus, Macedonius, Donatus, Nestorius, Pelagius, ^uthiches, the Mahometes
also, and the Papists.

12 And because iniquity shall have the upper hand, the love of many shall
abate. B. That is to say, that crookednes or evil disposition of nature, by
the which men only seek to benefit them selves, and have no regard to the
proffite of their neighbor: this abounding, charity and love must needs wax
cold. C. The which evil, how general it is, no man ought to be ignorant,
but few or none have any regard thereof. For, because by the light of the
Gospel, the faults of men are more plainly detected, we may also evidently
see that the study of benificence is fainte, and almost extinguished, even in
the honester and more godly sort. For thus every man thinks in him self, if
I bestow my lyberallitie upon this or that man, surely it is lost and in
vain, for experience, and daily practyse teaches me, that all men for the
most part are unthankful, untrusty, or dishonest. A grievous surely, and a
dangerous temptation: for what can be more absurd than to allow that
doctrine, which seems to diminish the study and force of honesty? And truly
where the Gospel is preached, love, with the which all men's hearts ought to
be possessed and inflamed, does rather wax cold then whote and fervent. But
the welspring of this evil must be noted: namely, that many do wax therefore
weary, because by reason of their infirmity, they fainte and sink in the
floude of iniquity, which by little and little ouerfloweth all. B. Paul also
plainly shows that love waxed cold in his time. 2. Tim. 1.
Surely, in that all men withstode Paul in Asia, it was a token that iniquity
should abound, and that love waxed cold.

13 But he that indureth to the end, the same shall be safe. C. By constancy and
perseverance in faith, Perseuera^ce and constancy
how many crewell persecutions soever are exercised against us, what grievous
offenses soever are objected against us by them that fall, 1. Petr. 1.
although the deceitful error of false Prophets do resist our faith, yet
notwithstanding, at the length we shall receive the salvation of our souls,
which is the end of our faith. Christ therefore requires this fortitude of
those that are his, that they persiste and abide stoutly in fight against all
impedime^ts of their faith. Thus also Paul commands us to do, 2. These. 3.
2 Timo. 2,
least we be weary of well doing. And in an other place he says that no man
is crowned except he strive lawefully. Weerefore we must bear all things
with a boulde mind and stout courage which the Lord shall lay vp-vpon us.
Read of this self and same sentence in the tenth chapter going before, and
in the two and twenty verse of the chapter.

14 And this Gospel of the kingdom, shall be preached in all the world, for a
witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come.

And this Gospel of the kingdom. Bu. By these words our Savior does
preuente an objection, Answer.
seducinges, seditions, and contencio^s, no Gospel can be preached? The Lord
answered: Your labor and diligence shall not want his fruit. For although
the world be mad, and what soever Satan goes about, and how many troubles
soever he brings in, yet notwithstanding, the Gospel will have an issue,
until it be preached throughout the whole world. So that in effect his
words briefly sound thus much, Although all things be troubled, yet
notwithstanding, this Gospel shall be preached. For, he thought it good to add
to this last sign a consolation, that they might fight the more boldly in
knowing that they should be conquerers. Fear discourageth men: but we are
under the banner of Christ without all danger, because we know that he is
far more strong than the deuel and the whole world.

This Gospel of the kingdom. Math ^
A. Why it is called the Gospel of the kingdom, read the fourth chapter
going before.

Shall Be preached in all the world. Mar. ^
A. The Euangeliste Mark has. And the Gospel must first be publyshed among
all nations. C. By the which words Christ declares that the Gospel must
be preached throughout the whole world. And although this were incredible,
yet notwithstanding, it behooved the Apostles to hope well where no hope was,
because their master had given testimony that it should be so, and in the
mean time to endeavor them selves to discharge their office.

A. This that Christ speaks of here, began in the Apostels time. Col^
Whereupon the Apostell Paul also writes, that the Gospel at that time did
fructify in the whole world.

And when it is said that it shall be preached to all nations, it is mente
that it shall be preached to the greatest part of nations. For how far the
Apostle Paul only preached the same, Rom^
it may be seen by his epistle that he writes to the Romans, where he says
that he went from Jerusalem and preached the Gospel to all the Regions that
lay there round, even to Illyricum. And in an other place he says, 1. Ty^
God was manifested in the flesh, and justified in the spirit, seen of the
Angels, and preached to the Gentyles, and was believed on in the world. And
where as some do obeicte the Antipodas, or other sorts of people which are
very far, to whom no part of the fame of Christ has hitherto come, we
answer thus.

^swere.
Christ does not mean in this place specially, every particular part and
corner of the whole earth, neither does he prefixe or appointe any certain
time: but only affirms that ye Gospel which shortly should be banished out
of Iewry, the proper place thereof (as men thought) should be spread and
published eue^ to the farthest parts of the earth, before his coming at the
last day to Judgment: according to the saying of the Prophet: ^m. 19.
(...) 10.
their sound went forth into the whole land, and their words to the
vtmoste parts of the earth. Therefore it shall be preached in the whole
world, that is, as well among the Gentiles as among the Jews. For the whole
world is divided into these two peoples: all are either Jews or Gentiles in
some repecte. But there is a figure used here called Synechdoche. used also in
many other places of the Scripture, as when a part is put for the whole.

For a witness to all nations. C. By these words he notes the end of
preaching. For although God never left him self without witness, (...). 14.
but after a special manner testified of himself to ye Jews: Notwithstanding
this was a special testimony above all others, and worthy to be noted, when
God revealed himself in his son Christ: ^m. 2.
and therefore Paul says that he should be testified at his time: because
this was the dew time of calling ye whole world unto God. Let us learn
therefore, so often as the Gospel is preached, that it is eue^ as if God should
come himself in the midest of men, and should call us after a solemn and
lawful manner, least as uncertain we should wander in darkness: but those
which refuse to obey are made inexcusable. B. That this word testimony, or
witness is often times taken in the Scripture for ye law and doctrine of God,
it does sufficientlye appear by the Psalms, as in the ho^dered and ninetene
Psalm, and in the three score and eightene Psalm where it is said. ^lm. 119.
^lm. 78.
He made a testimony or covenant with Jacob and gave Israel a law: in the
which place, testimonye and law, signifye all one thing. As therefore a law
was given to the Jews, and diverse ceremonys belonginge to the same, by the
which God declared his will and admonished the of their deuty: even so
afterward it was necessary that the Gospel should be preached to all nations,
that they also might have testimony of God: by ye which they might know his
goodness, and have also a faith in him, and a desyer of godliness. Among the
elect therefore of the Gentiles, the Gospel has been and is preached at this
day for a testimonye unto them, that is, that they may be learned and
instructed to salvation.

And it has been and is preached to the reprobate for a witness unto them,
that they may be convicted of impiety, which willingly do reiecte the grace of
GOD offered unto them.

And then shall the end come. C. Some do restrain that amiss to the
destruction of the temple, and to the abolishing of the ceremonies of the law,
which ought to be understood of the end and renouation of the world. For
because the Disciples had mingled those two together, as though the temple
could not be destroyed without the destruction of the world, Christ answeringe
to the question propounded declares that a long and sorrowful heap of evils
was at hand, and that they must not make haste to have the palm and victory,
before that they have ended the battle. His words therefore are in effect
thus: The end of the world shall not come, until such time as I have
exercised my Church a long while with hard and troublesome temptations. For
this latter part of the sentence is opposed and set against the false
Imaginations which the Apostelles had conceived within them selves. Whereby
we learn again, that a certain day is not appointed, as though the last
day should succeed strait way by order, the euente of those things, which he
foreshewed even now. For the faithful had felt of late, whatsoever we read
of before: and yet for all that Christ appeared not by and by. But the purpose
of Christ was nothing else than to brydell the Apostels with sufferance which
to hastelye desired the heavenly glory: as if he had said. The redemption
comes not so soon as ye Imagine, no, but there are long tourninges and by
ways which are set between.

15. When ye se therefore the abomination of desolation which was spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy place: (let him that reads
understand.

When ye see therefore. C. Because the matter was incredible (as we said even
now) that the temple and Cittye of Jerusalem should be destroyed: and
further, because it might seem absurd that the Disciples could be no
otherwise safe than if they were separated from that people, with whom the
adoption and conuenant of salvation was made: Christ confirms both these by
the testimony of Daniell: as if he should say: Least ye should ground and
stay your selves upon the Temple and ceremonies of the law, GOD has
appointed them a certain end: and testified not long since that when the
redemer came, sacrifices should cease, least it should be greuouse unto you
to be cut of from your native country. For God did admonish his of the
abdication and refusal of this nation in time. And such forewarning, was not
only necessary to take away ye matter and occasion of offense, but also to
erecte the minds of the Godly, that they knowinge God to have regard unto
them in extreme peril, and to care for their salvation, may fly to the holy
and sure anchor houlde, by the which, although they be in the midest of crewell
rage, yet notwithstanding they shall have safe an sure stay. But before we
go any further let us consider of this place, cyted by our Savior Christ.
Those interpreters are deceived which think that this testimonye was taken
out of the ninthe chapter of Daniell. Daniel. 9.
For as toutchyng the very word, we find not there.e

Ye shall find this text i^ the Geneua Bible for that is nerest to the
Hebrewe text.
The abomination of desolation, but, and for the over spreading of the
abomination he shall make it desolate, in the which there is some difference:
and it is certain that the Angel does not speak in that place of the last
destruction (of the which Christ makes mention here) but of the temporal
dissipation which Antiochus the tyraunte brought. But in the twelueth chapter
of Daniell, the Angel does foreshewe the small and last abrogation of the
service of the law, Dani^
which should be by the coming of Christ. For after he had exhorted the
faithful to an undoubted constancy, he defyneth the certain time, as well of
the ruin and decay as of the ins^^^ration and renewinge. His words are
these: And from the time forth, that the daily offringe shall be put down,
and the abominable desolation set up, there shall be 1290 days. O well is him
that wayghteth and comes is the 1335. days. We do know that this place,
for the obscurenes thereof, is wrested into many senses and diverse
interpretations: but this seems to be the simple sense and meaning of the
text, that an Angel, after that ye temple was purged from the pollucions and
Idol^ of Antiochus, pronounced that the time should come again in the which
it should be given up, and committed to new profanation again, and that it
should loose for ever the holiness and reverence dew to the same without all
hope of recovery. But because it was a bloody and sorrowful message, the
Prophet calls him back to one year, and two years, and six months. By
the which words, as well the continuance, as the end of the euels, is noted.
For in the continual order and course of euels, the compass of the year seems
long: but when the space of time is doubled, the trouble does a great deal
more increase. The s^rite of God therefore does exhort the faithful, that
they do not only prepare them selves to Patience and sufferance of a whole
year, (that is to say, long time): but also that they settel them selves to
suffer afflictions by continual tenor and order of many ages. But in the half
time there is contained no small co^solatio^: because although afflictions do
cotinew a long time, yet notwithstanding the spirit declares yt they shall not
be continual And before truly, he used this manner of speech, saying in this
wise: The calamity of the Church shall endure for a time, two times, and half
a time, but now he reckneth those three years and six monehts, (...), two ^
half a ^^ 1. years ^^ months
by days, that the faithful might wax more hardy and bold; in the longer
prolonging and continuance of euels. For it is often used among men in
adversity, to reckon and count the time of their trouble not by years and
months, but by days several: because one day to them is as it were a whole
year. At the length he pronounces them happy, which continue and abide
until the end of that time, that is to say, which continewe til the end
with invincible patience.

Now Christ only chose that thing which served for his purpose: namelye,
that the end of the sacrifices was at hand, and that, abomination should be
placed in the Temple, which was a sign of the last desolation. And because
the Jews did stand to obstinately upon their present state, in so much
that they gave no head to the Prophesys by yt which ye abolishing thereof was
foreshewed, Christ as it were opening ye ear, commands them to read that
place attentively, saying.

Let him that reads understand That they might know that the Prophets did
euidentlye speak of of that thing, which they so hardely believed. The
abomination signifies so much as this word profanation does: for by this
word the uncleanness is noted which defiles and overthrows the pure worship
of God. And it is called the abhominacion of desolation, because it brought
with it both the destruction of the Temple, and of pollitique government: even
as before in the ninthe chapter he had said that the pollucion and uncleanness
brought in by Antiochus, was as it were a spreading of the temporal
desolation. For so do we interpret this word Expansio. But they are deceived
which think that the destruction of Jerusalem is noted: neither do the words
of saint Luke help their error any thing at al, who purposed not to show the
same, but some other thing. For because that City was once delivered in the
midest of destruction, least that the faithful should ever after look for
any such thing, Christ pronounces that so soon as it is beseeged and
compassed about of the enemies, it shall be utterly destroyed: because God will
never help it again. The sense and meaning therefore, of this place is this,
the euente and chance of the ware shall not be doubtful because that City was
given and vowed, as it were, to destruction: for that the decree of God could
in no wise be disapointed. And therefore hereafter following it is added, that
the same shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, by the which sentence
the last destruction is declared. And because it might seem very absurd that
the holy City should so be laid open and committed to the pleasure of the
Gentiles, there is a consolation added, that so great liberty is committed to
the Gentiles for a time, until their wickedness wax ripe, and til such time
as the vengeance prepared for them, fall upon their heads.

A. Lastly, Christ exhorting the hearers to the exact reading add
understanding of the place of the Prophet. M. Does also therewith toutche the
blindenes of the Jews, which red the Prophetical Scriptures negligentlye,
without understanding.

16. Then let them which be in Ieury fly into the mountains.

The^ let them which be in Ievvry C. After that Christ has taught by the
testimony of ye Prophet, that the temple being profaned, the legal worship
should shortly after be put away, he does add ye plages and horrible
calamities are at hand for all Iewry: in so much that they shall desire nothing
more, than to be carried far from the same: and he says also that they shall be
so sudden, that they shall scarce have sufficient time to escape away Fly
into the mountains.

M. He means that there shall be no Cities in all Iewrye void of fear or in
safetye.

So the Angel commanded Lot to fly into the mountain, that he might be saved
there. This he spoke to the Disciples, that afterward he might admonish the
faithful of the same.

Eusebius writteth that the Christians which remained yet at Jerusalem, when
it was beseged with the host of the Romans, were commanded by the oracle and
word of God to flee unto a certain City called Pella beyond Iordane.

Hereby we are admonished not to trust to much to our selves as though by our
strength, wisdom, or miracle of GOD we should be delivered: Persecution may
be avoided by flighte if time and occassion serve.
but rather if we may to escape by flight.

17. And let him which is one the house top, not come down to fetch any
thing out of his house.

M. As concerning the fl^tte making of the roo^e (...) houses in Iudaea read
the tenth chapter goinge before. To come down from the house, or to return
out of the f^^lde, are spoken by a figure called Hyperbole, which is very
common to the Jews. For these speeches signifi great^ hast^ or spedy flighte:
in so much that if any man be on the house top, he should not go into the
house to fetch any thing out of the same* and if that time do take him in ye
feld, that he should fly straightwaie to the mountain and not return to the
house to fetch any apparel fete for the flight.

The Euangeliste saint Luke adds: For these are the days of vengeance,
that all those things which are written might be fulfilled. Luke. 21.
As if he should say. This shall be no small affliction, but the cruel
vengeance of GOD shall punish all this nation, and this people that has
been obstinate and rebelliouse so many years, whom the Prophets foretold
that such things should come to pass, (but specially Daniell) except they
repented. For the Lord does foreshewe nothing in vain: it must needs be
fulfilled at some time, Romans 2.
although he do differ and prolonge the time lookinge for repentance.

18. Neither let him which is in the feelde return back to fetch his clothes.

C. Least whilst he goinge about to save his goods, loose both, them and
his body also.

19. VVo shall be in those days to them which are with child, and to them that
give suck.

E. This word (Woe) does not always signifye condemnation, but ofttymes it
signifies some temporal misery, as we may see in this place.

M. Neither are these things spoken as though it were sin at such time as
this so miserable, to be with child, or to give suck unto the infant: But
rather that it is miserable, and troublesome, and hyndereth from flighte and
deliverance. These and such like are prouerbiall sentences.

20. But pray ye that your flighte be not in the winter, neither on the
saboth day.

Bu. By these words is mente that it shall be a sudden and great evil, out
of the which a man may hardelye deliver himself. This sentence has in it
a certain dark and hydden thing, the meaning whereof is this: pray that
your flyghte may be in have and spedy, being let by no delays, or
tempests, or religion.

For by winter the troublesome tempests is mente, and winter is very werysome
to ^^^ell in, ^^the for the extreme ^^^ld^ and (...) of the way, and also for
the shortenes of the days. And by the Sabothe, religion s^meth to be mente.
For it was a detestable thing among the Jews, to take a journey on the
Sabbath day, except it were only to walk their race of pleasure, which
was not (as some say) above two miles.

Whereupon we read in the Acts, Act. 1.
that mount Oliuete is said to be a Sabaothee days Journey from Jerusalem,
which was but the space of two miles. Therefore the purpose of Christ was,
first of all to awaken his Disciples, (...) the should imagine or dream day
longer of blessed reaste, or of the pleasure of an earthlye Kingdom and that
to fortifye their minds, least they should (...) or quayle with other men.
This ^^tion truly was violente, yet notwithstanding very necessary their
dulnes and infirmity considered.

21. For then shall be great tribulations, such as were not from the beginning
of the world to this time, nor shall be.

For then shall be great tribulations. M. He now shows a reason of so urgent
necessitye to flee. The Euangeliste Luke has, for there shabe great trouble
in the land, and wrath over all this people. And they shall fall through the
edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive in to all nations He means
the land of Iewry. By this word (wrath) he understands the vengeance of
God from Heaven, that is to say great afflictions and calamitis sent of God
from heaven, which declare that God is angrye. (...) 2.
He joined wrath and trouble together, because God being angery sends
trouble: (...) 1.
as if he should say: by this great trouble the Lord declares that he is
angrye against this people dwelling in the land of Iewry. And what this
trouble should be, he afterward declares when he says: And they shall fall
through the edge of the sword etc. And in this place is put instead of,
For. B. He that reads the story of Josephus, shall see that these things are
true in all points. For so many euels happened unto them in the time of
beseeginge that they can not be told, an innumerable sort of them in this
time perished daily, some by kyllinge themselves, some by honger, which
continued so long that a certain woman was feign to sees her own son for
food: there were also taken of them in the time of this war, a thousand and
four score and seuentene, prisoners: and their dyed between the beginnynge and
ending of this seege, ten hondered thousand, ^ lib. 7 ^^ Iu^^ cap. 18.
as writteth Josephus.

C. The Euangeliste saint Luke adds, that all those things which were
written might be fulfilled.

For saying the couenaunte of GOD was then broken by the obstinate malice of
the people, it was necessary that the earth it self, and the air should be
stricken with a wonderful alteration and change. There could no plage truly
be more deadlye and greuouse to the Jews, than to have the light of the
heavenly doctrine extinguished, and they them selves also rejected of God. But
they were constrained to feel the plage of their reiection, by sharp and
greuouse scourges, as in great obstinacye it was necessary.

More over the cause of so horrible vengeance was, for that the desperate
impietye of this people was come even to the full. For the medecin which was
brought for their disease, was not only proudlye despised of them, but also
contumeliouslye rejected: yea they did cruelly as it were mad men rage against
the Physician him self. Saying therefore the Lord revenged on them so
seuerelye the obstinate contempt of his Gospel, let us always have before
our eyes their punishment: and let us thereby learn that there is nothing
that the Almighty God can less suffer at our hands, than the obstinate
contempt of his grace. Co^tempte of the Gospel is most abominable i^ the sight
of God.
And although the same reward does abide the like contemners of the Gospel,
yet notwithstanding, God would have the same documente or instruction to
abide in memory above all others, to the end the glory of Christ his
coming might be more evident to those that should come after. For we can
not by word of mouth express any crime more hainouse than to put the son
of God to death, Mar. 13.
the author of life offered unto them from heaven. Therefore when they had
fulfilled this horrible act, Romans 8.
they seassed not by one wickedness or an other to bring upon them all the
causes of extreme destruction. A. Therefore Christ says there shall be great
tribulation.

Such as were not from the beginning of the world. Bu. Mark has, from the
beginning of creatures (which God created:) calling there the world the
creature of god: as in the eight to the Romans also.

Neither shall be. C. Christ says here that the like affliction shall never be in
ye world: because eue^ as the only repulse of Christ, being joined with such
obstinacy and ingratitude, was the most detestable sin that ever was
committed: even so also it was just and mete, that the revenge thereof should
pass all other in cruelty.

M. But if the Lord did so severely punish and revenge himself on that
nation which he had chosen to be a holy one to himself, what shall we
think will come to pass, except we being warned by these examples, follow
our calling.

22. Yea, and except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be
saved: but for the chosens sake, those days shall be shortened.

Yea and except those days should be shortened. A. That is except the Lord
should shorten those days. For Mark has: Except the Lord had shortened
those days, that is except the Lord had ended them. As if he should say: if
the Lord had suffered, that calamity, as it was vehement, so to have
continued: if also he had suffered the enemies to rage so much and so long as
they listed, not one among all that people should have escaped.

There should no flesh be saved. C. He put this word flesh for man,
according to the manner of ye Hebrews. We must understand these things to be
spoken of the Jews, not of all mankind, as some falsely interpret, as if he
should have said that no man should abide in safety. He amplifieth therefore
the cruelty of the destruction, notwithstanding he mitigateth the same again
with a consolation, namely, yt the name of the Jews thereby should utterly
be destryed and blotted out, except the Lord should have respect unto his
elect, and for their sakes to release somewhat of the extremity. And this place
agrees with that of the prophet Esaias where he says: Esaias, 1.
And except the Lord of hosts had left us a few alive, we should have been
as Sodoma, and like unto Gomorha. For it was necessary ye, that ve^gea^ce of
god which happened in ye Babilonical exile should be fulfilled again by the
coming of Christ, as the Apostell Paul witnesses. Romans 9.
Yea the greater that the wickedness was, the more greuouse ought the vengeance
of God to be. Therefore our savior Christ says, that except God should make
and appointe an end to these euels, the Jews should utterly perish, in so
much that not one of them should remain: But God having a consideration of
his co^uena^t (says he) spared his elect, according to ye Prophesy of Esaias in
an other place saying: Esaias ^^
Though thy people (O Israel) be as the sand of Sea, yet shall the remnaunte
of them convert in him and be saved. But for the chosens sake, those days.

A. The Eua^geliste Mark has, he has shortened those days. Because he had as
yet, and would have some of the chosen out of this people, the Lord
shortened those days of calamity, least the whole stock of the Jews should
altogether be extinguished. Whereupon Peter also writteh: The Lord knows
how to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2. Pe^
and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment for to be punished. He
preserved Noe the eight preacher of righteousness, and brought in the floude
upon the world of the ungodly: and he delivered just Loath being vexed with ye
uncleanly co^uersatio^ of the wicked. C. And this is a notable docume^t or
lesson of the divine Judgment of God, when he so afflicts ye visible Church,
that it might seem utterly to be destroyed: and yet notwithstanding to save
some sede, he does wonderfully deliver his elecct, being few in number, from
destruction, that they might without all hope arise out of the gulphe of
death. For so the hypocrites are terrefyed and made affrayed, least they
bearing them selves bold upon the titell and show of the Church, do feign
unto the^ selves a vain hope of escaping unpunished: because God will devise a
mean, by the which he may deliver his Church, they being given over to
destruction. But a wonderful consolation is here committed to the minds of
the Godly, because God will never give so much place to his wrath, but he
will have regard to their safety: So, in punishinge the Jews he was
horriblelye inflamed: yet notwithstanding contrary to the hope and expectation
of men, he did moderate himself, least any of the elect should perish. And
thus gave great occasion to wonder, that when salvation should spring out of
Iewry, God made floudes to issue and flow out of small drops of a dried
well, which should water the whole world. For so sone as they had brought
upon them selves the hatred of all people, it could not come otherwise to
pass, but that theye must needs have been tormented at a soden in every
place. Neither is there any doubt seeing that many sought to have the^ thus
destroyed, but that Titus was stayed by the power of God. least the soldiers,
and others, which were to greedy to execute this matter, should at his
apointement arm them selves. This therefore was a shortenynge to preserve some
seed, in that the Roman emperor did keep under and stay at that time,
the last misery and destruction of the whole nation. In the mean time, this is
to be noted, that for the electes sake he stayed the vyolence of his wrath,
least he should ouerwhelme them al. For why would he have a few to remain of
so great a multitude: and what cause had he, why he should prefer these
before other?

Suerlye the reason was this, namelye, because his grace rested upon the people
whom he had adopted: and least his couenaunte should be of none effect,
certain were elected and appointed by his eternal purpose and decree, to
salvation. And therefore S. Paul does assign the cause to the free election of
God, (...). 11.
that of so great a people, the remnaunt are sauid. Let therefore the merits
of men cease, when we are called back to the mere good pleasure of God,
least there depend any other difference between these and them, sauinge this,
that they must of necessity be saved, which are elected. The which thing
Mark seking more plainly and expressly to set forth, adds these words,
saying: But for the electes sake, whom he has chosen, he has shortened those
days. The participle truly might have served, but only that he went about
expressly to affirm, that God was not moved by any forrayne causes to be more
favorable to the one than to the other: but because it pleased him to elect
those whom he would save, that he might stablyshe the secret purpose of
his free grace in their salvation.

^ection.
Notwithstanding it may be demanded how God did moderate the destruction and
miserye for the electes sake, that he utterly destroyed not all the Jews, when
as many desperate and reprobate persons were sauid. We may easily answer,
Answer.
that part of the nation was delivered, that he might (the chafe being put
aparte) bring and save his elect therfrom, which were mingled even as seed.
Although therefore a temporal salvation, did happen as well to the reprobate
as to the elect: yet notwithstanding, because it profited not them, it is
justly ascribed unto these alone, even as it was directed for their sakes, by
the wonderful providence of God. M. We se by this place how perverse the
judgment of the world is as concerning the just. Where such afflictions do
fall, by and by all the falt is ascribed to those that fear God: when as
notwithstanding, for their sakes, God does moderate and temper the deserved
vengence.

23 Then if any say unto you: lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not.

Then if any say unto you. C. Now he repeteth that again, which he had
spoken, before, as concerning seducers, and deceyuers and not in vain: for a
greater danger, by reason of this temptation was at hand, least miserable
men, being deceived by a deceitful and false title in affliction and
desperation, should seek for counterfayte and feigned shows in steed of
Christ, and should embrace the delusions of Satan, in steed of the help of
God. For when the Jews, being so hardely oppressed for contemning and
despysinge the redemption, should be brought from their unfaithfulness, at lest
by vyolent remedies, Satan craftelye objected unto them new hopes, which
should seduce them farther from God. And truly there is nothing more deadly
than to be deceived under the pretense of the name of God by lies, Lies stop us
from repentance.
when we are void of council in adversity, the which lies, both stop up the
gate of repentance against us, and also do increase the darkness of
infidelity: and at the length, being confounded with desperation do bring to
madness. Wherefore in so great danger, this repetition was nothing at all
superfluouse: A. as if Christ should have said, See that ye be seduced, by
no means. M. because, if any say unto you in that desolate dissipation or
scatterynge. Behold here is Christ, or there is Christ, (that is, if they
shall show you some carnal savior) believe them not: I am the only savior of
all men, and the eternal Christ, which even now, by humility am conversant
in the world, and will shortly forsake the same in the flesh, until I come
again in greater glory. For I foreshewe unto you that false Christ's shall
arise, False Christ's.
and that theye also shall have their false prophets, which shall allure men
to them, not only by words, but by signs also and great wonders, in so
much, that many shall be deceived by them. B Thus, symplely these things must
be understood and taken. For it is certain that the lord in this place went
about to answer his disciples, what they ought to think of the coming of
Christ's kingdom, which they had always heard should be restored by Christ.
Neither is there any doubt, but that they always dreamed of a carnal
kingedome, and external felycitie, and that therefore the lord went about to
bring them from that error, as he did at other times also. Wherefore it can
not be denied, but that they were false Christ's, which by promisyng external
felycitie, seducede many of the Jews. So that this was the scope and end of
the answer of Christ in this place, to persuade the disciples, that the
kingedome of Christ should not be restored, with external felycitie and glory
in this present life, but in spirit, and faith, and that with the great
afflictions, and temptations of the citezens of this kingdom: And that there
should be many false Christ's, which should promise outward and worldelye
happiness, but falsely: and thereby also should turn their followers from the
spirytuall and everlasting felicity. and that therefore they ought to take heed of all those which promise the external kyngedome of God in this world,
or do tie the same to any certain place, which, because it is divine and
spiritual, can not be tied. These things also are more manifest to be seen
in Luke, by the answer of our savior Christ given to the Phariseies For
they demanding of him when the kingdom of God should come, we read that
Christ answered there thus: The kingdom of God shall not come with waitynge
for, neither shall they say, Lo here, or Lo there. Luke. ^
for behold the kingedome of God is within you. What other thing is this, than
to say, The kyngedome of God is not carnal, as you think, that it might be
showed in any certain place. For either it is comprehended in faith, Fayth^
^prehe^^ king^ God.
and is never seen: and although it brings forth plentifully his fruits,
wheresoever it be, yet notwithstanding it is with great persecution and
afflyction of the flesh. Or else it will be so manifestlye present to the
whole world, that it shall not need to be waited for, or marked, or that men
should say: Lo here is Christ, or lo, he is there. For he is now among you:
you have the king of that kyngedome present already: ye have the true
cittezens thereof, namely my disciples. But these things which appertain
unto us, seem unto you contrary and disagreing with the kingdom of God, and
glory of the Messiah: yet notwithstanding it is so ordained of God, that I must
first suffer many things, and be rejected of this nation, before that I shall
raygne in glory. Hereuppon commethe that my humillitie and base show of glory,
which so greatly offends you.

Let the reader, way diligently the words of Luke. Hereby now it is evident,
who are properly noted by the true christ to be false Christ's, what they were,
who^ we mentioned before with many others, which all had their false Prophets,
their signs and wonders. But we must diligently note that a false christ is
one, and an Antechrist is an other. There have been many Antechristes from the
beginning of Christ's kyngedome unto this day, Antech
namely all they which have taught at any time, any thing, whereby men
might be seduced from Christ, and from the faith of our lord Jesus, least
they should be persuaded, that by his only death they have everlasting
life. 1. John ^
of this read in the second chapter of the first epistell of S, John. But
they were properly false Christ's, ^ Chry^
which boasted them selves to be Christ, as some, which came to the Jews.
Others which were the authors of errors, are more rightely called false
prophets, than false Christ's. Where as some do now bring in this place
against the seducing doctrine of the Papists, and Mahomett, they do very
well, because when Christ testified in this place, that the kingdom of God
does consist in him by faith, and that it is not adicted to any certain place
in this world, these notwithstanding have taught to seek the kingedome of
God in external things. But yet no man may trewely teach, that Christ in
this place did speak of these men. There are other places as concerning
these, as the first chapter of saint Paul in his second epistell to the
Thessalonians: ^hes. 1. ^o. 3, (...) 1.2.
and the third of the second to Tymothe: the first and third also of the
second of Peter. For the Pope did never say that he was Christ, that is to
say, that restorer of liberty and all felycitie, which would exhibit and
offer in this present life, al those things that the Prophets had foreshewed
as touching the Messiah. But Mahomett came more near to this abomination.

24 For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great miracles, and wonders, In so much that if it were possible, the very
elect should be deceived.

For there shall arise false Christ's. A. Even as the true Christ had his
preachers of the truethe, namely, the Apostelles and other disciples, which may
be called prophets (that is faithful interpreters of holy things: even so the
false Christ's, will have their false prophets, (that is to say the masters of
lies) which may lead men from the sincere doctrine of the trewthe, to a lie.
And shall shevve great miracles.

C. Christ admonysheth that such deceyuers shall bring with them no small
deceites to deceive withal, but great signs and wonders, which shall
astonishe the minds of such as are weak, and make them amassed. For saying
that God does testify and declare the presence of his power by miracles, and
that therefore they may be seals as it were of true doctrine, it is no
marvel, if they bring reverence and credit to deceivers. And by such kind
of illusion does God revenge and ponishe the ingratitude of men: that they may
believe lies, which have rejected the truth, and that they may be more and
more in darkness, which have shut their eyes against the truth and light
offered unto them. Howbeit he does therewith exercise the constancy of those
that are his, which does more plainly show forth it self, when they give
place to no deceites. B. And as deceitful doctrine has always her signs and
wonders, by the which they that would not believe the truth, Superstition
has his oryginall of the flesh.
might be seduced to believe a lie, and as no age wants his false prophets:
again, as all superstition has his original, and beginning of the flesh, and
does frame and apply it self to the commodity and profit of the flesh:
even so there is nothing of those things whereof Christ has spoken, which
according to their manner, do not offer them selves unto us. Whereupon trewly
all men ought dilygentelye to way these forewarninges of the Lord, and to
keep them in mind. For although there be none at this day, which do
openly profess them selves to be Christ's, yet notwithstanding there are
many false Prophets and Antechristes, who go about to draw the minds of men
from the true and only Christ, to their works to their Masses, to their dirges
and trentals, to their own fastings, and choice of meats, and of apparel,
and to such kind of nedeful elements and necessary creatures of the world, and
also to the merits and intercessions of saints: being in this point like unto
false Prophets and false Christ's (of whom Christ properly in this place
forewarned his Disciples) that they do seduce men from ye truth to a lie, and
do falsely promise a Carnal Christ, a carnal worhsip, and external felicity.
For they do teach men to seek for salvation by other means, than by a lively
faith in Christ, and do suffer men to live after their own pleasure:
promisinge furthemore by their Masses, The leven of Papists,
and other lies of the like leven, that men shall have remission of their
sins, and reco^cilliation between God and them. Hereby therefore we must know
these manner of men, and eschew them as false prophets: but to who^ the
truth is not showed of the father, it is no marvel, if they be seduced by
Antechristes, and false prophets. C. Moreover seeing the Lord does here
pronounce that Antechristes and false prophets do bring with them, miracles
and signs, there is no cause why the Papists should so greatly brag of
miracles, or why we should stand in doubt of them. By miracles they do
confirm their superstitions, that is to say by those, Papists confirm their
supe^stition by miracles,
by which the son of God foreshewed, that the faith of many should be
destroyed. Wherefore they ought not to have such force among wise men, that
of them selves they should be sufficient to prove this or that kind of
doctrine. But if they obiecte and say that by this means, Aunsweare.
which should take away all doubt and fear of erring from the faithefull.
For so often as God showed forth his power to confyrme his seruau^ts, he did
not work so co^fusedly, but that there might be a true distinction, and all
together free from deceyte.

Moreover miracles do in such wise seal doctrine, that the same also does
shine in like manner, and does drive away all the clouds of darkness, by the
which Satan does obscure the simple minds of men. Finally, if we seek to
beware of deceytes, let us always keep the inseparable conjunction of signs
and doctrine. It is not therefore good to believe every sign, because it does
not follow by and by, that they have the truth which work signs. Miracles
were done by Christ, by his Apostelles, Mar. 16. John. 5. Act. 4.
and successors, by the power of the spirit of GOD, that their word might
be confirmed, and that it might be proved true which they preached, namely
that Christ was the son of God, which was promised and sent, in whom,
whosoever believed, should be saved. And they were so joined and linked to the
word of God, that they might not be without it. But the miracles of false
Christ's and false prophets, by the which the unbelieving were led from
Christ our savior, are done by the spyrite of Satan, and without the word of
God. Such miracles are they that are done by the Papacy, of the which Paul
speakinge of Antechrist him self says: And then shall the wicked be uttered,
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the appearance of his coming, even him whose coming is after the workynge
of Satan, with all lyinge power signs and wonders, 2. The
and with all disceyuablenesse of unrighteous, among them that perish:
because they received not the love of the trewethe, that they might be saved.
And therefore God shall send them strange delusion, that they should believe
lies: that all they might be damned: which believe not the truth: but had
pleasure in vnrighteousenes.

In so much that if it were possible the very elect. This was added to
terrefie, that the faithful might be more dyligent and careful to take heed.
For when false prophets do bring their purpose to pass by unbridled
license, and that they have such great power granted unto them to deceive, it
were an easy matter to entrap and snare the secure and careless with their
deceytes. Christ therefore exhorts and stirs up his disciples to
watchynge. then also he admonissheth that there is no cause why they should be
trobled at the newenesse of the things, if so be they se many often times to be
drawn into error. Moreover, as he sought to bring a care to his disciples,
least Satan (they being as it were a sleep) should circumuent them: even so
again he gives them large and great occasion of trust, in the which they
may quietly rest them selves, when he promises that they shall be safe, by
the help and preservation of God, against all the deceites and snares of
Satan. Although therefore the state and condition of the Godly be frail and
slippery, yet notwithstanding here is showed unto them a sure stay, upon
the which they may rest themselves: because it is not possible that they
should fall from salvation, which have the son of God to be their preserver
and keeper For they are not so strong of them selves, (...) can ^ resisted ^r
own ^gh^. ^ 10,
that they can resist the assaltes of Satan, but because they are the sheep
of Christ, whom no man can take out of his hand, therefore they are
strong. It may be therefore that the elect may be moved and tempted by
errors and signs: but this is impossible, that they should be altogether
seduced from the truth, and from Christ their savior Notwithstanding we must
watch carefully, and not be slothful, but consider our imbecillitie and
weakness, and commit our selves unto God, least we suffer our selves to be
ouercom and destroyed. C. For we must note this that the strength and
assurance of our saluatyon, is not set and placed in our selves, but in the
secret election of God. For although our salvation be kept and preserved by
faith (as the Apostell Peter teaches) yet notwithstanding we must assende
hyer, (...) 1.
namely, that we are therefore in safety, because the father has given and
committed us to his son: and the son him self affirms that nothing of
that shall perish which is committed unto him.

25 Behold I have told you before.

C. The Euangeliste Mark does more fully set forth the mind of our savior
Christ, saying: But take ye head: behold, I have showed you all things
before. By the which words we are taught that they are worthy of no excuse,
who are made afraid by the offenses foreshewed of Christ. For seeing the will of
God ought to be a rule unto us, it suffisethe that we are admonished in time,
that he is so pleased. Furthermore seeing he is said to be faythefull, and
will not suffer us to be tempted above that, which we are able to bear, we
shall never want power to resist, if so be that fear and negligence do not
increase our infyrmitie.

M. Therefore although the elect can not perish, yet nevertheless, they
have need to take heed, least they be deceived. So that the wicked ones do
foolishly obiecte and say: If I be one of the elect, I cannot be dampened. But
it is the part of those that are the elect children of God to be hedefull and
diligente. For in that they cannot be deceived, it comes not of them selves,
but by the divine prouydence and grace of God: which ought not to make them
rash and negligente, but rather dyligent and studious. Otherwise what need was
there of these seryouse, diligent, and often repeted admonio^s.

26 Wherefore if they say unto you, behold he is in the deserte, go not ye
forth: behold he is in the secret places, believe it not.

If they say unto you, behold he is. C. Because this place through ignorance
is diversely wrested, that the readers may have the true and natural sense,
they must note the Antithesis, or comparison between lurkinge corners, and the
propagation, and large rome of the kingdom of Christ, which was as sudden and
unlooked for, as the lyghtning that comes forth of the east into the west.
For we know that false Christ's (which was mete for the gross and foolish
hope of that people) did gather such multitudes as they could, together into
caves and dens of the wilderness, or into other secret corners, that they
might shake the yoke of the Roman empire from of their necks, by violent
force. The sense therefore of the place is this: Whosoever brings his goods
into a hydden place, that he may recover the liberty of the people, by
force, the same does falsely boste and vaunce him self for Christ: because the
redemer is sent, which sodeinelye and unlooked for, shall spread his grace
through out all the parts of the world. But these things are contrary one to
an other, to include the redemption into one corner, and to spread the same
throughoute the whole world. By this means the disciples were admonyshed that
the redemer should be no more sought for, in the lurkynge corners of Iewrye:
because he would sodeinely enlarge his kyngedome even to the utmost parts of
the world.

Behold he is in the secreate places. B. He calls those secret places,
which are most sure and close, either in houses or temples, into the which we
put those things, that we would have to be most sure and safe. Believe it
not. That is to say, be not ye persuaded, that the redemer is there.

27 For as the lightenynge comes out of the East, and appears into the
west: so shall the coming of the son of man be.

For as the lyghtninge. E. There is nothing more spedy and swifte, then the
lyghtenyng: and although it reaches not from the east to the weste, yet
notwithstanding it seems that it does so unto us. It ronnethe trewely a
great way in a short time. The lyghtninge commethe not out of the heaven,
but out of the cloudy reagion. Neither does the lord say that the lightnyng
does reach from the east to the weste, but that it apperynge in the east,
Luke. 17.
suddenly shyneth in the west. The Evangelist Luke has: As the lightninge that
appears out of the one part that is under heaven, and shyneth unto the other
part, which is under heaven, so shall the son of man be in his days. But
and if any man say, that it does not belong unto Christ, to allege things
that seem to be for things that are true we may answer, that it is
sufficient to apply that which seems to our eyes, to the expressing of the
sudden and unlooked for glory of Christ, (Howebeit apparante to all men). So
sone as we se the lightnyng, we look for thonder: but when the lightninge will
burst forth, it is showed by no sign: but before thou look for it, it
appears, and is gone.

Even so the doctrine of the Gospel unlooked for, and beyond all reason of men,
appeared and was made manifest to the world. C. And this wonderful celeritie,
and quickenesse, by the which the Gospel spredde it self througheout the
whole world, was a manifest testimony of the great power of God. For it could
not come to pass by the industry of man that the light of the Gospel, like
unto lyghtninge, so sone as it appeared, should pearce from one part of the
world to the other: and therefore Christ does not rashly by this circumstance,
commend his heavenly glory. R. As if he should say: seeing that false
Christ's, and false prophets will promise salvation, and will gather an host
of men to defend the Jews by vyolent hand, and to deliver them from all
euilles, I would not have you believe them, neither would I have you to follow
them. For as my kyngedome is not corporal, so shall it not be defended by
corporal power in this or that place only, or in the city of Jerusalem:
but as the lyghteninge burstynge forth from heaven, is not thrust into one
corner only, but is dispersed througheout all the reagion, which is under
that part of heaven: even so my kingedome shall not be shut up into one place
only, either of the city or of the deserte, but it shall be spredde
througheoute the whole world: and it shall be enlarged, not by warlike power,
but by the preachinge of the Gospel, That this place ought so to be
understood, the words following in Luke do teach, when he says: Luk^
but first he must suffer many things, and be refused of this nation. C.
Moreover the purpose of Christ was to show by setting forth the largeness
of his kingdom, that the destruction of Iewry could not let him to raygne.

28 For where so ever a dead carcas is, even thither also will the Eagles be
gathered together.

For where so ever a dead carcas it. M. The Evangelist Luke writes that
Christ being asked of the disciples, whether the elect should be taken,
(because he said, In that night there shall be two in a bed, one shall be
received, and the other forsaken) answered by this simylitude saying, Where
so ever a deadde carcas is, thither will the Egles be gathered together. R.
There are diverse kinds of Egles, among which one is of the Vultures kind,
excellyng the rest in bigness. And the Vultures (as writers do witness) do
flee two or three days before to the place where the carcas shall be. And Iobe
of the Egle says: Io^
Where any dead body lies, there is he immediately. It is likelye therefore,
that the common proverb arose of this kind of Egles, which is of the Vultures
kind: that they, which would signify that there is no need of great study
to join those which are lynked together by their own nature, may say.
Wheresoever the dead carras is: thither are the Egles gathered together. C.
This therefore is the sense and meaning of this place, that by what means and
practices soever Satan goethe about to alyenate and withdraw the children of
God, yet notwithstanding, the holy knott of unity is in Christ him self, by
the which it is meet that they be fast bound. For whereupon comes
dissipation and scatteryng abroad, but only, because many fall away from
Christ, in whom alone our assurance consists? Therefore, this mean is
prescribed to maintain holy conjunction, (...) is ^riaeth ^ errors
least the distractions of errors tear and rent the body of the Church:
that is to say, if we abide steadfast in Christ. The which thing is
diligently to be noted, for the lord does not tie us to the supremacy of the
Romayne seat, neither to any other tryffels: but with this only knot, he
binds his Church, if all men have respect unto him, being the only head.
Whereupon it follows, that whosoever cleaves unto him by pure faith, are
without all danger of scisme. Now let our Romayne prelates go, and proclaim
them to be scismatikes, which will not suffer them selves to be drawn away
from Christ, and to give their faith unto a thief robbing God of his honor.

Where as the Papists them selves do take this place for the society of
those which profess one faith, and do expou^de the Eagles altegorically for
those which are of sharp wit and occulate, it is to folyshe: seeing that it is
euidente, that the purpose of Christ was nothing else, tha^ to call unto him,
and to retain in him self the sons of God, wheresoever they be dispersed:
Neither is the body putt here simply, but the carcas. And Christ attributes
nothing to the Egles, saving that which might agree with our crows, or ravens,
according to the nature of the region, in the which we inhabit. Moreover their
reason is nothing sure or effectual, which upon this place say, that the death
of Christ was so effectual, that it allured the elect and chosen of God.

For it was rather the purpose of Christ to bring an argument of the less to
the more, as thus: If there be such wit in birds, that many of the^ will com
from far to one carcas, it is a great shame to ye faithful, not to be gathered
to the author of life, by whom only they are truly fed.

29 Immediately after the trybulations of those days, shall the son be
darkened: and the moon shall not geeue her light, and the stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be moved.

Immediately after the trybulations. M. Now Christ makes answer to his
disciples, as concerning his coming and the end of the world: C. and
promises* that after they have been vexed and troubled with so many euylles,
the redemption, in his time, shall come. For by his answer he went chiefly
about to stabishe his disciples in a good hope, least they should faynte for
the confused motions. Therefore he does not simply speak of his coming, but
usurps prophetical manners of speech, to the which, the more that every one
was bente and given, the more sharp battle of temptations of the contrary
euente and success, it was necessary he should have. For what could be more
absurd, than to behold the kingdom of Christ to be not only contemtible
and base, but also oppressed with the cross, covered with many reproaches, and
overwhelmed with all kind of affliction, of the which kingedome the prophets
preched so magnificently? Could not that majesty be required, which might
bring darckenesse to the Son, to the Moon, and to the stars, which might
stryke the whole foundation of the earth, and change the common order of
nature? These temptations our savior christ now seeks to prevent, pronouncing
that allthoughe these prophesies be not by and by fulfilled, yet
notwithstanding that they shall be approved to be true by the euente and end
it self. The sense and meaning therefore of this place is, that those things
which were foreshewed in time paste, as concerning the miraculouse and
wonderful stryking, as well of the Heaven as of earth, ought not to be
restrained to the beginning of the redemption: because the prophets
comprehended the whole race and course until such time as theye came to the
marcke. M. Moreover the Lord would have his discyples prepared at all times, to
depart hence, and therefore he would not show the time of his coming, and
yet notwithstanding would have them look for him every hour. And therefore he
would have it preached, as well by his own sermones, as by those that the
Apostelles made, that this day was not far of. 1. Petr. 4.
So the Apostell Peter said, The end of all things is at hand. And saint
Paul says. 1 Cor. 10.
We are they, upon whom the ends of the world are come. And therefore our
savior Christ says in this place, immediately after the trybulations of
those days. But nevertheless, he mente not by this to declare any certain
time of his coming. From the which opinion saint Paul dehorteth the
Thessalonians with great dyligence, The end of the world.
writing unto them after this manner. I beseech you brethern that ye be not
sodaynely moved from your mind nor be troubled, neither be spryte, neither by
words, nor yet by letter, which should seem to come from us, 2. These 2.
as though the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man deceive you by any
means, for the lord shall not come, except there come a departing first.
Wherefore this word (immediately) which we, read here, signifies no more
than that which we read in Mark, Mark. 13
where he says: Moreover in those days etc. As if he should say, After the
trybulation of those days, in the which the whole world shall be
overthrown, immediately, (howbeit, in an uncertain time, when men think
least of it) shall the end of the world come, with the full reuealynge of
mye glory, and the perfect redemption of my elect and chosen, M. to the great
horroure and fear of those men which have not believed in me. I say that the
end of the world shall come then immedyately, because afterward there shall
no great thing be showed: I will take no such open and manifest vengeance
on the impiety of mortal men, until that day come, in the which I will
return to judge all flesh, the which day with the Lord is not far, 1. Pe^
for one day with him, is as a thousand year, and a thousand year as one
day.

Shall the sun be darckened. M. These are those signs in the Son, Moon,
Luke ^
and stars, whereof Luke makes mention. B. The which words of the
Evangelist Luke are not so to be taken, as though those signs must go before
the day of the Lord: but signs are taken here for miracles, and things not
commonly seen, which shall not so much betoken the very day of the lord, as
they shall bring the present wrath of GOD upon the wicked. As concerning the
darkenynge of the son, and the rest, there are diverse opynions of
interpreters, yea, of the auncienter sort, but it seemethe that the
symplicitie and playnnesse of Christ his words ought to be retained and
kept. He says that the son shall be darkened, that the moon shall loose her
light, and that the stars shall fall from heaven, and so forth: We must now
believe that it shall so come to pass. But how the son shall be darkened, we
know not at this day, neither can we conjecture but the event of the same will
declare.

And the stars shall fall from heaven He means not that the stars shall
fall in deed, but that men shall thyncke them to fall. And therefore Luke only
shows that there shall be signs, in the son, moan, and stars. The meaning
therefore of his words is, that the strikinge, and shaking of the foundation
of the heaven shall be so great, that the very stars. shall be thought to
fall. The Euangeliste Luke speaks moreover as concerning the terryble motion
of the sea, that men shall fainte through very fear and sorrow. But the
whole sum is, that all creatures both above and beneathe, shall be as it
were cryers in sityng of men to the horrible tribunal seat of judgment, the
which wickedly they shall more and more contemn even until the last day. M.
It is also sure and certain, that this seruytude and bondage of creatures
shall feasse, by the which they are subject to vanytie, and that in the time
of delyueraunce, and glory of the sons of God, they shall be changed into an
other state and condition. ^ 8. ^. 102. ^ 1. ^3.
As concerning the which matter, read all these places coted in the
margente. And although the elect being changed to immortallitie, all other
things also shall be changed in deed, and there shall be new heaven, and a
new earth, yet notwithstanding the manner of the Scripture is to signify by
the darkening of the son, moon, and stars, and such like, which are here
spoken of, the great temptestes of Gods vengeance. ^. 13.24. Hier. 15 ^.
32. ^ 2.3. ^ 8. ^, 3.
After this manner we read that the vengeance of god was preached one while to
the Jews, and another while to other nations, as may appear by these places
noted in the marge^t. For the world being brought into great distress, it
seems to be troubled, the son darkened, the moon turned into blood, the
stars to retracte their light, the sea to rage and swell, and all things to
threaten destruction, not that it shall so come to pass in very deed, but
because men shall be driven to such strayghtes as though they happened in
deed.

And therefore, saying those more notable plagues and greater vengeances of God
(as were those that were taken of the Babilonians, of the men of Tire, of the
Egyptians, of the Jews, and such others) were certain exaumples (as it
were) and profes of the judgment to com, it is no marvel trewly, if those
things are understood by them, which shall come all together after their
manner at the later day of judgment: the which although it be unknown
unto us, yet notwithstanding it is best known to God him self. C. And
Christ here means that the heaven shall not be darkened at the first, but
after that ye church has suffered affliction, not because by the last
commminge of Christ at the length, the glory and majesty of his kingedome
shall appear: but because until that time the fulfyllynge of those things is
differred, which were begone after his resurrection, and of the which, God
only gave some taste to his Disciples, that he might lead them farther by
the way of hope and patience. After this manner Christ suspe^deth the minds
of the faithful, until the last day, lest they should thyncke that to be
void and of none effect, which the prophets foreshewed, as concerning the
restorynge, and reparation to come: because it lies hid under the dark
miste of affliction a long time. But cerrayne interpretoures do mysunderstande
the afflyction of those days, in applying it to the destruction of Jerusalem:
when as it rather belongs to all the wicked. Furthermore, by this argument
he does annimate his Disciples to sufferaunce, because afflictions shall have a
joyful and happy end: as it he had said: So long as the Church shall
wander in the world, there shall be a darcke and obscure time: but so soon as
the miseries have an end, the day shall come, in the which may majesty shall
appear. And the powers of heaven.

B. According to the manner of the scripture he so called all the host of
heaven, all the planettes and elements, of the which, the heavens consist. Or
else, he called the heavens the^ selves, the powers of heaven, even as though
they were strong and of great force: to the which exposition the Greek word
agrees, (becaue it signifies to move, to shaake, or by stryking to be in
danger) and not unto angels: whom, many say, are meant, by the powers of
heaven.

30 And then shall appear the token of the son of man in heaven. And the^
shall all the kinredes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the son of
man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

And then shall appear the token. C. Our savior Christ by this sentence does
put a difference between the present state of his kingdom and his glory to
come. For it is a kind of granting, that in the dark mist of afflictions, the
majesty of Christ shall not be seen, neither shall men feel the redemption
which he has brought. For truly the confused mixture of things, which we
now see, does both darke^ our minds, and also ouerwhelme the grace of Christ,
and does make it as it were vanishe out of our sight: at the least, that the
salvation gotten by him, might not be apprehended by the reason of the flesh.

Therefore he pronounces that he will at his last coming, arise and openly
show forth him self, that he being endewed with heavenly power, may, as it
were with a sign set up a lofte: make all the whole world to behold him,

Bu. For he does allude to the manner of the kings and princes of this
world, which goinge to the war or battle, do first display their banner,
to the which the soldiers having regard, are gathered together. M. Some
will have this sign to be the very body of Christ, having the testimonies of
his passion, the wounds of his feet, hands, and side: Othersome understand
by it, the sign of the cross: but their exposition is more simple and proper,
which take this word sign for a sygnification. As if he should say: By
these signs the faithful shall be admonyshed, to look for the son of God
from heaven.

And then shall all the kinredes of the earth more. C. Because Christ saw
that the greatteste part of men should contemn and despise his doctrine, and
be ennemies unto his kyngedome, he does also denounce unto all people mourninge
and lamentation: because it is meet that he keep under the rebelliouse and
obstinate, and destroy with his presence those which have despised his rule,
being absent.

But he speaks this, partly, that he brynginge terror to the minds of
the proud, may lead them to repentance. partly also that he might confirm
that minds of his Disciples, in so great contumacie of the world. For the
security and carelessness of the wicked, is no light occasyon of offense
because they seem to mock God without ponishment: again, there is nothing
more easy to be done, than for us to be taken with the intysynge snares of
their prosperity, and so to dishonor God. Therefore lest that they faythefull
should envy their dronken joy, Christ pronounces that the same shall be
converted at the length into mourning and gnashing of tethe. B. By the
kynredes of the earth, he understands earthely and carnal men, having
gotten no right or part of the supernall and heavenly City, these, being
ignoraunte of Christ the Sauyoure, shall weep when the sign of the son of man apperethe in the clowden, and going before his gloryouse coming,
felyng in them selves, that intolerable judgment tarieth for them: This
word (then) has a great Emphasis or force with it: as it he should say.
The which do now reiecte the grace of Gods kyngedome offered unto them,
and do contempne and persecute his mynisters, shall see in time to come what
they have despised, and shall mourn. C. And he alludeth to the place of the
Prophet, where GOD teachinge that a notable proof of his judgment is at
hand, says, that there shall be mourning among all kynredes, Zac^
like as men mourn for their only begotten son: yea and be sorye, as men
are sorye for the buryall of their first child. Wherefore there is no cause
why any man should look for the conversion of the world, because to late and
without profit at the length they shall feel, whom they have crucified.

And they shall see the son of man. This is an explycation of that sign,
because they shall see the son of man coming on the clouds, which was then
in earth under the form of a vile servant. And after this manner, he
declares that the glory of his kyngedome shall not be earthely but heavenly,
as the Disciple: falsely immagyned. M. And there is an emphasis or force in
this, that he says not, and they shall come, but, they shall see. As if he
should say: Him whom they contemn and persecute, shall they see coming with
great terroure and fear to judgment with power and great glory.

After this manner, Math^
he being brought before the presence of the high priests, said,
Hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of the sky. And in the nynteth of John it is
said, Io^
they shall see him whom they pierced They shall see I say the son of man.
For when he assended into Heaven, he did leave his humayne nature, but did
clarify the same. He means therefore that he will descend in the same
form and subtance, in the which he assended into heaven.

Coming in the clouds of heaven. M. He assended in the clouds. For it is
said. And the clouds took him away from their sight. ^. 1.
And as he assended, so shall he dessende again. So shall he come (said the
angels) as ye se him go into heaven.

^hes. 4.
S. Paul also says. And we shall be taken up in the clouds, to mete Christ
in the air. So often therefore as we see the clouds, let us be admonished of
these things. For they are and shall be the mynisters of Christ and ours also.
Let us think that they shall be our charriote, by the which we shall be carried
up to the heavenly glory. We are also admonished by this place, not to differ
our repentance and amendment of life to that time, in the which there is no
leisure to repent or convert. To late repentance is vain, which to no
purpose afflicts the wicked, at the coming of the judge, and makes the
unbelieving Jews, the Gentiles, and evil christians to mourn.

31 And he shall send his angels, with the great voice of a troumpet, and
they shall gather together his chosen from the four winds: even from the
higheste parts of heaven, unto the ends thereof.

And he shall send his angels with the great voice. ^ trumpte ^ elect.
Bu. Or with the trompet of a great voice for the greek text may diuersely be
taken. But the well soundynge and shryll trompet, (...) 10,
by the which the elect shall be called from all places, is that most
effectual calling, as well of the dead, as of the living, to the trybunall
seat of Christ, which shall be done by the mynistery of angels And it seems
to be alluded to the manner of the Israelites, who were wont to be gathered
together with the sound of a trompet, (...) 19.
by the Levites. Moreover the sound of the trompet was heard, when the law was
given to Israel, in the which there was a certain show made, of this last
gathering together of ye people of God. ^es. 4. ^, 15.
The Apostell Paul joins the shoute, and voice of the Archangell, with the
trompe of God, saying. For the lord him self shall dessende from heaven, with
a shoute and the voice of the Archeangel and trompe of God. And the same Paul
calls it the last tro^pe, in another place.

And they shall gather together his chosen. M. For consolations sake, he
shows what shall happen to the elect He says not, They shall gather together
Christians (of the which the greatest part are reprobates) neither the just or
pure from syn, which have well deserved: but the elect: that he might
commend the grace of election, A. out of the which, as out of a most clear
fountain, all good things what so ever, God has done, Hebre. 1. Angels are
the mynisters of God.
or will do for his children, does flow. C. And it is to be noted, that it is
said, tht the elect shall be gathered together by his aungelles, therefore
angels are the ministers of god.

From the four vvindes. That is, from the one end of the world to the
other. The Euangeliste Mark has, from the four winds, from the end of the
earth, to the vttermoste part of heaven. For he meanethe, that the elect
must be gathered from all places of the earth.

Even from the highest parts of heaven. That is even to the vttermoste part of
heaven.

For the heythe of the heaven signifyethe as much as the vtmoste regyon or
part thereof. But Christ speaks hyperbolically, that he might teach the
elect, that altoughe they be quite taken out of the earth, and their ashes
dispersed through the air, yet notwithstanding that they shall be gathered
together again, that they may grow and increase under his head to
everlasting life, and may inioye the long looked for inheritance.

For he mente to comfort his discyples, least the sorrowful scatterynge of
the Church should discourage them.

Wherefore also we, so sone as we discern and perceive the Church to be
racked and divided by the subtle practyse of Satan, or to be torn by the
cruelty of the wicked, either to be troubled by wicked oppinions, or else to
be vncertaynely led away, let us learn to have respect to this collection.
But trewly if the matter seem unto us hard to be believed, let the
Angellical power come into our minds, the which Christ therefore sets
before us, that he might put us in mind of more than that which man is able
to do. For allthoughe the Church being now weryed and molested by the malice
of man, wandereth unstable, chased into banyshmente, and being dashed and
bruised as it were, by the waves, and myserablye rent, has nothing sure and
certain in this world: yet notwithstanding it must hope well: because he shall
gather it, not after the manner of men, but by his heavenly power, which shall
be of greatter force than all lettes.

32 Learn a similitude of the fig tree: when his branches is yet tender,
and the leaves spronge, ye know that summer is nigh.

Learn a symilitude of the fygge tree. A. The Evangelist Luke, And he spoke
unto them a parable: Behold the fygge tree, and all the trees, when they shote
forth their buddes, ye see and know of your selves that summer is then nie at
hand: even so ye. etc. C. By the which words Christ does not only mean,
that the perturbation and trouble before mentyoned, is as certain a sign of
his coming, as the grenenesse and buddynge of the tree, is a sure token that
summer is at hand: but does also note a further matter. For as the tree,
being stayed and bound a long while, by the hard and byndinge rigor of the
frost, begins nevertheless in his time to budde, and bring forth fruit:
even so his Church, although it be bond and stayed for a season, by the
sharp and cruel storms of persecution, yet notwithsta^dynge in dew time it
shall bring forth his fruit to the glory of God. For as the internal sap
and moisture, which is in every part of the floryshinge tree, by his force
does mollify, renouate, restore and revive, that which was before dead and
decayed: even so the Lord by the internal and secret woorkynge of his holy
spirit, makes the corruption of man to bear and bring forth that fruit,
which he could not else bear.

Wherefore, the sum of Christ's words is, that we should not be dismayed at
the weak estate and external show of the Church, but rather that we should
hope for the glory which the Lord by the cross and trybulation has
prepared. For that which Paul affirms of every partycular member: 2. Cor* ^
must be fulfilled in the whole body: for though our outward man perish, yet
is the inward man renewed day by day, etc.

33 Even so ye, when ye se these things come to pass, understand that he is
nigh, even at the doors.

Even so ye, when ye see these things. Bu. As summer is not come by and by so
sone as we see the buddes of the fygge tree, but first the bud comes, then the
blossom, then the leaf, then the fig, and last of all the rypenesse of the
same, even so we must understand, that all those things whereof Christ
has spoken, shall not come at the first, but by degrees, and in order, that
when we se the beginning we doubt not but that the midst will come shortly
after, and when the midst is come, that we thyncke it not long until the end
by fynished. Euenso when the disciples of Christ, saw that many at the first
exalted them selves for Christ's, and seduced many, they knew straight way,
that wars and rumors of wars would follow, yet notwithstanding that
Jerusalem should not be destroyed immediately, but that they should first
suffer many persecutions, and the Gospel be preached every where. And then
they looked for the desolation of the holy city, and after that, that many
false prophets, and false Christ's should prevail, and so orderly they knew
that the end of the world should come. In like manner, when we know that
many of those things whereof the lord has spoken here, come to pass, we
ought to acknowledge that the kyngedome of God. and the day of the lord is eue^
at the dozes, and therefore to be looked for, by framing our selves with
diligence to godliness and virtue. For if we follow the estymation of God,
(as in these things we must) a thousand years with us, Psalm ^ 2. Pet ^
are before him, as one day, yea as a watch in the night.

Understand that he is nigh, even at the doors. C. That which Mathewe here
speaks obscurely, the Euangeliste Luke more plainlye expounds saying, that
the kingdom of god is nie eue^ at the doors And this place the kingdom of God
(as often times in other places) is so called, not of his beginni^g, but of his
perfection: and that according to their understanding whom Christ taught.
For they did not apprehende the kingdom of God in the Gospel, in the peace and
joy of faith, in spiritual righteousness: but they sought for that blessed
rest and glory, which is hyd under hope until the last day. (...) 5.
Bu. It is said to be at the doors by an allegory, because it is at hand. A. So
S. James says. Behold the Judge stands before the gate.

34. Verily I say unto you this generation shall not pass till all these
things be done.

Verily I say unto you Bu. Least any man should doubt in any point of
these things, or esteem them as vain threateninges, and therefore to be
despised, he does confirm that which went before as concerning the
calamities to come like a Prophet, with an oathe saying: Verily I say unto
you, This generation shall not pass. C. Although our Savior Christ uses a
universal note yet notwithstanding he does not speak generally of all the
miseries of the Church: but does simplely teach that before one age or
generation be ^oon out, whatsoever he had spoken as concerning the destruciton
of the temple, should be proved by the euente and success. For within fyfty
years after, the City was beseged the temple destroyed, the whole contrye
wasted and spoiled, the world showed it self obstinate against God: cruel
madness also waxed whote to take away the doctrine of salvation, there arose
false teachers which perverted the sincere Gospel with their lies: Religion
by wonderful means shaken: all the company of the godly was miserablely vexed
and molested. And although a long time after the same mischiefs continued in
like order continuallye, yet notwithstanding it was truly said of Christ,
that before one generation was ended, the faithful should perceive in very
deed, and by plain experience, how truly he had prophesyed of these things:
for the Apostels suffered the like, that the blessed martyrs and saints suffer
at this day. For it was not the purpose of Christ to promise to his Disciples
the end of calamitys to be within a short time, because if he had so done, he
should have been contrary to himself, for that he had told the^ before that
the end was not yet come But he rather sekinge to confirm them in sufferance
and patience, plainly tells them that it pertayneth to the generation of
their time. The sense and meaning therefore of the place is this, as if he
should have said: This prophesy is not of those euels which are a far of,
the which the posterity shall see that comes long after, but it is of those
plages which are now at hand, and that in one heap, in so much that this age
shall wa^te no part thereof. Therefore the Lord heapinge all kind of plages
upon one age, did not exempte their posterity from the same: but only
commands his Disciples to be prepared constantlye to suffer all things.

35 Heaven and earth shall pass but my words shall not pass.

Heaven and earth shall pass. A. This sentence is diversely expounded. B. Some
will have it an Hebrewe comparison, Rom ^. 2 Pet. 3.
as if a man should say, heaven and earth shall sooner perish than my
words.

M. Other some refer the passing away of heaven and earth, to the last day,
in the which, their transitory state shall be abolished. A. Of the which the
Apostel Paul writteth in many places. C. But because there is no doubt but that
Christ went about all that he could, to lift up the minds of his
Disciples, that they might have no regard to the world, he seems rather to
note the daily inclinations, which are seen in the world: as if he should
forbid us to judge of his sainges according to the instable varietye of the
world. For we know, when matters are tossed in the world, how easy a matter
it is for our minds therewt to be drawn away. Therefore Christ forbids his
Disciples to have regard unto the world: but rather to believe yt those
things which he had foreshewed should come to pass by the divine providence
of GOD. We have also out of this place a profitable doctrine, namely, that our
salvation (because it is grounded upon the promises of God) is not carried, by
the instable motions of the world, but stands fast, if so be that our
faith do reach above heaven and earth, Christ's words are infallible.
even unto Christ.

M. This place truly is very necessary, to prove the certeinty of the words
of Christ, to the end we might doubt of no part of them: A. as certain
profane Epicures do, 2. Pet. 3.
who deride and make a ieste at all those things, which the capacity of man
is not able to comprehend, of whom Peter writteth plentifullye in the third
chapter of his second epistell. Matthew. 5.


But my words shall not pass. Bu. What these words signify the Lord
himself in an other place declares, saying: One Jot, or one tytill of the
law shall not fail, until all things be fulfilled.

So that his words are in effect, as if he should have said: Nothing of
that which I have spoken shall pass, till it be fulfilled.

36. But of that day and hour, knows no man, no, not the Angels of heaven,
sauinge my father only.

But of that day and time. C. By this sentence our Savior Christ went about
to hold the minds of the faythefull in suspense, least they should by false
Imagination appointe any certain time of the last redemption. Curiouse
searching of gods secrets is forbidden.
For it comes to pass by the great curiosity of men, that they neglecte
those things which are necessary to be known, and do curiously desyer to
know those things, which God has not voutchsafed to reveal unto them. With
this disease of curiosity the Apostels were infected as we may read in the
first chapter of the Acts, where their curiouse question was thus answer by
the Lords own mouth: Act. 1.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the father hat set in
his own power. To the end therefore he might bring his Disciples from this
curiosity, and might take away from them all occasion of questioninge and
doubtinge, after he had spoken of his coming, and of those things that
should be in the same, he adds strait way,

Of that day and hour knovveth no man. C. For he would have the day of his
coming so hoped for and desyered, that no man for all that, should presume
to enquire when he will come: Furthermore he would have his Disciples so to go
forward in the light of faith, that being uncertain of the times, they may
wait patiently for the redemption. We must therefore be ware least we
search farther for the times and seasons, than the Lord will permit. For
the special point of our wisdom consists in this, if we keep our selves
soberly within the bounds of Gods word. B. Whereupon the Apostell Paul when
he had spoken certain things as concerning the last times and the coming of
Christ for consolations sake, he adds by and by against this curiosity,
saying.

As concerning the times and seasons it is not needful that I writ unto
you. 1. The^


No not the Angels of heaven. C. Because men should not take it grievously,
that this day was hydden from them Christ makes the Angels partakers of the
same ignorance. For it were a token of to much pride and wicked desyere, for
us to covet more which crepe upon the earth, than is granted to the heavenly
Angels.

M. Let us therefore wyllinglye hold our selves content to be ignora^^^ of
that, Ang^ not (...)
of the which GOD will have us ignorant. Hereby we see that Angels know not
all things, how much so ever they behold the face of GOD. Wherefore let no man give credit to the revelations of Angels, contrary to those things
which concern our salvation, Angel no true^ contrary saluati^
and are comprehended in holy Scriptures. Therefore the Apostell Paul says,
We beseech you brethren that ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor be
troubled, neither by spirit, neither by words, nor yet by letter. The
Euangeliste S. Mark adds: These. 2.
neither the soon him self.

C. Wherefore, he were to far out of his wits, which would not willingelye
submit himself to be ignorant of those things, when as the Son of GOD
himself for our sakes is content to be ignorante. But because many thought
that this was a reproach unto Christ, they went about by false interpretation
to mittigate the hardenes of this sentence. (...) heresy
And to defend this their error, peradventure the heresy of the Arrians, was
their refuge, which by this place went about to prove that Christ was not
the true and only GOD. Therefore according to their opinion Christ knew
not the latter day, because he would not make it known to others.

But saying, it is manifest, that ignorance is attributed to Christ as well
as to the Aungells, we must seek a more proper sense, the which before we
bring forth, let us brefelye put away their objections, which think it a
reproach to the Son of GOD, to say that there remains any ignorance in
him. First of all whereas they do obiecte, that there is nothing unknown to
the Son of God, we may easelye answer. ^^stio
For we do know that there were two natures in Christ so joined together
in one person, ^swere.
that both of them retained their propertye: but specially the diuinitye
rested it self, and did not show it self forth so often as it was mete for
the humane nature to work that aparte which belonged thereunto to the
fulfillynge of the office of a Mediator. Wherefore it is no absurdity to say
that Christ which knew all things, as he was manne, to be ignorante of
somewhat. For otherwise he could not be like unto us in being subject to
sorrow to anguishe of the mind, and to other affections. But where as some
obiecte that ignorance does not agree with Christ, because it is the
punishemente for sin, it is to absurd. First of all they show them selves
very ignoraunte in saying that ignorance, which is attributed to Angels,
should come of sin: but they are no less blind in the other in that they
do not acknowledge that Christ has there fore taken upon him our flesh,
that he might also receive the punishementes that were dew for sin. And in
that Christ according to his humanity knew not the latter day, that does no
more derogate from his divine nature, than the taking upon him our flesh.
But there is no doubt, but that he has respect to the office committed unto
him of his father, even as he did at an other time when he said, Matthew. 2^.
that it belonged not unto him to set this or that man at his left or right
hand in the kingdom of his father. For he did simplelye detracte that power
from him self (as we have already declared upon that place) but he means
that he was not sent of the father with this commandment, so long as he was
conuersante among mortal men. And thus we now perceive, that in respect that
he came unto us to be a Mediator, he received not that which was given unto
him after his resurrection, Math. 2^.
until he had fulfilled his office. For then at the length he affirmed that
the power of all things was given unto him. Bu. As therefore he took upon him
all the infirmitis of man, Hebr. 2.4.
and was like unto men in all things, sin only excepted: so also he took
unto him the knowledge, the ignorance, the reason and mind of man: according
to the which he is said not to know the latter day. Luke ^.
And therefore in an other place it is said: Jesus prospered in wisdom and
age, and in fauore with God and men.

37. But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of
man be.

But as the days of Noe were. B. The Euangeliste Luke adds to this, the
example of the Sodomites, where by occasion, Luke. 17.
not regarding the time, he recites this sermon of Christ. But it is no
absurditye that the two Evangelists were content with one example, although
two were propounded by Christ specially seeing the same does agree in all
points, that all mankind once, being overcome with securitye, was suddenly
destroyed except a few. By these things the Lord mente that the day of
judgment, (which he calls the coming of the Son of man, and Luke, the
day in the which the son of man shall be revealed) shall come when worldly
men think not of it, being altogether drowned in the cares and delights of
this life: even as the floude, and the vengeance of the Sodomites came in time
paste on the wicked, with their horrible destruction. C. Therefore although
Christ before suspended the minds of his Disciples, yt they might not
curiouslye inquire, as concerning the later day: yet notwithstanding least
they should carelessly settell them selves in the pleasures of this world, be
exhorts them now to carefulnes. Therefore he would so have his Disciples
uncertain of his coming, that nevertheless they might daily be occupied to
wait for him every moment. And to the end he might put away from them
slothful negligence, and might give them occasion to take the more head, he
foresheweth that the end shall come suddenly, the world being drowned and
overwhelmed in beastlye slouthfulnes: even as in the days of Noe all nations
were unawares drowned in the floude, when as they swetely crammed them selves
with delights and pleasures: and a little after that the Sodomites, being in
the midst of their pleasures, and fearinge nothing, were consumed with
heavenly fire. Seeing that the securitye of the world shall be such toward
the latter day, there is no reason why the faithful should please them selves
with the careless behavior of the common sort of people.

Now let us note the purpose of Christ who least the faithful should be
suddenly overthrown, teaches them to watch continually: because the last day
of judgment will come unlooked for.

M And this is to be noted also how the Lord to confirm this, brings not
in any similitude, but a plain example (and such a one which in time paste
happened to the whole world, and was not believed till it came to pass) that
they which will not believe things to come, may at least be moved by this
crample that is paste. The Apostel Peter also makes mention of these examples,
shewinge that GOD made them an ensample unto those, 2. Pet. 2.
that after should live ungodly.

How greatly all things were corrupted in the time of Noe, Moses
sufficiently shows in his first book. Gene. ^.


Hereby we are taught that the faithful shall be a very small number, which
shall lift up their minds unto Christ, and to the hope of his coming. But
this obscure kind of speaking, As it was in the days of Noe so shall the
coming of the Son of man be, is more plainlye expounded by the Euangeliste
saint Luke, when he says: And as it happened in the days of Noe: so shall it
he also in the days of the Son of man. This he speaks generallye. Then
recitinge the same particularly, Luke. ^
and as it were by parts he says: they did eat and drink, they married wives
and were married, even unto that same day that Noe entered into the Arc.

According to these things shall the day be, in the which the Son of man
shall be revealed.

38. For as in the days thot went before the floude they did eat and drink,
mary and were married even until the day that Noe entered into the ship.

For as in the day. M. Now he describes the security of men which lived
wyckedlye in those days.

They did eat and drink. C. In that he says that men gave them selves to
eating and drinking, to celebratynge of marriages, and to other worldly
busynes, when GOD destroyed the whole world with he floude: he means that
they were so occupied about the commodityes and pleasures of this present
life, as though there were no need to fear any alteration or change. So
that he does not by this place directelye condemn the intemperancy of those
times, but rather the obstinacy, by the which it came to pass, that they
despysinge the threateninges of GOD, looked desperatelye for horrible
destruction.

M. For who would have married planted and builded, and that until the same
day, in the which Noe entered into the Arc if this security had not raygned
among them? For they are not appointed for the present use only, but also
for the time to come. Saying therefore they promised unto them selves a durable
state, they were not afearde to go forward void of all care, in their old
fashions.

And truly this, of it self, had not been vitiouse or damnable, to
provide for their necessities, if so be they had not carelestlye resisted
the judgment of GOD, ronninge hedlonge of their own volontarye will into all
kind of wickedness, as though there were no Judge in Heaven. Even so now
Christ teaches that the last age of the world shall be altogether careless in
so much that it shall consider of nothing but of this present life, and shall
have a continual care, to maintain the common course of life, as though the
earth should always continewe in one state. This the Apostell confirms
saying: When men say peace, and all things are quyete, thee shall sodeyne
destruction come upon them.

Bu. And truly our people at this day, do plainly declare by their wicked
manners, ^es, 5.
and wonderful contempt of the Gospel what our Savior Christ means in
this place.

What therefore remains now, but that we should look day by day and
every hour for this latter day of judgment the very moment whereof is only
known unto the Lord.

29. And knew not of it till the floude came and took them all away: So
shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

And they knevv not. Z. When he says that they knew not it seems to signify
as much, as they would not know in this place. For there are some which
wittinglye will fall into error and ignorance. Or else it may thus be
expounded, They did not know, that is they did not believe that there should
be a floude, until such time as the floude came upon them in deed. C. The
well spring therefore and cause of their ignorance, was unbelief, which had
altogether blinded their minds as the Apostell also teaches in his epistell
to the Hebrews saying that by the eyes of faith he saw before hand the
vengeance of GOD, Hebr 11.
which was hydden as yet, that he might fear the same in time. And our
Savior Christ here compares Noe with the rest of the world, and the
Euangeliste ^. Luke compares Lot with the Sodomites: that the saithfull may
learn to prepare them selves least they wanderinge with others vanishe away.
And we must note that the reprobate did therefore sit down carelessly in
their wickedness, because the Lord did not voutchsafe to advertise any with his
saving admonition to beware, but his servants only, not because ye flood was
altogether hidden from the inhabitants of the earth: (whose eyes might behold a
sorrowful sight, by ye space of a hondered years and more, all the which time
Noe was preparinge the Arc) but because one man was specially admonished by
the will of God as concerning the destruction to come of the whole world, and
was erected to the hope of salvation.

And now although the fame of the last judgment do sound in ye ears of al
men: yet notwithstanding because few being taught from above, do understand
yt Christ shall come a judge in his time, it is mete that they be stirred up and
their senses sharpened by this singular benefit of God, least they fall into
the common ignorance. 1. Pet. 3.
For to this end Peter compares the Ark of Noah with our baptism, namely
because a few, that is to say eyghte souls were saved by the water, and
separated from the rest.

Wherefore we must seek to be of this small number, if we desyere to be saved.

And took them all away. S. He notes the small number of those which were
delivered and saved from the floude, for all perished except eyghte persons
only, as testifyeth the Scripture.

So shall the coming of the Son of man be. Read the end of the seven and
thyrtye verse goinge before.

40. Then shall two be in the field, the one received and the other to be
refused.

B. He shows here that there shall be wonderful choice: and also that few
shall be saved at his coming: and he does therewith admonish us by these
words, to watch carefully, that we may be of the number of those which
shall be received into eternal life. As if he should say: Even as in the time of
the floude a few were taken up into the Arc and saved, the rest shut out of
the doors and perished: so at the coming of the Son of man, those that
shall perish, shall suddenly be divided from those that must be saved: neither
shall God spare any man from the hyeste to the lowest: For the elect shall be
taken up, and the damned shut into prison. Two shall be laboring in the field
about one work, and for one reward the one of them shall be received, and the
other forsaken.

41. Two women shabe grinding together at the mill: the one shall be received,
and the other refused. Two in a bed, the one received, the other refused.

Two women shall be grynding at the mill. A. By these words he declares the
wonderful division: that shall be at the last day. C. Therefore the
Eua^geliste Luke speaks of those which are joined together in one bed, least
that couples, by the which men are mutually bound one to an other in this
world, should hold back or stay the godly. For often times it comes to
pass, that while one man looks upon an other, none sets forward.
Therefore, that every man (the bond and knot being loused) might spedely run
for himself, Christ teaches ye out of one pair or couple, one yoke fellow
shall be received, the other refused not because it is necessary that they which
are joined together, should be so divided (for the holy bond of piety will
bring to pass that the honest woman shall clean to the honest man) but
Christ only went about to exhort all men to make haste, that he might
cut of all lets and stays, that they which were now ready to roonne, should
tarry for their fellows in vain. A. To the which effect pertayneth this
exhortacion of the Apostell: Saying then that all these things shall perish,
what manner of persons ought ye to be in holy conversation and godlynes lookinge
for and hastynge unto the coming of the day of God. 2. Pet. ^


The one received the other refused. Z. As if he should say, the Lord knows
who are his: the elect shall not be forsaken, but shall be gathered and received
unto me: although some sodeine fear do take the^ at the first, yet shall
faith come at the last, and put away all fear. To receive, is a word of
Grace. And as touching that which appartaineth to the grynders, we may
gather out of the laws and hystories of them of old time, that men servants
and maids were wont to be sent and put into the will: Exodus ^
As appears in the eleventh chapter of Exodus where it is said: unto the
first borne of the maid servant that is behind the mill.

42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour the Lord will come.

Watch therefore B. He takes occasion to exhort them to watch, of the
uncertainty of his coming. What it is to watch, he afterward declares by
this that he says: Be ye ready. Vva^
For vigila^tly to look for the coming of the Lord is nothing else, than to
be in a redines to receive him with joy.

He speaks not of the bodily watch, but of the watchynge of the mind, that
is a continual care, desyer, and looking for the Lord to come. Luke ^
The Euangeliste Saint Luke adds: continually: least we should think that
we must watch only for a time.

For ye know not what hour C. We must note that the uncertain time of
Christ's coming (which brings slouthful security to the greatest part of
men) ought to be a prouocatio^ to stir us up to watchinge and warding. For
God would have this time hidden from us by his secret counsel that we being
void of care at no time, may always watch.

For what trial should there be of faith and patience, if the faithful
leading their whole life in pleasures, might have three days warninge to
prepare them selves to mete Christ. M. Watch therefore (says our Savior
Christ) for ye know not what hour the son of man will come, this he
speaks in an other place also. (...). 25


43 Of this yet be ye sure, that if the good man of the house knew what hour
the thief would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be
broken up.

Of this yet be ye sure. C. The Evangelist Luke does not recite these words in
the same place yt Matthew does: and no marvel. (...) 12.
For in the.xii. chap. he seking diuersiy to gather a sum out of diverse
sermons, does put in among the rest this parable also. Beside this in that
chapter, there is put a general preface, that the disciples having their
loins girded, and candels burning in their hands, should wait for their
Lord. To the which sentence the parable of the wise and foolyshe virgins, in
the chapter following, agrees very well.

What hour the thief would come. M. By this similitude we are taught how
sudden and unlooked for, the coming of Christ shall be. For the special desire
of thieves is, that they may steal upon men unlooked for, and therefore they
work their feats in the night when they think the whole household to be in
their deep sleep. By the good man of the house, he means every one of us:
and by ye thief he understands the last day. Therefore seeing it shall come
unlooked for as a thief in the night, at what time we know not, it behooves us
to watch continually, least it oppress us sleaping. C. If any man here the
thieves to break in, in the night, fear and suspicion will not suffer him to
sleep. Our slouthfulnes therefore shall have no excuse, if we, being so often
times admonished of the coming of Christ (which shall come stealing on us) do
sleep still void of care. E. The Greek text has, in what watch. For they of
old time, did divide the night into four watches, ^h. 14. ^ke. 13
of the which we may read in the fourtene chapter goinge before.

And not suffer his house to be broken up. The Apostel Paul says: ^es. 5.
ye your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord shall come even as a
thief in the night. And saint Peter has the same words. 2. Petr. 3.


44 Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour, as ye think not: will the
son of man come. A. Now he shows what he meant by watchinge, namely that we
should be ready for that day: C. seeing that here we must not only fear ye
bursting open of the gates and the loss of our goods, but also the deadly
wound to the destruction of our soul, except we take heed. The words of
Christ therefore te^de to this end, that by this admonition he might awake us
out of sleep: because, although the last judgment be differred a long time,
yet notwithstanding, we may look for it every moment: it were great folly
therefore to fall a sleep having suspicion of this approaching time, and
danger. M. Wherefore, if ever it were nedeful to give regard unto ye light of
Gods word, it is truly needful in these days, that we casting of the
sluggishnes of carnal affections, may stand before the tribunal seat of the
judge.

45 Who is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has made ruler over
his household, to give the^ meat in due season. C. This place is more set forth
by the Evangelist Luke, where the demand of Peter is added, which gave
occasion to a new parable. But to this end the answer of Christ tends, that
if it be mete that every one of the common sort do watch, much more it is
mete for ye Apostles to watch. Wherefore, as at the first Christ exhorted ye
whole fa^^ily to watch for his coming, so now he requires a special care
of the chief servants, which are therefore pointed the rulers of the rest
that by their example they may show the way of sobriety and temperance. By
these words he declares that they are not set in idell dignity, to live
carelessly in pleasure: but that the hier they are set in honor, the more
diligently they ought to labor in their calling. Therefore he teaches that
they must specially declare them selves to be faithful and wise. A faithful
servant.
M. He is faithful which faithfully dispenceth that which is committed unto
him, for his masters proffite, A wise servant.
not his own gain or private commodity. A wise servant is he, which does
bestow that which is committed unto him in due time, or which constantly
perseuereth in his office until the coming of the Lord. The Euangeliste Luke,
calls him a Steward, whom Mathewe here calls a servant. And who are
stewardes, saint Paul shows saying: Let a man thus wise esteem us as
stewards and dispensators of the mysteries of God: 1. Cor. 4.
and it is required of Stewardes that a man be found faithful. This faith
comprehends other virtues also, with the which he that is a minister or
servant, ought to be endued. Read the third chapter of the first epistle of
S. Paul to Timothe. 1. Tm. 3


Whom his Lord has made ruler. He must be called and sent of the Lord. For
they which run, being not sent of God, are thieves and robbers. John. 10


Over his household. He means, that he is chief over his family and
servants.

To give them meat in due season. He speaks according to the common manner:
for this was the duty of the chife servant, to distribute to every one his
food in due time, they were not appointed to be lords over others. Here
therefore we may behold the louinge kyndnes of God toward his household. He
will not have those that are his to perish with hunger, nay, he will not have
them fed negligently. What is the ministry of the word, Ministers of the
word are stewards
but a stewardship to nourishe and feed the household of the Lord. The Gospel
is the meat, with the which, men are fed and nourished to everlasting life.

46 Blessed is that servant, whom his lord (when he comes) shall find him
so doing.

Blessed is that servant. M. He shows in these words, that ministers,
shall not be faithful and wise in vain, which shall wisely govern the
family of the Lord. For although a faithful steward be not greatly accepted
of the family, because it has very small consideration of the Lord, yet
notwithstanding, of the Lord, to whom he is a faithful servant, he shall be
blessed, A. and shall receive a large reward: As the Apostell Peter testifies
in these words, 1. Petri. 5.
saying.

And when the chief shepehearde shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible crown of Glory.

Whom, when his lord comes Christ is now absent from us by his carnal
presence: but he shall come to judgment, as it shall be declared anon, in the
five and twenty chapter.

Shall find so doing. M. The happynes of the minister of Christ does not
consiste in this, that he appears faithful to the eyes of men: but in this,
that he is found faithful of Christ. So Paul says that he cares not for
man's judgment, 1. Cor. ^
but that his only care is to be found faithful of the Lord. M. These
things may be more plainly understood if they be co^ferred with that which
follows of the evil servant.

47 Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods.

M. By this part of the similitude he only goes about to show, that the
minister of Christ which is faithful, shall have great honor, and be made
equal almost with his Lord. Genesis ^
For when Joseph was made ruler over all the kings treasure in Aegipte, he was
reverenced above all, the king excepted. And the Lord him self says, Luk^
I appointe unto you a kingdom as my father has appointed to me: that ye may
eat and drink at my table in the kingdom, and sit on seats iudgeing the
twelve tribes of Israel. And the Apostle Paul speaks thus of him self: I
have fought a good fight, 2. Ti^
I have ro^ne my race, and I have kept ye faith: and there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which ye lord being aiust judge, shall give to me at
that day. And what the happynes of this faithful servant shall be, the eye
has not seen, ye ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man. 1. Co^
C. Therefore let all those hereby learn which are called to an honorable
office, that the greater their office is, the more they are bound with all
their study and industry to discharge the same. For seeing it is the duty of
the common sort of servants, to finishe the work committed unto them,
stewardes must be much more dilligent, to whom it pertains to have a care
of the whole household. Otherwise Christ reproves the^ of ingratitude,
because they being chosen before al others, frame not the^ selves according to
their honor. For to what end should the Lord prefer the^ before others,
but only because they should excel all others in faith and wisdom? Man ough^
^lige^ o^^ice.
A dilligent and sober attention is enjoined to all men alyke: but yet for all
that negligence and sloth, is more unseemly and less excusable in pastors and
governors of the people. Furthermore the hope also of the reward, ought to
kyndell a diligence in them.

A. For they ought to be certainly persuaded that their paineful travail in
their calling, is most acceptable unto the Lord, and that he will requyte the
same with a large reward.

48 But and if that evil servant say in his heart, my lord will be long a
coming.

But and if the evil servant say. Bu. Now of the contrary part he
threateneth destruction to those ministers, and others, which being advanced
to some degree of honor, do not consider that they are made rulers over their
fellow servants, and yt they must give account unto Christ: but first of
all do consume their Lords substance, and afterward show tyranny against
them.

In his heart. M. This is spoken according to the manner of the Hebrews. For a
certain secret persuasion of yt mind. So it is said in the Psalm: The
ungodly has said in his heart, ^ne. 14
there is no God: that is, he is fully persuaded that it is but vain which is
spoken of God. C. Therefore Christ teaches in these words, how it comes
to pass that the evil servants are so secure or careless: surely because
they bearing themselves bold upon his long tariance, do imagine that the day
will never come, in the which they shall give account. M. Of such the Apostell
seems to speak, saying: This first understand, that there shall come in the
last days, mockers in deceitfulnes, which will walk after their own lusts
and say: where is the promise of his coming, ^ct 3.
for since the fathers died, al things continue in the same estate that they
were in the beginning. Wherefore under the pretense of Christ's absence they
promise to them selves, that they shall escape unpunished.

For it can not be, but that the looking for him, so often as it comes in
our minds, must put away all slouthfulnes, and restrain the fleshly
affections, least we be wickedly carried. So that, there can be no exhortacion
more sharp and of greater force to prick us forward, than when we be put in
mind of that tribunal seat, which no man can avoid. Wherefore that every
one of us may watch and seek to discharge our duties, and that we may
dilligently and modestly keep our selves within our bounds, let us call to
mind that sudden coming of our Lord from above, the which, the reprobate
wickedly contemn.

49 And so begin to smite his fellows, yea, and to eat and drink with the
dronken. M. This is the fruit of the evil servant, which he brings forth
by the false persuasion of the slackenes of his Lords coming. He does all
things at his pleasure without fear. Christ therefore by the way shows
how easy a thing it is for bouldnes to increase, when a man having once loused
the raynes gives him self to sin. Neither does Christ only here make
mention of a dissolute and wicked servant, but also of such a one which
obstinately seeks to disturb the whole house, and peruersely abuses the
power committed unto him, exercises cruelty toward his fellow servants,
and riotously speadeth his masters goods, to his reproach.

This is the image and picture of a secure and careless servant. To the which
if you compare the Pope, the Cardinals, The Pope and his ministers are
unprofitable servants
the Bishops, Abbottes, Priors, and Clerks, with the rest of the clergy, and
layitie also, which serve Antechriste, you will say that they are most like
of all other to that sluggishe and careless servant. For these had rather sit
to eat and drink with ye dronken tha^ to repent at the preaching of the
Gospel. But think you yt they shall so do unpunished? no truly. For harken to
what follows.

50 The same servants Lord shall come in a day when he looks not for him,
and in an hour that he is not ware of.

The same servants Lord shall come. A. Behold the pain and punishment of
the wicked servant.

Bu. First of all he shall be deceived of his hope and expectation: For when he
says my lord wylbe long a coming, the lord shall come in a day when he
looks not for him: and so the sudden coming of his master shall bring the
greater terror and fear. A. And then shall follow grievous punishment. For
it follows.

51 And shall hew him in pieces, and give him his portion with hypocrites:
there shall be weapynge and gnasshing of teethe.

And hevve him in pieces. Bu. It was the manner of those of oulde time to cut
the bodies of them in pieces, which had broken faith and covenant with them.
Au^. Gel. Noct. At. 20 cap. 1.
Of the which matter we may read a long discourse in Aulus Gellius. C. Here
therefore a horrible punishment is added to terrify the wicked servant:
because such unbridled wyckednes, deserves the greater vengeance. And give
him his portion with hypocrites. B. He usurps this word portion or part,
for the inheritance: as does ye Prophet David also in his Psalms, where he
says. Psalm. 16.
The Lord him self is the portion of mine inheritance: he says that they
shall be joined unto hypocrites, that is, they shall be punyshed with the same
punishment that hypocrites are. And they are said to be hypocrites, because they
acknowledge the Lord with the mouth, and make them selves the ministers of
God, and the servants of the servants of God, when as they are in the
Church nothing else but idle bellies, not seking the Lord, but them selves.
Phili. 2,
Bu. In stead of that which he says here, And give him his portion with
hypocrites. He said in an other place, And cast him into utter darkness.
Ioyninge that there which now follows.

There shall be vveaping and gnashing of teethe. The which truly he added, least
any man should be ignorant of the inheritance prepared for hypocrites. For it
is written in the holy Scripture: Job, 13
No hypocrite shall come in his sight. To cast therefore the wicked into utter
darkness, and to give them their portion with hypocrites, is to cast them
everlastingly into helfler: of the which read ye fifth chap. going before.

The xxv. Chapter.
THen shall the kingdom of heaven be like unto ten virgins which took their
lamps and went to mete the bridegroom.
Then shall the kingdom. M. This parable pertains to the same effect that
the other following does, to the which also the similitudes going before do
belong also, namely, to this end that we should watch, and keep our selves
ready to mete with the Lord: because the hour of his coming is uncertain
and unknown, least, if, when he come, for our vnreadines, we be shut out.
Notwithstanding this parable is properly added that ye faithful might be
confirmed and brought to perseverance. The Lord knew well enough how prone
the nature of men is, to ease, and that it comes often times to pass, that
they do not only faynte by reason of the prolonginge of the time, but also
perish, with a sudden lotheing and yrckesomenes. To remedy and cure this
disease, he teaches that his disciples are not well prepared, except they be
armed with sufferance for a long time. The scope and end of this parable being
known, we shall not need to stand about frivolous and triffeling reasons,
which serve nothing to the purpose and meaning of Christ. There are some
which greatly trouble them selves, about the lyghtes, about the vessels,
land about the oil: where as the simple and proper sum of these things, is,
that a diligent endeavor for a small time, Pers^ in loki^ Christ ^ming.
is not sufficient, except perseverance and perpetual constancy be joined
therewith. And this thing Christ expresses by a most apt similitude. As
appears by the words of S. Luke, he exhorted ye disciples, Luke ^
seeing they should travail through troublesome and dark places, to take
lights with the^. But because except oil be put unto it, the weke of the
candell will wax dry, and loose his light: Now Christ says that the
faithful have need of the help of virtue, which increases the light being
kyndeled in their hearts: Otherwise that it would come to pass, that before
half were ended, their diligence would decay. M. we must also note, that it
is not shadowed in this parable what should happen to the unbelieving at the
coming of the lord (for they are judged already) but to those which are
thought to be Christians, and are called cittezins of the kingdom of heaven.
As if he should say: Then shall that happen to those that feme to pertayne to
the kingdom of heaven, which happened to the foolyshe vyrgins. C. By the name
of the kingdom of heaven, the state of the Church to come is understood,
which was to be gathered by the work of the Messiah. And he uses so
excellent a title, least the faithful should deceive them selves by the false
immagination of blessed perfection.

Z. Christ took possession of this kingdom by the preaching of the Gospel,
and specially after his resurrection, (...). 13.
when the disciples were sent throughout the whole world to preach the
Gospel: as it is said before. Which took their lamps. C. Christ takes his
similitude of the common custom of men. Very chyldishe was the speculatio^ of
Hierome and such others, which stretched this parable to the praise of
virginity: seeing the purpose of Christ was nothing else than to myttigate the
grief of tediousnes which the faithful might have by the delay of his
coming. He says therefore that he does require nothing of us, but that which
one friend commonly shows to an other in the solemn right of marriage. It was
a common custom in the marriages of the people of the Jews, that the
brydegrome should not come unto the bryde until midnight: and when he came, a
company of Iewyshe damsels, having torches, met him by the way, and brought
him to the bridge: who came not once forth without the bridegromes pleasure,
but sat at home waighting for the bridegroom. According to this common manner
and order of the Jewish marriage Christ speaks here. But the sum of the
parable tends to this end, that it is not sufficient for any that they were
once prepared and ready to do their duty, except they continue to the end.

And went to mete the bridegroom. M. It is very corruptly added of the old
interpretour, in that he says: To mete the bridegroom and the bride: Seeing
that it is found in none of the Greek books. And as for Chrysostom Hilarious,
and Theophilacte, they make no mention of the bryde. For Christ is the
bridegroom: and the whole parable te^deth to this end, that he now coming, we
should go forth to mete him. No part of the parable pertains to bryde, nay,
they which can mete the brydegrome in good time eue^ they (I say) are the
bride. S. Austen expounding this place (in a sermon which he made of the
words of Christ out of the.xxii. chap. of Mathewe) neither reads, nor
makes any mention, of this word bryde.

2 But five of them were foolish, and five were wise. But five of the^ were
foolish. M. He speaks not here of unfaithful (as it was said even now) but
of foolish and negligent Christians. We will not reason here of the
virginity, neither of the number of ten, neither yet of this, that so many
are said to be foolish, and so wise. For here we have to show, who are true or
false Cristia^s, Whose profession is to wait for the Lord to come, and to
make them selves ready to mete him, A. and to persevere in the study of a godly
life to the end. Bu. But they are mingled together without difference in this
life, and are joined together with one title of profession: all are called
Christians, all are baptized, al do profess ye faith in Christ, and the loking
for his coming with everlasting life: but when the lord shall come, it shall be
manifest, who are sincere and who not: who are prepared, and who not: who shall
be admitted and who excluded: whom Christ will acknowledge, and whom he will
reiecte. All are virgins by profession, al have lamps, all are called to the
marriage to welcome the brydegrome: but how unmeet they are, it shall appear
at the coming of ye brydegrome. And five were wise. C. In the chapter going
before, the Lord showed that he would have the stewardes to be wise above all
others: because it is mete that the more burden a man has, and is occupied in
weighty matters, the more wisely he ought to behave him self, but now he
requires wisdom generally of all ye children of God, least in rash running
they make them selves a pray unto Satan.

3 They that were foolish took their lamps, but took no oil with them.

M. Although there is nothing handeled here, but the manner of receiuinge
brydegromes which was used in that country, being therefore set forth that
the faithful might be admonished how they might be prepared to mete with the
heavenly brydegrome Christ, least they being unprepared should be shut out
from his weddinge: yet notwithstanding, it shall proffite to understand here
mistically by the lamps, all external worship, conversation, righteousness,
honesty, and all the works of charity.

4. But the wise took oil with them in their vessels with the lamps also.

C. He notes this to be a token of wisdom for the faithful to seek to arm
them selves with necessary helps to finishe and accomplish the race of their
life. For the time although it be short, seems by reason of our exceading
impacience to be very much prolonged: furthermore, such is our need, that it
wants helps every moment.

5 While the bridegroom tarried, they all slombered and slepte.

While the brydegrome tarried. M. Christ here declares that it wylbe late
before he come: for his return is in the end of the world, and is reserved
till the latter times. For it must needs be that the number of the elect be
fulfilled: Heb. 11.
least the company of the saints should be accomplished, without those of the
latter times, and ^east the iniquity and malice of this world should come to
the full, before it be judged and condemned: even as we read, Gene: 15. and.18
of the Sodomytes, and of the Cananeaus: whose punishemente by the long
sufferinge of God was so much differred, that by the fulness of iniquity it
was made ripe. M The Apostle Peter declares another cause also of this
prolonginge of the time. 2. Pet. 3.
The Lord is not slack (says he) as some men count slacknes, but is
pacient to you ward, for so much as he would have no man lost, but would
have al men turn to repentance. These things are to be considered, least
that we draw the slacknes of the Lords coming, with the wicked into an
argument of unbelief and negligence.

They all slombered and slepte. C. In that some take this sleep (here
mentioned) in evil part, as though the faithful gave them selves to
slouthfulnes as well as others, and sleep in the vanities of this world, let
us know that it is contrary to the meaning of Christ and to the order of the
parable. It should be more probable to understand it of death, of the which
the faithful taste before the coming of Christ, for we must not now only
look for salvation, but also when we, being departed this life, rest in
Christ. Notwithstanding, it is more simplely understood of earthly business,
with the which it is necessary that the faithful be entangled, so long as they
dwell in the flesh. For although they never ought to forget the kingdom of
God, yet notwithstanding the departure out of this world is not amiss compared
to a sleep. Neither can they waighte so diligently to mete Christ, Carca^ life
of hynde ^ faithfu^
but that diverse cares of this life, do either draw the^ back, make them
slow, or entangle them. Whereupon it comes to pass that in watchinge they
are in some point a sleep. M. We are truly by a thousand intisementes drawn
away: but yet for all that we ought to have oil in store always, at what
hour soever he call. It cannot be but that we should have our minds occupied,
for Satan does assault us by wonderful means: in the mean time let us not
be without oil, yt we may declare our selves not to be unprepared. The
infidel being called of the Lord is by and by troubled, he thinks of his
lamp, but has nothing in a redines. On the contrary part the faithful is
never take without his forniture and things necessary appertaining to him.
Infid^ alway^ prepa^ the lord ^^ing.


6 And even at midnighte there was a cry made, behold the bridegroom comes,
go out to mete him.

C. This cry is here metaphorically put for the sudden coming. For we know
by experience that so often as any new thing or unlooked for happens, men are
wont to make a tumulte. The Lord truly cries daily, that he will come
shortly, but then ale the whole world shall sound, and the terrefiynge
majesty shall so fulfill heaven and earth, that it shall not only waken those
that are asleape, but also make the dead to rise out of their graves: A.
according to this saying, The hour shall come, in the which, John. ^
all that are in the graves shall here his voice.

7. Then all those Virgins arose, and prepared their lamps.

Then all those Virgins arose, M. Even as the slackenes of Christ's coming,
does make even the wise slothful, so the loud cry of his coming, will
stir up, not only the wise, but also the folish, and will make them
careful how they may meet with Christ. And prepared their Lamps, All truly
shall adorn and set forth the meetinge of the Lord, as well these fools as the
wise: but by another manner of preparation, far differinge from theirs. The
wise because they have oil in their lamps, may easelye light them and make
them ready: but ye foolish cannot do so. They at the last when it is to late
go about to borrow unoccupied lamps, when they should meet with the Lord.

8. So the foolish said unto the wise: give us of your oil: for our lamps
are gone out.

C. In these words is declared their late repentance, which feel not their
want and lack till all remedy is past. For they are therefore condemned of
folishnes which do not provide and store themselves for a long time, because
they carelessly please themselves in their need, and do so ouerpasse ye time of
mutual communication, that they despise the help offered unto them. Because
therefore they remember not in due time the preparinge of their oil, Christ
derydinge their to late knowledge, sheeweth what punishmente they shall have
for their slouthe, because they shall see that they are void and dry without
profit.

9. But the wise answered saying, not so, least there be not anoughe for us
and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and by for your selves.

No not so least there be not C. We do know that the gifts of God are therefore
diversely distributed of the Lord to every one according to their proper
measure, that one may help another, and to make that serve for the general
propfite of al men, which one man particulerly enjoys: and after this manner
the holy connection and knitting together of the members in the Church is
maintained. But Christ here notes the time, in ye which unprofitable cariages
being taken away, Corin. 5.
all men shall be called by him to his tribunal seat: that every man may
receive according to his deeds, whether they be good or evil. C. He does
therefore rightly compare that part of grace which every man has received, to
that necessary carriage which every one that traueleth, has, because it will
not suffice many. Wherefore this that follows: Go ye rarher by, is not an
admonition, but rather a reproach: as in this sense: There was time anoughe
before now to bye, which should not have been neglected of you. For then there
was oil to sell which now can begotten neither for money nor love. But the
Papists do herevppon folishly bring in that the gift of perseverance is
gotten by our virtues or else by our industry. For in this word (bye) there is
no price noted: even as we may plainlye gather by the words of the Prophet
Esaias, Esaias. 55.
where the Lord calling us to bye, requires no price, but says that he
has wine and milk at hand, which he will give freely. Therefore there is no
other way to get this, than to receive by faith that which is offered unto
us.

M. So that the meaning of this place is not that the just in the end of the
world shall send the foolish to some place to bye this oil: but the meaning
thereof is, that there shall be no remedy then, by the which they reform and
amend their negligence, in the coming of Christ. For these things (as it is
said before) ought to he understood, by a figure called Ironia or else by a
certain exprobration, or reprochinge.

10. And while they went to bye, the bridegroom came, and they that were ready
went in with him to the marriage, and the gate was shut.

A. Al they which are ready enter into the everlasting joy: but the rest are
excluded and shut out.

11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying: Lord, Lord, open to us.
Afterward came also the other Vir.? C. Christ here affirms that the gate of
his Heavenly kingdom shall be shut up against those yt are not well provided,
because they faynted in the midst of the race. For we must not here
scrupulously demand how Christ says that the foolish Virgins went to bye
oil: because he means nothing else but that all those shall be driven from the
entrance of the kingdom of Heaven, which are not in a redines even in a
moment.

Lord, Lord, A. This repetition or doubleinge of the name (Lord) does
declare how greatly they shall be vexed which are contemners of the grace of
God, when they know to late that the hope of everlasting salvation is taken
from them.

12. But he answered and said: Verily I say unto you I know you not.

But he answered and said: A. This is the reward of unbelief. The Lord
promised truly, that he would here those that call upon him: yet
notwithstanding the folishe Virgins are not here heard, Invocation must have
trust of Gods mercy annexed to it.
because they call upon him without trust of his mercy and promises.
Hypocrites shall make lamentacion in vain, that all help is taken from the^.
And this is that which the Apostle writes to ye Hebrews saying: That there be
no fornicator, or unclean person, as Esau, Hebr. 12.
which for one mess of pottage sold his birth right. For ye know how that
afterward, when he would by inheritance have received blessing, he was put
by, for he found no place of repentance though he sought it with tears.
Reprobates repent not from the bottom of the heart.
He did not pray in faith, but did rather murmr against God. Such are the
complaints of all the reprobate, which know that they are excluded, and yet
cannot cry from the affection of the heart. I know you not That is to say, I
never counted you among ye number of mine.

13. VVatch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor yet the hour, wherein
the son of man shall come.

M. We ought dyligently to note the conclusion of this parable, watch (says
he.) Wherefore? Because the gate shall be opened to them that are ready, and
shut against the rest. When shall this be? Even in that day, when ye bridegroom
shall come, whose coming no man knows.

14. For as a certain man ready to take his journey to a strange country
called his servants, and deliuerd unto them his goods.

For as a certain man M. In the parable goinge before Christ admonished us to
watch, because the day of his coming is not known: but by this parable he
sheeweth what shall come to pass in his coming: specially to those that are
his servants and mynisters, to whom it belongs to dispense and bestow
those gifts faithfully according to the person and condition of every one, to
the profit and augmenting of the kingdom of God. M. For by the similitude of
the trauelinge man he does secretlye preuente the opinion of his Disciples,
which they had conceived of the present revealing of his kingdom: showing that
he must depart out of this life and yt he will return not by and by, but
after a long time to manifest and reveal ye glory of the kingdom of God.
Luke. ^^
Of the which matter we have a manifest place in the nyntene of Luke where
this parable also is put down unto us. M. Howbeit there seems to be some
difference between this our Evangelist Mathewe and Luke in the narratio^ of
this parable. C. For Matthew touching one only part, Luke comprehe^deth two.
This part both of them have, yt Christ is like unto a certain Lord, which to
get a kingdom, went into a far country, and left his goods with his
servants to occupye, and so forth as follows: But Luke has this more then
Mathewe, that the Citizens being abused in the absence of the noble man,
moved a tumulte, yt they might be no longer subject under him. Christ had
respect to both these parts, that the Disciples were greatly deceived, which
thought that ye kingdom was now established, and that he came now to
Jerusalem that he might set up the happy state thereof out of hand. So that
Christ seekinge to take away the hope of the present kingdom, exhorts them
to patience. For he says that they must labor diligently a long time, before
that they enjoy that glory, the which they so greedely desyered without
traueile.

Ready to take his journey. C. Saying the Dysciples thought that Christ went
then to take possession of the kingdom: he does first of all correct this
error, because he must go a great way of to get him a kingdom. And as
touching this far country, Christ thereby mente to note nothing else, than
his long absence from the time of his death, until the last coming. For
although he sittinge at the right hand of God, has obtained the rule and
power both of Heaven and earth: yet notwithstanding because he has not as
yet subdued his ennemies, and because he has not appeared as yet the Judge of
the world, neither has revealed his majesty, he is not without good
consideration, said to be absent from his servants, til he return again,
glorified with new honor and power.

It is most true that he reigns, when he does regenerate his to everlasting
life, and repayreth them to the Image of God, and associateth them with the
Angels, (...) raig^ now by ^^wer and ^^.
when he governs his Church with his word, defends ye same with his help,
replenisheth the same with ye gifts of his spirit, maintains the same with
his grace, sustayneth the same with his power, and gives unto it whatsoever is
necessary for his salvation, when he stilleth the rage of Satan and his
ministers, and disapointeth all their devises: but because this manner of
rayning is hid from the flesh the reuealinge thereof is properly differred
until the last day.

Therefore saying the Dysciples took hold of the shadow of the kingdom, the
Lord declares that they must seek for the kingdom a far of, that they
may learn to abide delay. Called his servants C. By the name of
servants, he does not only understand Preachers, but also all those that
are in the Church whom he appoints to this, that every one according to his
portion and abillitye, help his neighbor. But specially in these words he
has respect unto the mynisters. The Evangelist Luke makes mention of ten
servants: but we must not stand so much upon the number of the servants,
as upon ye sums of money. For Matthew making mention of diverse sums does
comprehend a more fruteful doctrine: namely that Christ does not commit to
every one an equal burden or portion of work, but gives to one a little
sum, to another a great portion. In this both the Evangelists do agree, ye
Christ does as it were take a long iorneye from his household, until the last
day of resurrection: in the mean time that it is not meet that they sit ydell
and unprofitable: for every one has a several office enjoined unto him, in
the which he may exercise himself: and that therefore they ought to be
deligent in their busynes that they may finish faithfully the Lords work.
Luke says simplely that a pound of money was committed to every one: because
if the Lord commit somewhat unto us, whether it be more or less, every man
shall give acompt for himself. The Evangelist Matthew (as we said even now)
speaks more expressly and plentifullye, who makes several degrees in the
distribution of the money. For we know that ye Lord does not deal a like with
all men in ye distribution of his gifts, Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 12.
but geeueth to every man as it seems to him best, that one may excel
another. But what gifts soever the Lord bestow upon us, let us know that it
is committed unto us, as it were money, yt some gain might come thereof. For
there is nothing more displeasaunte unto God, than to burye his graces (the
force whereof consists in fructefyinge,) in secret, and to bestow them to no
use. M. He says here that he called his servant, Calling is necessary for
the mynisters of Christ.
to the end we might know that vocation is necessary, insomuche that no man
without the same can play the true servant of Christ. They being called,
Heavenly gifts are committed unto them, for the profit of ye Church. They
which run of themselves, or are set in auctority by me^ only, as they are
not called of the Lord, so also are they destitute of the distribution of his
gifts and graces. But the certainty of the calling being more secret, is
known by the Heavenly gifts, namelye by those which are not common, but
meet for the promoting of the kingdom of God. Where these are found we may be
sure that there is that secret calling of God, thrusting out his mynisters
into his Vyneyarde.

And delivered unto them his goods We have nothing therefore of our own,
Man has no good thing of his own, but by imputacio^.
what good thing soever is in us it belongs unto God, yet nevertheless it is
committed unto us upon this condition that we should be count able unto him
for it. No man therefore ought to arrogate any thing to himself as though it
were his own, although he excel the rest in great gifts. What have thou O
man that thou have not received? 1. Cor, 4.
If thou have received it, why doste thou glory as though thou had not
received it? For this is not so to be understood, that he gave them his goods
to the end they should be their own, to use them at their pleasure, but
rather to dispense and bestow for the profit of others. Ephe. 4,
So ye Apostle Paul says in another place: He assending on hye gave gifts
unto men. For whatsoever is given to the mynisters of Christ, it is given more
unto the Church than unto them.

15. And unto one he gave five talentes, to another two, and to another one,
to every man after his abilitye: and straight way departed.

And unto one he gave five talentes M. All received not like gifts, but to
some more, to some less was given. Romans 12. 1. Corin. 12. Ephesi. 4.
As concerning the diversity of gifts, read the twelfthe chapeer of S. Paul
to the Romans. The grace of God is not equallye poured upon all men, but
according to measure, according to need, and according to the office
committed. Wherefore we must not only see what we have received, but also
what our calling and office does require.

To every man after his abilitye By these words, Christ does not put a
difference between nature, and the gifts of the spirit: for there is no
power or aptnes which being received, ought not to be referred unto God. So
that, whosoever will divide with God, he shall have nothing left to himself.
What is the meaning therefore of this, yt the good man of the house is said to
give to every one either more or less accordtnge to their ability? Surely the
meaning is this, that as God has desposed and given to every one natural
gifts: so also he enioyneth to them either this or that, he exercises them
in doing one thing or another, he exalts them to diverse functions, and he
does always plentifully offer them occasion to work. M. We must take heed
therefore least we think that any has any power in the kingdom of Heaven
in that sort, that he has power over his own: but we must grant, that not
only the officies themselves, but also the power to accomplish the same
comes of the Lord. Not yt we are able to think any thing of our selves,
2. Cor, 3.
as of our selves: but our abilitye comes of God which has made us meet
ministers of the new Testamente. And the Apostle Peter says, 1. Peter. 4
if any man mynister, let him do it as of the abillitye which God mynistereth
unto him. C. Rediculouse therefore is the opinion of the Papists, in
gatheringe herevppon that all men receive the gifts of God according to their
merits and deserts. For although the old interpreter has: To every one
according to his virtue: yet notwithstanding by this word (virtue) he meant
not that men are blessed of God and endued with grace from above, according to
their behavior and as they have gotten praise of virtue: but only according
as the Lord of the house thinks them meet. And we know that there is no
man found meet of God, until he have made him meet. And the Greek word
(Dhunamis,) which Christ used for this word (abillity) wants all ambiguity.

M. The Evangelist Luke adds saying: Occupy till I come. By the which words
he committed to the Apostles and Preachers, their office and mynisterye of
Preachinge the Gospel. For by that, as the Church is builded, so are the
goods of Christ increased, which goods or treasure are men obtayninge
salvation by faith in Christ. Therefore these words of Luke: Occupy till I
come: is as much as this, Go ye throughout the whole world and preach the
Gospel to every creature: Mark. ^
A. For I have chose^ you and ordained you to go, John. 15.
and bring forth fruit, and yt your fruit should remain. And straight way
departed Read the exposition of the 14. verse before.

16. Then he that had received the five talentes went and occupied with the
same and wan other five talentes. Then he that had received M. These words do
very well set forth unto us the mynistery of the word, specially the
Apostleship. This word, (went) has relacion, to, Go ye: and to this also: And
they went and preached every where. Howbeit this ought not to be restrained
only to the mynisters of the word, (as we said even now) but also to all
those, which being endued of God with diverse gifts, ought to promote his glory.

And occupied with the same C. They are said to occupy, which profitablely
bestow whatsoever God has committed unto the^. Bu. For to occupye is, to
exercise themselves in the gifts of God committed unto them, to geeue all
glory unto God, to praise God, to live honestlye, to exhort all men to
goodness, to do good unto all men, and by such like godly labor, to win many
unto God. C. For the life of the godly is very aptlye compared to occupyinge:
because they ought mutually to occupye among themselves to maintain
fellowship, love, and concord.

And won other five talentes The gain and fruit here mentioned is nothing
else, than the common profit, which sets forth ye glory of God. For although
God does not enriche or in increase our labors: yet notwithstanding as every
man does most profit his brethren, and does profitablelye use those gifts to
their profit which he has received at the hands of God: so he is said to
bring gain, and fruit unto God. For so acceptable is the salvation of men to
our Heavenly father, that what soever is bestowed upon the same, he will have
put in the accomptes. God therefore takes fruit of us, because by our work,
he will set forth his glory. We are unworthy truly, but he makes us worthy
by that grace, yt he used the Apostleship of Paul to preach the Gospel
throughoute diverse Nations, (...). 9.
which made himself a servant to all men that he might win the more unto
Christ.

17. Likewise also he that received two, gained other two.

Bu. The servant that received five talentes, signifies those, which because
they have received great grace, therefore they show forth the greatest
works. But this man which received two talentes only, does denote unto us
the meaner sort, who also according to the measure of the grace which they
have received, do labor faithfully and not in vain. All these occupye
profitablely, and do gain to the Lord, not seeking those things that pertain
to themselves, but the Lords.

18 But he that received that one, went and dug in the earth, and hyd his
Lords money.

M. This fellow represents those which discharge not their office according
to their abillity, ^ena^ts.
which they have of God, but do abstain from occupyinge, from labor, from
trouble, and from the dangers of Preachinge the Gospel, seeking only their
ease and quietness. ^no 4*
There were many of this sort in the time of Paul which forsakinge the
function of the Gospel, gave themselves to the world. They think it
sufficient if they keep their talente, having no care for the gain, in the
mean time they wonderfully dissemble, and hyde the gift received. This kind
of men, (because they thought that they could not be blamed, for that they
hinder not other men from doing their duty) is condemned of our savior
Christ, as untrusty and reprobate: to ye end he might thereby admonish his
Dysciples, diligently and faythfullye to dyscharge their duty.

19. After a long season, the Lord of these servants came and reckened with
them.

After a long season, M. Although it be long ere Christ come, yet for all
that, he will come at the length to Judgment, least any man should behave
himself the more negligently, because of the long coming thereof. And
reckened with them He sheeweth that whatsoever we have received of the Lord
is not given unto us simplely, but upon this condition that we should give
account of the same, as we have said before. But we are therefore oftentimes
void of care, and do not show our selves so dilligente in the obedience of
God, because we think those things, that we have received to be our own:
insomuche that he which has goods, if he through negligence leese any part
thereof, he thinks ye he leeseth nothing but that which is his own, not
consideringe with himself that he shall make an account for the loss: but
he which occupyeth another man's substance, and has the oversight of ye same,
cares for the utmost farthing, knowing that he must give account.

20. And so he that had received five talentes came, and brought other five
talentes saying: Sir thou deliuerest unto me five talentes: behold I have
gained with them sieve mo.

M. We have said already that we may not stand scrupulously upon every
point of the parable. Because he made mention of an account, therefore he
declares simplely what things are commonly spoken in making of an account.
For in the latter Judgment, ye good shall not declare, what and how much
good they have done, and how great vantage they have brought to ye kingdom of
God. Neither shall they know how much gain they have brought to the kingdom of
Christ, by their ministry: but shall say, Lord, when did we see thee hungrye
and fed thee etc. But the Lord himself to whom all things are bare and open,
shall be ignorant of none of those things which are wrought in faith and truth.
C. Therefore that we should not be wearye of well doing, Christ pronounces
that their labor shall not be in vain, which shall exercise themselves
faithfully in their vocation.

21. His Lord said unto him: well thou good and faithful servant, Thou
have been faithful in few things, I will make the ruler over many things.
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Well thou good and faithful servant This is a kind of speech used in the
praise and co^mendacion of him which has done his duty. Two special things
in a steward.
Christ commends in this man two things, namely, goodness, and faithfulness,

Thou have been faithful over fevve things The Euangeliste Luke has: Thou
have been faithful in the least. He calls those his goods few and ye
least, which he gave to his mynisters to occupye and bestow, being such and
so great, that without it we cannot be saved (the which the Apostle calls
the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 4. Ephesi. 3
Math. 7.
he calls it also a treasure, and the unsearchable riches of God, and
Christ himself compares it to precious stones) his goods (I say) being so
great and precious, he calls them few and the least in respect of those
things which we shall receive after this life. Hereby we are admonished how
great the joys of the life to come shall be. First of all he prayseth this,
that the servant declares his faith and trust according to the substance and
price of the thing committed unto him.

For mark this proverb.

He that in small things will be unjust, In matters of price deserves no
trust.

I will make the ruler over many things C. The Evangelist Luke has: I will
make the ruler over five Cities, (speakinge of him which had gained five
pounds: by the which words he declares that there shall be another manner glory
of kingdom in his last coming, than now appears. For now we do but
laboriouslye discharge the business of one that is absent: Faithf^ ^^uaunte^
their r^^
but then he shall have plentye and great abundance of riches at his hand,
with the which he may largelye enriche us. But our Euangeliste speaks more
simplelye saying.

Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord C. By the which he declares that
faithful servants, whose offices he has allowed, shall be partakers with him
of the blessed store of al good things. Bu. To this effect pertayneth that
which the Apostle writes: Romans ^
The afflictions of this life are nothing in respect of the glory that shall be
sheewed upon us. Inspeakeable benefits therefore shall be bestowed upon the
faithful servant of the Lord.

22. He also that had received two talentes, came and said: sir thou
deliueredst unto me two talentes: behoulde I have won two other talentes with
them.

Bu. Here is set forth ye other faithful servant, who according to his mean
gift, declared a wonderful trust toward God: whereupon he also brings
forth fruit not to be repented. Let no man therefore be grieved with himself,
in that he sees his neighbor to be endued with larger gifts, to flerishe
with many virtues, neither let him envy the glory of one that excels him:
let all men pray rather to the Lord for the increase of gifts and virtues.

23. His Lord said unto him: well good and faithful servant: Thou have
been faithful over few things I will make the ruler over many things. Enter
thou into the joy of the Lord.

Well good and faithful servant A. The duty of this servant also, which had
received less gifts of the Lord, is allowed, his faith praised, and rewarded
of the Lord. The Lord says unto him as he said to the first, Enter thou into
the joy of M. Both of them are said to be good and faithful, and are received
into ye Lords joy. Let no man therefore think yt he is despised of the Lord,
if he have a mean dispensation, if so be that he faithfully discharge his
duty. For it is not considered how much thou art of ability, and how hard an
office thou have: but the question is, how faithful thou have been toward ye
Lord.

24. Then he which had received the one talent, came and said: Sir I knew
thee, that thou art a hard man: reapinge where thou have not sowe^, and
gatheringe where thou have not strawed.

Then he which had received the one talent Bu. Now is depainted unto us the
most wicked and corrupt desposition above all others of this slouthful and
sleapy servant. ^^se ser^^.
And this fellow does very well set forth the blasphemous words of all the
wicked ones and the ungodly and vain excuses of al hipocrites. The wicked
cry, it is a hard and dangerous thing to serve the Lord: he requires of us
great things, to perform the which he has given us small ability: least
therefore any of his gifts perish here through my lack of wisdom, that
which he gave me untilled, I will leave untouched when I depart, An other
says: Why shall I give my mind to righteousness and holiness? If I be one of
the elect I shall be saved without all doubt how sinful soever I be: again, if
I be one of the reprobates, I shall undoubtedly be damned how much soever I vex
my self, and afflicte my body with chastisement, and pray for faith: for I
shall pray in vain, because election is not obtained by prayer. Therefore
least I offe^de I content my self, and commit me to the election of God, that
I may be saved by none of my merits, but by the free election and grace of God.
^s. 1
A. As though in deed this were not the end of our election, that we should
be holy and unblameable before God. Bu. Furthermore a man shall find at this
day, not unlearned and unskillful men, who when they are called either to office
of teachinge, or to ye office of a Magistrate, object and say: It is a heavy
and troublesome vocation whereunto I am called: and although God, has bestowed
upon me certain gifts, yet notwithstanding I know that they are not so
great as are required: least therefore I should offend I will live a private
man. ^^ptes (...) be made (...) gifts ^ day of ^gement.
A. But we shall hear by and by what the Lord will say to these careless
fellows when he shall come to reckon with them for those gifts.

Sir I knevve thee that thou art a hard man C. This hardness does pertain
nothing at all to the sum of this parable: and they are of a folish opinion,
which dispute here, how straightly and hardly the Lord deals with those that
are his. For ye purpose of Christ was no more to note such rygor, than to
commend vsurye, when he says that the Lord of the house required to have his
money delivered with advantage, Christ only means that their slouthfulnes
shall be inexcusable, which both suppress ye gifts of God, and also spend
their time in idleness.

25. And therefore was I afraid, and went and hid thy talente in the earth.
Lo there thou have that thine is.

A. The wicked and the ypocrites, fear where no fear is: and when they
should fear, then are they void of all care. This wicked servant should
rather have stood in fear, least he should despise his masters
commandment, by the which he charged him to work till he came.

26. His Lord answered and said unto him: Thou evil and slothful
servant, thou knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have
not strawed.

His Lord answered Bu. Here ye just judgment of God against ypocrites is
plentifully declared, beside the sharp reprehension of the wicked fact, and
equal ponishment. Thou evil and slouthful servant M. In that he calls him
evil and slothful, he sheeweth yt he ceased from work, not so much by the
fear of his seueritye, as by his own slouthfulnes and negligence.

27. Thou ought therefore to have delivered my money to the exchaungers,
and then at my coming should I have received my own with vauntage.

Bu. The Euangeliste Luke brings in before these words: Of thine own mouth
will I condemn thee. He is condemned of his own mouth by turning yt against
him, which he alleged for his excuse. As if he should say, Thou knew yt I
was a strait requyrer of gain: why then did thou not for fear of my
seueritye give my money to ye exchangers? and I which seek for gain there,
where I bestowed no cost, should shortly come and require my money with vantage:
yt is to say, yt I would reap there where I sowed not. The stock and chance
thereof was mine, and not thine: and thou did owe the duty of a servant to
ye Lord.

28 Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten
talentes.

Aunsweare.
We aunsweare, that we must remember that which we said before, that they do
err which scrupulouslye stand upon every word of parables. But the true and
natural sense hereof is this ye although now slothful and unprofitable
servants have the gifts of the spirit, yet notwithstanding at ye length
they shall be stripped out of all, that their nakedness and reproachful need
may turn to the glory of ye good. Christ says that these are slothful, or
yt they do dig their talent or pound under the earth: because they seeking
altogether for ease and pleasure, will suffer no trouble at all: even as we see
very many while they are whollye addicted to their private commodities, do let
pass all the duties of charity, and have no regard of the common buildinge.
So that we may easlye gather by this parable, that there is no kind of life
more acceptable before God, than that, by the which there comes some profit
to the society of men.

29. For unto every one that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance.
But he that has not, from him shall be taken away, even that which he has.

C. He says to him that has shall be given. For they do truly possess the
gifts of God which do rightly use them. Covetous men possess not money, but
are possessed of money.
The couetouse men are rather possessed of their money, because they know not
the right use of possessing. Even so of spiritual gifts: he which according
to his abillity, promoteth the glory of God, is rightlye said to have. He
means thereof that God does requight and reward the right use of the gifts
of the godly with the latter graces: but notwithstanding we must acknowledge
him to be the geuer and author of these things, both of that we receive, and
also of the right use of those things that we do receive.

For the reward is such, that it comes freely. For he owes nothing unto
us, nay we are rather detters unto him. A. Insomuche that when we have done
all that ever we can, Luke. 17.
yet ought we to say that we remain unprofitable servants, and that we
have not done that which was our duty to do. C. This is also a great
consolation to the faithful, when they here God to be so beneficial unto them
hitherto, that he will still enriche them with new treasure. And this promise
ought to kindle earnest study and diligence in the godly, that so much as they
can, they seek to bring profit, not to themselves, but to the Lord.

As touching the rest which pertayneth to the exposition of this verse, read
the 13. goinge before.

30. And cast the unprofitable servant into utter darkness there shall be
weepinge and gnashinge of teeth.

And cast the unprofitable servant M. This is to be noted that he is not
only an unprofitable servant which wastes his masters goods and tourneth
them to his own use, but he also which hydeth his masters goods in a
corner, which he received to occupye: Even as that is not called an evil
tree only which brings forth evil fruit, but that also which brings forth
no fruit. Into utter darkness Read the eight Chapter going before. C. For
there we taught that utter darkness, was set against the Domestical light.
Christ means here that they which are cast out of the kingdom of GOD,
are cast into extreme darkness.

31. When the son of man comes in his glory and all the Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the seat of his glory.

When the son of man comes B. The Evangelist Matthew proceeds on still, in
expoundinge the question as concerning the consumation and end of the world,
and of the Judge, and Judgment to come. For hither by the occasion thereof
Christ exhorted by some parables to watching and perseverance. C. That
therefore which before he described in parables, he now plainlye declares
without figures. The sum and effect is, that the faithful should prepare
themselves to the study of a holy and godly life, in having respect with
the eyes of faith to the Heavenly life, which being now hid, shall be at the
last revealed in the coming of Christ.

For in saying that he shall then sit in the seat of his glory, when he
shall come with Angels, he opposes or sets this last revelation
against the confused, and imperfect cogitacions of ye earthly war* as if he
should have said, that he did not therefore appear that he should straighte
way establishe his kingdom: and therefore he shows that hope and patience
is needful, least the long delay should make his Dysciples weak. Whereupon
we gather that this was also added, that ye Disciples being exempte from the
error of the present and sudden felicity, might suspend their minds until
the second coming of Christ: in ye mean time that they should not faint or
fall away through his absence: and therefore he says that at that time he
shall be glorious by the name of a king.

For although he began his kingdom in earth, and sits now at the right
hand of the father, that he might govern both Heaven and earth with great
power: yet notwithstanding that seat is not yet erected and set up in the
sight of men: whereby we may note, that his deuyne majesty shall much more
brightlye shine in the last day than now. For then we shall see the
perfect effect of that glory, of the which we have now but a taste only.
Christ therefore now sits in his Heavenly throne, because it is
necessary that he reign to bridle his enemies, and to defend his Church:
but then he shall openly sit upon his tribunal seat, that he may
stablishe perfect order in Heaven and in earth, that he may prostrate his
enemies under his feet, and that he may gather his faithful into the society
of the Heavenly and blessed life: yea then it shall appear in deed,
wherefore the kingdom of Heaven is committed unto him of the father. In his
glory M. He does so discribe the quality of his second coming, that he
declares the same to be far unlike the first, in the which he was then.

In the first coming he appeared base in the form of a servant: In the
second, he shall appear glorious in the form of ye king of all kings and
judges: In the first coming he was subject to reproach and ignominye: in the
latter coming he shall appear in glory. In the first coming he appeared
weak: In the latter coming he shall appear with Heavenly power. In the
first coming he was subject to the Judgment and condemnation of wicked
men? In the latter coming he shall geeue Judgment upon al reprobates. So
that, he calls that his glory, in this place, which in another place he
attributes to his father in the same sense: for he means simplelye the
deuyne glory, which then shyned in the father only, for so much as it was hid
in him. Matthew. 17. 2. Pet. 1.
M. The glorifyinge of Christ's body, makes very much for this glory, some
sight whereof the Apostles had. It is also well approved by the company of
all the Angels which shall wait upon him, and by the power of Iudginge also.

And all his Angels with him As if he should say, I which now seem to be
base and of small reputacion, by your contemptible service and waytinge, will
then appear with a train of Heavenly soldiers and Angels. For he goes
about to express with what virtue and power he shall come.

And the Apostle describinge the glorious coming of Christ to the terror of
the wicked and consolation of the godly, calls ye Angels that shall come
with Christ, the Angels of power, when he says, It is verily a righteous
thing with God that he recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: and
to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from Heaven wi^h the Angels of his power, with flaminge fire, which
shall render vengeance to them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting
dampnation, 2. These, 1.
from ye presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall
come to be glorified in his saints. How great the power of Angels is, we may
see by that one Angel, which sleyinge.185000. troubled all the host of ye
Assyrians. 4. King. 19.
And how great a multitude shall come with Christ, we are toulde in this that
he says, And all his Angels with him. Daniell. 7.
And the Prophet Daniell describinge the coming of Christ, says, A
thousand times a thousand, served him: ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him: that we might know, that the number of Angels coming with
him shall be infinite.

Then shall he sit upon the seat of his glory. M. Those things that are
spoken toward the latter end of this Chapter, seem to be spoken by the
similitude of a sessions haule. But what this seat of Judgment shall be, let no
curious person, in so serious a matter, Act. 1.
seek. This is certain that he shall come corporally and visiblelye in the
clouds, Matt. 24
to be seen of all the wicked. He shall so come (said the Angels) as ye see
him go into Heaven. And Christ of himself said, Then shall they see the Son
of man coming in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory. Daniell
7.
How terrible this seat shall be to the wicked, the Prophet Daniell declares,
when he says that the throne of Christ shall be like to a flaminge fire. Also,
according to the manner of the Scriptures ye Lord is said to sit as Judge, when
by just Judgment he delivers the innocent, Psalm 9.
and punishes the wicked. So the Prophet David said, Thou haste maintained
my right and my cause: thou art set in the throne that iudgest right. The
which truly is not so to be understood, as though Christ also at this day
sits not on the seat of his kingdom, gouernynge all things: but that then
he will call all things openly to judgment, and will declare his glory.

32. And before him shall be gathered all Nations. And he shall separate them
one from another, as a shepeherd deuideth the sheep from the goats.

And before him shall be gathered C. With large and magnifycent titles, he
extolleth his kingdom, that the Dysciples might learn to hope for another
felicity than that which they had conceived in their minds. For they thought
this sufficient, to have their counterye delivered from myseries, with the
which at that time they were oppressed, that it might appear, that God had
not made his covenant in vain with Abraham, and his posteritye. But Christ
does farther extend the fruit of the redemption which he brought, because
he should be the Judge of the whole world: and to the end he might exhort
the faithful to a godly life, he denies that ye same shall belong to the
good and bad alike, because he should bring with him the reward which is
laid up for them both. And the sum of his words, is, that the state of his
kingdom shall be then profited, when ye just have obtained the crown of
glory: and when the reward, which the wicked have deserved, is paid unto
them. Matthew. 2^
Al Nations (says he) shall be gathered before him: Bu. namelye from all parts
of the world, when he sits on his trybunall seat. By all Nations, he
means al those that are dead, and those also, 1. Thessa. ^
which shall be found then at that day living: as teaches the Apostle Paul in
the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle to the Thessalonians. 2. Cor, 6


And in another place he says: We must all appear before the tribunal
seat of Christ, that every man may receive ye works of his body according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Matthew ^ Math 13


And he shall separate them M. This separation also is noted before by
certain similitudes, as by the fanninge and pourginge his flower: by the
similitude of the tares: Sepera^^ of ye (...) bad.
and by the net cast into the sea. But in that this separation of ye sheep and
goats is differred until that day, he declares that the wicked and
reprobate are now mixed with the godly and elect, Ezechi^
that both of them may live together in one flock of God. And the Prophet
Ezechiell seems to use this comparison, where the Lord complayneth thus: I
will put a difference among the sheep, among the weathers, and the goats.

Was it not anoughe for you to eat up the good pasture, but ye must tread
down the residue with your feet? Wherefore the words of Christ tend to this
end, that yt condition and state of the faithful should not be to grievous
unto them, if they be now constrained to live with the goats, yea if they
suffer of them sharp stripes with their horns: and that they might take heed
least their stinking smell infect them: Thyrdly, that they may know, that
they loose not their labor in leadinge a godly and innocente life: because a
difference shall at the length appear. This place also serves against their
enterprise, which go about in this life to separate the goats from the sheep
the which thing none can do but Christ at that time.

33. And shall set the sheep on his right hand, the goats on the left: The^
shall the king say to them that be on the

34. right hand: Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the world.

And he shall set the sheep Bu. The right hand is a place of felicitye and
dignitye: the left hand, a place of unhappiness, and miserye. Whereupon the
ancient writers in steed of the right hand, have set down unto us,
everlasting life: and for the left hand perpetual damnation.

(...) seperatio^ (...) be made (...) ye last day.
And then shall the king say C. We do see here that it is the office of
Christ only (which in this place calls himself a king) to separate the
good from the evil, but not before the last day. In the mean time the
mynisters must labor diligently, to separate the wolves, the goats, and the
sick sheep, from the sheep that are sound: for to this end Ecclesiastical
discipline is ordained the which ought not to ve wantinge in the Church.
^^cipline ^^^t to be in (...) Church Christ.
Yet notwithstanding when they have done their duty to the utmost, there
shall remain still a mixture even until the end of the world, because Christ
only chalengeth this to himself, to make a clean purgation of his Church:
and this purgation he puts of until the last day.

Come ye blessed of my father M. This boyce does note the affection of a
singular fauore, and of the love of a friend. The which affection Christ
declared, when he was also in the world, (...) 11.
as when he said: Come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy laden, and
I will refreshe you. But who should come unto this Judge of the lyuinge and ye
dead, except he himself of his own good will should indue our minds with a
trust of coming to him? Ye blessed of my father That is to say, ye beloved of
my father, being in my fathers grace and favor. To to this is contrary, Ye
cursed of my father, that is, cast out of Gods favor and subject to his
wrath. C. But let us note here the purpose of Christ: for he would have his
Dysciples to be now contented with hope, that they might look for the fruition
of the Heavenly kingdom patientlye, and with quiet minds: then he would
have them carnestly occupied, and not to be weryed in the right race.

To this latter part is referred this, that he promises the inheritance of
Heaven to no other, but to those which by good works strive for the Palm,
and to the end of the supernall calling. But before he speaks of the
reward of good works, he sheeweth by the way, that the beginning of
salvation does issue from a hyer spring. For in calling them the blessed of
his father, Salvation comes only of the free mercy of God
he declares that their salvation comes by the free mercy of God. For the
blessed of God, with the Hebrews, is as much, as the beloved of God. Moreover
not only the faithful have used this kind of speech to set forth the grace
of God in men, but they also which swerued from true godliness: as Laban, who
said to the servant of Abraham, Genesis 24.
Come in thou blessed of the Lord. We do see that these men had learned to
geeue God the praise of all good things. Wherefore there is no doubt, but
that Christ describinge the salvation of the godly, began at the free mercy of
God, by the which they are predestinate to life, who by the guidinge of the
spirit in this life aspyre to righteousness. To that effect also pertayneth
that which he says by and by.

Inherit the kingdom prepared for you Allthough a man might object and say
that a reward was laid up in store for the merits of those to come: yet
notwithstanding if we way the words without contencion, we shall grant that
there is a secret commendation of the grace and mercy of God. For Christ does
not simplely inuit ye faithful to possess the kingdom, as though they
should get the same by their merits: Merits obtain not the kingdom of
heaven.
but does plainly express that the same shall be given at the length to the
heirs.

Possess (says he) or, as heirs possess. If it be an inheritance it
falls unto us: because we are the sons of God, not by nature, not by
merits, but by free adoption. Salvation therefore comes of free mercy, not
by merits, or worthiness.

Yet notwithstanding the other end is to be noted to the which the Lord had
respect.

For although the life of the godly be nothing else than a miserable, and
sorrowful exile, in so much that the earth can scarce sustain them in the
time of persecution: and although they be in need and suffer reproach, and
grief: yet notwithstanding the Lord says that there is a kingdom prepared
for the^ in another place that they might be of a good courage to overcome all
lettes and stays.

This is no small exhortacio^ and encouragement to patience, when men are
certainlye persuaded, that they labor not in vain. Therefore, least the pride
of the ungodly in the which they now rejoice, should discourage us, least also
our own mynisters should debilitate and quail our hope, let us always
remember the inheritance which is prepared for us in Heaven: because it
stands not in hazard, but was appointed unto us by God: before we were
borne. Moreover, whereas it is here said that the kingdom was prepared from
the beginning of the world, and in another place, before the creation of Heaven
and earth, there is no absurdity in that at all.

For Christ does not appoint here any certain time, in the which the
inheritance of everlasting life, was given to the children of God, but does
only put us in mind of ye fatherlye care that God had for us, by the which
he embraced us, before we were borne: and does hereby also confirm the
certaintye of our hope, because all the troubles that we sustain, are not able
to overthrow our life. Some do cauil here saying, that the kingdom was
appointed of God to those, whom he forsawe to be worthy.

But what could God forsee in us, but sin only? He chose us truly that we
should be sanctified, not because he did foresee us to be sanctified.

35. For I was an hongered, and ye gave me meat, I was thirstye and ye gave
me drink: I was harborles, and ye took me in.

B. Because the works of love are here added, Papists are defenders of
superstitions
the Papists being defenders of superstions, do contend, saying than we
domerit the kingdom of God by our works C. But if the cause of our salvation
were disputed of here, they should not gather amiss, that we deserve eternal
life, by our good works: but seeing ye purpose of Christ was nothing else, than
to exhort his Disciples to ye study of a godly life, they do falsely gather of
his words, that our works are able to merit. In that they stand upon the
casual word (For) it is nothing. For we know that the cause is not always
noted, but rather the consequence, when eternal life is promised to the just.
Howbeit there is a more plain aunsweare to be made. For we do not deny a
reward to be promised to good works, but we say that ye free reward is not
promised to good works, because it depends of the adoption.

The Apostle Paul reioyseth that there is a croune of righteousness laid up
for him: but whereupon has he this trust, but only because he was a member
of Christ, which is the only heir of ye celestial kingdom. 2. Tym^
He says that the just Judge shall geeue him this crown, but how has he
this reward, but only because he is freely adopted, and endued with
righteousness, of the which we are all void? Two the here to ^^ted.
These two things therefore are to be noted, namelye, that the faithful are
called to the possession of ye heavenly kingdom, in respect of good

Z. Moreover it is a thing often used in ye Scriptures, to geeue that unto the
latter which belongs unto the first, as to works that which pertayneth to
faith: and again that is oftentimes attributed to faith which is only proper
to the divine election. Wherefore these works here added, must not so be
taken, as though for them God will call the elect to the possession of his
kingdom, but because these works do testify, that they are blessed of the
father, and chosen to the possession of ye kingdom before the world was made:
by the which works they declared that they were endued with the spirit of
the father: For to bless the needy, is a work only belonging to the spirit
of the father.

36. I was naked and ye clothed me: sick and ye visited me: I was in prison,
and ye came unto me.

I was naked and ye clothed me: C. Christ does not reckon up here all the
parts of a godly and holy life, but only touches for examples sake certain
duties of charity, by the which we declare that we worship God. ^^che is a^^
works.
For although the worship of God does far excel the love of men, and
therefore faith and invocation, are preferred before alms deeds: yet
notwithstanding, Christ does justly set before us the testimonies of true
righteousness, which do more appear If a man should be beneficial to his
neighbors, and liberal to the poor, and yet a co^temner of God, his mercy
would profit him nothing at all to please God: because in the mean time he
defraudeth him of his right. ^^h^s are (...) of our ^^ation.
Christ therefore does not place the su^me of righteounes in alms deeds, but
does show as it were by more familiar signs, what it is to live godly and
justly, ye the faithful truly, might not only profess with the mouth, but
also prove by serious exercises that they woorship God. Wherefore, fantastical
and mad men do very preposterously under the color of this place, withdraw
the^ selves both from the hearing of the word, and also from the use of the
holy supper, and from other spiritual exercises: because by the same color,
they would also reject faith, the bearing of the cross, prayers, chastity, and
such like. But truly Christ mente nothing less, than to restrain the rule
of life, which is contained in the two tables of the law, to part of the
second table. Yet notwithstanding, these are the true exercises of Christians,
to do good unto their neighbors.

And by this means, God shall have a trial of us whether we love him truly
or no. For seeing that hypocrites feign them selves to serve God, it is showed
unto them out of the second table, that their service is false. For he which
steals, curses, and so forth, although he be daily occupied in prayer, yet
he bewrays his impiety: even as he that does well, declares his goodness to
al men. There are truly some times wicked persons which are innocent among
men, and yet in the mean time idolaters. And therefore both do comprehend
piety and love: for love only is not sufficient, neither is that preferred
before faith and the invocation of God, for the worship of God is more
excellent than any duty belonginge to men: seeing the duties which pertayne
unto men, do stand upon the worship and piety in God. M. There are also many
other excellent works which without all doubt shall be acknowledged and
allowed at that day in Christians: as the works of those which will forsake
all, yea, their life, for Christ's sake: that faithfully work in dispensing
mysteries, and many other such like: but he reherseth those which may
generally agree to all Christians: in so much that he which is found here
void of synceritie may be rejected as one not pertaining unto Christ.
Although therefore Christ commending unto us love, excludes not the duties
pertaining to the worship of God, yet notwithstanding, he teaches his
disciples that this shall be the lawefull trial of holy life, namely, if they
exercise them selves in love, according to the saying of the Prophet: Ose. 6*
I will have mercy and not sacrifice, because that hypocrites, being covetous,
cruel, deceivers, violent dealers, proud, and such like, do notwithstanding
feign holiness, by the pomp and show of ceremonies. Whereby also we gather,
that if we covet to have our life allowed and accepted before the hie Judge, we
may not wander in our own inuencions, but we must rather consider, what he
does specially require of us. For whosoever shall depart from his
commandments, all though they trouble and weary them selves in feigned
works, yet nevertheless, at the last day they shall hear this said unto
them. Who sought for these things at your hands? Esaias. 1.
I was in prison and ye came unto me. Z. Of these six which are here
rehearsed, the Moonkes, and such like rables, have made unto them selves six
works of mercy: when as notwithstanding, there are many mo than six.

And Christ according to the manner of the Hebrews, reckeneth a certain
number, and that of the chief among many, under the which, by a figure called
Synecdoche, he left the rest to be understood. C. For to comfort the
sorrowefull, to help those that are unjustly oppressed to further the simple
with counsel, to take the miserable out of the mouths of wolves, is a kind of
mercy, deserving no less praise, than to clothe the naked or to feed the
hungery.

M. But they always observe this prescripte nombre, which feed the poor and
hungry, not of a Christian affection and sincere love, but rather for an
hypocritical show. Bu. Furthermore Saint James does testify that those
works which are here repeated of Christ, are acceptable before God: Pure
devotion and undefiled (says he) before God the father is this: to visit the
fatherles and wydowes in their adversity, James. 1.
and to keep him self unspotted of the world.

37 Then shall the righteous answer him

38 saying: Lord when saw we thee an

39 hungered, and fed thee: Or thirsty and gave thee drink?

The^ shall the righteous. A. Those whom before he called the blessed of the
father he calls now the righteous: to the end we might know that
righteousness comes of the everlasting blessing of God. Lord when did we se
the hu^gry C. Christ here brings in the just, doubting, who know
notwithstanding, yt he would count that to be given him which is given unto
men. But because this is not so much imprinted in their minds as it ought,
therefore he does represent it by a figure called Hypotyposin. Hypotyposis, it
is a figure called illustration, by the which the form of things is so set
forth in words that it seems rather to be seen with the eyes the^ heard
with ye ea^es.
For how comes it to pass, that we are so slack and slow to do good, but
only because this promise comes not into our minds, that whatsoever we give
unto the poor shall be rewarded of God in time to come with gain? Therefore the
words of Christ in this place serve to this end, that we might learn to
arise above the capacity of the flesh, so often as our miserable brethren do
crave our faith and help, least the sight of a contemned man do stain our
liberality.

40 And the king shall answer and say unto them: Verily I say unto you, in
as much as ye have done it unto the least of one of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me.

And the king shall aunvver. C. As Christ taught even now under a figure,
that we were not able to conceive how much he esteemed the duties of love:
even so now he openly pronounces, Alms is given to Christ
that he will take that as done unto him self, which we bestow upon his
members. M. And by an earnest affirmatio^ he takes from us all uncertainty,
by the which a man might doubt, whether he would count those things done
to him self, which should be done to the faithful. C. Wherefore we shall be to
sluggishe and incensible, except this sentence fetch love even from the
bowels of mercy, namely, that Christ is either neglected or worshipped in
their person which stand in need of our help. Therefore so often as we are
slow in helping the miserable, let us have the son of God before our eyes,
whom, to deny any thing is cruel sacrilege. By these words also he
declares, that he does acknowledge those good deeds which are done freely
without any respect of reward.

And truly saying he commands to do good to the hungry, to the naked, to
the harbourles, and captives, of whom no reward can be looked for again, we
must needs have respect unto him, who of his own accord hyndeth him self
unto us, and because it might seame otherwise to be lost, he is content to
have it reckened unto him, and to be put in his accomptes. Unto the least of
one of these my brethren. C. He does only in this commend unto us the
faythefull by name: not because he would have all others despised, but because
the more near, that every one is joined unto God, the more dear they ought to
be unto us. For although the bond of society and love pertayne to all the
sons of Adam: Yet notwithstanding, the sons of God have a more holy
conjunction among them.

Therefore, because it is mete that the household of faith should be
preferred before strangers, Christ does specially commend them unto us. A.
according to the exhortation of saint Paul, who says: Gala. ^
While we have time let us do good unto all men, but specially to them of the
household of faith. C. The beneuole^ce of Christ toward those that are his,
is exceadingly co^me^ded unto us, who are so dear unto him that he does
acknowledge the least of the^, not only for his own, but also for his
brethren: When as nevertheless the world, yea those that would seem to be
Christians, do reiecte and contemn them.

The same affection of Christ also is declared in an other place, when he
said: See that ye despise not one of these little ones. Also he says: ^^. 18
It is not the will of your father, that one of these little ones should
perish. All the faithful and children of God are called by the name of
brethren. For they are the sons of God which believe in his name. (...) 1.
(...) 2.13.
Also they are the sons of God which are the brethren of Christ. Christ
therefore must be acknowledged in his faithful, which are called Christians.
Furthermore, we may not reiecte any man as not pertaining to Christ, seeing we
must do good: neither ought we to separate any man from the congregation of the
faithful. For he says: That which ye do to one of the least of these. By
the which words he declares that no man ought to be excepted whatsoever he
be. These things ought to encourage us to be liberal. M. Whatsoever he be
that needs, and craves help for Christ's sake, ought to be counted of us the
brother of Christ. So that if thou contempne this man, thou do despise
Christ. For he said also unto Saul. Saul, Saul, (...) 9.
why persecutest thou me? When he persecuted his Church.

41 Then shall he say also to them, that shall be on the left hand: depart
from meye curssed into everlasting fire: which is prepared for the deuell and
his angels.

Then shall he say to them. Now he comes to the reprobate who are so dronken
and bewitched with their earthly prosperity, that they immagin they shall be
thereby always blessed. He says therefore here, that he shall come to be
their judge, and to shake away their delights in the which they are now
drowned: not that the coming of Christ might terrify those, which think
that they have made a couenaunte with death, and live in security: but rather
that the faithful being admonished of the horrible destruction of these men,
might not envy their present condition. For as the promises are necessary for
us which do stir us up to the study of a godly life: so also are
threateninges in like manner to keep us in care and fear.

^^e of (...) the (...)
For in the elect also there is a certain fear of helfyer: because the godly
are set in the flesh under the disciplyne of the spirit of God: which
brings them to a voluntary piety: Discipline of the spirit puts away
evil.
but it wynneth them not only by the promyses of eternal life, (as we have
said) but also it dryueth them from evil actions, by the fear of eternal
punishment. Furthermore Christ added this thing as concerning the reprobate,
that the elect might have consolation in trouble, by hearing that they are
accurssed, and not appertaining to Christ, which do not refreshe him when he
is hungry, thyrsty, and suffering adversity. And it is a most miserable thing
to be cast out of the sight of God. For the Prophet David says. The fulness
of joy is in thy presence, and at thy right hand there is pleasure for ever
more. We are taught therefore what a singular thing it is to be joined to the
son of God: because eternal destruction and the tormente of fire is prepared
for all those whom he puts from him in the last day. For then he shall
command the wicked to depart from him, because many hypocrites are now
myngled with the just, even as though they were nere of kyn unto Christ.
Depart from me ye curssed. Bu. By faith in Christ the curse is taken away
and turned into a blessing. Faith turns the curs^e into a blessing Galathi.
3.
For Christ took upon him the curse: even so by unbelief the curse is
retains and abides. For saint John says: He that believes in the son of
God has everlasting life: but he which believes not the son, 1. ohn. 3.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Into everlasting
fire. C. We have said before, that in the name of fire, Hell fire.
the torment of the punishmen is metaphorically shadowed, which we are not
able to comprehend. Wherefore it is but superfluous and lost labor to contend
with the Papists, either about the matter or form of this fire. For then in
like manner we must dispute about the worm which the Prophet Esaias joins
to the fire. Esaias. 66. Mark. 9
Moreover, the same Prophet sufficiently declares that it is a metaphorical
speech, because he compares the spirit of God to a pair of bellows, with
the which, Esaias. 30.
the fire is kyndled. Wherefore by these voices we must conceive that the
vengeance of God shall fall upon the reprobate, which being more grievous
than all torments, shall bring wonderful horror of mind unto the^. M. So
that, we must lean the knowledge of this fire unto the judge him self: least
hereafter we feel the pain thereof, while we so curiously seek after the same.
C. We must note also here the continuance of this fire: for as the continuance
of the glory before promised to the faithful is eternal, even so shall the
pain of the reprobate be also: A Contrary to their opinion, which affirm
that all the wicked, and deuels themselves shall after a time of torment be
saved.

Which is prepared for the deuell. C. Christ opposes or sets the deuell,
Satan is the head of the wicked.
against him self, as the head of all the reprobates. For although all
Apostatas are the deuels Angels, yet notwithstanding many places of Scripture
do refer the principallitie to one, which gathers under him all the
wicked, as into one body, to destruction: even as all the faithful do grow
together unto life under Christ. Math. 12
As concerning the which matter, read the twelfthe chapter before. And now
Christ faith that helfier is prepared for the deuell, least that the wicked
should trust, that they might escape the same, when they hear that the deuell
and they are adjudged to one punishment, who without all doubt is cast into
hell fire, without al hope of deliverance. And his angels. Although some
interpretours by the Angels of the deuell, do understand wicked men, yet
notwithstanding, it is more lykely that Christ does speak of the deuels
only. And so under these words there is contained a secret reproach, that
men being called to the hope of salvation by the Gospel, had rather peryshe
with Satan, and rejecting the author of salvation, do cast them selves
willingly into this miserable lot. Not because they are less ordained to
destruction than the deuell: But because in their wickedness the cause of the
destruction does openly appear, when they reiecte the grace of calling.
Although therefore the reprobate, by the secret judgment of God, are vowed
and given to death everlastingly, before they be borne: yet notwithstanding, so
long as life is offered unto the^, they are not thought of us, neither are
they reckened heirs of death and fellows of Satan: but their destruction is
bewrayed by incredulity now, which before was hyd.

42 For I was an hungered, and ye gave

43 me no meat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink.

C. As before he preferred the duty of love before all other things in the
godly, so also here he lays cruelty to the charge of the wicked. Charity or
love is a token, by the which me^ declare them selves to worship God: and
therefore he makes mention only of love. On the contrary part he makes
mention only of inhumanytie and cruelty toward our brethren, although
infidelity should first of all be considered: because that by this cruelty
they declare that they love not God. For so writes S. John: He which has the
goods of this world, and sees his brother have need, 1. John
and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
Again he says: If any man say that he loves God, and yet hates his
brother, 1. John
he is a liar. For he which loves not his brother whom he sees, how can
he love God whom he sees not? C. Let us note therefore that hypocrites
proffite nothing by their words (how holy soever they appear before the
world) if they be cruel against their neighbors: which thing I would to
God were graven in the hearts of men.

44 Then shall they also answer him saying: Lord when saw we thee an
hungered, or a thirste. etc.

Then shall they aunsvvere. C. The same figure called Hypotyposis, which is
used before, he now also repeateth again: to the end the reprobate may
know that the vain and cou^terfayte shows of godliness, with the which they
now deceive them selves shall profit them nothing at all in the last day.
For whereof comes it that they so proudely contemn the poor, but only
because they think that their contempt shall escape unpunished? To the end
therefore ye Lord might shake of from them all such flattering persuasions,
he declares that they shall in time to come, (but to late) feel that, which
they will not vouchsafe now to remember: namely that they which now seem to
be rejected, are no less precious unto Christ then his own members.

Lord when savve we the an h^^gred. M. Behold these also acknowledge Christ
for the Lord which is nothing else, but because they would seame to be
Christians, and such which never suffered Christ to hunger, to thyrste, and
so forth: but were ready to do their duty to him with reverence.

45 Then shall he answer them saying: verily I say unto you, in as much as
ye did it not unto one of these, ye did it not to me.

Bu. The Lord now confuteth their foolish Appollogy and defense, and
detecteth their hypocrisy, A. showing yt they were altogether void of the love
of God. For God cannot be truly loved, where the members of Christ the son
of God are carelessly despised.

Wherefore let us learn to help our neady brethren all that we can, being
myndfull of the words of the Prophet, which says: O my soul, thou haste
said unto the Lord thou art my God, ^^lme. 16.
my goods are nothing unto thee. All my delighte is upon the saints that
are in the earth, and upon such as excel in virtue.

46 And these shall go into everlasting pain, the righteous into life
eternal.

M. Here we see that both the godly and the wicked shall rise again. A. Even
as it is said in an other place: ^^hn, 5
They that have done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of death, or damnation. M.
Furthermore after that the judge has pronounced the sentence, no man can
appeal to the tribunal of God: But immediately the execution of judgment
must follow. And although they will not of them selves go into punishment,
^att. 13.
yet notwithstanding, they shall be cast into this fire by Angels and heavenly
power: as we saw before in the parable of the tares.

The xxvi. Chapter.
ANd it came to pas,
And it came to pass when Jesus. Bu. To all that has been hitherto declared
a short sum and most perfect work of our whole salvation is added, that
is to say, the sacred and most proffitable history of the passion and
redemption of Christ our Lord, in the which he fulfilleth all the duties as
well of a priest, as of a king, and in a short compendium he makes an open
show of his power and strength for all me^ to behold. For by all his words
and deeds he teaches dilligently: he instituteth the solemn and blessed
sacrament: he prays fervently: he sacrifices for sins: he purges,
delivers and has compassion on sinners, and defends those that are his:
and also he treads under foot and punysheth the wicked, showing oftentimes
wonderful humillitie, and yet for all that declaring no small glory, when
that all the elements being troubled at his death, showed forth wonderful
proofs of great grief. Wherefore our Evangelist Mathewe prosecuteth here all
things in desent order, and with pure, plain, and lively style. E. For these
words And it came to pass. are a certain manner of knitting together, or
passing from matter to matter: and according to the manner of hystoriographers,
he joins the things followyng to that which went before, saying. And it
came to pass, When Jesus had finished all these sayings. B. Namely those
which he had the third day after his glorious enteraunce into Jerusalem. Ye
know that after two day, shall be Easter. To the end that those things
which follow, may be the more easily understood, we must know that the
Hebrews began the day at the evening: (as it is written. Leuiti. 23.
From even to even shall ye rest in your sabbath) furthermore that the day from
his glorious enteraunce into the city of Jerusalem until the day of his
resurrection, may be named four manner of ways: as is declared by this
example here under placed.

The days of the Hebrews. Of the Gentiles. Of the Christians. The mysteries of
every day. 1 The first of the Sabaothes Sun day The Lords day Was 1 The
day of his enteraunce into Jerusalem 2 The second Moon day The second
ferie 2 The day in the which he cursed the fig tree 3 The third Mars day
The third ferie 3 The day of the feast 4 The fourth Mercuries day The
fourth ferie 4 The day in the which he was sold 5 The fifte Jupiters day
The fifte ferie Was 5 The day before the day of svvete bread 6 The
preparation of the great Sabbath Venus day The sixth ferie 6 The first day of
svvete bread, of the holy supper, of the passion, and of the burial. 7 The
Sabbath Saturnes day The Sabbath 7 The day of rest in the sepulchar. 8 The
first of the Sabbath Sun day The Lords day 8 The day of his resurrection.

Notwithstanding in the description, the last rewe save one, is used both of
ye Jews and also of ye Christians: because seeing ye Jews called the seventh
day the Sabbath, (that is to say rest) in consideration of the creation of
the world, (because God that day having made an end of al his work rested)
the Christians bouldly retained the oulde name having no respect of the
number. Howebeit, there are some which think that it was called the Sabbath,
of them, in the consideration of an other thing, namely, because Christ the
Lord of life rested all that day in the sepulcher. It seems therefore that
Christ spoke these words (After two days) the third day after his
kinglyke entrance (as we showed even now) into Jerusalem. For after two
days, the sixth day after his entrance into Jerusalem, beginning the same
day in the evening (which the Christians, (beginning the day from midnight)
make the evening, and part of the night of frydaye) the Lord did eat
Passover: and the night followyng that evening he was betrayed, and brought to
the hie priests. of the which matter he adds saying. And the son of man
shall be delivered up to be crucified. All men do say that Christ celebrated
the Passover the same day which was prescribed in the law, being the
fourthten day of the month of March at even: and that therefore he said:
After two days shall be Easter. The Evangelist Mark has: And the first day
of sweet bread, when they offered Passover. And the Evangelist Luke has: And
the day of Passover came, in the which it was necessary that passover should
be offered. And so it appears that Christ celebrated in one day both the
typical passover, and the true offered passover. But what day ye Jews did
eat it, there are two sorts of opinions. For some write that the Jews
celebrated passover the next day after ye Christ suffered: which was upon
the Sabbath day. Other some say that all the Jews offered passover ye self
same night that Christ did, and that it was not lawful for them either to
offer or to eat it on the eve of the great Sabbath. They which defend the
first opinion write thus, saying that it evidently appears by the words of
John, that the same sixth day in the which Christ suffered, was the day of
preparation for the solemnity of the pasouer: For he going about to describe
the washing of the disciples feet, which was done after supper, being now the
sixth day, and the solemnity of passover to the lord, John. ^^
writes, Before the feast of Easter: that is, the day before the feast of
Easter. In like manner he speaking afterward of ye Jews, says. John. ^^
And they went not into the judgment haule, least they should be defiled, but
that they might eat passover.

After that he making mention of the time in the which Christ was condemned
writes thus: John. 19*
It was the preparing day of the Easter about the sixth hour. Therefore that
day in the which Christ was crucified, was ye day of preparation or eve, not of
ye Sabbath but of Easter. As may appear by the holy men, which observed this
time also. For Nicodemus and Joseph of Aramathia, bought that day sweet
odours, Mark. 15. ^uke. 23.
and oyntements, and after that they had anointed the body of ye Lord, they
buried it: which was no more lawful for them to do on the day of Easter,
than on the Sabothe day. Even so those women which were with the Lord, bought
their oyntements also, and prepared them even the same day of preparation,
^uke 32.
that they might rest the day followinge, according to law. They did not
put of or defer these things to be done on the Easter day, no not till the
evening, which brought an end to the day, because so soon as the evening
came the Saboth began.

Wherefore except we wreste ye words of S. John we must grant that the
public paseouer was celebrated of the Jews, ^^hn. 19.
the next da^ after that Christ suffered, that is to say on the Sabothe
day* Whereupon it was called ye great day of the Saboth: in the which both
the solemnity of the Paschall, and of the Saboth came together. For in that day
they celebrated the paseouer according to the tradition of the fathers, which
some say was appointed by Rabbi Eliezer, the second house of God being
finished, after the people were returned out of ye land of Babylon, into
their own contreye: and was ordained of a certain curiouse observation of
days, according to the course of the moon, least that two holy, and days
of rest should come together, in the which it was not lawful to do any manner
of work: the which thing was greuouse to so great a people. This
co^stitution is entreated of at large by Paulus Burgensis in his anotacion upon
this place, being joined to the commentaris of Nicolaus de Lyra. There want
not some which say that the Jews took away the Easter contrary to order
and custom, for the gredy desyere that they had to kill the Lord the which
thing how they durst do we see not: saying that so great a multitude were
wont to come from all quarters to this feast. But now they, which say that all
the Jews offered Paseouer the same night that the Lord did, do defend their
opinion after this manner. Seeing that our Lord was the most faithful and
diligent obseruer of the law of his father, no man ought to doubt that he
offered and did eat the Paseouer the fouretene day between ye two eueninges,
as it is commanded in the law. And every man of the multitude of Israel
shall offer him between the euenings. Exodus 12.
The which two euenings do not signify the evening of the fyftene day, and the
evening of the sixtene day: as thouge the Lord had commanded the Paseouer
always to be offered and eaten within the fyftene day, and not to be differed
unto the sixtene day: but it is evident that those two eueninges of ye
beginning of the 15. day were understood. Exodus 12.
For it follows in the place before recited: And ye shall not leave any
thing therofe until the morning: and ye which is left thereof until the
morning, shall ye burn with fire. It must needs be therefore ye two eueninges
went before the morning: of the which two, ye first begins at the soon
setting and continues until ye twy light or shutting in of the day: and the
second begins at the end of the first evening, ye is, from the time ye the
evening is shut in, until the morning. Between this first and second evening,
the Paseouer was appointed to be offered. For it was not lawful to offer the
same, before that ye soon was set as it is written: Thou shall offer paseouer at
eueni^g, Deuteronomy. 1^.
about ye going down of the Soon. But the Paseouer was appointed to be eaten
in the second evening, which is the night. And the first evening continues
for the space almost of six hours: and the second almost nine hours. Verse.
17.
The Evangelist Matthew speaks of the first evening, when he says The first
day of sweet bread, the Disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, where will thou yt we prepare for thee to eat the Paseouer? Exodus 12.
Of the second eueninge it is written in Exodus: And they shall eat the flesh
the same night roste with fire, and with unleavened bread. The which also is
gathered by ye words of Matthew, where he says: When the eue^ was come be sat
down with ye twelve. And that the Jews offered paseouer in the night of the
same year, that Christ did it may appear by that which Mark has, saying:
The first day of sweet bread when they offered Paseouer: and the Euangeliste
Luke says: Then came the day of sweet bread, when of necessitye Paseouer
must be offered. If it were necessary that Paseouer should be offered in that
day why may not we say that all of necessitye also offered in that eueninge
paseouer? And that day was called the preparation of the paseouer, in the
evening whereof the Lord did offer paseouer: the which day of preparation, was
in deed a festival and solemn day, Exodus 12.
as appears by the words of Moses which says: Seven days shall ye eat
unleavened bread: The first day shall be an holy convocation This first day
here mentioned, was the day of preparation. And in an other place it is said:
In the four and twentye day of the first month at even is the Lords
paseouer: and on the fyftene day of the same monethe, Leuit 23.
is the feast of sweet bread unto the Lord But the evening of the fourthtene
moon is the beginning of the fiuetenth day. Therefore the day of
preparation, in the which the Lord celebrated his Paseouer was a festival
day. Notwithstanding it is true that the same day, wiche follows the
night of the Paseouer, (and which begins at the morninge and ends at the
eueninge) is called properly and particulerly, the festival day as well of
the Paseouer, as of the sweet bread, the denomination being given to the
light as to the more principal part of the day: Number. 28. Leuit. 23.
As we may read in the 28. chapter of Numery, and in the three and twentye of
Leuiticus.

For the day does comprehend, both the night, and the light: as we may read
in S. Luke where he says, Luke 22.
Then came the day of sweet bread, when of necessity Paseouer must be
offered: For if it were necessary that paseouer should be offered in the day
of sweet bread, and if the Paseouer were offered at no time sauinge between
the two eueninges, that is in the twy light before night: then the twy light
with the night was a part of the day of sweet bread, and also of the day
of Paseouer for so much as they are both one.

Wherefore, when we read in the Gospel the holy or solemn day, we ought
thereby to understand holiness or solemnity, least we be deceived by the
diverse signification of the words. For they do signifye also a holy and
festival day. Therefore before the feast of Easter, is as much to say as,
before the solemnity of Easter or Paseouer, as in the night goinge before the
day of the solemnity of the Paschall There are some which, John. 13.
goinge about to prove that the Jews did not offer Passover the same day
that Christ did, do obiecte this place of S John, where it is said: John. 19.
It was the preparing day of the Easter, about the sixte hour. By the which
they would seem to prove that the preparinge day of the Easter was that day
in the which Christ suffered: and that therefore the Paseouer was celebrated
of the Jews in the evening of the Saboth following. But that place may thus
be distinguished, It was the preparinge day about ye sixte hour of the Easter
or Paseouer: where this word Easter and hour are joined together. Whereupon
it follows that the same sixte hour of the Paseouer was in the day time,
and that the same day was the feast of Paseouer, and also that the Paseouer
was offered between the two eueninges, and eaten the night going before, and
further that the same day of preparation was the preparation of the Saboth, and
not of the Paseouer. Hereuppon the Euangeliste Saint Mark says: And now
when the even was come, Mar. 15
(because it was the day of preparing that goes before the Saboth) etc. And
Luke has, and that day was the preparinge of the Saboth, Luke. ^^
and the Sabothe dr^we on.

Also ye Evangelist S John says: John, ^^
There laid they Jesus therefore, because of the preparinge of the Saboth of
the Jews, for the Sepulcher was ^ye at hand. But what do they call the
preparinge of the Jews, sauinge that day, which goes next before the
Sabothe, being so called, because in it all things were prepared which were
necessary for the Saboth, in the which it was not lawful to prepare any
thing? Moreover ye day going before the Paseouer is not properly called the
preparation of the paseouer: because nothing was prepared, neither would the
law suffer any thing to be prepared for the Paseouer, in the day goinge
before: but in the very evening the day of Paseouer being already begone,
which begins at the even. But admit, the place is not so distinguished, yet
what other thing shall be understood by the preparation of the paseouer than the
day of preparation, which was on of the Paschal days? They also obiecte this
place of John, (...). 19.
when he says: For it was that great day of the Saboth: when for all that he
calls it not the great day of the Saboth, because it was both ye Saboth and
the Paseouer: but because there was a double solemnity, that it is to say, of
the Sabothe and of the sweet bread. For it was the second day of sweet bread:
as it is written: Thou shalt keep the feast of sweet bread, (...) 23.
that thou eat unleavened bread seven days long as I commanded thee. They
do also obiecte this place of S. John: It was in the morninge, and they them
selves went not into the judgment haule, least they should be defiled, but
that they might eat Paseouer. (...) 1^,
It was (says he) in the morning. But of what day was it the morninge? Truly
it was the morning of the day of preparation. And they had not eaten Paseouer.
Therefore they purposed to eat it in the eve of the Saboth. For they offered
Paseouer in the first eueninge of the day of preparation: although
peradventure many of them, had not yet eaten: because they had been so
occupied that night in taking of the Lord, fearinge least he being now
sold might escape away, that they had not sufficient leisure to eat
Paseouer. And the Euangeliste John in this place, seems not to make make any
mention of true eatinge of the Paseouer, but to reprehende them of double
error, namely, of to much diligente in sekinge to destroy an innocente, and
of to m^uche negligence in not eatinge the Paseouer in dew time, for the care
that they had to catch the Lord: because they hoped, being as yet but
morninge, that they might eat the Paseouer, if so be that they entered not
into the Judgment haule: The which notwithstanding the law commanded to be
eaten before the morning, as appears by these words, There shall remain
nothing of it until the morninge. But what and if they did eat the Paseouer
that night although they were so greatly occupied? Then will we understand
by the Paseouer, the Paschall meat, that is to say the sweet bread: because
that day, which from the morning followed the night of the Paseouer, was
called the feast of Paseouer and the feast of sweet bread: as appears by
this place. And the fourtenth day of the first monethe, Number. 26.
is the Paseouer of the Lord: And in the fyftenth of the same month is the
feast. Again it is written, In the fyfteneth day of the same month is the
feast of sweet bread unto the Lord. Leuit. 23.


And it was lawful for none to eat of the sweet bread, but for such only
as were clean. But, that the day of preparation, in the which the Lord did
eat the Paseouer, and also suffered, was no feast day, it may be proved by
many places of Scripture and namelye by this: Not on the feast day least
there arise a tumulte among the people. Verse. 5. Mark. 14.
Therefore they took him not and slew him on the feast day. And although
they took him not in the solemnity, saying that the solemnity was commonly
said to be of the day, yet notwithstanding they took him in the feast day:
namelye the night goinge before the solemnity, the which one day, is solemn
and holy. The which thing was not don without good consideration, for the
typical paseouer only was appointed to be offered on the feast day: wherefore
much more that also which was the only true paseouer, which is Christ, that is
offered for the salvation of all men. But they said, not on the feast day:
not because they would not symplelye have him to be taken in the feast day,
but because they feared, least there should arise a tumulte among the people.
Notwithstanding Judas devised a way for them whereby he might be taken without
the tumulte of the people namelye, by sending soldyers in the night In the
feast day therefore at night, when they knew that a tumulte could not then
be raised among the people, they took him: and condemned him, and delivered
him to the deputye to be adjudged to death, before that the people knew of it,
or could raise any tumulte.

But that there was a solemnitye when he suffered it may appear unto us by
the deeds of Pylate, the Evangelist S. Mathewe saying, Mat 27. Mark. 15.
Luke. 23.
At that feast the deputy was wont to deliver unto the people a prisoner
whom they would desyer. And in S. John it is said thus: You have a custom
that I should let one louse unto you at Easter. What mean these words, at
that feast, but only. At that solemnity? The solemnity S. John expresses,
John, 18
when he calls it Easter.

They allege also this place. Before the feast of Easter, when Jesus knew
that his hour was come. And when supper was done, John. 13.
after that the Deuell had put into the heart of Judas and so forth the which
places are certainly known to contain the mysteris that were done in the
night of preparation.

Therefore the feast day of Easter was not yet. We grant that those
mysteries were done in the day of preparinge, before the feast day of
Easter, that is, before the solemnity of Paseouer: but not before the day of
Paseouer. For the solemnity of the Paseouer is one, and the day of Pasoeuer in
an other. To these they add that the same Saint John writteth saying. Some of
them thought, because Judas had the bag that Jesus had said unto him:
bye those things that we have need of against the feast. Therefore the
feast day was not then.

Nay rather by this we believe that the Evangelist went about to declare that
this day was a feast, even as if the Disciples should have thus understood
the words of Christ, By those things which we have need of for the
solemnity: which, John. 13.
from the morning followed the same night next of all. For then was the night
of the even of the fourtenth day: and the day next following from the
morninge, was the solemnity of paseouer. Last of all, a man may say* If that
had been the feast day those thnges had not been lawful to be done which
were don in it. In the day of paseouer and in the other days of swet bread,
the Saboth only excepted, many things were lawful to be done which might not
be done in the Saboth.

These two opinions we have set before the reader, that he might follow that
which seems unto him most probable. C. For truly, saying the Euangeliste
Saint John says manifestly that when Christ was crucified, it was the
preparing day among the Jews, not of the Sabothe, but of the paseouer:
Furthermore that they entered not into the judgment haule least they should
defyle them selves, because they mente ye next day after to eat the
paseouer: there is no doubt but that Christ did eat paseouer with his
Disciples the day before that all the people celebrated ye public paseouer.
Neither can this be avoided or shifted of by any cauils, that the Jews did not
solemnise the festiual day, in that day that they crucified Christ (in ye which
it was not lawful to punish any man) and that then they had their solemn
preparacion, that Christ being buried they might eat Paseouer. Now it may
be demanded how Christ ordered this matter. For he did nothing in this
rite contrary to that which was contained in the law. There is no doubt but
ye both the lawful day was observed of Christ, and also that the Jews followed
the ancient custom. First of al it is without al doubt that Christ was put to
death the day before the Sabothe, because he was buried in ye Sepulcher which
was at hand with as much speed as might be by reason that after the
evening it was necessary to keep holy day. But now there is no doubt, by
the aunciente observation, that the Paseouer and other festival days, when
they fell upon the fridaye, were put of till the next day after: because
the people could not bide to have two holy days come together. The Jews
affirm that this law was appointed stra^te after that the people were
returned from the exile into Babylon, and that by a heavenly oracle or
revelation, least they should seem to alter any thing rashely of the
commandments of God. But and if it were the manner then to join two holy
days into one (as the Jews confess, and as it appears by their ancient
monumentes) it is a sufficient probable conjecture that Christ, which
celebrated the Passover the day before the Sabothe, observed the day which
was appointed by the law.

For we know what a diligente care he had, least he should swerue from one
tytell of the law. For saying he would be bound to the law, that he might
deliver us from the yoke thereof, he was not unmindful of this subjection
even at the last instante. Therefore he thought it better to omit the
external ceremony, than to transgress the commandment given to him of God,
and so to ru^ne in danger of the reproach of the wicked. The Jews them selves
truly will not deny, that one holy day was only observed so often as Paseouer
was joined to the Sabothe, and that it was so appointed by the Rabbines.
Wherevpppon it follows that Christ in forsakynge the manner and commen
custom, did nothing contrary to the law.

Shall Be Easter. The Lattin word for Easter is Pascha. B. For the which word
Pascha ye Lattin interpreters which translated the same unto us out of the
Hebrewe tongue, have put down Phase: The Syrians or Chaldeis have Pasha, the
which the Lattines and the Grecians, tourning the Hebrewe letter Heth into the
Greek letter Chy, call Pascha. ^eth, is. H. ^y, is, chapter


But they which for Pesah, say Phase, do make of P. ph, and of e, a, as for
Perez, Pharez for Peleg, Phaleg: and of Heth, they make, e as of Noah, Noe,
Corah, Core. But the Syrians of the first e, make, a, and taking away the
second vowel they join a, to the last letter, as for Pesah Pasha: the which
they are oftentimes wont to do when they go about of Hebrewe words to make
their own, the which are often times used in ye new Testament. As for e^ample
Abba, Racha, Gabatha, Golgotha, and many other like unto these. But the
Grecia^s do not decline this noune Pascha The Lattines do decline Pascha
Paschatis upon the third declension amiss: they should more truly decline
it Pascha Paschae, by the first declension. Therefore these words, Pesah,
Pascha, Phase, Easter, and Paseouer, are all one in signification. Furthermore
this day of Paseouer was a festival day, which was celebrated among the
Hebrews with great zeal, puttinge themselves, from year to year in memory of
that day in ye which, their door posts being stricken with the blood of the
Lamb, when they dwelte among the Egyptians, were delivered from the destroying
Angel For thus we read: And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on
the two side posts, and on the upper door post, even in the house where they
shall eat him And a little after it is added: For I will pass through the
land of Egipte, this same night, and will smite all the first borne in the
land of Egypt, both of man and beast, and upon all the goods of Egipte
will I the Lord do execution. Exodus 11.
And the blood shall be unto you a token, in the houses wherein ye are. And when I
see the blood, I will pase over you and the plage shall not be upon you to
destroe you, when I smite the land of Egipte. And this day shall be unto you a
remembrance, and ye shall keep it holy day unto the Lord, for ever. M.
Christ says not here simplely, after two days the son of man shall be
delivered up, etc But he says. After two days shall be Easter, and the soon of
man, etc To the end he might declare that the time of Easter was the appointed
time in the which he should be crucified. Furthermore yt he might declare yt
he was the true Paseouer which must be offered for the redemption of the world,
Paseouer of the Jews was but a tipe of the paseouer of Christ. Mar. 14.
the tipe and figure whereof was ye Paseouer which the Jews celebrated every
year. The Euangeliste Mark, instead of, Ye know that after two days shall be
Easter, write, After two days was Easter and the days of sweet bread, that
is (according to the words of S. Luke.) The feast of sweet bread drew nigh
which is called Easter, Luke. 22,
that is to say the eating of the Paschall lamb, and the unleavened bread. For
in the fore said chapter of Exodus, where it was commanded as concerning the
celebration of paseouer, it is straight way added, Seven days shall ye eat
unleavened bread.

And the Son of man C. Now Christ confirms that again, which we have
heard him so often foreshewed unto his Disciples: but this last forewarnynge
does more plainly show how willing he was to offer him self to the death: and
it was necessary, because God could not be pleased but by the Sacrifice of
obedience. He meant also to prevent the offense, least the Disciples, thinkinge
that he was constrained by necessitye to be delivered to death should quayle
and faynte in the

He does therefore here openly declare yt he comes to Jerusalem with good
aduisement, that he might there suffer death. For he having liberty to go back
again, and in quiet return to ouerpasse that time, yet notwithstanding
even in the very moment and time convenient, he goes with good aduisement and
deliberation into the midest of his enemies. And although it did then nothing
profit the Disciples to be admonished of the obedience which he showed
toward his Father, yet notwithstanding afterward their faith was not a
lyttel builded by this doctrine. Even as also at this day we receive no small
profit thereby: because as it were in a lyuelye glass the willinge sacrifice
is set forth unto us, by the which all the transgressions of the world are
wypped away: Sins put away^ Christ's ^crifice.
and we do behold and see the Son of God in goinge boldlye and without
fear, to his death to be now the conqueror of death.

Shall Be delivered up to be crucified Bu. Namely by Judas, to the hye Priests:
of these he shall be delivered to Pontius Pilate: and of him, to the tormenters
to be crucified. In this short sentence he comprehends many things. Read
the twenty chapter goinge before.

3. Then assembled together the chief priests, and the Scribes and the elders
of the people, unto the palace of the hye priest which was called Cayphas.

Then assembled together the C. The Euangeliste Mathewe means not that they
were gathered together, even in the second day, or within the compass of two
days, but he brings in this history to show that Christ as he was a man
was not able to appointe any certain time of his death. For what might move
him thus to conjecture, when as his enemies were fullye determined to differ
the time? The sense and meaning therefore is this, that he spoke by the spirit
of prophesy, of his death seeing, that no man could suspecte that it was so nigh
at hand. M. For although the death of Christ was ordained by God and
depended upon the secret counsel and purpose of God, and not of men, yet
nevertheless the narration of the history did require, that it should be
described by what and whose practices the same was wrought: to the end we may
know that there is no one sort of men more hurteful to the kingdom of Christ,
than they, which reign and exercise tyranny against the people of god under
the show of Godliness. But note who they be which are said here to come
together: they truly which had the name of the Church: what one innocente
would have been afraid of the assemblely of these men? Unto the palace of
the hye Priest. M. Here was the head of the priestely kingdom: and the
matter was now about the authority hereof. They had all one scope, namely, to
defend and preserve that priestely kingedome.

Which was called Cayphas, B. This Cayphas had also to name Josephus, which
succeeded in the priesthood, the son of Simon Canithus, being made hie
priest of Gratus then presidente, whom Pilate succeeded. He was also removed
again from the priesthood, by Vitellius the proconsull of Syria, Ionathas the
son of Anna, ^sep. Judah. (...) 18. ca. 4 ^ 5.
being placed in his steed. Read Josephus for this matter. For all things,
yea deuyne offices, through couetousenesse and ambition of the priests, were
bestowed amiss by the Romans.

Bu. This Cayphas was a man corrupted with couetousenes, ^^phas a ^^pted ^it.
with lust, with pride, and one that swelled with ambition, being called by
no lawful ordinance to the dignity of the hye priesthode but for bribes and
favor of the wicked presidentes which were Ethnixes, was taken from the
fylthy puddell, and set in the dignity of the hie priest. Behold this
chiefetaine in the counsel of the prestes.

4 And held a counsel that they might take Jesus by subtlety, and kill him.

And held a counsel Bu. The Evangelist says here, that they held a counsel
that they might take Jesus by subtlety or deceyte, that is, not openly,
neither by force, but by some pretense: the which Judas brought to pass,
which fayning friendeshippe, betrayed him with a kiss. What this counsel was
S. John describes at large, saying: Then gathered the hie priests and
Pharisetes a counsel, and said: What do we? For this man does many miracles.
If we let him escape thus, all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall
come and take away both our rome and the people. And one of them named Cayphas
(being the hye preeste the same year) said unto them: ^ 11.
Ye perceive nothing at all, nor consider that it is expediente for us, that
one man dye for the people, and not that all the people peryshe.

5 But they said not on the holy day, least there be an vproare among the
people.

But they said, not on the holy day. C. It was decreed truly by the advise
and counsel of Cayphas, yt Jesus should be destroyed, because he could not be
ouercom cepte he were extinguished by death: but they thought they had not a
convenient time, until the feast were ended, and the people departed. E. For
they were afraid least if they had set upon him in that day, in the which the
greatest multitude of people came together, some tumulte should arise, because
there were many among the people, which beholdynge the miracles, hearing his
wonderful doctrine, and marking the inspeakeable clemency and meekness of his
manners, had him in great admyration and reverence: yea they held him as a
prophet, as it is said before. C. And here upon we gather, that although
those hongery dogs did gredely seek the death of Christ, yea although
they raged furiouselye to obtain the same, yet notwithstanding yt they were so
restrained by the secret brydell and workynge of God, that nothing was done
by their counsel and arbytrement. They seek so much as they may for an other
time: Man can not withstand Gods appointment.
but God does hasten and set forward the time in spighte of the devil. M. For
God had so appointed that Christ should die, and be offered as ye true
Passover in the festival day. Vain therefore was the fear of the tumult of
ye people, who departed away, and were sodeinely gone so sone as the hie
priests, had gotten occasion by the treason of Judas, to prosecute their
purpose: such was the blindness of their minds, into which they were cast
by the power of God. C. And it pertayneth greatly unto us, to note this
thing, that Christ was not rashely taken by the lust of his ennemies, and
put to death, but was led thereto by the will of God: because the faith of
propiciation is builte upon him, God was pleased with the same sacrifice,
which he had ordained from the beginning: and therefore he would have his
son offered upon the day of passover, and upon no other, to the end the
lamb which was slain from the beginning might by one and the last
sacrifice, obtain everlasting life, and that the old sacryfice might give
place, to the only sacrifice of eternal redemption. But there seemed to be a
more convenient time than thie, to those that sought for nothing else than to
destroy Christ: The body of Christ and the shaddowe thereof me: together.
yet God which had made him a sacrifice and an oblation for sin, chose a
proper and special day which should oppose or lay the body joined to the
shaddowe. Whereby now also the fruit of Christ's passion does more clearly
shine unto us.

6 When Jesus was in Bethani, in the house of Simon the leper.

When Jesus was in Betham B. M. The Euangeliste should have added by order,
those things which were done with Christ in the time of these two days
before Easter. For both the counsel of the hye priests, and this present
history also, went six days before Easter at the least. S. John speaks more
expressly of this feast, John. 12
saying, Six days before Easter, came Jesus to Bethanie. C. Yet
notwithstanding this is put in here in good time, that we may know what
occasion did so soddeynely drive the chief priests to make haste. They durst
not set upon Christ with open force: and to oppress him by deceyte, was not so
easy a matter. But now, when a way unhoped for, was opened and offered unto
the^ by Judas, contrary to their expectation, the very facillitie of bringing
their purpose about, makes them to gather an other counsel. But there are
some which would have this story to be all one, Luke. 7
with that mentioned in Luke, and to differ from that which S John reherseth
to be done by Mary the sister of Martha. John. 12.
Othersome say, that there is a difference between this (which Mark also
has) and that, which is set forth by Luke and John. And many affirm (which
is more lykely) that the storye here written by Matthew, is all one with that
mentioned in John, but contrary to that which Luke has. For although Matthew
make mention of two days before Easter, yet for all that he does not say that
this feast was celebrated two days before Easter. And S. John, although he
make mention of Lazarus, of Martha, and of Mary, yet notwithstanding he does
not deny but that Christ did suppe in the house of Simon the leper: the which
thing, both this our Evangelist Matthew, and Marcke also, have. For it might
be that these, abydinge in one vyllage, were called to supper into the house of
Simon, for the presence of Christ, and that Martha ministered there unto
Christ, according to her diligence. C. Neither does it prove the dyuersitie of
the deed. C. because John says that the feet of Christ were anointed, and
Matthewe and Marc^e the head: For it might be that both the head and feet
were anointed. We do know truly that oyntmentes were not wont to be cast
down at the feet: but according to the manner, when the greatest part was
then spente and powered out, S. John to a^plifie the matter, says, that his
feet were soupled therewith.

Mark also says, the Alabaster here being broken, that all the ointment was
powered on his head. wherefore it agrees very well that it ran down to his
feet. M. Wherefore they have not sufficient strong ground, which are moved
by the dyuersitie of the time, of the place, of the persons, and of the deed
also, to deny that the Evangelists Matthewe, Marcke, and John, make not
mention of this history, together.

7 There came unto him a woman, having an alabaster box of ointment, that was
preciouse, and powered it on his head, as he satt at the boorde.

There came to him a woman. E. This woman was named Marye, being the sister
of Martha and Lazarus. Having an Alabaster box Bu. This was a very fine and
delicate box, being made of Alabaster, which was a kind of glass, very
necessary to preserve ointment in: it was so called of the Grecians, of
taking, and of the primative, a, because for the smothenesse thereof, it
could not be ^aide.

Plini in his six and thirty book and eight chapter, makes mention of this
Alabaster stone. For when he has spoken in the five and thirty chapter of the
O^icke stone, he goes forward thus: Some men (says he) call this the
Alabaster stone, the which they make hollow to put in oyntemente: because it
is said, to preserve the same very well. These things agree with that which
Homere writes, saying the little Onix will draw unto it a pype of the oil
Spykenarde, Horatius in (...)
or Nardus ointment.

Of oyntement that was preciouse. These words sound as much in Greek as if
thou should say: Of a great price: because money in time paste was wayed
and not told. The Euangeliste S. John, has expressed both the quantity, and
the kind, and so has S. Mark like wise. For he says: Then took Mary a pound
of ^intment (called Nardus, perfect and preciouse.) Judas declared the price
thereof, when he said that it was woorthe thirty pence. As concerning the
oynteme^t Nardus read Dioscorides. ^^oscor. li. ^ap. 72.
All these things were both a forewarning of the death of Christ (as he
himself interpreted them) and also a declaration of the love of this woman
toward Christ.

And povvred it on his head. This did she according to the manner of the
country, by the which custom, those that were special and singular friends:
were welco^med and honored in the midest of feasts and banquetes of their
friends, with this kind as it were of recreation: as we may perceive by the
words of Christ when he said to Simon the Pharisey: My head thou haste not
anointed with oil, ^^e. 7.
but she has anointed my fete.

And to this effect tends the allegory of David, when he says: Thou shall
prepare a table before me, ^^ 23.
against the^ that trouble me. Thou have anointed my head with oil and my cup
shall be full. For they used ointment, not to anointe the fete, but the head:
but Mary, contrary to the custom, bestowed such plenty of ointment, (as we
said even now) that it ran down to the fet also.

Therefore S. John says, that she anointed the fete of Christ and wyped them
with the hears of her head, that he might express and set forth the great
humility of the woman

8. But when his Disciples saw it, they had indignation saying: whereunto
seruith this waste?

But when his Disciples. C. This is no unwonted thing among the Evangelists,
to attribute that unto many which was done by one man, if so be that they give
their consent. Saint John says that this murmr arose of Judas which
betrayed Christ.

Mathewe and Mark impute it to the rest of the Disciples, as well as to him:
namelye because none of the rest durst once to have murmured or grudged if
the wicked tongue of Judas had not kindeled them even as a fyerbrand. But
when he began to condemn the superfluouse expense, the rest were easelye
allured to do the like. And by this example we are taught, how great
danger comes of wicked, and poisoned to^ges. The danger of evil to^ges
For they which are of good judgment gentle, and modeste by nature, except
they wisely take heed unto them selves, shall easily, being deceived by false
and slanderouse reports fall into wrong judgment. Wherefore, if foolish
credulity and rash belefe entangled the Disciples of Christ in the society of
Judas, what shall happen unto us if by light credit we receive whisperers and
caryers of false tales, which are wont to carpe, Tale cariers and whisperers
must be avoided,
and speak euel of good deeds? We ought also hereby to receive an other
admonition, and that is this, that we do not rashelye give judgment of a
matter not thoroughly known unto us. Rash judgment comes of light credit
The Disciples maintain the saying of Judas, and because it wants not a
pretense, they rashelye judge amiss? But truly it became them to inquire more
narrowly, whether that ye deed were worthy of reprehencion: specially their
master being present, to whose judgment they should have referred the
matter. Let us understand therefore that sentence is not orderlye given,
except the word of God go before: because none of us, (as S. Paul teaches)
do live or dye to our selves, but must all be brought before the judgment
seat of Christ, Romans 14. 2. Cor. 5.
where we shall give an accounte. The word of God truly teaches us to give
unto the poor, and this cost at the first sight might seem superfluouse: but
this ought not to be given to the poor, because Christ does command the
present use thereof, as appears in the eleventh verse followynge. Least
therefore we should be deceived by the show of a right zeal, let us observe
a mean, and learn neither to iustefie nor condemn any thing, but that
which is iustefied, or condemned by the mouth of God. And although there were
great difference between Judas and the rest (because he falsely cloaked his
theft, and the other were led by foolish simplicity) yet notwithstanding we
see that they being drawn from Christ, are linked through want of
wisdom, to Judas.

9 Foy this ointment might have been well sold, and given to the poor.

For this ointment might have ben^ well sold. B He shows a reason (as it
might seem) that he murmured not without just cause. Thus commonly are
hypocrites wont to do, who seek when they are most wicked to retain their
estimation. In stead of these words.

John. 12.
It might have been well sold S. John has, Why was not this ointmente
sold for three hundred pence And given to the poor. B He pretended a care for
the poor, of whom in deed he had no care: even as S. John declares, saying.
This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief,
and had the bag, and bare that which was given. ^ouetousnes a monsterous
beast.
C. By the which example we are taught what a monsterous beast Covetousness
is. The great loss which Judas thought he had sustained, the occasion of
his theft being taken away brought him to such madness, that he was not
afraid to betray Christ. And it is to be thought, that he did not only lie
unto others, as concerning the deceived power, but flatered him self also
within (as commonly hypocrites do) as though the betrayinge of Christ were a
light offense, by the which he would conteruale the loss that he had
received. For ye only cause of betraying Christ was, that he might by some
means or other, recover the loss, and pray which escaped his hands. For the
grudge conceived for ye loss of gain, drove him to seek occasion to betraye
Christ. But it is marvel why Christ chose such a steward, whom he knew to
be a thief. For what was this else, but to make a snare to strangle him self.
Mortal man can make no other answer, then to say, that the judgments of God
are of profounde deepenesse Notwithstanding the deed of Christ in this place
ought not to be drawn into a common rule, to commit the care of the poor or
any other holy office, to a wicked or unjust man. For God has prescribed
unto us a law, who they are which must be called to the gouernemente of his
Church, and to other Holy Offices: the which law ought not to be
transgressed. Also we may answer to the question before moved, that seeing
Christ was the eternal wisdom of God, he gave place to his secret
predestination in the person of Judas. B Therefore Judas did that, which
impiety is wont commonly to do: he pretended one thing, and thought an other
in his heart.

10. When Jesus understood that, he said unto them. why trouble ye the
wooman? for she has wroughte a good work upon me.

When Jesus understood that Bu. The Lord makes a defense for Mary, who
never forsakes those that woorship him: and therefore now also he does most
constantly defend Mary, that he might show what all the godly may learn and
look for, by this deed of the woman.

Why trouble ye the woman E. Or why do ye stay the woman from the h^stnes
which she has taken in hand. M. Behoulde the gentleness and humanity of
Christ, not only in this that he defends Mary, but also because he does not
by and by bewraie the deceyt and malice of the hypocrite, neither severely
reprove the deceiuer as he deserved: but only seeks to maintain the deed of
the woman, and to see that nothing do moleste her. And as for the sin of
Judas, because it was hyd, he would not publicly declare it. For she has
vvroughte a good work upon me. C. It is marvel why Christ, whose whole
life was a rule, and example of temperance and frugality, would now commend
immoderate cost, which always proceeded of luxury, and superfluous delights.
But we must note what kind of defense he uses: for he does not say that
the woman had done well, as though he would have the like daily to be done, but
because the same was once done of her, he affirms it to be acceptable unto
God, because upon just consideration it must needs be done. Although
therefore Christ did not desire the use of the oyntmente, yet notwithstanding
this annoyntinge did please him by reason of the circumstance. Whereby we
gather that certain singular deuties are sometime accepted of God, which
notwithstanding are not to be followed. But there is no doubt but that Mary
came by the secret motion of the spirit to anoint Christ: even as it is most
certain, that so often as the saints of God are called to any extraordinary
work, they are driven forward by the unwonted motion of the holy Ghost,
least they should do any thing without the guiding* and direction of God.
There was no commau^demente which should enjoin this annoyntinge unto Mary:
(neither was it needful that there should be a prescript law for one
thing) but because the heavenly calling is the only beginning of dooinge
right, and because all, what so ever men take in hand of them selves, is
rejected of God, Mary was governed by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, that
she should finishe this work upon Christ with an assured trust. E. Let
us also note here that things made for delighte and pleasure, may be used of
the godly, if so be ye they do not pretermit occasion to healpe the poor.
There is no doubt but that many poor folks were hungery, when Christ was
anointed with this precious ointment: but Christ also wanted not a good
consideration why he suffered the oyntmente to be powered upon him by this
wooman, to honor his death. Let no man therefore seek after pleasure: ^^mot. 4
and yet notwithstanding let no man again condemn those that use delights
not far sought for, but such as are at hand. For there is nothing which
the most wise God has made to our use, which the godly may not use well.
Moreover, as the Lord would have a difference in all other external things,
even so he would also have it in the use of delights and pleasures. It is
manifest that David, Solomon, and other godly Kings and Princes, did abound
oftentimes in sundry delights, when as many others wanted necessary food, yet
for all this they did not displease God. Only let there be a love which
forgeatteth not the necessity of the neighbor: let there be a study of
holiness, least the concupiscence of the fleash have his liberty: to be
short, let there be a mind seekinge the glory of God in all things, that
there may be no creature, the use whereof may hurt.

C. Moreover by this answer of Christ, the cause of one wooman was not only
defended, but also the holy glorying and reioysinge of all men was approved,
who coumpted sufficient that they and their works are accepted of God. It
does oftentimes come to pass, and will do always, that Godly men shall not
be only reprehended, but also openly condemned unjustly, who notwithstanding
are well assured that they do nothing but by the commandment of God: and
this is coumpted pride, if they despisinge the perverse judgments of the
world, are content with the only approbation of God. Because this is a hard
temptation, and because it can scarce be but that the wicked consent of many
shall pearse us, we must note this lesson, that none at any time shall be
animated constantly to do well, except they depend upon the only will of God.
Christ therefore does here revoke the diversity of the good and the evil to
his only arbitrament. For seeinge he affirms the work of the wooman to be
good, which was already condemned of the Disciples, he does by these words
state the rashness of men, which give them selves liberty to judge. Wherefore
let us learn also bearinge our selves boulde of this comfort, carelessly to
set at naught all such rumors and tales, as are spreadde abroad of us
throughout the world: knowinge this, that the same which is condemned of men,
is allowed of God. Even so Esaias being oppressed with wicked reproaches, Esaias. 50.
calls God a Judge, saying: He is at hand that iustefieth me, who will then
go with me to law: behold the Lord God stands by me, what is he then that
can condemn me. And S. Paul has the like words in effect. 1. Cor. 4.
Let us learn therefore not to regard the judgments of men, and when the
world shall rise against us with great outcries, let this comfort only
suffice, that the Son which is judged to be evil in earth, is pronounced
good from Heaven.

11. For ye have the poor always with you: but me shall ye not have always.

For ye have the poor alvvaies, C. Christ now answeareth to the objection
which deceived the Disciples: they did not of their own accord accuse
Marye, but were pricked forewarde thereunto by Judas: For hypocrites are as it
were a Fan, or Bellows to set others on fire to work wickedness.
Christ therefore by this sentence does declare that the deed of Marye was
acceptable unto him, not that he requires daily unction, but as a work
extraordinarye. As if he should say: As touching the poor, it is your
duty always to do them good: this unction is once allowed of me. So that
Christ does not simply defend Unction, that we might follow the same, but
he admonishes that it pleases God for a certain consideration.

The which thing we must wisely consider, least with the Papists, we
feign out of order, sumptuous and costly woorshippinge of God: For when they
heard that Christ would be anointed of Marye, they thought that he was
delighted with Perfume, with Franke^sence, with Wax candles, with Goulden
Vestementes, and with gorgeous pomp. Hereuppon came such glisteringe shows
in their Ceremonies: Papists worship God with outward shows only.
neither do they think them selves to be true Woorshippers of God, except
they bestow such cost. But trewely Christ here declares plainly, that the
thing which he would have then once done, should never after that be
acceptable unto him. For when he says that the Poor shall be always in the
world, Woorship extraordinary and necessary.
he puts a difference between the dailye woorshippe, the use whereof ought
to be among the faithefull, and that extraordinarye woorshippe which ceased
after his assension into Heaven. Will we lay our money well in the true
Sacrifice? A lines (...) true sac^^
let us give then to the poor. For Christ does not say, that he is with us,
to the end he might be woorshipped with external pompes. We do know
undoubtedly, and do feel by experience of Faith, that he is present with us
in power, and spiritual grace: but he is not with us visiblye, that he might
receive of us earthly honor. For in that he is with us by the grace of his
holy Spirit and power, in that he dwells in us, and in that also he feeds
us with his fleashe and bloudde, this pertains nothing at all to corporal
Woorshippes. Wherefore what Woorshippes so ever the Papists do inuente to
woorship Christ with, they do bestow them in vain, saying he does openly
reiecte them. A. Therefore the vnitinge and agreemente of this place, with those
which promise unto us the presence of Christ unto the end of the world, is
easy to be made: Such are these that follow: Mat. 1^ Mat. 18
Bu. Behoulde I am with you unto the end of the world. Also: Where so ever two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the middeste of them.
For according to his majesty (says S. Austen with Hierome) according to
his providence, according to his inspeakeable, and invisible grace, it is
fulfilled which he said. Behold I am with you to the end of the world. But
according to the fleashe which the word took, according to that, that be
was borne of the Virgin Mary, according to that, that he was taken of the
Jews, that he was crucified on the tree, that he was taken therefrom, and
lapte in linen clothes, and in that he was laid in the Sepulcher, and
manifested in the Resurrection, he said: But me shall ye not have alvvaies.
Wherefore? Because he was conuersante according to the presence of his body
fortye days with his Disciples, and they accompanyinge him, saw him ascend
into Heaven, and is not here: For there he sytteth at the right hand of his
Father. And he is here: for the presence of his majesty is not departed from
us. C. Furthermore in yt he says there shall be always poor, we do see that
it is our duties to be liberal to the poor, not for a year, or two, or
three, but for ever: because that is always acceptable unto him. Moreover
although in this place the hypocrisy of the Jews be touched, yet
notwithstanding we gather, that many are not poor, and needy by chance,
^^ty is ^^ted to (...) cha^^
but by Gods appointmente, to the end he might by their need exercise us in
the works of charity. And truly alms deeds are acceptable, and have a sweet
savor before God, by the which yt want of the poor is hol^en, whom God, if it
pleased him might make rich. S. Mark adds, And when so ever ye will, ye may
do them good. C. The sum of this place is, that although the Lord do
command to give our selves, and all that ever we have to him, yet
notwithstanding in respect of him self, he requi. reth no other thing then
Spiritual woorship, which consists not upon any cost: but will rather
that we bestow those things on the poor, which superstition foolishely
bestows to woorshippe him. Wherefore maddde and obstinate are they which
bestow great cost upon tryflinge toys, which God has rejected and does
abhor.

12. And in that she has cast this ointment on my body, she did it to bury
me. And in that she has B. In Mark he says: (...). 14.
She has done that she could: she came aforehande to anoint my body to the
burying. C. By the which words Christ confirms that which we said before,
that the precious ointment was not acceptable in respect of his odor, but only
in respect of the burial of Christ: because by this sign he would declare
that his burial should be so odiferous, ^^^ts b^^^ savor ^^.
that it should cast the sweet smell of life, and salvation throughout the
whole world. Therefore Christ does not allow this as an ordinary service, and
that the use thereof might always remain in the Church. For if he would that
this service should be done unto him daily, he would have said some other
thing then this, that it was given to bury him withal. C. But in John, Mary is
plainly commended, because she had kept this oyntmente against the day of
burial. John 12.
By the which words Christ means that the oyntmente was not spente out of
time, but according to the circumstance of the time. For it is said to be
kept, because it was under custody, that it might in a meet and convenient
time be powered out. For it is certain, that if any man would have bestowed
upon him any sumptuous delights before this time, he would not have suffered
it. But trewely, he denies that Marye did this for ma^ners sake, but that she
might bestow upon him the last service. And the annoyntinge of bodies at
that time was no vain Ceremony, but rather a Spiritual sign, which set
before the eyes of men, the hope of the Resurrection. The Promises were as yet
obscure, Christ was not as yet risen, which is not without cause called the
first fruits of them that sleep, 1. Cor. 15.
and shall rise again. Therefore the Faithefull had need of such little
hopes, which might direct them unto Christ, being as yet absente. So that
the annointinge of Christ was not superfluous, saying he should be buried
shortly after. For he was anointed as one that should be laid up in the
Sepulcher. This thing the Disciples knew not as yet. And Marye no doubt was
led by the direction of the Spirit, to do that thing, whereof she had
not premeditated before. But Christ applied that to the hope of his
Resurrection, which they so greatly disliked, that the very vtilitye and
profit thereof, might revoke them from wicked way wardnesse and childish
grudginge. And as God would have the childishenesse of the people of Oulde
time to be governed by such exercises: even so it were an absurd thing at
this day to prove the like, neither should it be done without injury to
Christ, who by the brightenesse of his coming, has put away all such
shadows. But because his Resurrection had not fulfilled as yet the figures of
the Law, it was necessary that his burial should be adorned with external
right. Now the odor of his Resurrection has of it self sufficient
efficacye to reuine the whole world, without either Nardus, or Spices.

13. Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in all
the world, there shall also this that she has done, be toulde for a
memorial of her.

Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached, C. He says, that this shall be
a honor unto Mar^, because she shall be praised in the Doctrine of the
Gospel. Whereby we gather, that there is a reward appointed to our works,
not by the judgment of men, but by the testimony of the word of God. B.
Furthermore we see how the memory of the Saints which have served Christ
in the Church, is kept, namely by the preachinge of the Gospel. For all the
deeds of Saints deserve not to be keapte in memory among their
posteritye, but those only which are joined with the preachinge of the
Gospel. Christ therefore confirms his sentence goinge before: for he says
that Mary was so far from blame in dooinge this thing, that rather she
should have great praise of them which shall preach the Gospel, and of
them also which shall receive it. The praise therefore of the godly is true, when
they are praised of God, and in his Church. In all the world, M. Here Christ
foresheweth plainly that it shall comme to pass, that this Gospel shall be
preached, not only in Iewry, but also in the whole world: the which might
bring great consolation to the minds of the Disciples, (because the death
of Christ was at hand, and they did want all kind of consolation, that
after his assension they might be the more boulde) although at that time no
man received the Gospel, yet notwithstanding that it should be preached in
the whole world. C. Christ therefore by these words witnessed the calling of
the Gentiles, in the which our Salvation is grounded. But how the Gospel
should be preached in the whole world, Math. 24.
we have showed before.

There shall also this that she has done be toulde In that he says, that
the memory of Mary shall be honorable in the whole world, he does ouerthwartly
touch by this comparison, his disciples: because by the consent of all the
Gentiles this deed ^t all be praised among those that dwell in the utmost
parts of the earth, in condemning whereof, they of the household had been so
greatly waiward. Christ also does gently correct his disciples, because they
think so grossly of his kingedome to comme. A. Solomon, Prove ^ Psalm. ^^
as concerning the memory of the just, writes thus: The memory of the just
shall have a good report. And the prophet David says: The just shall be had
in everlasting remembrance: and that not only before the Angels, but also
before the whole Church.

14. Then went on of the twelve (which was called Judas Iscarioth) unto the
chief Priests. Then went one of the twelve, C. What fruit reprehe^sions
bring forth, we here see The disciples are still and silent, not for shame, but
for true obedience sake. For they stand so much to the judgment of Christ, that
after they know that the thing which displeased the^, pleased him, they are
quiet. Even so ought we to do, when we have received a fall. being taught not
to be ashamed to rise from our error. On the contrary part we see what good
reprehension does in the minds of the obstinate: Repreh^^ does (...) fit the
^^nate.
for the admonition of Christ did profit so little to turn the heart of Judas,
or to make it better, that he went by and by void of care, to make a most
wicked bargain with the enemies of Christ. But it was a wonderful and
monstrous insensible dulnes, that in the loss of the ointment he thought he
had gotten an honest excuse to so wicked a fact: and further that he being
admonished by the words of Christ, knew not what to do. The only mention of
his burial had been enough to mollify an iron heart: when as he might have
gathered thereby ye Christ offered him self a sacrifice for ye salvation of
mankind. But in this spectacle we behold how great the blindness of wicked
desires is, and how effectually they bewitcheth the mind. Judas was
seruentely bente, and given to steal: and by long use he was hardened to
commit wickedness: now because he knew not how to ^gete his pray, he
lets not traitorously to deliver the son of God, the author of life, to
the death: and although he were retracted and revoked therfrom, yet violently
he goes on: yea, as though he were in a madness he runs to the sworn
enemies of Christ. It is true that he had the same in his mind before, but he
was now more inflamed, even as those men be, whom the Lord by his judgment
urges, that they run headlonge more and more into mischief. But and if
Judas had been asked wherefore he did this thing, no doubt he had alleged
that excuse, which the wicked at this day do, and had said, he urged me too
much. For they will have the servants of God to be in the fault, as they
which ought to bear with all wickedness. The wicked cannot be h^lde except
men flatter them: When they are urged, they break the raynes, nothing can
houlde them, and afterward they lay the whole fault upon the Servants of
God, which reprehende them. They keep in their poison for a time, in so
much that it appears not, but they will in no wise be reprehended: but when
they are urged, they seek to do all the mischefe they can, because they are
possessed of the Devil. Whereupon S. Luke does not without cause expressly
say, that Satan entered into him, not that the Spirit of God did govern him
before (because he could not have been given to theft and rapine, unless he
had been the mansion place of Satan:) but Luke meanethe that he was then
wholye given to Satan in possession, that being desperate he might run
headlong into his own destruction. ^^en pos^^^h the re^^te.
For although Satan do make us fall dailye, and reigns in us when he
carries us into a greater liberty of sinninge: yet notwithstanding he is
then said to enter into the reprobate, when the fear of God being taken
away, the light of reason extinguished, and shame also clean put of, he
possesses all our senses. But God does show this extreme kind of vengeance
upon none, but such as are given to destruction. Wherefore let us learn to
repent in time, least the long continuance of our hardenesse do stablishe
the Kingedome of Satan in us.

For so soon as we are cast into this tyranye, we be out of our wits
beyond all measure. Ephesians. 5.
A. For we know what the Apostle writethe, that the Gouernoure of the Air
woorkethe in the children of unbelief. And in an other place he affirms,
that they which resist the truth, are held with the snares of the Devil to
his pleasure. B. But to demand whether Satan entered substa^tially into
Judas, or no, is a vain question. This thing is more necessary to be
weighed, how horrible a thing it is, that men being made to the similitude
of God, and appointed to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, should not only
be turned into stinkinge Stables, but also be made the cursed mansion places of
Satan. One of the twelve, B. This is plainly expressed and set forth,
that we may see that there is no societye so sound and clean, but that it
may be spotted, since that among the Apostles of Christ, a Traytoure was
found. Wherefore let no man be offended, if any companion of Judas be found
among the ministers of Christ: neither let him think that for the impiety
of one man, the Ministerye of the rest ought to be laid aparte.

Bu. In the mean season let us learn that feigned friends are more pernicious
and pestilente, then open enemies. Unto the chief Priests. Judas knew that
the hie Priests were the serua^ntes of the devil, and tyrants: yet
notwithstanding he byeth him apase unto them, that he may sell his master:
because he and they were led by one spirit, namely the devil.

15. And said unto them: what will ye give me* and I will deliver him unto
you? And they appointed unto him thirty pieces of silver.

And saede unto them: what will ye, A. O s^amelesse, and wicked man. M. He
does not ask what matter they had against Christ, or what they would do
with him: but simply he enquireth after the money, having no care what they
would do with his master Christ.

Hereby we may perceive how trewely Paul writ, when he said:
Covetousness is the root of all evil, 1. Tim. 6.
and they which will be ritche, fall into diverse temptations and snares. Bu.
This unhappy Judas and woe begone, will recompense the loss which he
thought he had by the powringe out of the oyntmente, with the price of his
master. Yet for all that, he does not require any certain sum (least it
might seem to be a money Treason) but deliueringe him as a vile bondslaue, he
put the price into the Buyers hands, to know what they would give.

And they appointed unto him thirty pieces of silver. A. Mark and Luke say,
that the Hie Priests hearing Judas, were glad: in the which we have an
example set before our eyes of obstinate blindness: they were glad upon hope
of bringing that to pass, whereof they had consulted.

16. And from that time forth, he sought opportunity to betraye him.

Luke 22.
And from that time forth, Bu. Luke says that he commoned with the hie
Priests and Elders how he might deliver him unto them. The oportunitye
which he sought for to betray the Lord, was, that he might deliver him
without the tumult of the people, as S. Luke declares in the sixth verse of the
chapter last mentioned. He having taken therefore the most unhappy money that
ever was received, seeks by and by with great diligence a convenient time, in
the which he might deliver him unto them without any troble of the people So
nimble, diligente, and quick do Bribers make the Receivers. Christ meant by
this image to declare that there should come such, which being corrupted
with the love of money, should betraye the Doctrine of the Gospel: and that
this mischefe should specially come of those, which being the heads, and
pillars (as it were) of Ecclesiastical Religion, seem to know the secrets
of their Lord, with whom they are so familiare, that they do betraye his
Doctrine to the wicked, and Heathen Magistrates, by false interpretation
thereof, seekinge for nothing else then the destruction of the truth of the
Gospel.

17. The first day of sweet bread the Disciples came to Jesus, saying unto
him, where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Paseouer?

The first day of svveetebreade, C. It may be demanded why that is called the
day of Sweetebreade, which went before the offeringe of the Lamb. For the
Law commanded that they should lay away their Leven, til they did eat the
Lamb. But this question may be easily answered: namely that this observation
is referred to the day folowinge, as may sufficiently appear by the other two
Evangelists. A. For S Mark has: The first day of sweetebreade when they
offered Paseouer. Mark. ^ Luke. 22.
And Luke has. The feast of sweetebreade drew nie, which is called Easter.
C. When therefore the day to kill and eat the Pascall Lamb was at hand
(which begannne at the evening) the Disciples asked Christ where he would
eat Paseouer.

The Disciples came to Jesus, A. We read in Luke, that Christ first sent
Peter and John to prepare the Paseouer: and that then they demanded of the
Lord, where they should prepare a place to eat it. He sent (says he)
Peter and John, saying: Go and prepare unto us the Paseouer, that we may
eat. They said unto him: Where will thou that we prepare? In that they ask
of him where he would eat Paseouer, it is a sign that they were wandringe
and unstable, having no certain place: and their entrance into the Cittye
could not be without great danger. For they had there mortal enemies,
which sought occasion to take them. But behoulde how Christ neglected
nothing which pertained to the common rule of the godly. Fore he would be
subject to the Law, that he might redeem us from the Curse of ye Law, as
witnesses S. Paul: he would not therefore pretermit the Paseouer no more the^
he did ye other rites. Gala. 5.


18. And he said: go into the City to such a man, and say unto him, the
master says: my time is at hand, I will keep Easter by thee, with my
Disciples. And he said: go into the city,

E. In the Greek text, as touching the word, it is readde, To him. After
the which manner the Grecians do speak, when they mean a certain man, whom
notwithstanding they do not name. C. Whereby it appears that S. Mathewe
names here a certain man. But the other two do show that the Disciples
were sent as to one unknown, because a token was given unto them of a man
carryinge a Pitcher of water. But this discrepance and variety, may easily be
reconciled: because Mathewe pretermittinge the miracle, notes that man which
was then known to the Disciples. For there is no doubt but that after they
were come home to the house, they found some one of their familiare friends.
For Christ, according to his right, commands that he prepare room for
him and his, naming him self the master: and he without delay fulfilled his
commandment. Moreover, although he could express the man by his name, yet
notwithstanding he rather sought to direct his Disciples unto him by a
miracle, that when they should see him a little after to be abased, yet their
Faith might be stayed up by his Documente. For this was no small
confirmation, that a few hours before he was carried to his death, he
should by a manifest token, declare him self to be God, to the end they
might know that he was not constrained by necessity to suffer death, but
that he took it on him self of his own free will And although in the very
momente of perturbation, it did nothing at all peradventure profit them, yet
notwithstanding the remembrance thereof afterward was very profitable. Even
as at this day also to avoid the stombling block of the cross, it
pertains unto us to know this, that the glory of the Deity, as well as the
infirmity of the Fleashe appeared in Christ, a little before the time of his
death. The master says: A. By these words, although he were coumpted a
vile and abiecte person, he taught his Disciples that he was the true Lord,
to whom it belonged to command all men, who commaundinge, all ought to
obey: and that he has also the hearts of men in his hands, in so much
that he can dispose and constrain them to obey him. Such a one he names him
self, and such a one in deed he proves him self, Math 2 1.
when he commaundethe the Fool to be loosed and brought unto him, as appears
in the 21. Chapter before. And (says he) if any shall say unto you, why do
you loose him? say ye, The Lord has need of them* And by and by he will
let them go. Mar. 11. Luke 19.
Mark and Luke add, saying: And while they were loosinge the Coulte, the
owners thereof said unto them: Wherefore do ye loose the Coulte? And they
said: Because the Lord has need thereof. And they suffered them.

But in an other place also he does most plainly call him self a master: as
when he says, Ye call me master and Lord, John. 13.
and ye say well, for so I am. My time is at hand C. Although he did rightely
celebrate Paseouer according to the commandment of the Law, yet
notwithstanding he seems not without consideration to allege this, that he
might put away the fault of moro^^tie and waywardness. He says therefore
that he has cause to make haste, that he might apply him self to every
usual Custom: because he is called to a greater Sacrifice. In the mean time
notwithstanding (as we said in the second verse before) he does renew
nothing in the Ceremony. B. Neither does he say: My death, but, My time is
at hand: that he might declare that his death was for certain appointed of
God: and also to teach us by his example to be ready and willinge when the
time shall comme, which is appointed to every one.

C. Christ does so often therefore inculcate that the time of his death is at
hand, that the Disciples might know that willingely he made haste to obey
the Decree and Will of his Father.

I will keep my Easter by thee. B. Behold with how great confidence and
authority he commands this man to give him room and place, in the which he
might keep his Easter. Marcke and Luke add that he said: Where is the
gheastchamber, that I may eat Paseouer with my Disciples? And he shall show
unto you a great Parloure, paued and prepared: there provide and make ready
for us. And his Disciples went, and came into the City, and found as he had
said unto them. The Evangelists say, that they found as the Lord had
said: by the which we are taught that he will never frustrate our hope, if
we give credit unto his words. For he cannot deceive. C. But in that he
joined the shadowed sacrifice to that which is true, he thereby exhorted the
faithefull that they would compare that with the Old Figures which he
fulfilled in deed. For this Comparison settethe forth no small force and
effect of his death. For Paseouer was not enjoined to the Jews to this end
only, that they should be mindful of the Oulde Deliverance, but also that
they should hope for the more special Deliverance that should come by
Christ. To this effect pertains this sentence of Paul: Christ our Paseouer
is offered up for us. 1. Cor. 5.


19. And the Disciples did, as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready
the Paseouer. And the disciples did, C. Here the Apostles declare how much they
believed the words of Christ, and how obedient they were: in the which we
must note their godly docilitie and aptness to be taught. For they might
have doubted, seeing they followed an unknown man, whether they should obtain
that of the goodman of the house, which their master, by their message
required: saying they knew that he was contemned, and hated of the most part.
But truly they do not carefully inquire of the event and end, but quietly
they obey his commandment, M and do simply finishe the thing they were
commanded. C. And we must observe this rule, if we desire to prove our
faith, that being content with the only commandment, we may go forward
to that which God commands and that we hopinge for the success which he
promises, may put away all carefulnes. For if we be to inquisitiue, it is a
sign of distrust: and of distruste follows rebellion and obstinacy, which
seperateth us from the grace of God.

20. When the even was comme, he sat down with the twelve. When the eue^ C.
Not that he might eat Paseouer: (the which should be done standing, even as
men that have haste of their journey, being shodde, and eat their meat with
the staff in their hand) but the solemn rite being done, it is mente that
he sat down to supper. Therefore the Evangelists say: the even being come:
because in the first even they did kill the lamb, and did eat the flesh
thereof roasted

He sat down with the twelve. M. Great was the impudency of Judas, that
after the bargain made with the hie priests, he durst sit down with the
rest at the Lords table, being nothing afraid of his masters conscience.
For peradventure he thought that he was ignorante of his purpose, or at least
that he would not bewray it, by reason of the meekenes of his mind, whereof he
had oftentimes experience before.

21. And as they did eat, he said: verily I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me. And as they did eat. Bu. Christ was not ignorante of the
practices, counselles, and conspiracies of his enemies, therefore easily he
could have deceived them, if he would: but he rather sought by the
foreshewinge of them, to fortify the weak against the stumbling block of the
Cross: even as he said unto them, John. ^
I have toulde you these things before they comme to pass, that when they
come ye might believe. A. And because the wicked treason of Judas seemed to
excel al ye rest, he thought good to show that the same was not hidden from
him, saying: One of you shall betray me. M. By these obscure and dark words,
the Lord went about to prove the mind of Judas, and secretly to prick his
conscience, that none of those things might be omitted, which did pertain to
his repentance.

For although Christ knew the blindenes of the trayter to be such, yt he
should be admonished in vain, yet notwithstanding it was not without
consideration to strike his conscience, yt hereafter he might be void of all
excuse, neither that any of those things might be omitted which concern the
duty of a good man. The Evangelist Mark has: One of you which eats with
me. C. For to ye end he might make the treason of Judas the more detestable, by
this circonstance he increases his unworthiness, because he sittinge at the
holy Table went about treason. For if a stranger had don this it had been more
tolerable: but for one of the household to work such mischief, and then
under the collar of friendship, to join himself to the holy supper, was to
monsterouse a thing. And therefore the Evangelist S. Luke has. Yet behold,
the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the table. And although Luke
brings in this saying of Christ to be spoken after Supper was ended, yet
notwithstanding the order of the time cannot hereby be gathered, which we
know to be often times neglected of the Evangelists. Yet for all that it is
probable yt Judas was present, when Christ did distribut the signs of body and
blood.

22. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him: Lord is it I?

And they were exceeding sorrowful. M. Three things caused the sorrow of the
Apostels. First, because he said that he should be ^ 14.
and therefore the Lord comforts them in the fourthten of John.

(...) 20.
Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw ye
Disciples after the how could ye godly which were among the^ be free from
trouble? Thirdly because they know not who the traitor should be. Moreover
Christ, John. 13.
Therefore the Disciples are not afraid, as men which disquiet themselves
being afraid without cause: but abhorring the wicked fact they desyer to be
purged from the suspicio^ thereof. This truly is a sign of reverence, that
being toutched and stricken after a bye sort they do not stoutly and churlishly
answer their master but refer them selves every one to his judgment: yet
notwithstanding bearing themselves bold of a good conscience, they freely
testify how far they are from doing so hainouse a fact. Whereupon every one
of the^ demand saying. Is it I? M. They could not doubt of the words of
Christ: and although they knew themselves to be gylty and thing of this matter
yet notwithstanding they could not be quiet in all points. For we are always
such yt we may be changed every hour in so much that the thing which we
think not of to day, we shall earnestly seek after to morrow. Peter truly
could abide nothing worse than that he should deny Christ: but yet it came to
pass yt he did deny, him. Innocents also are fearful not because they
distrust the promises of God, but because they fear themselves. I know
nothing by my self (says S. Paul yet I am not hereby justified. For the
Lord does look more narrowly: and there are in us infinite lurking places. 1.
Cor. 4.
A. Therefore S John writes not without cause saying: John. 13.
The^ the Disciples looked one upon an other doubtinge of whom he spoke.

23. He answered and said: he that dippeth his hand with me in the dishe, the
same shall betray me.

C. Christ by this answer does neither take away the doubt from them,
neither shows unto them the person of Judas, but only confirms that which
he said even now that one of his familiar ghestes should be the trayter. A.
As it may also be gathered by the other two Evangelists. M. For S. Mark
has: It is one of the twelve, eue^ he that dippeth with me in ye platter, And
S. Luke has: Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the
table. And so by this heaping together and amplifying of the matter (as we said
before) the disposition of this wicked man, was noted, who was nothing moved by
the communion and fellowship of the table, to abstain from so wicked a deed:
yea he being set at the table devised nothing but how he might have
convenient time to betray him C. And although it was greuouse unto the
Disciples to be left suspe^ded and in perplexity for a time, that they might
busy the^ selves in considering ye hainousnes of the fact, yet notwithstanding
there followed after that, an other profit and commoditye, when they knew that
the Prophesye of the Psalm was fulfilled which says: It is not an open enemy
yt has done me this dishonor, Psalm. 55.
neither was it my adversary that magnified himself against me: But it was
even thou my companion, my guide, and my own familiar friend. We took sweet
counsel and walked together in the house of God as friends. Moreover under the
person of Judas, the Lord would have his servants of all ages to be
admonished that they be not dismayed or discouraged, when they see trayters to
come from among the faithful: because the like that happened unto him being
the head of the Church must of necessity happen also to those that are his
members.

24. The son of man truly goes, as it is written of him: but who unto that
man, by whom the son of man is betrayed. It had been good for that man, if he
had never ben borne.

The son af man truly goes C. Christ speaks these things as turned to
himself, after he had admonished Judas. M. As if he should say: As toutching
yt which happens unto me there is no danger, nothing shall happen unto me by
chance or unlooked for: that which is written of me must needs be fulfilled,
and to this in deed I am ready: the wicked can do nothing against me, but that
which is appointed of God. Bu. My death is ordained by the father himself: it
is not therefore by the power and policy of men that I suffer, but by the will
of God. C. By these words Christ preuenteth the offense, which otherwise
might grievously assail the minds of the Godly.

For what could be more absurd, than for the son of God, being falselye
betrayed by a Disciple, to be committed to the will of the enemies, that he
might be drawn to the most shameful and slanderouse death. But Christ
pronounces plainly that this comes by the will of God. And he proves this
decree by the testimony of the Scripture, because he has made manifest and
fulfilled ye thing which was appointed to be done by the mouth of the Prophet
long before.

Now let us note to what end the words of Christ do tend, namely that the
Disciples knowing whatsoever is done to be governed by the providence of God,
should not think that his life or death, was ordered by chance. But the
profit that comes of this doctrine, does farther extend it self: because
then at the last, the fruit of Christ's death shall be truly ratifyed unto us,
when it is manifestly known, that he was not rashely, carried of men to the
crose, but by the eternal decree of God was ordained a sacrifice to take away
the sins of the world: For how comes reconciliation unto us and the
attoneme^t, but only because Christ by his obedience has pleased the father?
Wherefore let us always remember the providence of God, to the which both
Judas, and all the wicked also (although against their wills) must needs obey.
Let this always abide fixed and firm in our minds, that Christ therefore
suffered because such kind of sacrifice pleased God. Bu. But some man will
object and say: If it were so appointed by the providence of God, and set down
in the Scriptures, that the son of GOD should be betrayed by Judas, I see
not truly why Judas offended, who did nothing but that which God would have
don, which he had ordained, and by ye Scriptures foreshewed. The Lord answers
this objection here, saying. But vvo to that man by whom the son of man is
betrayed. Aunsw^
C. By the which words he denies Judas to be absolved by this pretense,
because he did no thing but that which was appointed of God. For although God
by his right and just judgment appointed the death of his son to be the
price of our redemption: Judas nevertheless in betrayinge Christ, because he
was full of falsehoode and covetousness, brought just damnation to himself: and
in that God would have the world redeemed, it did nothing let but that Judas
might he (as he is) a wicked trayter. Hereby we perceive, that although men
can do nothing but that which God has appointed, yet notwithstanding they
are not absolved from gyltines, when by a wicked affection they are feruentlye
given to sin. For although God by a secret brydell leads them to an end
unknown to them, yet notwithstanding they seek for nothing less than to
obey and accomplish the decrees of God. These two things truly seem far
contrary to humane reason, that God should so govern humane matters by his
providence, that nothing should be done but at his will and pleasure: and yet
for all that, that he should destroy the reprobate, by whom he has executed
his will. But we see here how Christ Ioineth both of them together, making
Judas subject to the curse, although God himself had ordained that he
should be an enemy unto him: not that the treason of Judas ought properly to
be called the work of God, but because God turned the falsehood of Judas to
serve his purpose. We must therefore put a difference between the work of
God, and the impietye of Judas. Because God is always Just in his counsels, he
does nothing without cause: but wicked men are moved by an evil cause: the
which thing even their conscience decl reth. The thief, and the judge,
although both of them kill men, yet notwithstanding there is a great
difference between them. For thee severity of the Judge is commended, and the
thief condemned It came to pass by the will of the father that Christ
suffered, and it was his pleasure so to have it, but the impiety of Judas did
not please him. ^lme 5.
A. For he is a God which is not delighted in wickedness. It is foreshewed of
Christ that those which are his shall suffer tribulation in this life: Romans 8.
(because those whom he knew before, he also ordained before, that they
should be like fashioned unto the shape of his son) Z. Yet notwithstanding
the wicked are not thereby excused which are the persecutours of the faithful.
Judas when he betrayed Christ, had not respect unto the will of God, but to
the wickedness of his own heart, that he might receive money. According to
the same wickedness therefore he is justly condened. Therefore, although at a
blushe the wicked seem to have some fellowship with God, yet for all that we
must more narrowly behold them, and then we shall see ye they are as far from
him as heaven and earth. They are not excusable, but rather woe unto them. These
things are diligently to be noted, because many frensy and hedstrong men do
entangle and confound all things, not in disputing, but with controllinge and
reprochinge with God: neither do they seek for any thing else, than to defame
ye whole doctrine of God, that by hate of religion, the contempt of God, and
brutishe boldness may arise: that men may differ nothing from beasts, let us
learn therefore to make a difference as Christ here has done. And yet for all
that we must not deny but that God does use the works of the wicked, that
they may serve his providence (though against their wills) and do that also
which he has decreed. C. We do know truly how many interpreters do avoid
this rock. they grant that ye Scripture was fullfilled by ye work of Judas:
because God declared that, by prophesies which he knew aforehande. Therefore
to the end they might mittigate the doctrine which seems unto the^ to be some
what to sharp, they set forth ye knowledge of god in sted of his decree or
appointeme^t, as though God should only behold those things yt were to come a
far of, but should not dispose them according to his pleasure. But the holy
ghost does far otherwise end this co^trouersy, bringing in, not only the
reason why Christ was delivered, namely because it was so written, but also,
because it was so appoi^ted. For whereas Matthew and Mark do allege Scripture,
Luke brings us directly to the heavenly decree, eue^ as he teaches in the
Acts of the Apostels, Act. 2.
ye Christ was not only delivered by the foreknowledge of God, but also by the
determinate counsel of God. Also he says: Herod, Pontius Pilate with the
Gentiles and people of Israel, Act. 4.
gathered them selves together to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done. Whereby it appears yt they roon out of course
which fly unto the bare foreknowledge of God. It had been good for that man C.
By these words he declares what horrible vengeance shall fall upon the
wicked, for whom it had been better that they had never ben borne. Howebeit
this life, though it be but transitory and full of sorrows is a singular and
special benefit of God. Moreover also hereby we gather how detestable their
impietye is which do not only extinguishe the preciouse gifts of God and
turn them to destruction, but bring to pass that it had been better if they
had never tasted the goodness of God: Let us learn therefore to tremble at the
judgment of God, that we may abhor all wickedness and whatsoever is contrary
to the righteousness of God. It had been better for Judas never to have been,
than to be damned to torment for ever. But this is worthy to be noted, that he
says: It had been good for that man not to have been borne: because although
the state and condition of Judas by miserable, yet for all that it was good for
God that he was created, who appointing the reprobate to eternal destruction,
does thereby set forth his glory as Solomon in his proverbs teaches saying:
The Lord does all things for his own sake, yea and when he keeps the
ungodly for the day of wrath.

25. Then Judas which betrayed him, answered and said: master is it I? He said
unto him thou haste said.

Then Judas which M. We see here the wonderful impudency of Judas, which
does not only dissemble the wicked deed, but also with a brazen face offers
himself, and denies the deed. Because all the rest had demanded of Christ
and said, Is it I? least^ he should seem to be gyltye, he bursteth forth also
in like manner saying* Master is it I? He does not ask this question to know
the truethe, neither because he was so^y as the rest were, but least he
should be had in suspicion of the rest, if he should hold his pea^e. C.
Although we see often times those that are gilty in conscience to tremble for
fear, yet notwithstanding they are so wrapped in fear, in brutishe
sencelesnes, and in blindenes, that that they boldelye stand to the denial:
but at the length they secretlye bewraye their mischief. Even so Judas,
having his own conscience accusing him, could not keep silence: so cruellye
did that tormenter within his breast disquiete him with fear and care. Thou
haste said Christ by his answer crossely reprhending the boldenes of Judas,
stirs him up to consider his wicked fact which he sought to hide. M. As if
he should say: I say not that thou go about to betray me, I do not reveal
thy wickedness: but thou thy self say it. Take heed therefore what thou
doeste. Behold here the wonderful mekenes of Christ, he does not chyde him,
he casts not his benefits in his teeth, he drives him not from the communion
of the table: he holds him contented that he has stricken his conscience,
and that he has well provided for the faith of the rest, in shewinge that
these things happened unto him according to the Scriptures. C. But now the
mind of Judas being possessed with deuelishe madness, he could not conceive
any such meaning.

Moreover let us learn by this example, that the wicked in excusing their
sin do nothing else but bring the judgment of God more spedely upon them
selves M After these things Saint Luke adds that he said thus: I have
inwardly desiered to eat this Paseouer with you, before that I suffer. For I
say unto you: henceforth I will not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled
in the kyngedome of God. And he took the cup and gave thanks and said. Take
this and divide it among you. For I say unto you: I will not drink of the
fruit of the vine, ^uke. 22.
until the kingdom of God come. A. The which sentence we will expou^de in
the.29. verse followinge.

M. But Matthew hitherto declares that Christ was not ignorant of the counsel
and purpose of his betrayer: of the which he makes mention, not with a
disdainefull mind, neither to the end he might bewray the wyckednes of
Judas, or contend with him: but he rather did it to fortify the rest of his
Disciples. Of the which thing truly this is an evident argument, that he
leauinge the trayter, commends and instituteth to his Disciples the proffite
and memory of his death, by the sacrament of his body and blood Before the
whichh institution it is evident, that he did, and spoke these things, by the
words of Luke before rehearsed, by the which he declared that the Paseouer of
the Jews, was not only a remembrance of the deliverance out of Egypt, but
also a type of the deliverance to come, which even now was ready to be
fulfilled, weereof he himself should the author. C. But because Luke makes
mention that Christ took the cup twyse in his hand, we must first of all
se whether it be a repetition (for sometimes the Evangelist do repeat one
thing twice) or whether Christ, after he had tasted of the cup, did the like
again the second time. Surely it is like that he tasted of the cup twyse.
For we know that the solemn rite of supping in the sacrifyces was observed of
the holy fathers: where upon it is written, I will receive the cup of
salvation, and will call upon the name of the Lord. So that we doubt not but
that Christ did syp, according to the old custom, ^me. 116.
in the holy feast: the which could not otherwise be rightlye accomplished.
The which thing S. Luke plainly declares before yt he comes to ye narratio^
of the new mystery, the order whereof was distinguished from the Paschall lamb.
This also was done according to the accustomed and solemn use, in that he is
expresely said to give thanks when he took the cup: (For in the beginning
of Supper, no doubt he prayed, even as at no time he came to the table without
invocation of God) But now also again he used the same service least, he
should omit the ceremony, which we said eueen now was annexed to the holy
Sypping. B. For the good man of the house, if he had a domestical sacrifice,
began first if it were the sacrifice of the whole people or multitude, the
king began first. Christ truly would not despise that commen manner or
custom. For there was nothing mixed in the Paseouer of superstition. Thanks
therefore being given for the solemn assemblye, he set before them the cup, yt
every one might taste or syppe thereof: in doing whereof, they declared that
they would give thanks with the same mind, eue^ as if they should have
said, Amen.

This Ceremony was nothing else, than a testimony of agreement. Now let us come
unto the Supper: for that first sypping was only a giving of thanks.

26. When they were eating Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks,
he break it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said: take eat this is my
body.

When they were eating. C. These words are not so to be understood as
though this new and far more excellent supper, were joined to the Paseouer:
but rather that the first supper was then ended.

The which thing also is more plainelye expressed of S. Luke, when he says
that Christ after supper took the cupe and gave it. Luke. 22.
For it had been an absurd thing that one and the self same mystery should be
cut of by the distance of time. Wherefore there is no doubt but that orderly,
so soon as he had given bread, he gave the cupe also And that whick S Luke
speaks particulerly of the cup, we extend to the bread also. Therefore as
they were eatinge, Christ took bread, that he might call them to the
participation of the new supper. The giving of thanks was a certain
preparation and pasing to consider the misterye. Thus, supper being ended,
they tasted of the holy bread and wine: because first their security was
stirred up, that they might wholely give them selves to so hye a mystery.

And reason does thus require, that this evident testimony of life spiritual
should have a difference from the old shadow But in that Christ instituted
the Sacrament of his body and blood when supper was ended, he mente not thereby
to make a law that the faithful should take their Supper, before they
celebrated the mistical supper: how beit, that was the custom among them of
old time, that they should celebrate the Lords supper from year to year,
after meat, being begone by superstition and invented by ye subtilty of Satan.

Jesus took bread. B. It was the manner in time past among the religiouse and
Godly Jews, that when they sat down at the table, the good man of the house
or some other which sat vpermost at the table, should take take bread in his
hand, and give ye Lord thanks. and after that, breaking ye same in pieces,
should distribute it unto the ghestes, as out of the hand of the Lord, before
they had tasted of any other meat At the end of the feast they carried about
the cup after the same manner. This institution was committed unto the Jews by
the holy fathers, before the incarnation of Christ, that they might always
take meat and drink before the Lord even as it were out of his hand, and
might thereuppon be provoked to live wholly unto God, Deuteronomy. 8.
of whom they acknowledged themselves to be so lovingly fed and nourished. As
concerning this institution, certain men (called Thalmudici) do dispute upon
this place of Moses. When thou haste eaten and filled thy self thou shalt
bless the Lord. C. But because this is a humane tradition, grounded upon no
commandment of God, it needs not that we should curiously labor in
searchinge out the original of it.

But if this ceremony were in use at that time among the Jews, Christ did so
follow the usual manner, that he might being, notwithstanding the minds of
his Disciples to an other thing, in changing the use of the bread to an
other end. This truly ought to stand fyrme without controversy, that the
figures of the law being abolished, this new Sacrament was set forth of
Christ. Bread. B. It is a solemn and usual manner among al men in matters of
great weight, which they finishe and dispatche among them selves, to deal
not by words only, but also to join to their words external signs of
those matters with which they have to do, that by those signs they may
deliver that with the hand which they offer with their mind: specially when
either spiritual things must be delivered, or else those carnal things which
either are not present, or if they were, could not be given with the hand.
They which give their faith, ^o deliver ye same not only by words, but also
with the hand, even as we are wont to do when we promise effectually to
perform the thing which is required of us. Of them, which are appointed to
swear, not only words, but also the lifting up of ye hands toward heaven,
and the kissing of a book is required. They which receive a kingdom, are
consecrated not only by words but also by reaching forth of the Scepter, and
other ceremonis. They which sell houses or lands, do deliver the possession
thereof either by writing, or some other external matter, to the byar. This
custom also is observed and kept in spiritual exhibitions, and deliueris.
Far as God speaks and talks with us according to our capascity, even so
also he works by external matters delivering unto us invisible and spiritual
things by visible and corporal signs, visiblely, and corporally (so much as
pertains to signs. Gene. ^
So he confirms the covenant and promise made unto Noe, with the sign of the
Raynebowe in the clouds. Gene. ^^ Leuit. ^ Exodus ^ Exodus ^ 1. King ^ Mark ^
Mark ^ John. ^
To Abraham he confirmed his promise by carnal circoncision. Afterward to
the Israelites in the deserte by sprinkeling ye blood of a bullock. Also he
offered his presence by ye mercy seat of ye Arc. He appointed the
consecration of priests and kings, by pouring oil on the head. And our
savior Christ himself gave invisible grace, by ye visible laying one of hands,
both to children and sick folks. Also he gave ye gift of the holy ghost, by
breathing on his Disciples. After this manner therefore ye Lord thought good to
commend unto us this his oblatio^ and exhibitio^, ye su^me of our whole
salvation, not only by word neither by baptism only, being the sign of the
washing away of our sins by him: but also added signs of meat and drink:
that is to say him self, which is the true heavenly and living bread, the
sustentation and food of eternal life, which he gives unto us so long as he
is and lives in us. But in the institution he chose these two signs, namely
bread and wine, which were most common and usual in the ceremonies of all
nations, and appointed them to be distributed, according to the common and
solemn order already received and used among the people of God: because he
would both have religion published and declared to all men, and also the fulness
and amplenes of the spirit to be given, yt it might be mete to take such
signs, as should be both few, and also common and simple. For so Baptism
is a sign, by the which an inuitation and calling to religion, and to all
religious action, was made both among the Jews, and also among the Gentiles.
Therefore because the tasting of bread and wine, was used in sacrifices among
all nations, and also because they were things simple and easy to be gotten,
the Lord did sanctify the^, and make them a sacrament of his church, that
thereby he might give the true communion of his body and blood to those that
are his. And when he had given thanks. C. The Evangelists Mark and Mathewe
according to the Lattin translation have. And when he had blessed: But saying
instead thereof we read in Luke the Greek word Eucharistesai, there is no
ambiguitie at all in sense. And seeing they say that he gave thanks when he
took the cup, they do sufficiently interpret the former saying. Ridiculous and
gross therefore is the ignorance of the Papists, which express this
blessing with the sign of the cross, as though Christ had used exorcisme or
coniuration. But we must keep that in memory which we touched eue^ now,
namely, that this giving of thanks was joined to a spiritual mystery. For
Christ had not respect to the common kind of food only, that the faithful
might be thankful to God, because he susteineth them in this tra^sitory life,
but he had also respect to the holy action, that he might give thanks unto
God for the eternal redemption of mankind. For if the norishementes which go
into the bellye, ought to move us and give us occasion to praise the fatherly
goodness of God, how much more ought we to be stirred up and inflamed to this
deuty and godly service seeing that he fedeth our souls spiritually.

He brake it. B. The loaves are thought to be of that form, that they might be
conveniently broken, as cakes or such like.

And gave to his disciples. Here by the name of Disciples, all godly Christians
are understood, to whom Christ gives his body as to his disciples, so often
as they celebrate this holy supper among them selves in the congregation of the
faithful. For the priests only are not understood by them, as some very
childishly and peruersely expound it, who may easily be confuted by the place
of S. Paul, where he teaches the Corinthians the true use of the supper, 1.
Cor. 11
speaking to men and women without exception, and to the whole body of the
church: and testifies that he delivered the same to them as he had received
it from the Lord. But he distributed bread to the Apostles, that all generally
might eat, and that every one should so take his portion, that there might be
an equal participation among all. For he says: Take eat. C. In that he
commands us to take, he means that it belongs unto us: and whereas he
commands to eat, he means that it is made one substance with us. For he
did so institute all these things that the disciples might communicate this
supper among them selves. Whereupon it follows that it was a deuelishe
inuencion, that one man seperating him self from the residue of the
congregation, should privately celebrate the supper. For what is more unseemly
than to have the bread distributed in the presence of the people, and then to
be eaten up in a corner of one alone? Popish mass is contrary to the
institution of Christ.
Although therefore the Papists do boaste yt they have the substance of ye
lords supper in their masses, yet for all that in deed it is plain, yt so many
private masses as they have celebrated, so many conquestes has Satan erected
to overthrow the supper of the lord. Neither is it true which they say, that
it is a sacrifice offered in the name of ye whole church. For Christ did not
command yt one man should eat it in the name of all the rest, but that every
one should take and eat the^ selves. By the same words we are taught what
oblatio^ was offered of Christ in the supper. He commands his disciples to
take. He it is therefore that offers. Where as therefore the Papists feign
that Christ offers him self in the Supper, it comes of ye contrary
author, namely of the deuell, and not of Christ. And truly this is a
wonderful inuersion and preposterous dealing, that a mortal man, when he is
commanded to take ye body of Christ, should take unto him self his office of
offering: and so making him self a priest, offers unto God his son.

We go not about here to declare how full of sacrilege and execrable
abomination their feigned oblation is: it is sufficient for us to prove that it
has so little affinite with the institution of Christ, that it does rather
directly impugn the same.

This is my body. Christ calls the bread his body. For the relative, (This)
does express the bread, and not the body. For by and by it follows. This
cup is the new testament in my blood: the which are figurative sayings, as
we shall see anon. But where as they say that the bread was consecrated by
these words, that it might be an outward sign of Christ's flesh, we do
not dislike, if so be that this word (sign) be rightly and truly taken.
Christ therefore chose the bread which was appointed to nourishe the body,
and sanctifies it to another use, that it may now begin to be spiritual
food. And this is that conversion, whereof the ancient writers of the church
have made mention. True consecration.
But for all this we must note that the bread is not consecrated by whyspering
and breathing over it, but by the pure doctrine of faith. And truly it is a
magical sorcery, when the consecration is directed to a dead element: because
the bread is not made a sign of the body of Christ for it self, but for us.
To be short, Consecration is nothing else, than a solemn testimony, by the
which the Lord does give unto us a terrestrial and corruptible sign, to a
spiritual use. The which thing cannot be done except ye commandment and
promise do plainly sound forth to the building of faith. Whereby it is evident
again that the Papists do wickedly profane ye holy mystery with their
obscure muttering and breathing. But it Christ do consecrate the bread, when
he testifies unto us that it is his body, we must not imagine the alteration of
the substance: but we must mark the newnes of the use. And except the
craftines of the deuel had so bewitched the world, yt being once carried by the
vain imagination of transsubstantiation, it will at this day admit no true
interpretation in these words it should be superfluous and in vain, to spend
any long time in sekinge out the sense and meaning. A Sacra^ consists ^^
visible si^^
Christ pronou^ceth that the bread is his body, and he entreats of the
sacrament. And we must needs confess that a sacrament does consiste of a
visible sign, to the which the thing signified is joined, which is his
truth.

This also has been ever a general rule, that the name of the thing signified,
is tra^sferred to the sign. Wherefore no man that has but indifferently
traueled in the scriptures, will deny but that a sacramental speech must be
taken denominatiuely. Deno^ is this, ^ for wy^ say Ba^ which ^ the dron^ God
(a^ctes fay^ For lec^^ Venus. Titus ^ 1. Cori^ John. 1.


We let pass general tropes and figures, which are in diverse places of the
scripture. This only we say, that so often as the external sign is said to
be that which it signifies, all men will confess that it is done by a figure
called, Metonymia, or Denomination: If Baptism be called the lauer of
regeneration: if Christ be called the Rock, from which water flowed to the
peopled that were in the deserte: If the holy ghost be called a dove: no man
need to doubt, but that the name of those things is attributed to signs,
which they figure. How comes it to pass then that they which so much
reverence the words of the Lord, cannot abide to have that joined to the
supper which is common to all sacraments? The simple and litterall sense does
please the^: why then shall not the same rule prevail in all other sacraments.
Truly unless they grant ye Christ was a rock substantially, the reproach with
the which they oppress us, is unsavory and stinketh. If we expound ye bread
to be called ye body of Christ because it was a sign and outward token of his
body, they prete^de and falsely allege by and by that the whole doctrine of
the scripture is overthrown and made frustrate.

For we have not of late time invented this rule of speaking, but all men have
received the same, being set down to us by S. Augustine out of the authority
of the ancient fathers, that the names of spiritual things are improperly
ascribed unto signs: and that all places of Scripture ought so to be expounded
when mention is made of Sacraments. But to what purpose do we take an Axioma
and sentence, always received and approved, to move great cries and shoutes,
as it were in a new and unwonted thing? But let mad men cry while them list,
this shall prevail with modest men and such as are in their wits, that
there is in these words of Christ, a sacramental manner of speech.
Whereupon it follows that the bread, because it is a sign of Christ's body,
is called his body. But there are two kinds of men which contend with us in
this matter. The Papists being deluded with their transsubstantiation,
^rassubsta^^^n. ^rst sort
do deny the bread to be seen, because the show thereof does only remain
without the subject: but S. Paul confuteth their fantasy, affirming that the
bread which we break, is the communication of Christ's body. Cor. 10
Furthermore, the very nature it self of a Sacrament does abhor their fond
imagination, the which can not stand perfect except the outward sign be
true. For whereby shall we learn that our souls are fed with the flesh of
Christ, if the true bread be not set before our eyes, but a vain phantasy?
For the body of Christ is not here given unto us simplely, but to eat: and
the color of bread does not nourishe, but the substance.

Moreover, what will they say as concerning the other sign? For Christ says
not: This is my blood: but, This cup. Therefore according to their fantasy,
not only ye wine, but the matter also whereof the cup was made, must of
necessity be transsubstantiated into blood. Now, where as our Eua^geliste
has, I will not drink hereafter of this fruit of the vine, he plainly
thereby declares, that it was wine which Christ gave to drink, and not his
blood. Therefore every way the gross ignorance of the Papists is confuted. M.
And where as they say that they gathered this their tra^ssubstantiation out of
the wrytinges of the fathers, peradventure it is true that they gathered it,
but if they did so, it was by false interpretation and misco^struing of their
works that they did it. For the fathers in some of their wrytinges say, that
the bread with great admiration and wonder is changed in to the body, and the
wine into the blood of Christ. Now these gatherers understood the^ of the
mutacion and changing of the substance, whereas the fathers touched not the
same, but understood that the terrestrial condition and use of bread, was so
changed into a heavenly, that it was now to ye faithful man not terrene or
earthly bread, neither in that use that earthly bread remains, but that it
passes into the body of Christ, and into celestial nourishement. The which
change might be called conditional and not substantial. And because it is a
thing wonderful in deed, they said truly that the bread and wine after a
wonderful manner was changed into the body and blood of Christ. For who
would not marvel that the terrene bread should be taken and changed into
such dignytie, that it may be called the body of Christ? Who would not
marvel that ye gross eleme^t of water, should be changed into the lauer of
regeneration? and that it is given in washing the body, to have ye purifying of
the soul, and the wyping away of sin? A. And this is that consecration of
the which we spoke before. The second sort that strive against the true use of
the Sacrament.
C. And there are other some which reiecte the figure, and like mad men,
receive the same by and by again. The bread according to their judgment is
truly and properly called the body. Neither do they like of
transsubstantiatio^, because it is altogether void of reason. But when they
are asked if the bread and wine he Christ, they answer that the bread is
therefore called his body, because it is received under the bread and with the
bread in the Supper. But truly by this answer we may gather that the name
of body is improperly transferred to the bread, whereof it is the sign. And it
is marvel, seeing that these men can say that Christ spoke thus in respect of
the Sacramental union, that they mark not what they say. For what is the
sacramental vnio^ of the thing and of the sign? Is it not so called because
the lord fulfilleth that which he promises by the secret power of his holy
spirit? Wherefore these masters of learning, are no less ridiculous tha^ ye
Papists. Hitherto we have expounded ye words of ye Lord. Now let us se how ye
body of Christ is given unto us. Some declare that it is given unto us, when we
are made partakers of all the blessings, which Christ has gotten unto us as
in his body, when by faith we embrace Christ crucified and raised from death
for us: and that by yt means we are made partakers effectually of all his
blessings. Other some much better say, yt we do then receive the blessing and
benefits of Christ's, when we obtain Christ him self. For we do obtain him
not only when we believe yt he was made a sacrifice for us, but also when he
dwells in us, when he is one with us, when we are his members, and of his
flesh, and of his bones, when we grow (if we may so speak) into life and
substance with him. Furthermore we hear what the words may signify, for
Christ does not only offer unto us the benefit of his resurrection, Ephe. 5
but his very body, in the which he suffered and rose again. Therefore the
body of Christ is truly given unto us in the supper, that it may be the food
of life unto our souls: that is to say, our souls are fed with the
substance of Christ's body, yt we may truly be made one with him: or else
(which is as much in effect) the quickening force out of the flesh of
Christ, is powered into us by the spirit, although it be far from us, and not
mixed with us. Therefore a void or vain sign is not set before us, but they
are truly made partakers of the flesh and blood of the Lord, which by faith
receive this promise. For the Lord should command his disciples to eat
bread in vain, affirming it to be his body, except the effect were added to
the figure. Neither is this question handled among us, whether Christ do give
unto us him self truly or figuratively only. For although we behold there
nothing but the bread, yet notwithstanding he does not frustrate or mock us,
which takes upon him to feed our souls with his flesh. The true eating
therefore of the flesh of Christ, is not set forth by a sign only, Three
things to be observed in the Sacrament of Christ's supper.
but also is offered in very deed. But it is good for us here to observe thro^
things: namely, that the spiritual matter be not joined amiss Christ has,
is derived and brought unto us. For if we see yt the Sun shining with his
beams upon the earth, does strike and pearce through the same, and after a
sort co^neieth his substance unto it, to bring forth to nourishe, and quicke^
the creatures thereof, why should the shining beams of the spirit of Christ be
inferior, to conueye the communion of his flesh and blood into us? Wherefore
the Scripture speaking of our participation with Christ, does refer the
whole force thereof unto the spirit: notwithstanding let this place of S.
Paul, among many, suffice to prove that Christ dwells no otherwise in us,
than by his spirit, when he says: But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit: if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you. ^^m. 8.
By the which notwithstanding, he does not take away that communion of the
body and blood, of the which mention is now made, but teaches that it comes
by the spirit only, that we possess and have Christ within us.

To the end therefore we may be capeable of this communion, we must lift up
our minds to heaven. Here therefore he helps our faith after that all our
fleshly senses fail. When mention is here made of faith, we must not
understand it to be every opinion grounded upon the inuencio^s of men, as many
very fondly do. What the^? Thou see bread, but nothing else: but thou hear
that it is a token and pledge of the body of Christ: doubt not, but that the
same, which the words do sound, shall be fulfilled of the Lord, namely that
the body which thou see not, shall be unto thee, spiritual M. This seems
incredible, that we should be fed with the flesh of Christ, which is so far
from us. But let us remember that the work of the holy ghost is secret and
wonderful, in so much that the capacity and understanding of man is not able
to measure or comprehend the same: and in the mean time let us put away al
gross immaginations, which stay us in the bread. Leave unto Christ the true
nature of his flesh, neither extend thou his body by false imagination
through heaven and earth, as though it were infinite: rack him not with thy
fained inue^cions, neither worship thou him in this or that place according to
thy carnal understanding: suffer his glory to abide in heaven, and ascend
thou thither, that thereby he may participate him self unto thee. These few
words will satisfy the discrete and modest: as for the curious let them seek
else where to fulfill their gredy desire. S. Luke and S. Paul add these
words, Which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me. C. But
Mathewe and Mark omit it, which not withstanding was not superfluous. For
therefore the flesh of Christ is now bread unto us, because in it, salvation
was once gotten for us. And as the crucified flesh of Christ does profit no
man, but such as eat the same by faith: even so in like manner, the eating
should be cold and of no waighte, but only in respect of the sacrifice once
offered. Therefore whosoever desires to have the the flesh of Christ
nourisheme^t unto him, let him consider the same offered upon the cross, how
that it was the price of our reconciliation paid unto God. For the Supper is a
glass which sets Christ crucified before our eyes, in so much that no
man can receive ye supper profitably and with fruit but he which imbraceth
Christ crucified. But the saying before mentioned, Do this in remembrance of
me, does pertayne to both parts that is to say, to the bread, and to the cup.
For he would have the whole action of the Supper to be a remembrance of him,
to help our infirmity.

Otherwise, if we could remember sufficiently the death of Christ,
sacraments were to no purpose, for they are helps of our infirmity. But what
remembrance Christ would have celebrated in his supper, we may read in the
foremencioned S. Paul. And whereas many do gather hereupon yt Christ is
therefore absent from the supper, because it is only a memory of one that is
absent, they do very well gather and rightly. For Christ is not seen visibly
with ye eyes, as the sign is, which in figuring him stirs up our
remembrance to think upon him. But although he be absent, yet in power he is
present: and will be to the end of the world.

27 And he took the cup and thanked, and gave it to them saying: Drink ye all
of this.

And he took the cup. E. The Evangelist Luke adds (and so does Paul) saying,
and when he had supped: because he gave the cup twyse, first according to the
ancient custom: and supper being ended, he is now said to give it again,
that we might know the matters to be diverse. Drink ye all of this. C.
Because it was the purpose of Christ to direct our whole faith to him self,
least we should seek any thing without him, he testified that our life was
included in him, by two signs. This body, stands in need of meat and drink
to sustain it and keep it alive. Therefore Christ seking to teach us that he
only is sufficient for us, to give unto us all things necessary for health,
gives or attributes ye course of meat and drink to him self. By the which
his wonderful sufferaunce appears because he seking to help our faith,
does in this wise frame him self to the rudenes of our flesh. Whereby it
appears the more, how detestable the wicked bouldenes of the Pope is, by the
which he is not afraid to break this holy knot. We hear that the son of
God wytnessed and declared by two signs at once, the fulness of life which he
gives to those that are his. By what right is it lawefull for a mortal man
to pull a sonder those things, which God has joined together?

We must always remember this, that Christ does first command us what we
shall do, and then adds a promise: if we fulfill not his commandment we
look for the promise in vain. For he begins with a commandment: and
commands all of them to drink of this cup. Therefore, if the enemies of the
Gospel do boaste that they have the blood of Christ without the communion,
let us assure our selves that it is most false: For the promise is away,
where the commandment is not kept. Why Christ does rather here, than in that
which went before, add this general word (All) this seems to be the reason,
namely that he might prevent the deuelishe invention, which afterward crept
into the church: the which because he foresawe, he thought good openly to
condemn. As concerning the bread, we read that he willed them simpely, to
take: but why does he expressly command all to drink, and why does Mark
say plainly that all drank, but only because the faithful should learn to
beware of new inuencion? And yet for all this severe prohibition, the Pope was
not one whit afraid, but durst take upon him to change and violate the law
which the Lord so firmly made. For he kept all the people from the use of the
cup: and to excuse him self, he says that one kind is sufficient, because
the blood is included in ye flesh. As though truly the whole Sacrament might
not be abbolished by that pretense, because Christ can (if it pleased him) make
us partakers of him self, as well without either of both signs. Furthermore,
the Papists say that it was dangerous least the blood should be shed. For
they thought that it was wine no more, but pure and true blood: and they would
be wyser than the son of God, to avoid that danger, whereof he took no
head. But their impiety is nothing at all furthered, by these chyldishe
cauils: because there is nothing more absurd, than to deprive the faithful
wyllingly of those helps which the Lord has given unto them: and therefore
nothing is less tolerable than this wicked tearing of the mystery. Seeing
therefore one error brings forth an other, the institution of Christ,
which is the wisdom of his father, must be kept sound and perfect, and he
only ought to be preferred before all men: and forsaking all other, we ought to
cleave to his authority.

28 For this is my blood (which is of the new Testament) that is shed for
many for the remission of sins.

For this is my blood Saint Luke describes these words thus: This cup is the
new Testament in my blood. And S. Paul has the like words. No man truly,
need to doubt but that Luke and Paul, keeping the same sense and meaning,
altered the words which Mathewe and Mark have saying: This is my blood of
the new Testament. ^^ things ^t forth ^ Cup.
In either form of words this is most evident that the Lord by this Cup does
offer and set forth two things, namely, his blood, and the new Testament. For
the new Testament is ye fruit of Christ's blood, which was shed on the
Cross and abides in us, and for that cause the end and sum in this
mystical exhibition. Herevppon S. Luke and the Apostle Paul, expressed that
in the former place: but because we have a couenaunte and league by the blood
of Christ, they added saying: In my blood. The sense and meaning therefore
of the words of the Lord is (as Luke and Paul expressed them,) Take and
understand by this Cup, the new covenant of grace, being confirmed unto
you by this my blood, which take ye also here of me, and drink. Although
this exhibition of ye blood of Christ to be drunk, be not so plainlye
expressed in the words of the Lord, by Luke and Paul: yet notwithstanding it
is most evidently gathered by the words of Mathewe and Mark, which say: Take
ye, and drink ye all of this. And he said unto them, this is my blood of the
new Testamente. Which words, what do they signifye else, than this, Take ye
with this Cup, and drink my blood by the which my new covenant is
confirmed and given unto you. C. For this covenant is sealed by nothing else
than by the spiritual drinking of the blood of Christ, that it may be strong
and of efficacy. But hereby we may gather, how folishly the Papists and such
others, are superstitious, which byte and choppe ye words. For although they
make a noise and talk, yet for all that this exposition of the holy ghost
cannot be rejected, yt the Cup, is called blood because it is the Testament
in blood. And truly, the like consideration is to be had of ye bread:
whervppon it follows that it is called the body, because it is a Testamente
in the body. There is now no cause, why they should contend and say that
we must believe ye simple words of Christ, and that we must shut our ears
to al other foreign interpretacions. It is Christ himself which speaks,
whom they will not deny to be a meet interpreter of his own words. But
truly, he manifestly declares that he called the bread his body upon no
other consideration, but because, he made his everlasting covenant with us,
that the sacrifyce being offered we might eat and drink spiritually. Of
the nevve Testament B. The Epistle to the Hebrews, intreatinge of ye new
Testamente, alludeth to the order of Testamentes, which are made only for the
disposinge of the inheritance: and are then at the last confirmed, and in full
strength, when the testators or will makers are desceased. In like manner,
Christ being dead, the Heavenly graces are exhibited and given to us, even as
out of a Testamente or will. The Greek interpreters of the Bible have
translated the Greek word Dhiatheken to signify a Testament, the which word
our Evangelist Mathewe uses also. Howbeit S. Hierom has translated it to
signifye a league or covenant. Of the which word when the Scripture makes
mention, namely that God entered into a league (whether it were by the old or
new) with his people, it means that couenaunte and promise, by the which
God promised that he would be the God of his people, and by the which his
people promised likewise yt they would take him for their God, for their
father, and savior, and that they would give themselves wholly to the will of
God. The old Testament. Genesis 17. Exodus. 19. and 24. Iosue 24.
The oulde leage and Testamente therefore is that by the which God chose
Abraham and his seed. After that he did renew with all the people by Moses
in the mount Sion. This was also confirmed again in Iosue, as we may read in
the four and twe^tye Chapter of his Book. The new Testament. Esaias 54 55. 59
and 61. Jeremy 31.
The new leage and Testamente is that, by the which God chose all Nations to
be his people, by the Gospel: of the which Testament the Prophets foreshewed
many things: as Esaias, Ieremye, and others. This Testamente is described by
remission of sins, and in destributinge the amplenes of ye spirit to all the
elect, that they may know the Lord from the smallest to the greatest
having the law written in their hearts. The holy fathers of old time also
were partakers of this leage and Testament, but not so clearly and in such
mightynes of spirit, as now yt Christ is exalted. For truly there is but one
mediator of God and man: neither was there any man which was able to please God
at any time, but the same had his sins remitted, and the law of God by some
means written in his heart The blood of Christ is one price of redemption to
all the saints. But as the more full and perfect revelation of the old
Testament, Exodus. 24
was confirmed by the same blood of Christ, but under ye type notwithstanding
of the blood of a young bullock: even so the new was sealed by no other
blood, then by the preciouse heart blood of Christ himself. For immediatlye
after the death and resurrection of the Lord, the Gospel began to be preached
to all creatures, and a new people to be gathered.

Herevppon the Lord says that he geeueth his blood of the new Testament,
(that is, by the which this new Testament was sealed) and the Testamente it
self confirmed with this blood. For this cause truly we acknowledge and
worship God the father, and are partakers in deed of the true spirit, and of
the grace of the new Testament, because Christ lives in us, Ephe. 5.
and because we are flesh of his flesh. C. But two things are here worthy to be
noted. Faith is helped by sacraments.
For we gather by this word Testamente, or leage, yt there is a promise
included in the holy Supper. By yt which their error is confuted, which deny
that faith is helped, cherished, stayed up, and increased by Sacraments. For
between the Testament of God, and the faith of men, there is always mutual
relation. Whervppon it follows that they are not only among men external
signs of profession, but also inward helps of faith.

Furthermore, by this word (New) Christ went about to teach, that old figures
have now an end, that they might geeue place to the firm and eternal
covenant. There is therefore here a cross opposition or comparison between
this mystery and the shadows of the Law, whereby it appears how much our
condition is better than the fathers, which after the sacrifyce finished on the
Cross do enjoy the sound and perfect truth. That is shed for many. Luke
declares that he said also, For you. Christ does here depaint and set forth
himself as though he were hanginge on the Cross, and imbrewed with blood.
For he says which is shed, and not, which was shed.

And when he says, For you, in Luke, he declares his own innocencye, which
was not subject to death, for so much as the Prince of this world (which had
rule over death) had nothing in him, because he was free from sin, Hebrew^
John. 14
whereupon it was not needful that he should offer for his own sins
first, according to the manner of the hye priests: because he is holy,
undefiled, and void of all sin. He teaches also how great his love is
toward us, Heb. 7
that when he ought nothing unto death, he would suffer the same for us.
Greater love has no man than this, John, ^
that a man bestow his life for his friends. But whereas this our Evangelist
Mathewe says, that Christ said: (For many) some man might marvel, saying
the Apostle says: Christ dyed for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves. 2. Cor, ^ 1. John ^
And saying it is said in another place that Christ is the propitiation for
the sins of the whole world. The answer to this doubt is. That our savior
Christ under the name of many, does mean not only a part of the world, but
all mankind also. Auns^
For he opposes or sets many against one: as if he should say that he
is the redeemer not of one man only, but that he suffers death to deliver
many from the gilt of sin, and curse. Even so in the fifte to the Romans,
Romans 5
S. Paul takes many for all men, by a comparison between one and many.
Neither is there any doubt, but that Christ speakinge here to a few, meant to
make the doctrine common to more. Notwithstanding we must also note that in
Luke, he speakinge to his Disciples by name, exhorts all the faithful, to
apply the effusio^ of his blood to their use. Thereforefore, when we come to
the holy Table, let not only this general cogitacion come into our mind,
that the world is redeemed by the blood of Christ, but also let every man
think with himself that Christ has satisfied for his sins: M. For the
death of Christ is a universal redemption: for that cause he is called the
savior of the world: and the preachinge of the Gospel was sent into the
whole world, that all men might be called to the faith of Christ. But because
the elect only do receive this grace, he is specially said to be the savior
of the elect and faithful: who, in comparison of the reprobate are few, and
yet in them selves are many.

For the remission of sins C. That whereof Mathewe and Mark made no mention
in the sign of bread, they now express in the Cup: namelye, that his blood
should be shed for the remission of sins. But this note ought to be referred
to both parts. Therefore to the end we may eat ye flesh of Christ aright
we must behold his offeringe, because it was necessar yt he should be given
once for our salvation, that he might be daily given to us. Let us know then
that by these words we are directed to the sacrifyce of Christ his death,
without the rememberaunce whereof, the Supper shall never be rightly
celebyated: Neither truly can the minds of the faithful be otherwise filled,
but by this that they know God to be favorable to them. M. But this is
diligently to be noted, that he said in the plural number, (Of sins) not,
of one sin, against the opinion of those which wickedly say that the death
of Christ has made satisfaction for Original sin, but not for actual
sin: ^^^^iction all sins ^ by ^st.
and for those sins also which were committed before Baptism, and not after:
for the which they appoint a proper satisfaction. Against whom S. John also
writes thus: My little children these things writ I unto you that ye sin
not: but if any man sin we have an advocate with the father, ^^hn 2.
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiacion for our sins, He
writ no doubt to the Christians which were already baptized, and therefore he
teaches also that the sins of those yt are baptized are forgeuen by the
propitiation of Jesus Christ. To these words of Christ S. Paul adds
this: Do this so often as ye shall drink it in the remembrance of me. And
then, what that remembrance is, he declares in the words followinge: For so
often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye shall show
forth the Lords death till his coming.

Therefore the Supper is ^ certain memorial, which ought continuallye to abide
in the Church, even till the last coming of Christ, being instituted to
this end, that Christ might admonish us of the benefit of his death, and
that we might acknowledge the same before men: whereupon it is also called
Eucharistia, that is a thanckes geuinge.

29. But I say unto you: I will not drink henceforthe of this fruit of the
vine tree, until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers
kingedome.

But I say unto you C. By this sentence the Dysciples were admonished, as well
of the death of their master which was at hand, as of the new and Heavenly
life. For the more near that the hour of his death approached, the more they
were to be confirmed, least they should altogether quail.

He sheeweth also that his Disciples shall in a short time, have the truth of
this sign. As if he should say: I do not apoint a sign ye truth of the which
is far of, no, it is at hand. He commends unto them his supper for this
consideration, because they should not always have him present with them.

While he was present they were confirmed by his Sermones: and now yt he must
be absent they had need of another confirmation. Great therefore is the force
of ye supper, which supplyeth ye presence of Christ, and sets him before us.
But because it was sorrowful tydinges when he affirmed, that he must now go
out of the world, there is by and by added a consolation, that there is no
cause why they should abhor death after which there shall follow a better
life: as if he had said* Now truly do I make have unto death, but to this end
that I may thereby pass to blessed immortality: not to live alone in the
kingdom of God by my self, but yt I may have you partakers of ye same life.
So we see yt he lifts us his Dysciples to the hope of the resurrection,
after he had led them by the hand, as it were, to the Cross. And as it was
meet yt they should be directed to ye death of Christ, that by that ladder
they might assende into Heaven: even so now Christ having tasted of death, and
being received up into Heaven, it is meet that we be brought from the
behouldinge of the Cross to the lifting up of our minds to Heaven, that death
and the repayringe of life may agree together. And that they shall be partakers
of the same glory with him, it may euidentlye appear by his words, When I
shall drink it nevve with you in my fathers kingdom. Bu. As if he should
say: I being now made immortal, and translated into the glory of my father,
or else: I being now in Heavenly glory, and in eternal joy. For Luke has
almost the like words, when he says: And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my
father has appointed unto me: yt ye may eat and drink at my table in the
kingdom. C. But whereas some do obiecte that meat and drink does not
appertain to ye kingdom of God, it is a frivolous and vain objection,
because Christ means nothing else, but that his Dysciples should shortly
want his presence, insomuche that after this he should eat with them no
more, till yt they enjoyed the Heavenly kingdom together. Again, the eatinge
and drinkinge mentioned in Luke, is spoken of our savior Christ allegorically.
To be short, Christ here commends unto us the fruit and effect of the
redemption which he got by his death. Whereas some think that this was
fulfilled so often as the Lord did eat with his Dysciples, it is contrary to
his mind, and nothing so. For saying he was the mydle state, between the
course of mortal life, and the goal or end of Heavenly life, the kingdom of
God was not then as yet revealed: and therefore he said unto Mary: John. 20.
Toutch me not, for I am not yet assended to my father. Moreover the Dysciples
were not as yet entered into the kingdom of God, that they might drink new
wine with Christ, and be partakers of the same glory. But whereas we read
that Christ drancke after his resurrection, (when as notwithsta^dinge he had
denied to do it, till such time as he had gathered his Dysciples into the
kingdom of Heaven) that show of repugnancye may easlye be put away. For he
speaks not precisely of meat and drink, but of the custom of this present
life. And we know that Christ did not therefore drink, either because he
was a thrist, or because he would retain his Dysciples in his meat and
drink: but only that his resurrection being thereby approved of ye which
they were as yet doubtful, he might lift up their minds to Heaven. Let us
therefore content our selves with this true and proper meaning of the place,
that the Lord promises to his Dysciples the fellowship of the blessed and
immortal life with him, seeing they had the fellowship of his mortal humanity
in earth.

30. And when they had said grace, they went out unto mount Oliuet.

And when they had said grace, C. The first three Evangelists omit those
divine Sermones, which S. John says ye Lord made as well in the house, as by
the way that they went. For their purpose was to comprehend and set forth
the Historye of things done, more than doctrine. This only they toutche that
he went of his own accord to the place whether Judas was determined to
come: to the end we might know that he so disposed the seasons of that
^^^e, that voluntarily he might meet with his betrayer. E. The lattine
translation has, And when they had song a Hymn, or Psalm. Whereupon Paul^s
burgensis affyrmeth that it was an ancient tradition and custom among the
Jews, when they had eaten the Paschall lamb to begin this Psalm, Praise the
Lord ye servants, Psalm^
And to singe forth till they came to this Psalm: Blessed are all those that
be undefiled in the way, and walk in the Lord: Psalm
And he thinks this to be ye Hymn which Christ song with his Dysciples.
Hereby truly it appears that they were wont of common custom, to singe a
Hymn, so often as they celebrated Paseouer: Notwithstanding it is uncertain
with what words they praised God here, and whether they song this praise or
spoke it simplely. The Greek word in this place signifies that they gave the
praise due unto God, but it does not therevppon follow that they did singe it.

It cannot be affyrmed whether Christ used those words which the Jews did, in
the feast of Paseouer. It is credible, that he spoke to his Dysciples at this
special feast of Easter, by some new Hymn, (which should not so much put
them in mind of their deliverance out of Egypt, as it should celebrate and
commend the mystery of the kingdom of God, which was the^ in hand) that they
might geeue the more dilligente heed to accept his words. All the words
and deeds of Christ in this day of Pasouer, do express and declare a singular
affection. What matter is it if we believe yt this grace or Hymn was
agreeable to the matter which was then in hand?

They went out unto mount Oliuet M. It seems to some, that, grace being
said, the Lord roose from supper and washed his Dysciples feet, and that
afterward he had that long talk, whereof S. John makes mention, partly in the
house, and partly in their journey to the mou^te of Olives. Other some think,
that, the supper being prepared, he washed his Dysciples feet, and that
afterward he did eat Passover: and then, that he instituted the mystical
supper: and last of all that grace being said he went out, and taught his
Dysciples those things, whereof S. John writes, from his.15. Chapter, unto ye
18. Chapter: in the which he says thus: ^^n. 18.
When Jesus had spoken these words he went forth with his Dysciples over the
broke Cedron, to mount Oliuet as he was wont, ^e 22.
as says Luke.

B. This was not the first time that ye Lord went out to mount Oliuet, but (as
it was said even now out of Luke) he went often thither. For (as the same Luke
also says) in those days he was wont from the time yt he entered so king
like into Jerusalem, to teach in the day time in the Temple, and in the
night time to abide in the mount of Olives. ^^ke. 21.
And herevppon Judas took occasion and oportunitye to betray him without
tumult, the which oportunitye the Lord (knowinge whereabout he went)
willingly gave him: whereas oftentimes before he fled away, because his hour
was not yet come. Saying then he went forth at this time to that accustomed
place which was known to Judas ye trayter, it is a manifest toke^ that he
suffered not his passion against his will.

31. Then said Jesus unto them: all ye shall be offended because of me this
night. For it is written: I will smite the shepehearde, and the sheep of the
flock shall be scattered abroad.

All ye shall be offended C. That which Mathewe and Mark extend to all the
Dysciples in general, Luke says it was spoken to Peter only. For although
he spoke to all, yet notwithstanding it may be that Christ spoke unto them
in ye person of one, which was to be admonished before all other, and had
need of singular consolation, least after the denyinge of Christ, desperation
should utterly overthrow him. M. But there were two causes why Christ
forewarned his Dysciples: for first they might be more ware, if they had any
mind at all: Secondlye it served to humble them when they should see their
fall notwithstanding that they were forewarned. To be offended in this place,
signifies as much as to be troubled. As the ship is driven out of her course
into another way through a tempest: even so Satan deuiseth all means possible
to trouble us in our race, that he may draw us into a contrary way: Because
of me says he, or for my sake, that is, I will be unto you an occasion of
trouble. For when he was taken all fled away: therefore the person of Christ
was unto them the stomblinge block of offense.

For it is written B. Hereby we are admonished that all things are dispensed
and ordered according to the will of God, and that the death of Christ was of
such estimation with the father, that all things almost which he suffered,
were foreshewed of him by the Prophets. I will smite the Shepeherde C. By
this prophesye he exhorts them to overcome offense, Streyinge sheep are not
rejected of the Lord.
and to put away trouble of mind: because God will not let to acknowledge
those for his sheep, which are compelled to scatter and straye from place to
place for a time. For after the Prophet had spoken of the restoringe of the
Church, least that the extreme myseries which were now at hand, should
ouerwhelme the minds of the godly through despair, he pronounces that,
government being confounded and overthrown, there shall be a sorrowful and
miserable dispertion, but yet for all this, that the grace of God shall
overcome. B. These are the words of the Prophet: Arise O thou sword, upon my
Shepehearde, Zacha 13.
and upon the Prince of my people, says the Lord of hosts. Smite the
sheepeherde, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad. C. But although all
interpreters for the most part do restrain this place of the Prophet to the
person of Christ only, yet notwithstanding it may be more largely extended:
as if it had been said, that there shall be no more gouernemente, with the
which the people were defended, because the sheepeherdes shall be destroyed. For
there is no doubt but that the purpose of the Lord was to comprehend all that
whole time, in the which after the tyranny of Antiochus the Church was left
naked and despoyled of good pastors, and brought into vaste desolation. For
the^ God suffered the sword to walk horribly a long time, which extinguishing
the pastors, wonderfully troubled the state of the people.

Yet for all that, this dispersion and scatteringe did not let and stay the
Lord, but that at the length he gathered his sheep together with an
outstretched arm. But although the Prophet does generallye declare, that the
Church should be deprived of her shepeheardes, yet for all that the Prophesy
is truly and properly applied unto Christ. For saying he was the head and
chief of al Pastors, of whom only the salvation of the Church did depend,
he being once dead, all hope might seem to be quight cut of and taken
away. And this was an extreme temptacion, that the redeemer which was the
spirit and life of the people, so soon as he began to gather the flock of
God together, should sodeinly be carried to death. By the which the grace of
God was the more manifest, when that the little flock that was left, gathered
marvelously together again, from dissipatio^ and destruction. We do see
therefore that Christ used this testimony very aptly to the purpose, least the
dispertion yt was to come should terrifye the Dysciples out of measure: and
yet notwithstanding that they knowing their own infirmity, might rest
themselves on their pastore. The sense therefore and meaning of Christ's
words is this, Ye think, no doubt, because ye know not by experience your
own infirmity, that ye are valiant and strong anoughe: but shortly ye shall
well know how truly it was Prophesyed of Zacharye, that the sheepeherde
being slain, the sheep must be scattered. But nevertheless, let the promise
which is added, comfort and stay you, namely, that God will stretche out his
hand, yt he may bring back unto him again the dispersed sheep. Bu. And
whereas he does expressly make mention of sheep, it is a consolation to the
Dysciples that they may abide in the flock. C, This place also teaches that
there is no wholesome unity, but that which keeps the sheep together under
the sheepehooke of Christ. Bu. But the similitude of the shepeherd and ye
sheep does sufficientlye declare that these things were spoken of the Lord
with a gentle and sorrowinge mind. For who can blame the sheep for flyinge
when the sheepeherde is stricken? who knows not that the sheepeherde is the
safegarde and preserver of the sheep?

32. But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilae.

But after I am risen again, C. Christ here more plainly expresses that
which we touched even now, that the Dysciples being stricken with fear,
should be so like unto dispersed and scattered sheep, that at ye length they
must be brought back again to the sheepefoulde. For Christ says not
simplely that he will rise again, but says that he will be their captain
and guide, and to make them his companions, as if they had never strayed. And
to the end they might conceive the more trust he appoints them a place to
the which they might come together: Bu. as if he had said: The hope of faith
shall not perish and be confounded: for allthough my enemies nail me to ye
Cross, and although wickedness seems to have ye upper hand, yet
notwithstanding, at the length I will have the victory: for the third day I
will rise again, and will appear unto you alive, forgeuing you all your
sins. Ye shall see me once again, specially in Galilae, in the which I will
gather you together, being dispersed at Jerusalem, and as a sheepeherde
guidinge his flock I will go before you, and recreate and comfort those that
are afflicted. How truly this promise was fulfilled the Angel teaches, as
appears by yt which he spoke to the women seeking the Sepulchar: Go quickly
and tell his Dysciples yt he is risen again from the dead. Math. ^
And behold he goes before you into Galilae, there ye shall see him. Lo I
have toulde you. And in another place: Go your way and tell his Dysciples, and
Peter, that he goes before you into Galilae: Mar. ^
there shall ye see him.

33, Peter answered and said unto him: though all men be offended because of
thee, yet will not I be offended.

Though all men be offended C. Here we have in Peter an excellent example of
our bouldnes, when we be out of all danger: but if it come once to fight,
hand to hand, this valiantnes is turned to cowardlynes. And we must note, that
there was nothing in Peter, which is not in us, as touching infirmitye. This
Historye therefore does comprehend a general doctrine. So often as we here
this voice: Though all men forsake the faith of Christ yet notwithstanding
will I stand, let us know that we do all make this brag with one mouth,
until the Lord do abate our pride, But they which are taught in the schole
of Christ, are not so puffed up: for the first rules are that we should not
trust unto our selves. To this agrees the saying of the Apostle: Corin. 10
He which stands, let him take heed least he faule. And again: Thou
stoodest steadfast in faith: Be not hye minded, ^m. 11.
but fear. Notwithstanding it may be demanded whether it were not lawful
for Peter to hope that it should so fall out as he made warrantise to
himself that it should: ^estion.
and whether also ought he not to have made this promise to himself, bearinge
himself boulde upon the promise of Christ.

We answer that whereas Christ promised before to his Dysciples the spirit
of invincible fortitude, ^nswere.
it pertayned to ye time of newnes which followed his resurrection. Because
therefore they were not as yet endued with Heavenly power, Peter having
conceived a trust of himself passes the bonds of faith. So that he sins
two ways: For first in preuentinge the time, he Philip. 2.
because it is God which works in us, both the will, and also the deed.

Therefore so often as any temptacion happens unto us, first let us call to
mind our own infirmitye, that being humbled we may learn to seek for
help else where: then let us remember the grace promised, which delivers us
from doubt. For they which forgettinge their own infirmitye, not calling
upon God, think themselves strong anoughe, do even as rash soldiers are
commonly wont, who rashlye arm themselves, but when their bellyes are full,
they devise al means how to ru^ne away. B. Truly this unskillfulness and
ignorance of our own infirmitye, is the cause that we lift up our Pecockes
tail and ambitiously prefer our selves before others.

34. Jesus said unto him: Verily I say unto thee, that in this same night,
before the Cock crow, thou shalt deny me thryse.

Verelye I say unto thee, S. Christ swears in a matter sure, and certain
sheewinge yt it is not in the power of man, not to be offended at this Cross.
That in this same night He sets a short time, against a most large
promise. Before the Cock crovve The Evangelist Mark has: Before the cock
crow twyse. For ye house cock begins to crow about midnighte, and before
the break of the day. He makes mention therefore of the Cockecrowinge, to
geeue him a token, and to printe a certain sign in his mind, which might put
him in mind the denial which was toulde him before. For it follows in the
74. verse. And immediately the Cock crewe. And Peter remembered the words of
Jesus, which said unto him: before ye Cock crow, thou shall deny me thryse.

35. Peter said unto him: Yea, though I should dye with thee, yet will I not
deny thee: Likewise faide all the Disciples.

Yea though I should dye It is marvel that he does so wilfullye brag
that he will not be overcome. For Mark has: But he spoke more vehementlye.
He had felt nothing before, neither had he wayhed his strength. And how
great experience soever he had of the peril of death, and how strong and
stout soever he had been, yet notwithstanding he wanted not presumption, and
wonderful rashness, in yt he strove against the words of Christ, being so
manifest, and confirmed by the testimony of the Prophet. Hereby we are
taught, that we cannot learn true humillity, except we have experience of our
own infirmity. Let us not marvel therefore that we fall so often, for
otherwise we cannot profit in the doctrine of humility. But so often as we do
fall, let us remember that we are admonished of our infirmity, of the Lord.

Likewise also said all the Disciples C. It is marvel that the rest of the
Dysciples after that Peter was reprehe^ded, burst forth notwithstanding into
the same rashness.

Whereupon it appears, how little acquainted they were with themselves. By
the which example we are taught, that we must presume to do nothing, but yt
whereupon God will set his hand: because there is nothing more vain than
rash zeal.

The Disciples saw that there was nothing more filthye and absurd than to
forsake their master. Therefore they do not without just cause deteste this
vice: but being not fullye setteled in the faith of the promise, and
neglectinge prayer; they do indiscreetly brag and boast of their consta^cy,
which was nothing. Even so al our fortitude is nothing else but a vain
immagination which seems to be somewhat, before ye proof and trial be made.

36. Then came Jesus with them unto a farm place (which is called Gethsemane)
and said unto his Disciples, sit ye here while I go and pray yonder.

Then came Jesus with them C. This is in deed the exordium and beginning of
the sacrifyce by the which we are reconciled unto God. For Christ began here
to offer himself it was meet yt this should be a voluntarye sacrifice. If he
had been drawn against his will, it had been no true sacrifice or oblatio^. He
humbled himself, being made obedient to death, even to ye death of the
Cross. Philip 2.
No man takes away my life from me (says he) but I give the same of my
self. John. 10.
Christ therefore rightly take upon him the parts of a mediator, yt by his
sacrifyce, he might take away the sins of the world, because he offered
himself to the death willingly. If we consider the tormente and pain yt he
suffered, and not this obedience also, we omit ye principal part. Unto a place
which is This Greek word which the interpreter has called a farm in this
place, signifies a place and field. Luke uses a word less doubtful, which
signifies a place. John 18*
S John calls it a garden: which seems more specially to express this
place. He adds also that Jesus oftentimes resorted thither, and that Judas
which betrayed him knew the place. Whereby we gather ye Christ went not aside
to hyde himself, but went as it were of his own accord and mind to the
death. Sit ye here while I go and pray M. By these words it is declared for
what cause he went a side into this garden: namelye to pray: and we may
hereby gather yt this was his accustomed manner when he would pray. He went
aside therefore that he might power out his mind wholly before God.

For he had need of the singular help of God, that he might strive against
death.

C. But leauinge the Disciples, he spared their infirmity: even as a man,
which being in the war, saying great daunger-like to happen unto him,
leaves his wife and children in a quiet place.

37. And he took with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebede, and began to
wax sorrowful and heavy.

And he took with him Peter, C. Although he would have all to be out of
danger yet notwithstanding he took three of them with him to bear him
company: and he was the chosen flower in which there was a sweet smellinge
sauer. M. The Lord at other times also, chose these three before the rest, to
behoulde special matters: as we may read in the.17. Chapter goinge before,
and in the eight of Luke.

And the same three he takes now, C. not that they were able to suffer the
like violence, but that they might be a document and pattern of the
infirmitye of them all.

M. Mark expresses the two sons of Zebede by name, saying, James and John.
He began to be sorrovvfull Or he began to wax sad, and to be grieved in mind.

Mark has: And he began to wax abashed, and to be in an agonye.

C. We have seen before that the Lord strove with the fear of death: but
because the Lord now fights hand to hand with the fear of death, ^rtue is
^ed in pre^ trouble.
it is said to be the beginning of sorrow and heaviness. Whereby we gather
that there is no true trial of virtue, but in a present matter. For then ye
debillity and weakness of the flesh shows it self which before was hid, and
the inward affections power out themselves. Therefore although God had
oftentimes before summoned his son to battle, and exercised him with
certain skyrmishes as it were, yet notwithstanding now by the more
approchinge sight of death, he does more grievously wound him, and strike him
with unwonted fear. And because this seems reproachful to the glory of
Christ, that he should be stricken with fear and sorrow, many interpreters
have carefully trauayled in seekinge startinge places: but their labor was
very rash and nothing profitable. For if we be ashamed of the fear and
sorrow of Christ, the redemption will soon be gone. For truly says S.
Ambrose: I do think him (says he) not only inexcusable, ^mbrose.
but also I do no where more marueyle at his piety and majesty.

For he had little profited me, except he had taken on him my affection.
Therefore he sorrowed for me, who had nothing in himself to be sorye for,
and the delectacion of the eternal deuinitye being sequestered, he is
molested with infirmity, I do therefore bouldlye call it sorrow and heaviness
that he suffered, because I preach ye Cross. For he took not upon him our
flesh in cooller and show, but in deed. He ought therefore to suffer
grief, that he might overcome sorrow not that he might exclude it.
Neither have they so much praise of fortitude, which being wounded feel not
the same, as they that suffer the grief of the wound: Thus far S. Ambrose.
They truly which Immagine the son of God to be free from these passions, they
do not acknowledge him to be a man truly and effectuallye. Yea, when it is
said that the deuyne power of Christ being hid as it were rested for a time,
that he might fulfill the parts of a mediator in sufferinge: it is so far
from absurditye, that otherwise he could not fulfill the misterye of our
salvation. Yet notwithstanding the infirmitye which Christ took upon him,
ought to be distinguished from our infirmitye, because it is far differinge
from that which is in us.

For in us affection is not void of fault, because all of them do exceed a
mean, and right temperature. But Christ was so troubled with sorrow and
fear, that notwithstanding he murmered not against God, but said: Father if
it be possible let this Cup pass from me: Nevertheless not that I will:
but that thou will be done. So that he framed himself according to the true
rule of temperaunce. For it is no marueyle he being pure and holy, and free
from all spotte, if that pure affections flowed from him, although they were
witnesses of human infirmitye: and if from the nature of man there does
spring nothing but that which is filthye and full of puddle. Let us therefore
note this difference, that Christ in fear and sorrow was weak without any
spot of sin: and that all our affections, because they gushe and burste
forth in excess, are vicious.

B. We must acknowledge then that he was true and perfect man, and that he
did say by a cooller that he was sorrye and troubled. C. But now we must
note the kind of affections, with the which Christ was tempted. Mathewe
says that he was affected with sorrow and heauynes: Luke says that he was
in an agonye: and Mark says that he was abashed. But how came it to pass
that he was sorrowful, heavy, fearful, and abashed, but only because in
his death he conceived some thing more sorrowful and horrible, than the
separation of the soul and body. And truly he suffered death, not only
that he might assende from the earth into Heaven, but rather that he taking
upon himself the curse, to the which we were subject, might deliver us from
the same. He feared not death therefore simplelye, as it is a departure out
of this world, but because he had before his eyes the fearful Judgment of
GOD, the Judge himself being armed with incomprehensible vengeance, and the
huge heap, of our sins (which were laid upon him) oppressinge him.
Wherefore it is no maruayle if the horrible gulphe of destruction do sharpelye
vex him with fear and sorrow. M. Here therefore is set before us a hye
priest, which can have compassion upon our infirmities, which was tempted in
all points, like as we are, but yet without sin, to whom let us go bouldly
as unto the seat of grace, Heb. 4. and 2. and 5.
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. This
place also brings consolation unto us, teachinge us not to think that we
displease God, when we are thrown down with the fear of death. Christ
doubted not to complain of the horror of death which he suffered, in praying
to the father. The which thing also we may read in the Psalms, to be done
oftentimes of David.

We are also forbidden that we do not judge by and by, or contemn those
which are discouraged by the fear of death, as though they had evil
consciences: and that also we do not justify those which dye with a boulde
courage.

38. Then said Jesus unto them: My soul is heavy unto the death: Tarrye ye
here: and watch with me. My soul is heavy unto the death: M. Christ was
full of sorrow before he did pray.

C. But he makes these three Dysciples privy of his death, that they might
be partakers of the same passion: not because their weakness was hidden from
him, but because they might afterward be the more ashamed of their dulnes in
understanding. And this kind of speech does express a deadly wou^d of
sorrow: as if he had said, that through sorrow he was out of heart and half
dead. So Jonas answered the Lord, Jonas 4.
and said: I am angery even unto the death. We therefore geeue this note*
because certain of the old writers handelinge this place, folishly affirm
that the soul of Christ was not heavy in the death, but to ye death. Again,
this so great sorrow and heaviness of the mind, was not contrary to the will
of the father, for the father would not have him suffer without sorrow and
grief. It was the will of the father that Jerusalem should be besieged: yet
notwithstanding Christ bewailed the same, insomuche that he wept.

Tarrye ye here, and watch with me M. Such is the disposition of the wicked
that they desyer to have those, whom they take to be their friends, to mourn
and sorrow with them: even as if thou would not bear a heavy burden
alone, but would lay part thereof upon other men's shoulders: which in deed
is some help to the afflicted. It should seem that Christ being thus
affected, desyered to have these three Dysciples before any other to watch
with him, that is in prayinge and sighinge to labor with him. And least any
man should think ye Christ was void of this affection, let him note this
thing which the Prophet says: I looked for some to have pittye on me, Psalm ^
but there was no man: neither found I any to comfort me. This was yet a
farther declaration and more evident argument of ye human infirmity that was
in Christ: As if he should have said: Lend me your hand. Although he were
out of danger, yet it behooved him to sustain these things.

Wherefore saying we see these things in Christ, let us not despise the
prayers of our brethren: he has undoubted victory over death: yet
notwithstanding he says, Watch with me. How be it, we may gather that
Christ did not require these Dysciples to watch with him, so much for
himself, as for their own sakes, as if they had been in the like danger,
that they might not be overcome with the temptacion to come. Luke says that
he added, And pray least ye enter into temptacion: yt which we will expound
in the one and fortye verse followinge.

39. And he went a little farther, and fell flat on his face and prayed
saying: O my father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.

And he went a little farther M. He went aside as we said before to pray
the more earnestlye. C. For the which cause also we read that he went
another time to pray without witnesses: for when we are out of the sight
of men, we do better consider and feel our selves, that we may geeue the
more heed to that which we do. It is not necessary truly that we go into
secret corners so often as we would pray: no, it is not always meet: but
when any great necessitye does urge us, because the feruentnes of prayer does
more freely pour out it self in the solitary place, it is profitable for us to
go a part to pray. Wherefore if the Lord did not neglecte this help, it
should betoken to much madness and pride in us, not to use the same our selves.
Moreover where God is the only arbitrator, vmpire and Judge, the faithful
mind may more familliarlye open it self, and more simplely power out prayers,
sighs, cares, fears, hope and joys, into the bosom of God. For God does
wincke at many folish toys which are in his servants, which should not
want os^entacion in the sight of men.

B. Therefore Christ prayed not in the presence of those three, but leauinge
them, he went a little aside. S. Luke sheeweth how far he went from
them, saying: And he gat himself from them, about a stones cast. And fell
flat on his face Mark adds, To the ground, Luke has, And he kneeled
down. C. By the which gesture also, he declared the earnest vehemencye of
prayer. For although the kneelinge be bsed commonly in prayer, as an outwardr
sign of reverence: yet notwithstanding Christ in simplely prostratinge
himself upon the earth, for the very greatness of his grief, framed himself
to a miserable show and outward gesture.

^lity al^ is ioy^ ye pray^ ^^ the ^.
M. And such gestures do belong to a troubled and disquieted mind: they have
also an argument and proof of humilitye, which is always joined to the prayers
of the godly. Thus truly are the holy and godly sort of me^ wont either to
kneel, or postrate them selves upon their face, to declare an humbled mind
before the majesty of God.

O my father, Mark has set down the Chalde word, adioyninge to it the Greek
word expoundinge, as it were, the other as, (...) things ^ed in (...)
Abba, father. By the which we are taught that these two things are required
in prayer, namely, the ardent affection of ye mind, and the faithful trust of
sons, toward God: that these two were in Christ, these words, in this place
do testifye.

If it be possible C. Some travail in vain when they go about to declare,
that prayer is not here described, but only a certain complaint. But we,
although we confess that it was an abrupte prayer, being suddenly expelled with
violent anguishe of mind, doubt not for all that, but that Christ conceived
prayer. Neither does it hinder, that he requires to obtain a thing
impossible: because the prayers of the faithful do not continue in one order
to the end: they do not always keep one temperature, neither are they
always made in distinct order, but are confused, intricate, and doubtful,
either they do strive with themselves, or else they do stand still in the
midst of the race: even as the ship tossed with waves, which although it
tend to the Haven, yet notwithstanding it cannot keep his right and straight
course because of the unquiet sea. We must note that which we touched even
now, that the affections of Christ were not troublesome, which should put of
and from his mind, (as ours do) all pure moderation: but so much as the
sound and perfect nature of man could bear, he was stricken with fear, and
held with sorrow, that he could not of necessity, at every other prayer or
petition but be tossed between the violent waves of temptacion. This is the
reason why he having prayed to put away his death, by and by brideleth
himself, and submittinge himself to his father calls back suddenly, and
corrects that carnal request. M. For these words (If it be possible) have a
condition. Luke has: If it be thy will. C. But it may be demanded how he
requires to have the eternal decree of the father cut of, of the which he was
not ignorant. For although this condition (If it be possible) be put between,
yet notwithstanding this seems absurd, to make the purpose of God flexible
and uncertain. For it is meet to be sure of this, that it cannot be that GOD
should retracte or alter his purpose. And by Mark it should seem that Christ
does oppose or set the power of God against his decree. All things (says he)
are possible to thee. But truly the power of God is extended amiss hitherto,
that by making him mutable, his truth might be weakened and discredited.

Answer.
We aunsweare that it is no absurditye if Christ, according to the common
manner of the godly, lettinge pass the consideration of the deuyue purpose,
put down into the bosom of his father, his desire with the which he burned.
For the faithful in pouringe out their prayers, do not always assende to the
behoulding of the secret counsayles of God, neither do they way, as though
they were at leisure, what might be done, but are ferue^tly carried sometimes
with hasty desire to obtain their requests. So Moses desyered to be blotted
out of ye book of life. Exodus. 32.
So Paul wished himself accursed for his brethren. This prayer of Christ
therefore was not premeditated, Romans 9.
but the force and violence of grief, did extort from him these words to the
which he added by and by a correction. The same vehemence took from him, the
present remembrance of the Heavenly decree, that he considered not in the
very moment, that he was sent for this cause to be the redeemer of mankind:
even as we see oftentimes that great grief brings a miste before the eyes,
that we cannot remember all things at once. To be short there is no
absurditye if we have not a present consideration of all things in our
prayers, that a distinct order may be kept. And whereas Christ said (as
appears by the words of Mark) that all things are possible to the father,
he said it not to bring his power, and his mutable truth and constancye, into
controuercye and contencion: but because there was no hope, (as commonly there
is not in troublesome, and desperate matters) he commits himself to the
power of God.

Let this Cup pass from me, M. This is an Hebrewe phrase of speech, and is
as much to say, As let me be delivered I pray thee from this cruel kind of
death: Take away this Cup from me. C. We have showed before, that by the
name of Cup the providence of God is noted, which dispenses to every man the
measure of ye Cross, and of afflictions: even as if the goodman of the house
should appoint to his servants their allowance, and distribute to his
children their portion. Read the twenty Chapter goinge before: M. This prayer
brings much consolation to the afflicted minds of ye godly. Christ in this
matter knew the will of his father, and he knew all those things certainly
that should happen unto him: and yet notwithstanding he does seek by prayer to
resist his passion to come, not lightly, but earnestly, not once, but twyse,
yea thryse, as the Evangelist notes. It is not therefore unseemly and
disagreeinge from the affection of the godly, when they are in danger, to
resist the Cross, and other troubles, by prayer, this being always added,

Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou vvilt, C. We do see here how soon
Christ brideled his affections, and submitted himself. But first of all here
it may be demanded, how his mind was pure from all sin, Aunswe^
for us to frame our affections in general to the will of God, yet
notwithstanding there is a certain kind of disagreing, which is void of
fault, and is not imputed for sin: as if a man do wish the state of the
Church to be quiet and prosperous, if he desyer to have the sons of God
delivered from sorrow and trouble, to have all superstitions taken away
quight, and to have the will of the wicked restrained least they hurt.

These things, being of themselves right, may be rightlye required of the
faithful, though the will of God be otherwise, who will have his son to
reign among the enemies, his servants to be exercised under the Cross,
and the victory of faith, and the Gospel, to be set forth by the contrary
practices of Satan. We do see that they are godly peticions, which seem to
disagree sometimes from the will of God: because God will not always inquire
of us exactly, or scrupulouslye, what his will is, but suffers that to be
required of him, which in our reason and sense is to be wisshed for.
Notwithstanding the question is not as yet fullye answered. For saying it was
said even now that all the affections of Christ were ordered aright; how does
he now then correct himself? for he so submits himself to the will of God,
as though before he had exceeded a mean.

In the first request truly, that moderation whereof we spoke before, does
not appear, because he does go back so much as he may, from fulfilling the
office of a mediator: We answer that there is no falte in him, because the
terror of death being offered, the mist of oblivion was objected also, so that
all other things being omitted, he lepte spedely to make this request. Neither
ought we here subtily to inquire whether he might forget our salvation or no:
because this one thing is sufficient for us, that when he burst forth into a
desire of staying, and putting away his death, he thought upon no other
things which had shut the way: If any man do obiecte, that the first
motion (which was mete to be brydeled before it wentee any farther) was not
tempered as it ought to be: we answer that the feruency of our affections in
this corruption of our nature, can not be seen so tempered with moderation, as
the feruency of Christ was: but that we must give this honor unto the son of
God, least we judge of him by our selves. For all the affections of the flesh
do so boil and burn in us, ^^ctions of ^^s mind ^ sinful.
that they quickly run into contumacy, or at least one wyckednes or other is
mixed with the^: But Christ did so burn with the feruency of fear and
grief, that he kept him self notwithstanding in his measure. Yea* even as
diverse tunes disagreing among them selves, are so far from discord that they
rather make a pleasant and sweat harmony: Even so we have here a singular
example of true proportion in Christ, between the will of God and man, that
without conflicte, and repugnancy, they differ between them selves. This place
truly evidently teaches that those ancient heretics were to incensible,
which were called, Monothelites, because they feigned Christ to have one only
and simple will. For as he was God he wylled nothing contrary to the will of
the father. It follows therefore that they were the affections of his humane
mind, being destincte and separated from the secret purpose of God.

But now, if it were mete that Christ should keep his will captive, that he
might submit the same to the will and rule of God, (although it were well
governed) how careful ought we to be, to repress and keep under, the
liberty of our affections, which being always rash, are carried hedlong,
and are full of obstinacy? And although the spirit of God do govern us, in
so much that we desire nothing contrary to reason, yet notwithstanding, we owe
this obedience unto God, patiently to suffer, when success is not given to our
prayers. For this is the modesty of faith, to permit God, to determine
otherwise tha^ we desire. Specially this rule must be observed, when we have
not a certain and special promise, to take head that we ask nothing without
this condition, namely that God may fulfill that which he has decreed: the
which we can not do, but we must needs commit our requests unto him. M.
Yea, and the denying of our own will is necessary to all Christians: (of the
which Christ says, He which will follow me, let him deny him self,) the
which is done in the very time of temptacion, and under the cross. C. Now it
may be demanded, what profit Christ received, Hebre. 5.
For so that place ought to be read, and not as it is in the common
translation, Answer.
where it is said that he was heard for his reverence. For that should not
agree if Christ simplely had feared death, because he was not delivered from
the same: whereupon it follows that he was constrained to wyshe away his
death, for fear of a greater evil: namely when he saw the wrath of God
laid before him, he being before the tribunal seat with all the sins of the
world upon him, it was necessary that he should fear the deep gulphe of
death. Although therefore he sustained death, yet notwithstanding, because his
sorrows being loused, Act. 2.
(as Peter also teaches) the better got the victory, ye Apostell truly says,
yt he was heard because of his fear. Here unlearned men make much a do, and
say that it is a great reproach to affirm that Christ feared least he should
be swallowed up of death. But let the^ answer us, what fear they think that
the same was, which caused Christ to sweat drops of blood: for that mortal
sweat never issued but of some terrible and unwonted horror. If any man at
this day should sweat blood, in such abundance that drops should distill
from his face to the earth, it shall be counted a thing monsterous, and not to
be believed: but if we do believe that this happened to any man, we will say,
that it came through the fear of death, and by reason of a weak and
effeminate courage. Therefore they which affirm that Christ prayed not, that
the father would deliver him from the gulphe of death, they make him very
tender, and not to be compared to any common man. If any do obiecte that the
fear whereof we speak is of infidelity, we answer: When Christ was
stricken with the horror of the divine curse, the sense of his flesh was so
touched, that faith remained without harm, and in safety. For the integrity
and perfection of his nature brought to pass, that he felt the very same
temptations that prick and stinge us, without wound or harm. In the mean
time they foolyshely immagine him to be a conqueror without fight, which
say that he felt no temptacions. Neither truly, ought we to think that
he did feign or dissemble, when he complained of the mortal sorrow of his
mind, nor that the Evangelists did lie in saying that he was sorrowefull, and
abashed.

40 And he came unto the disciples, and found them a sleep, and says unto
Peter: what, could ye not watch with me one hour?

And he came unto his disciples. A. It is the manner of friends that are
afflicted and troubled, to fly unto their friends, for comfort and succor.
Christ goes to his friends, and fyndeth them sleaping. This therefore is one
part of our infirmity which Christ for our sakes took on him. S. Paul
commends Prisca and Aquila, Romans 16.
because for his life, they laid down their necks. And in another place he
admonishes us to weep with the^ that weep, Romans 12.
and to rejoice with them that rejoice. But Christ is so far from receiving
consolation here of his friends, that they rather stood in need of his
comfort.

C. It had been truly no small ease of his grief to have his disciples
fellows and companions with him, but on the contrary part, it was a great
discomforte to be destitute also of them. For although he stood in need of
no man's help, yet notwithstanding, because he wyllingly took upon him our
infirmities and because he would in this agony declare that abaseing and
empteing of him self, whereof saint Paul makes mention: it is no marvel if
their sluggishenes, whom he chose to be his companions, added a more grievous
and heavy wayght to his grief.

And found them a sleep. M. This sleapenes of the disciples came not of the
security of the mind, by the which they cared not what came to pass: But
grief brought upon them this slouthfulnes, as witneseth Luke, saying: He
found them sleaping for very heaviness. And Christ had said unto them before,
after supper. But now I go my way to him that sent me, John. 16.
and none of you asks me whether I go: But because I have said such things
unto you, your hearts are full of sorrow. And seeing yt we see these things to
have happened to the disciples, let us learn thereby, how great the
infirmity and weakness of man's nature is. What shall we do except Christ
watch in us by his holy spirit? And he says unto Peter, what, could ye not
watch C. Christ does not make this complainte to his Disciples faynedly: But
affirms that he is grieved even in the true sense of the mind, because he is
left alone: M. Specially when they had bound them selves unto him, with so
many promyses. Peter had said: Luke 2^
I am ready to go to prison, and to dye with thee. Also, I will ieopard my life
for thy sake. John. 13.
The other two also had boasted, that they were able to drink of the cup,
that he should drink of. Matthew. 2^
And Christ being now most of all grieved, they sleep. C. And this was just
reprehention of their sluggyshnes, because in his extreme anguishe they had
not watched one hour.

C. M. Notwithstanding, let us note, how great patience he uses toward his
servants, although he sees them to sit down in their evil. By the which
we are taught how we ought to bear with the infirmity and weakness of our
brethren, and yet notwithstanding, to rebuke and reprehende them also, that
they may acknowledge and deteste the same.

41 Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit is willing
but the flesh is weak.

Watch and pray. A. Christ uses great clemency: M. He is no sharp and
severe master, he does not straight way cease to care for us: But rather
includes that which he taught before. It is our parts in like manner, not to
reiecte the commandments of ye lord: if we think a thing yt to have once
told unto us, is sufficient, we are deceived: we do see how easily we fall,
except he again confirm us with his doctrine. ^atching.
Watchyng pertayneth to the busying and lifting up of the mind to God: ^^er.
But prayer serves to call upon God for his help. These two things must be
joined together, namely watchyng and prayer: By the which he declares that
we have need of the help and sustentation which comes of God. This place
is to be noted: for we must fight daily by diverse means against te^ptacions.
That ye enter not into temptation. C. Because the Disciples did carelessly
steape in their masters danger, they are called back unto them selves, that
they might be awakened by the sense, and fealing of their own evil. Christ
therefore denounces that except they watch and pray, they may be by and by
oppressed with temptation: as if he had said. When ye have no care of me, I
would not have you to neglect your selves, because here ye matter touches your
selves and except ye take heed, temptation will straightway ouerwhelme you.
For to enter into temptation, is to give place and to fainte in temptation. M.
This was the danger which the disciples should have feared, the temptation was
come, whereof the Lord had said: (...). 22.
Simon, Simon, behold Satan has sought to sifte you, even as wheat is
sifted. The which Peter expounding as it were says, Be ye sober and watch,
because your adversary the deuel goes seking like a roaring Lion whom he may
devour. ^etr. 5.
Christ says not here, Least ye be tempted, but he says, Least ye enter into
temptation, that is (as we said before) least ye be vanquished with the
temptation to come, and be after a sort swallowed up of the same. C. And let
us note that the manner of resisting is here prescribed, not that we should take
courage upon our own power and strength, but rather that we knowing our own
infirmity, may crave strength and might of the Lord. Watchinges without
prayers profit nothing.
Therefore our watching without prayers will proffite nothing at all.

The spirit is vvilling, but the flesh. Least he should with terror
discourage the disciples, he does gently chastise and correct their sloth,
comforting and putting the^ in good hope again. And first of all he
admonishes, that, although they being ready and prompte, are desirous to do
well, yet notwithstanding that they must sight with the infirmity of the
flesh: and that therefore their prayers are never superfluous. By the
promptnes and willingness of the Spirit, Spirit.
he understands the affection of the mind, which is governed by the holy
ghost. And that part which is reformed by the spirit of God is called, the
spirit in than, by a figure called Metonymia, or denomination: this is that
readiness of the spirit which coueteth to follow God whether soever he shall
call: where such promptnes is in man, it may be called a willing spirit.
Flesh.
And he calls that flesh which by nature rests in man, and the natural
affection of the mind also. We see therefore that he grau^teth unto them the
praise of wyllingnes, least their infirmity should cast them into despair:
and yet notwithstanding we see that he prycketh them forward to prayer,
because as yet they were not sufficiently endewed with a strong spirit.

Wherefore this admonition does properly pertayne to the faithful, who being
regenerated by the spirit of God, desire to do well: yet for all that, they
labor as yet under the infirmity of the flesh. For although the grace of the
spirit be in them, yet are they weak according to the flesh. And although
the weakness of the Disciples is here showed unto them only, by Christ: yet
notwithstanding, because the same that is found here in them, pertains to all
other men, we may hereby gather a general doctrine, namely that we must
watch dilligently in prayer: because we have not as yet in us such strength
of the spirit, but that we may easily fall through the infirmity of the
flesh, except the Lord do stay and hold us up with his hand. Moreover,
there is no cause why we should tremble or fear: Because a certain and and
sure remedy is propounded unto us, the which we shall not seek a far of,
neither in vain. For Christ promyseth that all they shall have the upper
hand, which giving them selves unto prayer, cast of diligently the
sluggishenes of the flesh.

42 He went away once again and prayed saying: O my father if this cup may
not pass from me, except I drink of it thy will be fulfilled.

He went away once again. C. Although he says that Christ prayed here the
second time, yet notwithstanding, we see here no form of prayer. But this
prayer is nothing else then a testimony of obedience, to brydel him self of his
own desyer, that the will of his father might be fulfilled.

Notwithstanding there is no doubt but that this testimony of Christ may be
called a prayer. For he so testifies that he altogether desires to have this
will fulfilled in him: as when we say thy will be done, we do not make our
petition so as though he should do it against our wylles: but that he would
bend and frame our minds to will that which he wylleth. By these words of
Mathewe therefore Christ seems more freely to commit him self (all fear as
it were being gone) to his father. Neither does he desyer any more that the
cup might be taken from him, but this desyer being paste, he rather seeks to
obey the counsel and purpose of God.

If this cup may not pass from me. C. But did Christ doubt here? There are
diverse and sondery motions truly in a troubled mind: For what is perturbation
else, than as a wave, with the which the minds of men are carried? He was not
troubled verily as we commonly are: yet notwithstanding, it was mete that he
should be troubled after a sort, that he having a felyng of our infirmities
might be merciful unto us. C. The Euangeliste Mark makes no mention of this
goinge: yea and when Christ returned the second time, he is said to
^itterate the same peticions that he did before. And there is no doubt, but
that so often as he prayed, he was driven thereunto by the fear and horror of
death. Notwithstanding, it is probable that he was at the second time, more
inclyned to show his obedience to the father, and that he was by the first
assault of temptation encouraged to go to his death with the greater
bouldenes.

Luke does not distinctly show that he prayed at several times: but says
only, that when sorrow and grief did urge him, he did the longer, and with
the more vehemence pray, as though it had been one only prayer. But we do know
that the Evangelists sometimes omitting the circumstaunces, do only touch
the effect.

Where as therefore he says that Christ came at the end of his prayer to the
disciples, it is so spoken by a figure called, Hysteron proteron: Hysteron
Proteron is a figure ^sed, when ^thing is d^red out of ^der prope^rously.
Even as in the other part also, where he says that an Aungel appeared from
heaven, before that he makes mention of the agonye of Christ: which should
by order have been first declared. But the preposterous order which the
Evangelist uses, proves no absurdity: because, to the end we might know,
that the Angel was sent unto him in vain, he does afterward express the
necessity: and so the latter narration, is as it were a showing of the cause.
And although fortitude comes of nothing, but of the spirit of God only,
yet notwithstanding this lets not, but that God may use his Angels as
ministers.

And hereby we may gather, what great torments the son of God suffered, when
that it was mete for the help of God to be so set forth, that he might
behold the same with his eyes.

43 And he came and found them a sleep again. For their eyes were heavy.

And he came and found them a sleep again. C. We do see here that Christ
used not a continuing prayer, but put this solace between, namely the coming
to the disciples. For such continuance of prayer is not required of the
faithful, that they might not leave of from the same: But rather let them
continewe in their prayers after the example of Christ, until they be come
so far as their infirmity will suffer, let them cease for a little time,
notwithstanding when they have breathed them selves, let them turn again
unto God by prayer.

A. Even as therefore at the first time he rose from prayer, and coming to his
Disciples, sought for some solace, even so now this second time he
retourneth to them again: at whose hands he found no more ease, than he
did before.

For their eyes were heavy. C. This sleapynes came, neither with gluttony, nor
by gross security, nor by any sudden merynes of the flesh: but rather by
immoderate sorrow, as Luke testifies. Whereby we do the better perceive
how prone and ready our flesh is to slouggishenes, to the which, the very
dangers them selves do bring the forgetting of God. So that Satan has
every way apt and mete occasion, to snare us. For if we fear no danger, we
are by and by as it were in a dronken sleep, in the which he lulleth us: and
he ouerwhelmeth our senses with fear and sorrow, (by the which we should
be styrred up to prayer) least they should serve the Lord: And so by all
means men are alienate and drawn away from God, until he gather them unto
him again: We must also note the circumstaunce, that the disciples being so
sharply reprehended, fell strayghtwaye a sleep again. But this is not spoken
of all the disciples, but of those three only which the Lord chose to bear
him company. What shall become then of the common sort, when this happened in
the flower? M. Truly there is nothing spoken here of the infirmity and
slouggishenes of the disciples, which happens not daily unto us. For how
often are we admonished, and how often do we fall for all that? We have need
therefore of Christ, which may stir us up, we have need also of his
suffera^ce, that he may bear with our forgetfulness, least we by and by be
cast of according to our deserving.

44 And he lu^te them and went again and prayed the third time saying the
same words.

And he left them. C. He saying that the eyes of his disciples were heavy,
and that his former reprehencion had profited little with them, left them, and
went to prayer again.

And prayed the third time. M. The affection of nature abhorring the cross
caused him to do this. For although there were not in him such a wrestlynge of
the flesh and of the spirit, as there is in us: yet notwithstanding, because
he took upon him our infirmities, it was mete that he should be like unto us
in somewhat, that fear might have his course to come again, though it were
once or twyse overcome.

Saying the same words. C. The itteration or repetition of one thing was not
lip labor which Christ condemned in hipocrites, Matthew 6.
which think that they shall obtain that, with their vain babbling, which
they ask not sincerely or with the heart: but Christ taught by his example,
that it becomes us not to be discouraged, nor weary in praying, if we
obtain not by and by our desiers. This therefore is not a superfluous
repetition of words, if the temptation of repulse, or denial of our
requests, do not extinguyshe the desyer of praying, but do continue askyng
the same thing, the third and fourth time, which the Lord before seamed to
have denied. M. The Euangeliste Luke adds saying: And his sweat was like
drops of blood, trickling down to the ground* The which words are not so to
be taken, as though he would say, that these drops, were but like dropes of
blood, and not blood in deed: but we must understand them, that his sweat
ran down with drops of blood. And ye Greek word here, does not only
signify likeness, but also the show of truth: as when it is said. And we
saw his glory, as it had been the glory of the only begotten son of God.
John. 1.
that bloody sweat truly was a token of great pain and torment, and very
miraculous.

45 Then comes he to his disciples and says unto them: sleep on now and
take your rest: behold the hour is at hand, and the son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners.

Then comes he ^o his disciples. Bu. His prayers being ended, and his whole
cause being committed unto God and his mind being framed and confirmed to
suffer death, and to abide all kind of torments, the Lord retourneth to his
disciples, whom he found nothing the more vigilante: and says.

Sleep on now and take your rest. C. It may appear evidently enough, ye Christ
speaks here Ironice, but yet let us see to what end this figurative speech
does appertain. For, because Christ had profited nothing in admonishing his
disciples, he does not only touch their sluggishnes, but also denounces,
that although they would be slouthful, they should have no leisure. The sense
therefore is this: Because I have hitherto spoken unto you in vain, I will
now cease to exhort you any more: But how soever ye have liberty to sleep
through me, yet notwithstanding your enemies will not suffer it, but will
constrayne you to watch against your wills. Bu. For now both my pain, and
your great danger also is at hand. And therefore in Mark it is added, It is
enough: as if he should have said: It is not now time to sleep.

And after this manner the Lord does oftentimes chasten the sluggishnes of
men, that they which are deaf to hear words, may at the length be
constrained by euels to watch. Wherefore let us learn by the words of the
Lord, to give ear in dew time, least that necessity pluck that from us by
violence to late, which he by fair means would have gotten at our hands in
due time. Behold the hour is at hand. M. He makes mention of his hour, to
the end they might understand, that now there is nothing less, tha^ the
time of sleep, to be taken: as if he should say, It is now the hour in the
which I must be taken, my enemies are present that must lay hands upon me,
and yet ye sleep: this hour requires an other matter, now can y^ not sleep
any more, arise: and so forth. And we must note that he calls that time of
his taking his hour, that is, the certain and appointed time. Even as it is
said in another place: They sought therefore to take him, but no man laid
hands on him: because his hour was not yet come. We are therefore here
admonished that every man has a certain and appointed time either of life or
death, Man has a certain time appointed either of life or death.
which he can not pass.

And the s^n of man (...) and into the hands of sinners. M. By the name of
sinners in this place, (as in many other also) all mortal men are not
understood which by nature are sinful: but the wicked only, and such as have
no fear of God before their eyes. Act. 2.
Whereupon S. Peter also says thus: Him have ye taken by the hands of
unrighteous persons, after he was delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, and have crucified and slain him. To be betrayed into
the hands of sinners, is to be delivered into all their power, and to be given
to be used at their pleasure. When he says that he must be given to sinners,
he means, that he being innocente, must be delivered up, and shows also
that they were wicked and unjust ministers of his death, although he should
be delivered into their hands by the divine counsel of the father. Hereby we
perceive that the divine dispensation uses the reprobate to the chastisement
of his sons, yea, Reprobate^ are used to chastiseme^ of the godl^
and the ministry of Satan also: as we have often times declared before.

46 Rise let us be goinge: behold he is at hand that does betraye me.

Rise let us be going. C. By these words he declares, that so soon as he
had prayed he was armed with new weapons.

Ar the first truly he was willing enough to dye, but in the very instante,
he had a sharp battle with the flesh, in so much that willingly he would
have delivered him self from death, if so be he might have done it with ye
good will of his father.

He obtained therefore by tears from heaven, new power: Not that he ever
stood in lack or wanted the same, but because under the infyrmitie of the
flesh, which hee^ took upon him of his own accord, he would paynefully
travail, with grief and hard labor, that in his own person he might get
unto us the victory.

And now the trembling being assuaged, and fear subdewed, to the end he
might again offer a voluntary sacrifice to the father, he does not only
stand to his purpose constantly, but goes wyllyngly to the death.

A. He says not: Rise let us fly away: but arise, (...) us (...) them. M.
Whereupon ^. John writes thus. And Jesus knowing all things that should come
on him, went forth, and said unto them, whom seek ye? Behold he is at
hand that does betraye me. M. He rather makes mention of the traitor than
of any other, because there was more fault in him than in any other of ye
soldiers that came with him. He said not, Judas is at hand: for then they
should have understood what danger there might be, by ye coming of Judas,
which was their fellow disciple: but he says: He is at hand which does
betraye me: yt being thereby moved, they might start up with speed, as if he
should say: He is come, of whom I said unto you at ye Supper One of you shall
betray me. Now ye see yt I spoke unto you the truth. C. For the Eua^gelistes
do declare with great diligence, yt the Lord foresawe, whatsoever he spoke.
Wheruppon it might certainly be gathered, yt he was not drawn unto death by
external violence, but in respect of this, that ye wicked executed the secret
counsel of God. Although therefore a sorrowful and fearful sight was by and
by set before ye disciples, yet notwithstanding an argument and co^firmatio^ of
their faith was therewith offered, whereby they might erecte and conforte them
selves, seeing ye matter it self did declare yt nothing was don by chance, and
the fore warning of Christ directed the^ to behold ye glory of his deity.

47. While he yet spoke, lo, Judas one of the twelve, came, and with him a
great multitude, with swords and staves, sent from the chief pristes, and
elders of the people.

While he yet spoke. M. S. John writes saying: Judas then, after he had
received a bond of men (and ministers of the hye priests and Phariseis) came
thither with lanterns, and fyerbrands, and weapens: after these things the
words which our Euangeliste writes, follow, namely, While he yet spoke. The
weapens me^cioned by s. John, are called by Matthew, Mark and Luke, swords and
staves. And because ye Lord had said to his sleapy Disciples, Behold he is at
hand which does betray me, now the Euangeliste does consequently describe how
it was don, saying: While he yet spoke, lo, M. The Disciples, Peter, James,
and John, being a sleep, Judas sleapte not, but watched diligently, that he
might bring the work of his treason to an end. The which is an example of
ye wicked disposition of man, by the which it comes to pass, yt the
reprobate are more vigila^t to do euel, than ye elect are, ^t wicked ^sition
of ^bates.
to do good.

One of the number. C. A horrible example truly, that Christ should be
betrayed of one of his Apostels, which he had chose^ himself. It was mete it
should be so, least peradventure we should be troubled with daily treasons,
when we see yt such betrayers of ye word should come of the number of ye
ministers thereof. That must be fulfilled i^ ye church which was begone in the
head thereof the which is never more grievously afflicted, tha^ of those which
seem to be the members thereof.

And with him a great multitude M. He says not, And behold a great multitude,
and Judas with them, but (speaking of the captain of this multitude) he says,
Judas came, and with him a great multitude. So has Luke, And he which was
called Judas, one of ye twelve, went before the^. So yt the enemis of Christ
which came against Christ, were co^ducted under the ba^ner of Judas the
Disciple of Christ. A. And as the first Ada^ was taken by the subtilty and
deceit of the Serpent, eue^ so the second Ada^ was betrayed by ye wickedness of
Judas the son of the deuell: but Adam consented to sin, whereas Christ being
altogether heavenly, got unto us al* by his obedience, everlasting life. But
let us behold and consider the hainousnes of ye matter. Judas was therefore an
Apostel of Christ yt he might bring the multitude of people to believe on
Christ, by the Gospel, the word of eternal salvation, and to obtain
everlasting life of him For ye Gospel is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.
to all that believe the same. But behold, the reprobate wretch brings the
multitude to destroy Christ, and to get them perpetual damnation: for somuche
as, Romans 6.
the reward of sin is death. The hye priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, and the
elders of the people, were ordained to this purpose yt they should shadow and
prefigure Christ, with their sacrifices (for it was impossible ye sinnee
should be put away by the blood of beasts) and yt they should administer
pollitique and civil government, Hebr. 10.
to preserve ye promises made as co^cerni^g christ but behold (O vilsanouse
deed) they se^de forth a traiter, with a multitude of soldiers, utterly to
destroy christ.

With swords M. S. John calls these swords, and staves, weape^s, which ye
enemies of Christ used, either, least ye Disciples, or multitude, should
rescue and defend Christ, or else yt the custom and common manner might be
observed in taking of Christ, as of a seditiouse person. Wherefore not all
the multitude, but they only which were sent of the hye Pristes, Scribes, and
Phariseis, went forth with the trayter, having received a company or band of
soldiers, of the Roman captain.

C. Whereby also it appears that the hye pristes and Scribes were stricken
and vexed with an euel conscience, in so much that they did all things with
fear. For to what end should such preparation be to take Christ, whom they
knew to be altogether unarmed? Hereuppon therefore came such careful provision,
because the divine power of Christ, (which they were constrains by many
documents to fels) did vex and trouble them within. But of the other part,
their mo^strouse madness burst forth, in that they bearing them selves boulde
upon the force of weapons, dare presume to rebel against God. A. And we must
note yt there were some of all estates, which did help, and give their consent
to take Christ Of the Apostels, Judas, was one, who sometimes, took sweet
counsel of the Lord and walked with the Lord as a friend, Psalm 55. John. 18.
and yet for all that now, he betrayeth him. Of the soldiers, there was the
chief captain with his wicked company, as S. John declares at large. Of the
hye priests, Scribes, and Phariseis their ministers.

Of the elders of the people: their servants: that no man might have excuse.

48. But he that betrayed him, gave the^ a token saying: whom soever I kiss,
that same is he, hold him fast.

But he that betrayed him A. This feigned show, and hidden hypocrisy makes the
falt of Judas more hainouse: not because it was hidden from Christ, (for he is
a searcher of ye heart and reins) but because he would not seem to be a
traitor, but a friend. C. For their is no doubt, but that he was stayed,
either by the shame of his wicked act, or else for the reverence of the Lord,
not openly to profess him self to be one of his enemies: yea, whereas it is
said in S. Mark, that he charged the soldiers, to lead him away warely, it
was done because he remembered by how many documents the Lord had proved at
other times, his divine power.

Hold him fast. Bu. He would have him taken with all speed that might be,
least he should escape away. For the Lord, his enemies being deluded, and
mockd had escaped oftentimes out of the hands of those that sought his death.
Luke. 4. John. 8. and.10.
A. Least therefore, the like should happen now, the trayter admonishes the
soldiers, to hold him fast, and to lead him away warely (that is to say,
with diligent head) least he should escape. C. But notwithstanding the madness
of the trayter is wonderful either to cover him self with vain
dissimulation, when he should come in the presence of the son of God, or to
set the power of men against his power. E. S. John adds after this saying,
Jesus therefore knowinge all things that should come upon him went forth
and said: Whom seek ye? They answer Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto the^,
I am he. Judas also which betrayed him stood with them. By the which words
truly, the Evangelist does more plainly express, with how willinge a mind
Christ went unto his death: and therewith also he declares what great power
he breathed forth by one word: that we might know, that the wicked were
able to do nothing unto him, but upon his own sufferance. The like miracle
almost we have of the host of the king of Assirians, which was strycken with
blindness at the prayer of Elizeus.

49. And forthewith he came to Jesus, and said, hail master: and kyssed him.

And forthwith he came to Jesus Bu. The Evangelist Luke has: And Judas one of
the twelve, went before them, and pressed nigh unto Jesus to kiss him.

Hayle master C. There is no doubt but that Judas fained by these words as
though he fearing his masters danger, had been touched with mercy. And
therefore Mark has a repetition of this word: Master, Master: for although
ye majesty of Christ did urge him, yet notwithstanding ye deuel had so
bewitched his mind, yt he though his falsehoode to be very well hydden with
a kiss and flattering words, therefore this salutacion or acclamatio^ was a
pretense of compassion.

And he kissed him We must Judge the same of the kiss that we did of the
salutation going before. For although it were a common manner among the Jews,
to entertain their friends with a kiss, yet notwithstanding, because Judas
was departed a littell before from Christ, he seems now, as one suddenly made
afraid through fear, to give his master the last kiss, or farewell. And so
by an outward show of godliness he seems to excel the rest, when he seems
with great grief and sorrow to be separated from his master: But how little
he profited by his deceits, it appears by the answer of Christ hereafter
followinge.

Bu. Judas therefore feigned these two things, namely the cooler of
frendeship, and the show of Godliness. ^attery in ^^eship. ^ing. 19.
He was an open enemy, and yet nevertheless he calls Christ his master, and
that with a repetition thinking thereby to deceive the minds of Christ and of
his Disciples. Even so Ioab going about to kill Amasa, kyssed him, and
flattered him in this wise, saying: Art thou in health my brother. Let us
learn therefore by this place, how great the force of impiety is, and
whether it will bring us at the length, if we do not resist the beginninges
and original thereof. This Judas is not afraid for money, of envy, and
impiety, to salute his Savior, and to give his master a kiss, when as
notwtsta^ding he did acknowledge hi^ to be his master, neither kissed he hi^ for
any love or frendeship, but only to give him a dedly wound. Thus did Cayne
deal with Abell, who under the pretense of frendely repaste, slew his
brother. It is no merueile therefore if they at this day, which seek for
nothing else, than to overthrow Christ and his Gospel, do use also fair
promises, oaths, words, and signs. He which knows not that Judas is the
father of these men, being such wicked hypocrites as he was, believes their
gloseinge, and painted promises.

50. And Jesus said unto him: friend wherefore art thou come? Then came they
and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

And Jesus said to him Bu. Here we may behold in Christ a most perfect
example of mekenes.

He did not refuse to receive ye kiss of ye hipocrite Judas: but bewayling his
blindenes, and calling the miserable wretch to repentance, stricketh his
conscience with a most loving, friendly, and gentle saying.

Friend wherefore art thou come. C. The Euangeliste Saint Luke more expresely
says, Judas do thou betraye the Son of man with a kiss? These words of
S. Luke do more vehemently urge Judas of hipocrisy tha^ do the words of
Matthew, howbeit they are not spoken so much to reproach him, as to put him in
mind of the clemency and love which before he had showed toward him, being
now abused. For we may not think that when Christ called Judas, friend, he
did it Ironice, as if he had me^t him to be his enemy, but he rather casts
his ingratitude in his teeth because of a companion and friend he is now become
a trayter: even as it was foreshewed in the Scripture, where it is said: It is
not an open enemy that has done me this dishonor: for then I could have borne
it: neither was it mine adversary that did magnifye himself against me:
Psalm 35.
For then peradventure I would have hyd my self from him.

But it was even thou my companion, my guide, and min own familiar friend, etc.

Wherefore art thou come? Bu. Christ was not ignorant wherefore the traiter
was come, but after he had showed a token of his love, he reprehendeth him, and
prycked his conscience, that he might understand that the deceyte which he
used was not hydden from him. As if he had said: O Judas, thou do
dissemble thy frendeship with a kiss, and call the son of man Rabbi, or
master, and think yt I am ignorant where about thou go. But I appeal to
thin own conscience, tell wherefore art thou come? To what end use you this
kiss: I know well enough yt thou betrayest the son of man with this kiss.
Bu. I pray thee my friend* wherefore come thou to me with so wicked a mind?

Thou ought to remember the old faith and frendeship that has been
between us, and how haynouse and cruel a thing it is to betraye the Son of
man with a kiss which is a token of frendeship. C. Thus we must learn,
according to the example of Christ, to mingle oil, and vinegar together:
When the wicked are admonished, Moderation to be used in reprehension.
we must use this same moderation, which Christ uses here: we must neither
flatter the^, nor use to much severity: and al things must be done
unfeignedly: otherwise we shall not follow Christ, whose admonition here
described, was unfeigned. If the wicked do repent at our admonition, we have
won the salvation of our neighbors, but if they do not repent, our good
will shall be nevertheless profitable unto us.

The same admonition did the Apostell give to the Bushopes, 2. Tim. 2.
as appears in his epistell to Timothe. Here also we do evidently see yt,
whereof we are admonished a litell before, namely, yt by what deceit soever
hypocrites do cover them selves, when they come in the presence of the Lord
their wickedness is revealed, yea and that this does bring great judgment unto
them, because they being fre^dely entreated of Christ, do rebel against
him. Moreover let us understand that the Church shall be always subject to this
evil, which Christ once in his person sustained, that is: it shall nourse
and bring up in the bosom thereof trayters, and false brethren. And therefore
it was said a litel before, And the trayter which was one of the twelve came:
being spoken to this end, least we should be troubled out of measure, by such
examples: because the Lord will try our faith both ways, as, when Satan does
set upon us within and the Church without, by open enemies: and, when he goes
about our secret destruction, by hypocrites.

Notwtsta^ding we are therewith taught that all we which are the Disciples of
Christ, do embrace sincerity with him. For the defectio^s, and reuoltings
which we daily behold, do stir us up to the study of true piety and to the
fear of God, as witnesses S. Paul saying: let every one which calls on
the name of the Lord depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2.
We are al commanded to kiss and embrace the son of God. Psalm. 2.
Let every one therefore take heed that he do it not trayterouslye.

Then came they and laid hands on Jesus. E. The wicked multitude observed the
trayterouse sign which was given them and laid hands on Jesus* and took
him. But for this cause he was made bond, for this cause he was taken, that he
might deliver us from the bondage of sin, and thraldom of Satan into the
gloriouse liberty of the sons of God, and that he might teach the
woorshippers of him patience, if they at any time being taken with violence,
should be cast into bonds. Neither is there any danger least the word of
God should be bound with us also: for Saint Paul says that the word of
GOD was not bound. Furthermore, 2. Tim. 2.
the son of man is overcome, but nevertheless the eternal truth of God,
abides free, and invincible.

51. And behold one of those, which were with Jesus, stretched out his
hand, and drew his sword, and strocke a seruante of the hye Priests, and
smote of his ear.

And behold one of them. B. The Euangeliste Luke shows what the Disciples
minds were, before that these things were done by Peter, by these words:
When they which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him:
Lord shall we smite with the swoorde? Mark. ^
It is likely that all of the^ were ready to defend Christ: for they had
promised that they would rather dye with him than that they would deny him.
They seem therefore now to be willinge to perform that which before they had
promised. C. Whereby again it appears how much more ready and bold we are to
fight than to bear the cross. Wherefore it is mete that we always wiselye
consider, what the Lord commands, and what he requires of every one of
us, least the feruency of our zeal do burste forth beyond reason and
measure. And where as the Disciples are said to ask Christ, they did it not
with ye mind to obey his will, but by these words they declared, that they
were ready and prepared to resist the force of their enemies. Neither did
peter look when he should have a commandment and leave given him to stryke,
but rashelye brake forth into unlawful violence. B. This one, which stood by
Christ, here mentioned is said of the Evangelist S. John to be Simon Peter,
which durst defend Christ before so many armed men, when as on his side
there were but two swerdes present, and not one amongst them all mete for the
war. C. At the first sight truly, this boldness might seem worthy of praise,
that the Disciples forgetting their own infirmity, and being not mete to
resist, ventured notwithstanding their bodies for their master, and are not
afraid to put the same in hasarde of death. For they rather desyered to dye
with the Lord, tha^ they to live and se him oppressed A. Furthermore they knew
that great injury was done unto Christ, whom they knew to be irreprehensible,
both in doctrine and in life. And again, ^od. 2.
if Moses defended the Hebrewe against the Egiptian, why should not they be
excused which desyer to defend their master from the multitude of wicked and
mad men? C. But because they do attempt more, than the calling of God will
bear, or permit, their rashenes is justly condemned. Wherefore let us learn
to take heed, that our diligence may please the Lord, and that we may depend
upon his will, that no man move his finger without his comaundemente. And
therefore specially we ought to give our selves unto this modestye, diligently:
because instead of true and just zeal, troublesome rashenes, does very much
reign in us. And stroke a servant M S. John says that this servants name was
Malchus. And cut of his ear. Saint Luke, and Saint John, says that it was
his right ear. Furthermore S. Luke adds that Christ said: Suffer ye thus
far forth. As if he should say, God forbid, that ye should fight with the
sword for me: but I will that ye suffer my aduersary^ to take their pleasure
of me, so far forth as it is permitted unto them.

By these words of S. Luke we may easily gather, that not Peter only rose
against the enemies of Christ, but that others also were fellows, with him in
the same inte^perancy, and rashness. For Christ does not speak only unto one,
but says generally to all: Suffer ye thus far forth.

52. Then said Jesus unto him: put up thy sword into his sheath. For all that
take the sword: shall perish with the sword.

Then said Jesus unto him. Z. This is a greuouse rebuke, by the which Christ
teaches that the deed or zeal of Peter was nothing else but rash sedition
against authority, contumely against God the father, arrogance against the
majesty of God and violating of the whole Scripture: so far it was from true
fortitude, or godliness. Let us therefore understand that Christ condemns in
the person of Peter, Rash zeal.
whatsoever men presume to atte^pte of their own brain. The which doctrine is
specially worthy to be noted. For there is nothing more commen now a days,
than to defend that which we do under the pretense of zeal. As though truly
it were no matter, whether that thing which men think to be right and good be
allowed of God, or no: whose wisdom is nothing else, but mere vanity. If we
did perceive nothing to be amiss in ye zeal of Peter, yet notwithstanding it
should become us to be content with this one thing, that Christ pronounces
that it pleases not him. But truly we do see that he did all that he could,
that Christ might be revoked from his death, and that his name might be
subject to perpetual infamy. For in that he resists violentlye the Roman
capteyne, and the soldiers, he plays the part of a rebel: because he
resists the power ordained of God. And Christ being to much already hated
of the world, might by this deed have given occasion to have all the reproaches
laid on him with the which his enemies did falselye oppress him. Again this
was to far out of order, to prove his says with ye sword, which he could
not do by word.

When he is hereafter called (as you shall hear) to confess his faith, he
denies and now without the commandment of his master he goes about to
make a tumulte. Wherefore, we being warned by so notable an example, let us
learn to moderate our zeal. And because the lasciuiousnes of our flesh does
presume to enterprise farther than God does command, Zeal ought to be
guided by the word.
let us know that our zeal shall have evil success, so often as we dare
do any thing without the warrant of Gods word.

Let therefore obedience be the foundation of all those things that we take
in hand. C. Therefore by this reprehension of Peter, he confirms the
commandment of the law, by the which private persons are forbidden the use
of the sword. And specially we must note the confirmation of the
punishment, which is here added.

For every one which takes the svverde shall perish. For the punishemente was
not appointed at the will or mind of men, by the which they might revenge
their own blood: but God himself, severally forbiddinge us murder, declared
how dear mankind is unto him. And this is a perpetual doctrine, and the
very same which Moses writes in effect, saying: Whosoever sheadeth man's
blood, Gene: 19.
his blood shall be shed.

First of al therefore, Christ will not have himself to be defended, with force
of arms, because God has forbidden to strike in the law. And this is a
general reason: but by and by he shows a special reason. But here a question
may be moved, whether it be lawful at no time with violence to resist
wrong? Respon.
because the laws do arm him and give him power against a commen eneny of
mankind, he shall not be subject to punishment: and so, as often as defense is
opposed or set against unjust violence, the punishment does cease: which the
Lord has commanded the Judges of the earth to execute. But the simple goodness
of the cause does not absolve the conscience from giltines, except there be
joined with it a pure affection. Defense our selves must be w^ out anger.
Therefore whosoever will rightly and lawfully defend him self, he must first
of all put of the ferne^cy of anger, hatred, desyer of revenge, and all the
evil motions of the mind, that the defense may have nothing in it that is
troblesome, or proceeding from a wicked desyer. Because this is a rare thing,
and never almost heard of. Christ does not without just consideration, call
his Disciples to a general rule. For whosoever passes the bounds of his
calling, although he be commended of the world, shall nevertheless have blame
at Gods hands for his deed: Moreover by this place, certain mad men, very
foolishely go about to take away ye sword from judges, affirminge it not to be
lawful to strike with the sword. We grant that certainly to be true, because
it is lawful for no man to take ye sword at his pleasure, and so to be the
author of murder: but we deny that magistrates, (which are the ministers of
God, by whom he exercises is judgment) should be counted as the commen and
vulgar sort are and so to have no difference.

Moreover by these words of Christ, this power is plainelye committed unto
them. Iudge^ by swerd^ ^taineth to Judges (...) the earth
For saying he pronounces that all murderers must be executed with the
sword, it follows that the sword is committed into the hands of judges,
that they may take vengeance upon al unjust murders. It comes to pass
truly some times, that me^ne which are shedders of blood are punished by
other means: yet notwithstanding this is the ordinarye mean, by the which
the Lord would have the crueltye of the wicked brideled, least they should
rage at their pleasure unpunished.

But and if the Magistrate be negligent in this part, God him self will
execute this judgment which he had committed to the Magistrate.

Canonistes give the Te^porall swerd to the Pope.
And now, whereas certain Canonistes were so impudente, that they durst
affirm the Sword not to be taken from Peter, but that he received a
Commandment, to keep it secret, until the time conueniente to draw it
forth, came: Hereby we perceive how grossly these dogs have dallied with
the Word of God.

53. Thinkeste thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall give
me, more the^ twelve Legions of Angels.

Think thou that I cannot now pray G. Now follows that special
reason, of the which we made mention a little before. For Christ admonishethe
that he could have a far better kind of defense, and more lawefull, at
hand, if it were not that he must obey his Fathers will For this is the
sum, saying he was appointed by the eternal purpose of God to be a
Sacrifice, and because the same was declared also be testimony of Scripture,
it was not meet to impugn or resist the same: And thus the rashenesse of
Peter is condemned by an other circumstance, because he went not only about
to frustrate the heavenly Decree, but also to stop the way of man's
Redemption. Peter did not only unlawfully lift up the Sword: but also
foolish and mad were the Disciples, in that they being a few and weak,
durst withstand a band of Soldiers, and great multitude. Therefore the
Lord, to the end he might more evidently reprove their folly, puts this
comparison, that if he would seek for help and munition to defend his life,
he could have not only a leven Angels, but a great, and an invincible army
of Heavenly warriors. Seeing therefore he called not for Angels to help him,
much less would he have had a rash motion, whereby no profit was to be
hoped for to help him. For the tumult of the Disciples profited no more, then
if a few frogs had made a noise.

He uses therefore this reprehension for two causes. The first was, because
it was not lawful: although there were great necessity, yet
notwithstanding it does not excuse. For we must always consider what God will
suffer to be done: neither does this excuse profit, Necessity which has
no Law, constrained me: Let us give ear to the admonition of Christ, which
says: It is not lawful, because God does not permit it. And now for an
other cause Peter is reprehended, Means not lawful.
that they do iniurye unto God, which fly unto shameful means by the
pretense of necessity, as we showed even now If any man want lawful
riches or helps, he is by and by carried headlong to naughty devises, and
wicked practices: and that because few have regard to the secret defense of
God, which only ought to be sufficient to quiet and content us. There hangs
danger over our heads: now by and by because we see not the end thereof,
according to the fleashe, we devise with our selves this thing and that: as
though there were no Angels in heaven, whom the Scripture so often pronouncethe
to be set, and appointed to be our keepers and defenders. Psalm 34 91 Heb. 1.
So that we do deprive our selves of their help For whosoever are carried
with unquietness, and too much care, to take in hand forebidden remedies: it
is most certain that they forsake the providence of God.

Twelve Legions of Angels: C. A Legion did consiste almost of five
thousand footemenne, and five hundred horsemen. Hereby we perceive what
great care the Lord has for the Godly. For seeinge that Christ is given
to the faithefull which believe in him, it is certain that this dignity also
is given unto them with Christ, that they may have the help and service of
Angels. The which thing was proved by a certain Miracle in Elizeus, 4 King. 6.
who was compassed round about with a mountain full of Horses, and Chariottes
of fire, to defend him from his enemies.

A. Therefore Christ refers Peter here, to the Decree and Will of his
Father: even as in John also, when he says: Will thou not that I shall drink
of the Cup which my Father has given me? C. The which words do teach
that it became Christ to be doumbe, and not to open his mouth, that he might
be brought as a Lamb to the Sacrifice. Notwithstanding this pertains to
example, because the like sufferance is required of us all.

The Scripture compares afflictions, to Drinks. For even as the goodman of
the house distributeth meat, and drink to his Sons and servants: even so
does God deal with us, vsinge us as it seems good unto him self. But
whether he make us merry by prosperity, or humble us by adversity, he is said
to geeue unto us either sweet, or sower Drink. This Drink was appointed unto
Christ, that he might suffer the death of the Cross for the reconciliation
of the whole world. He says therefore that he must drink of the Cup which
his Father had given and measured unto him. In like manner we ought to frame
our selves to suffer the Cross. And yet notwithstanding the opinion of
fanaticall and mad men, ought not to prevail among us, which affirm
that we may not seek remedy for diseases, maladies, and other euilles,
least we reiecte the Cup which God has given unto us: because we know
that we must once die, it is meet that we be prepared unto death: but
notwithstanding, because the time of death is known unto us: the Lord does
permit unto us to defend our Life, by those means and helps that he has
ordained. Diseases must partly be suffered, although they be grievous unto our
fleash: and so long as they are not known to be unto death, we may seek
for ease. Onley we must beware and take heed, least we take any thing in
hand, contrary to the prescripte rule of his word. To conclude, let us
always have this in our minds, that we seek to fulfill the Lords will,
then do we not refuse the Cup which the Lord has geeuen us, in seeking
for deliverance from these euilles, with the which we are urged.

54. But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled? For thus must it be?

But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled? C. The reason why he prayed
not unto his Father is, because it was necessary that the Scriptures should be
fulfilled, which had foreshewed that Christ should suffer. He wanted not the
Scriptures truly to prove, that it was then appointed unto him from above to
dye: but because mortal men do not know what God has determined, until it
be revealed by the Word. Christ having respect unto his Disciples, does
upon just occasion openly show, what was the testimony of Gods will. We
do know, that what evils so ever do happen unto us they are sent from God:
but because we are doubtful of the end in seekinge for those remedies which
he does permit, we do not strive against his power: but when we know his
will, there remains nothing then, but patience and quietness. Christ
therefore now plaieth here a new part, he does no more entreat, neither does
he fle or fear death: and although he does fear, yet nevertheless he
goethe forewarde, because he knows that it is his Fathers pleasure to have it
so, and that therefore it must be accomplished of necessity. By these words
also the Scripture is commended unto us, because this is the special scope
thereof, to show that Christ has by his Passion put away our sins.

For thus must it be. We must add somewhat to make this more plain, thus:
How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, which testify that this shall
come to pass, and that it must needs be fulfilled? A. For the Scripture
cannot be loused. ^hn. 10.
Whereupon the Lord after his Resurrection said: Was it not meet that Christ
should suffer these things, and then enter into his glory? And a little
before he said: These are the words which I spoke unto you, ^^k. 24.
while I was yet with you: that al must needs be fulfilled, which were
written of me in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms.
C. But although Christ teaches only here that he must patiently suffer his
Death, because it is declared in the Scriptures that it must needs be so:
yet notwithstanding the use of this Doctrine is more general, namely, that
the Scripture is fete to bridle and tame the lasciviousness of the Fleashe:
because to this end God doothe show unto us what does please him, that he
might keep us in the obedience of his will. Therefore S. Paul attributethe
these parts, as proper to the Scripture, namely, (...). 15.
to bring us patience, and consolation in adversity, that we might have hope.
By the words of Luke it should seem, that Christ more shortly reproved
his Disciples, saying: Suffer ye thus far forth: but notwithstanding here
he does sharply inueighe against their boldness, because they went about
a damnable deed: howebeit he does therewith put them in hope of pardon, if
they forsaking their wicked rashness, burst out no further. The Euangeliste
Luke also adds: And when he had touched his ear, he healed him.

Peter (as we said before) by his foolish and rash zeal, might have
brought dishonor, and perpetual infamy to Christ and his Doctrine. And
there is no doubt but that Satan by his subtiltye, went about to bring
everlasting reproach to the Gospel, as though Christ had used the
feloweshippe of quarrellers, and raysers of tumulte, to alter the state of
things. This therefore seems to be the cause, why Christ healed the Wound
which Peter had geeuen to Malchus. But the enemies were blind, and
insensible myraculously, which were nothing moved by the sight of so
wonderful a Miracle.

Notwithstanding it is less marvel that they did not behoulde the power of
Christ in an other man: when they being cast to the ground with his voice,
ceased not to forsake their madness This is that Spirit of madness with the
which Satan does bereue, and bewitche the senses of those which are his,
when they are blinded of the Lord. But specially in the Servant which was
healed we have a notable example of ingratitude: for he was not helped by the
divine power of Christ to turn from his wickedness and repent: neither was he
converted by the benifite, of an enemy to becomme a Disciple. Foolishelye do
certain Monks interpret this place, saying that he was healed also in mind,
lest the work of Christ should be imperfite: as though in deed the
goodness of God does not daily extend it self even to those that are
unworthy thereof. A. Do we not read that Christ healed ten Leapers with
his word, Luke 17.
of the which ten, there was but only one that returned to give thanks,
and the same was a Samaritane?

55. In the same hour said Jesus unto the multitude: ye be comme out as it
were unto a thief, with Swords and Staves for to take me. I sat daily with
you, teachinge in the Temple, and ye took me not.

In the same hour C. Christ here compares their handlinge of him, to the
catchinge of a thief, which being boulde and desperate, cannot be taken of
one man. Bu. By the which he declares that these wicked ones do unto him
great and manifest injury, which upon spite and mere envy came to take him
with such great preparation: for this is the meaning of his words. What
need had you to come against me with such great force of weapons, as
though some thief should be taken? For ye invade me as if I were a thief,
and a disturber of the peace.

C. But trewely I always walked amongeste you, as a naked man without weapon,
in peace and quietness: when I taught in the Temple, ye might easily have
taken me without any soldiers. M. Hereby we learn that it is the part of a
Christian man, how so ever he be prepared to the Cross, to declare his
innocence, Luke 20. Math. 23.
when he sees that the same is craftily accused. I sat daily with you
teaching Hereby it appears that they did use to sit teachinge in those
days. I was (says he) daily conuersante in the Temple, not with an host, or
band of men, but teachinge: I have given you no occasion of this matter. Note
this word, Daily, and consider how he was always occupied in teachinge his
Fathers will. In the day time he taught in the Temple, Luke 21.
and in the night he went to Mount Oliuet, And ye took me not. M. The
Evangelist Luke has: And ye stretched forth no hands against me. Christ
says not here, And ye went not about to take me, John. 7.
but, And ye took me not. For they had oftentimes gonne about to take him,
but his hour was not then comme. And behoulde how privily he puttethe them in
mind of that deed, whereof S. John makethe mention in the 44. verse of the
foresaid chapter. The Servants of the Hye Priests were sent to take the
Lord in the Temple. They found him teachinge, they heard him, and being
amazed, went their way. Being asked of the priests, why they had not
brought him: they made answer: Never man spoke as this man does. The very
same therefore, when they came to take Christ, are very well admonished of
this deed. As if he should say: Why did ye not take me in the Temple? Ye
heard me, and were amazed: in so much that ye thought it not meet to lay
hands on me: can I not now also escape, if I would?

C. And although he does complain of their malice, because they did
violentlye comme upon him, as upon a seditious man? yet notwithstanding he
does again prick their conscience, because a Traitor being their guide,
they comme not but with fear, and many signs of distruste.

56. But all this is done, that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be
fulfilled. Then all the Disciples forsook him, and fled.

But all this is done that the Scriptures C. Mark and Luke seem to write
somewhat otherwise. For that which Mathewe recites in his own person,
Mark seems to attribute unto Christ. A. For there Christ seems to speak
thus: I was daily with you, teaching in the Temple, and ye took me not. But al
these things are done, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled. C. The
Euangeliste Luke also uses other words then do either of the other two: for
he has: But this is even your very hour and the power of darkness.
Notwithstanding the purpose of the Holy Ghost is sure and certain, that what
so ever the wicked went about, there was nothing at all done without the
will and providence of God. For as it is said before, God did affirm nothing
by his Prophets, but that which he had determined with him self. A. That
therefore which is spoken here, has this sense and meaning. C. In that now
ye wax mad against me, and lay hands on me it comes not therefore so to
pass, because ye are of greater power now, then ye were when I lived
quietely among you, teaching in the Temple: but this comes to pass by the
permissio^ and providence of my Father, whose will is, that I should be taken
of you this hour. Now Satan which is the prince of darkness, has gotten
power to afflicte me.

Here therefore first of all we are taught, that although Satan too rejoice
and tryumphe, with all the wicked ones, at their pleasure, with unbridled
license: yet notwithstanding the hand of the Lord shall always reign, that
he may lead them against their wills, whither soever he will.



^criptures (...) fulfilled.
M. We must note also that the Scriptures are said here, the second time to
be fulfilled of necessity: whereby we do see, that the verity of the holy
Scriptures is so great, that they could not vanishe away for Christ's sake,
but it was necessary, what so ever the Holy Ghost had foreshewed, should be
fulfilled.

C. Furthermore, we must know that Christ spoke thus, to take away offense,
which otherwise had not a little troubled the weak, when they should see him
so contumeliously to be vexed. Howebeit, he meante not only to provide hereby
for the Disciples, but also to beat down the pride of his enemies, least they
should tryumphe, as men that had gotten the victory. And therefore in Luke he
says that is their time. By the which he declares, that this liberty is
granted unto them of the Lord, but for a short time. And the power of
Darkness, is taken for the power of the Devil. A. Of the which S. Paul
writethe thus: ^^es. 6.
We strive not against fleashe and blood, but against Rule, against Powers,
against Lords of the World, even Gouerners of the Darkness of this world,
against Spiritual craftines in Heavenly things. C. This word therefore was of
no small force to overthrow the enemies of Christ. For how so ever they extol
them selves, Christ notwithstanding teaches that they are nothing but the
mansion places of Satan. As if he should say, My Father has granted this
thing to Satan (whom ye serve) that he should afflicte me: otherwise your
practices were in vain. And hereuppon we have to learn, that al things are
in the hand of God, and that our enemies can do nothing unto us, but by his
permission and will. Then all the Disciples forsook him, Bu. They which
before would dye in haste, are now with more speed glad to run away. C
Whereby again we may gather, how mutche more ready they were rashely to
fight, then to follow their master. Even so we are too bold when we should
not, and when we should be bold in deed, we show our selves to be cowardes.

If it be to fight, we are by and by very rash: but when Christ would have
us his companions, and partetakers of his Passions, not one of us then will
stir a foot. Let us hereby learn the truth of Christ: for he said before
that it was written, I will smite the Sheepehearde, and the sheep shall be
scattered abroad. Furthermore, let us note that no man can bear the Cross
for the Name of Christ, except he have first received power from Heaven to
bear the same: which is only given when we must suffer. This was not a
time of Fight, but of Flighte: and therefore they flee. But when God had
appointed their time to suffer, they stood to it strongely in deed to the
end. Wherefore let us judge of no man by one Flighte, because we know not
what fortitude the Lord will give to the godly, after true runninge away. A.
S. John says that Christ added, saying: If ye seek me therefore, let these
go their way: that the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke: Of them
which thou gave me, I have not lost one. Mark also makes mention of a
certain young man which followed Christ, being clothed in Linen upon the
bare, who being despoyled thereof by the Soldiers, ran away naked. This
young man is thought of some to be S. John. But they which so think, have no
probable reason to lead them thereunto. It is rather likely, that it was some
one that bare good affection unto Christ, who hearing of the tumult that was
in the night to catch Jesus, Mar 14.
came out of his bed, and ran without his clothes in haste with a sheet,
or sum other white linen clothe about him to cover his shame, either
because he would disclose this Conspiracye unto Christ, or else to aid him
the best he could.

57. And they took Jesus, and led him to Caiphas the Hie Priest, where the
Scribes and the Elders were assembled And they took Jesus, C. S. John says,
that they took him, and bound him. Here therefore, that the stombling block
of the Cross may be taken away, we must consider the profit that Christ by
the abasinge of him self brought unto us: for so it will comme to pass, that
the inspeakeable goodness of GOD, and the efficacy of his grace, shall
abolishe and put away by the brightenesse thereof, what so ever is deformed,
odious, and bitter therein. The Son of God to be taken, overcome, and bound,
was filthy, and unseemly, according to the fleashe: but truly when we weighe
and consider that we by his bonds are loosed from the tyranny of the Devil,
and from the debt dew for sin, the stomblinge block is not only taken
away, at the which our faith does stagger, but also instead thereof, the
admiration of the wonderful grace of God does succeed and comme: who
esteemed our deliverance so much, that he gave his only begotten Son to be
bound of the wicked.

This also shall be unto us a pledge and token in the love of Christ toward
us, in that he spared not him self, but willingely suffered him self to be
bound, that he might deliver our souls from bonds that were worse.

And led him to Caiphas: C. S. John says, that Christ was first led to
Anna. This thing the other two Evangelists pretermitte, because it makes
not much to the effect of the Hystorye: for there was nothing done there
worthy of memory. For where as men commonly say that Peter forswore him self
in the House of Anna, it is not so. Peradventure the commodiousnes of the place
caused the Jews to put Christ into the house of Anna, until the Hie Priest
called a Council. The Hie Priests C. Although the greater jurisdiction were
taken away from the Jews, yet notwithstanding there remained part of that
Judgment, Deuteronomy. 17.
which the Law geuethe unto the Hie Priest. So that a little chastisinge was
leafte, though the mere and sole Gouernemente were gonne. Hereuppon it came
to pass that Christ was leadde unto the Hye Priest to be examined: not that
he should there receive his last Judgment, or Sentence of Death at the
Tribunal Seat: but that he being first pressed with his Judgment, might
afterward be brought before the Deputye, by the Priests. Joseph. ^ 18.
Cayphas was also called Josephus, who (as Josephus the Hystoriographer says)
was made Hye Priest by Valerius Gratus, Lieuetenant or Deputy of Judea, when
as Simon the son of Canithus, was displaced from that Honor. But the
Syrname is only put of the Evangelists, because peradventure it was then more
commonly known, then any other. And where as John says that Caiphas was his
priest the same year, he means not that the Office of the Hie Priest, was
but from year to year (which many falsely supposed) but that Cayphas was the
Hye Priest at that time: the which ways evidently appear by Josephus. It was
a Perpetual honor by the Commandment of the Law, that it might not be
endued but by death: but Ambition and Discordes brought to pass, that the
Roman Maiestrates would deprive one Hye Priest of his Office, and set up an
other, either for Money, or for Favor, at their pleasure. Even so Vitellus
deprived Caiphas, whom Ionathas the Son of Anna succeeded.

Where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled. M. Although Caiphas were
no true Hye Priest, which boughte his Office for money against the Law of
God, yet notwithstanding, because like will to like, he was allowed, and
reverenced of the Scribes, and Senioures of the people, of whom he should
have been rejected.

The Hye Priest was a mortal enimye unto Christ, because he feared the loss
of his Office, which cost him a great Sum of money. The rest were
partetakers of the Priests gaynes.

Therefore, as things were corrupted in this Iewishe Priestehoode, even so all
men conspired against Christ, and gathered a Council how they might
destroy him, and all to preserve the Priestely Kingedome: and for this
purpose, Christ beeinge taken, they came together to the Hye Priest.

Here trewely is set before our eyes a fearful, and horrible spectacle:
For at that time, neither the Temple of God, neither the Lawful Woorshippe,
nor the Face, or Image of the Church was any where else, sauinge at Jerusalem:
the Hye Priest was a Type, and Figure of the only Mediatoure between God and
Man: They which were gathered together at this Council, did represente the
whole Church of God: yet notwithstanding they all conspired together to
destroy Christ, the only hope of Salvation.

^n 8.
But because it was foreshewed by the Testimony of David, that the Stoane,
which was cast aside of the Builders, should be nevertheless the head
stoane of the Corner: and because in like manner it was prophesied by Esaias,
that the Lord should be a Stoane of Defense, ^y, 8.
at the which the people of Israel should stomble: it was very well provided
for of the Lord, least such Impietye of men, should trouble the minds of
the Faithefull.

58. But Peter followed him a far of, unto the Pallaice of the Hie Priest,
and went in, and sat with the Servants to see the end.

But Peter follovved a far of. M, Here the Euangeliste makes a way to speak
of the Denial which Peter made of his master. By the feruente zeal and love
which he bare to the Lord, he followed him, when the rest fleadde, but a
far of: for he was afraid. For the earneste affection of the mind toward
Christ, and the fear of danger, are oftentimes joined together in a Godly
man.

Unto the Pallaice of the Hye Priest: How he came into the Pallaice, S. John
shewethe by these words: And Simon Peter followed Jesus, ^n. 18.
and so did an other Disciple: that Disciple was known unto the Hie Priest,
and went in with Jesus into the Pallaice of the Hie Priest. But Peter stood
at the Door without. Then went out that other Disciple (which was known
unto the Hye Priest) and spoke to the Damsel that kept the door, and brought
in Peter.

Sum were deceived by a light conjecture: which thought that this Disciple
was John: because he always in his Gospel speakethe of him self, omitting
his name.

But how should John comme to be acquainted with the proud hie Priest,
which was a poor Fisher? And how could he frequente the House of the Hie
Priest, when he was always in the company of Christ? It is more likely that
he was none of the Twelve: but was called a Disciple, because he embraced the
Doctrine of the Son of God. And S. John is not curious in disposinge, and
compactinge the Historye: because he thought it sufficient to gather a brief
sum. For after he has declared, how Peter denied Christ once, he
bryngethe in certain other things: and after that, he retournethe to the
other two Denyalles.

And hereuppon it came to pass, that the negligente Reader gathered, that the
First Denial was in the House of Anna: But the words geeue no such
occasion, but do rather plainly express that it was the Damsel of the Hye
Priest, which urged Peter to deny Christ.

We must note therefore, that when Christ was brought unto the Hye Priest,
all men were not admitted to comme in, but that Disciple, which was known,
obtained leave for Peter.

Now there is no doubt, but that they both of a godly love followed Christ.
But seeinge Christ affyrmed that he would spare Peter, and the rest, it had
been mutche more profitable for them to sighe, and pray in sum secret
corner, then to comme forth in the open sight of men, saying they were of
no better strength.

But Peter above the rest, might have absented him self, as better shall
appear. For now he takes that upon him, of the which Christ before had
discharged him: But he failethe in the Confession of the Faith, in the which,
(as he said before) he would stand, to the Death.

C. Wherefore he did rashely, when he came into the Palace of the Hie Priest,
A. saying the Lord had said before: Whither I go, John. 13.
thou canste not follow me now, but thou shalt follow me hereafter. And
thus it commethe oftentimes to pass, that the Faithful cast them selves into
Temptation, by the show of Virtue. Wherefore we must pray unto the Lord,
that he will stay us with the bridle of his Spirit, least we passinge our
bounds, he pounished for the same. We must also pray unto him, so often as
we take any thing in hand, least he suffer us to fall in the middeste of
our enterprise, or in the beginning of our work, but that he will give us
strength and ability from heaven, to the end.

The fealynge of our infirmitye ought not to stay us from taking that in
hand, whereunto the Lord doothe call us: but it ought rather to restrain
our rashenesse, least we go beyond our calling: It should also stir
us up to Prayer, that God, which gave us power to begin well, will also give
grace to persevere, and go forewarde.

And sat with the Servants to see the end. A. Luke says, that he sat
with them by the fire, as appears by these words: And when they had
kindeled a fire in the midst of the Pallaice, Luke 22.
and were set down together, Peter also sat down among them.

To see the end. Be oulde here the End why Peter followed Christ, namely
that he might see what would becomme of him. This Narration as concerning
Peter which our Evangelist Matthew has here begone, is ended in the three
score and nienth verse folowinge. In the mean time he writethe what was done
unto Christ by Caiphas.

59 The Chief Priests, and the Elders, and all the Council sought False
witness against Jesus, for to put him to Death.

The Chief Priests, and the Elders, M. Mathewe said before, that the
Scribes, and Elders of the people were gathered together in the House of
Cayphas. Now he describethe wherefore they were gathered together, namely to
consulte by a common Council about the Death of Christ.

Sought False witness. C. By these words the Evangelists do note, that
the Priests, Scribes, and Elders of the people, went about nothing les,
then to enquire of the cause, that the matter beeinge found out, they might
minister unto him justice: for they had fully determined before to destroy
Christ and now only they seek how to oppress him. And it cannot be that
equity shall take any place, when the cause is not first known. Their False,
and wicked Crueltye bewraiethe it self, in that they seek for False
Witnesses. A. S. John says, that Christ was demanded as concerning his
Disciples, and his Doctrine by the hie Priest: the which the other three have
omitted.

60. But they found none: yea, when many False VVitnesses came, yet found
they none. At the last came two False VVitnesses, and said:

But they found none. B, They did not gather a Council, that the cause of
Christ might be known, and that truth might take place, but only to condemn
him by False Testimony, and to deliver him up to Pilate to be slain. C. In
the which they do notably declare their Crueltye. And, where as they beeinge
disappointed of their hope, do persiste notwithstanding in their wicked
purpose, we may the better perceive their blind obstinacy. Therefore in
that blind madness, the Innocence of the Son of God did shine
notwithstanding, that ye Devils them selves might know that an Innocent was put
to death. B. For the Lord was so clear, not only from all evil, but also
from all show of Evil, that ye whole counsel could find no false witness
to come in against him, that they might have any likelihoode, or show of Truth.

Chiefly we must note this Innocence of Christ, not so mutche in this
present Public Action, as in that also which Pilate did, as hereafter
followethe: I say we must note this as the special Head of our Salvation,
and principal place and fruit of the Lords Passion. For it was meet that
we should have such a Hye Priest, ^b 7. Co^. 5.
which is Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and separated from Sins, that we
through him might be made the Righteousness which is allowed of God. S. Mark
has: Many bare False Witness against him, but their witnesses agreed not
together.

At the last came in two False A. False Testimonies of other, here mentioned
by Mathewe, are not spoken of by the other Evangelists, but are simply
condemned of Falsehoode and vanity: and the Testimonye of these men is
therefore brought forth, because it has sum show of Truth.

61. This Fellow said: I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build
it again in three days.

This Fellow said: How are these called False Witnesses, seeinge we
read, that they said nothing, but that which Christ spoke.

C. But we must note that they are called False Witnesses, ^lse witness
not only which bring forth a Lie made of nothing, but also which do
cauellingly peruerte those things, which were trewely spoken, and wreste them
to a Fault: Of the which matter, we have here an example, as concerning the
Ruin, and New Buildinge again of the Temple.

^^hn. 2.
Christ truly said, that when they had destroyed the Temple of his Body, he
would raise it again in three Days. So that now, the False Witnesses do
not devise a new Lie, but do deprave, and misconstrue his words, as though
he would have used sum Legierdumaine, or crafty conueiance in building the
Temple. For he said not, I can destroy or, I will destroy: but Christ
said: Destroy ye, or if ye do destroy, attributing the destruction of the
Temple unto them, not to him self. Furthermore, he said not: This Temple made
with hands: but they being superstitious, divised it, esteeminge the Temple
made of Stoane, to be more excellent, and Holy, then the Spiritual Temple,
which is a faithful Soul. And of that superstition spronge that Iewishe
cruelty, which not only Christ fealt, but the Prophets also, and S Steven.
Act. 6.
The same Superstition also reigns at this day.

To conclude, he could not by right be called the Destroyer of the Temple of
God, which destroyed not the Temple, to the end it might lie waste, but that
it might be better, then it was before.

If they did not believe that he could make it better, why did they believe yt he
could destroy it in three days, saying the same also was impossible to man.
Wherefore Mark says, But yet their Witnesses agreed not together.

62. And the Chief Priest arose, and said unto him: Answearest thou nothing?
Why do these bear Witness against thee?

And the Chief Priest arose, M. Although this Testimonye was not sufficient
to bring Condemnation, yet notwithstanding the Hie Priest, for too mutche
desire that he had to kille Christ, could not pretermitte this with
silence, but risinge in his Authority, goes about to exaggerate the matter,
and to make it more heinous.

C. But it is certain that Christ held his peace, when False Witnesses
pressed him, not only because they were unworthy of Confutation, but also
because he did not now seek to be loused, knowinge that his hour was comme:
Notwithstanding, Cayphas tryumphethe because of his silence, as though he
held his peace, because he was ouercomme, even as they do, whose Consciences
accuse them.

But the wickedness of Caiphas was the more, in that he dissemblethe Christ
not to be without fault, because false Witnesses do stand against him. For
that is the meaning of this question.

Why do these bear witness against thee? As if he had said: How comes
it to pass that these men comme against thee, but only that Conscience
causes them? Neither are they thine enemies without a cause. M. What notable
wickedness, and never heard of heretofore, is that which these men lay to
thy charge? C. This doothe he speak impudentely, as though he knew not that
they were subourned, and craftily colored, for this matter. M. Cayphas trewely
here shows him self to be an unjust Judge, in that he does amplify the
Accusation against an Innocente: and in that by his Authority he goethe
about to discourage, and oppress the Accused through fear.

63 But Jesus held his peace. And the Chief Priest answered, and said unto
him: I charge the by the Living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be
Christ, the Son of God?

But Jesus held his peace. M. Christ held his peace again (when as
notwithstanding he had a most certain and ready Defense. For he knew
this, that they went about to take away al Defense from him: that sum what
might be colourably pretended to his Condemnation. Again, this Accusation was
so impudente, that the very Enimyes thought it not sufficient to bring that
to pass, which they sought for whereupon they did not prosecute the same.
Furthermore, he thought not his Enimyes worthy to hear any purgation of his
Innocencye against such impudente Declarations.

C. Last of all we must note, what person the Lord doothe represente
here: he stood not before the Hie Priest, to defend his own cause, but that
he might suffer Death for us. It was meet therefore, that Christ, after
this manner should be silente, and beeinge geeuen to be a Sacrifice, to cast
away all care of his own Defense: the which thing is to be noted in the
whole Historye. For he held his peace also before Pilate, knowinge what was
commanded unto him of the Father. He having done the Office of a Teacher,
there remained nothing, but that he should be coumpted among the wicked: it
became him to houlde his peace at al reproaches: notwithstanding, the cause of
his silence was, that he might be evil entreated for us.

I charge thee by the Living God, A. The Evangelists Mark has: And the Hie
Priest asked him again, saieinge: Art thou Christ, the Son of the Living
God? C. The Hye Priest thought that this one fault was sufficient to
condemn Christ, if that he professed him self to be Christ. But truly
saying they all boasted that they looked for Redemption by Christ, they should
have first demanded whether it were so, or no. They durst not deny that
there should be no Christ, by whose hand the people should be delivered:
Christ comes for the into the midst, with the Title of Christ: Why do
they not give regard to the matter it self? Why do they not examyne the
signs, whereby they might have true Judgment? But because they had once
determined to destroy Christ, they are content with this pretense of Sacrilege,
that he took upon him the glory of the Deity. And yet notwithstanding Caiphas
taking an oath, does so examinate and beat down the matter, as though the matter
being evident, he were ready to give place. In the mean time his mind was
full stufte with hatred, and contempt of Christ, and so blinded with Pride and
Ambition, that so soon as the matter was not denied, he thought he had the
just cause of Damnation in his own hand, without any further inquisition of
Right.

C. Heretofore we see that the wicked will never make an end, until they have
oppressed Innocente men.

Furthermore by the words of Caiphas we may gather, that the City of the
Messiah, was then common among the Jews, in so much that they called him the
Son of God. And trewelye they knew by the testimonies of the Scripture, that
he was both the Son of God, and the Son of David also.

And Caiphas seemethe to use this Epithete, or name of the Son of God, either
to terrify Christ, or else to increase his envy: as if he had said: Behoulde
whereunto thou art comme: For thou canste not say, that thou art Christ,
but thou dooste also arrogate the Name of the Son of God, which Name the
Scripture gives unto him.

M. Notwithstanding the wicked Hye Priest abused the Name of the Living God:
For he sought not for the Treuthe, which he loved not, but for Reproach.

Even so also we read of Achab, how be charged Mycheas the Prophet to tell
him nothing, but that which was true: when as notwithstanding he sought
not for the Truethe, but to cavil.

Such is the nature of the wicked and Hypocrites. King. 22.
A. As they do daily know by experience, which have to do with ungodly
Flatterers of the Romish Antichriste.

67. Jesus says unto him: Thou haste said. Nevertheless I say unto you:
hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man, sittinge on the Right hand of
Power, and coming in the clouds of the Sky.

Jesus says unto him: M. Christ houldethe his peace no more: but for the
reverence of the name of God, he tells the truth, of the which he was asked,
and straitely charged, (although he knew that they sought an other matter
then the Truth) least he might seem, in contemnynge that Charge, neither to
fear God, or Man, nor to be touched with any zeal.

How be it, the wicked must not be always answered, although they charge us
a thousand times by the Name of the Lyuinge God: But we must dilygentely
take heed that we houlde not our peace, when we see that the Glory of God
may be endammaged thereby, but to give sum sign of reverence, least we be
thought to be without God. Insteade of, Thou haste said: the Euangeliste
Mark has: I am.

C. The Euangeliste Luke bringethe in an other Answer, by the which Christ
touchethe the malice of the Hye Priest: Ye will not believe (says he) if I
tell you. By the which words he declares, that although he should prove
him self to be Christ a hundred times, yet notwithstanding it should
nothing at all profit the obstinate: For, they had not only heard, but
had seen with their eyes the Miracles, which had been sufficient to prove
his Heavenly and Divine Power, although he had held his peace, and to cause
them also to cry: This is the Redeemer, which was promised to us long ago.
Jesus therefore affirmethe him self to be Christ, not to avoid his Death,
but rather to inflame the rage of his enemies against him.

Nevertheless I say unto you, M. This sentence comprehends a horrible
threatenynge, that hereafter they should have experience of the Truth it
self, which now they would not believe, but blasphemed.

C. For, because he was then under a filthye and base Form, he says, that
he shall comme at the last in his time, with Kingely Majesty, that they may
fear the Judge, whom they cannot now abide to acknowledge the author of
Salvation.

M. Therefore he says not simplye: Hereafter the Son of Man shall sit:
but he says: Nevertheless I say unto you. As if he should say: Ye do
not now believe me. Nevertheless I say unto you, (for so much as thou dooste
adjure and charge me by the Living God, to tell whether I am Christ, or no)
that hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man, whom now ye despise as an
abiecte, to sit at the Right Hand of Power, indewed with Divine Majesty to
reign for ever: and to comme at the length in the Clouds of Heaven to judge
the reprobate. These things (I say) after this shall ye see, what so ever ye
judge of me now.

To this effect also it doothe pertain, that he doothe not only say: Ye
shall see the Son of Man on the Right hand of God: but, On the right
hand of Gods Power: that he might oppose, or set the power of God,
against the base Form and show of Servitude, which he then had on, and
for the which he was despised.

We read not here, At the right hand of Gods Power: but, On the Right
hand of Power. Yet notwithstanding we must in sense, add this word, God,
Luke 22.
as appearethe by the words of Luke. C. The sum and effect of his Word
is, that they are greatly deceived, if they judge of him according to the
present state, and outward appearance: because he must be humbled and
brought, as it were, to nothing, before his coming, which should be with
great majesty and power.

For this word, After this, doothe put a difference between his First, and
Secone Coming, and doothe join with it also two places of Scripture. For as
concerning his sittinge at the right Hand of the Father, the Prophet David
speaks thus. The Lord said unto my Lord, Psalm. 110.
sit thou on my Right Hand, until I make thine Enimyes thy Foot Stool.

And the Prophet Daniell prophesiethe thus of his coming: I saw in a Vision
by night, Daniel. 7.
and behoulde there came One in the Clouds of Heaven, like the Son of Man,
which went unto the Oulde Aged, before whom they brought him. Then gave he him
power, and dignity Regal, that all the people, Tribes, and Tongues should
serve him. His Power is an everlasting Power, which shall never be put down:
and his Kingdom endurethe incorrupt. All the wiche things the Angel Gabriel
witnessed to belong unto Christ. Luk 1.


M. To sit at the Right Hand of the Power of God, is to have all power. C.
Christ therefore is said to sit at the Right Hand of the Father, because
he beeinge made the King of all Kings, governs the whole world in his
name, even as if he received of him the Second Seat of Honor and Dignity.

Christ therefore sittethe at the Right Hand of the Father, because he is
his Vicare: and he is therefore called this Right Hand of Power, because God
does not now declare his Power, Math. ^
but by the hand of his Son, and will also by him comme to Judgment in the
Last day.

In the Clovvdes of the sky: M. Read the four and twentye Chapter going
before.

C. Here we may gather a very profitable Doctrine, which is general. For
whereof comes it that the wicked are so ready to rebel? but only because
Christ Jesus Crucified, is of no Price, or estimation with them. Therefore
they must be put in mind of the horrible Judgment, because they will not
foresake their insensible dullness, and careless negligence.

and although they do make a ieste, as of a Fable, of that which is spoken
of the Coming of Christ that shall be, yet notwithstanding the Judge doothe
not call them to his Tribunal Seat in vain, by his Gospel: for thereby
they are made void of all excuse.

65. Then the Hye Priest rent his clouthes, saieinge: He has spoken
Blasphemye: what need we of any more VVitnesses? Behoulde now ye have heard
his Blasphemye.

Then the Hie Priest rent his clothes, Bu. The Hye Priest having gotten
that which he sought for, rose out of his Chair, not so much for the love
of Godliness, as for joy that he had gotten his pray: and to the end he
might make the fault of Christ more heinous, he rent his Garments under a
pretense of singular zeal.

M. Feininge that he could not hence this Blasphemye for very gri^fe of
heart. This was a common manner among the Jews, as well to the Godly, as to
Hypocrites.

As concerning that which Hypocrites used, the Prophet Ioell says: Joel. 2.
Rent your hearts, and not your Garments. As concerning that which the
Godly used, S. Luke makes mention, speaking of Barnabas, and Paul: We read
also that David rent his clothes. ^ct. 14. ^ King. 1.3. ^d. 13. ^ King. 2.
^euit. 21.
And also we reed that the Prophet Elizeus did the like: and diverse others.
Although therefore there was a commandment given that the hye priest
should not rent his clothes, yet notwithstanding this hipocrite would do it
to aggrauate the cause of Christ, as though it were some greuouse matter that
caused the hye Priest to tear his clothes whereby men might think that
Christ had committed some notable offense. He has spoken blasphemy. They cried
that he had blasphemed the name of God because he reported himself to be
Christ, and that therefore he ought to dye according to the law. What need
we of any mo. C Hereby we perceive, ^euiti. 14.
that the miracles by the which Christ declared his power had profited these
wicked ones nothing at al. But it is no merueile that the sone of God was
contemned under the base form of a seruante, by them, who were toutched with
no care of the promised salvation For except they had been altogether void of
the sense and felinge of godliness they would in so lamentable estate, have had
careful regard to the redemer. But now omitting all inquisition and seeking
after the same, being offered unto them, do they not so much as in the^ is,
extinguishe all the promises of God And first of al truly the hye priste
pronounces Christ to be a blasphemer, and then the rest subscribe to the
same. And also ye tearing of his garments does plainly declare how boldly and
impudently the profane contemners of God do pretend a false zeal.

Behold now have ye heard of his Blasphemy. Bu. As if he should have said:
Hitherto we have bestowed much time in hering testimonys and in the examininge
of witneses: to what end now should thereby mo witneses? He himself shall
serve for many witneses: al ye have heard a blasphemous confession of his own
mouth. What there fore remains now but just judgment.

66. What think ye? They answered and said, he is worthy to dye,

M. Now he seeks to get the favor of the people. He asks other what they
think, as though he gave them liberty, when he himself already had pronounced
the sentence: or as though they were mete to judge right, which had already
fully determined in their hearts to put him to death.

He is worthy to dye. S. Mark has: And they all condemned him to be worthy
to death.

67. Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him with fistes: And other
smote him on his face.

Then did they spit in his face. C. Either the order in S. Luke is quight
disordered, or else the Lord suffered twyse so many reproaches. The which
latter seems more probable. Notwithstanding there is no doubt but that the
ministers did devise how they might more despightfully strike him and spit in
his face, after they saw that he was appointed to dye by the fore judgment of
the counsel. It was wonderful madness truly in ye priests, who handeled
Christ with so great cruelty, forgetting that they were Judges. He is thus
shamfully entreated, for the judgment yt they gave: for they thought that he
whom so great a potentate as the hie priste pronounced to be a blasphemer,
and an enemy unto God, was worthy of all reproach and ignominy: But thus ought
the Scripture of the Prophet be fulfilled, when it is said: I offer my back
unto ye smiters, Esaias. 50.
and my chikes to the nippers. I turn not my face from shame and spitting.
But let us note, yt he suffered these things for our sakes. For what are we
before God, so often as we behold our life, and consider what we want? If God
call us to judgment, with how much and how many reproaches shall we be
covered? But Christ took away this ignominy and reproach that there might
appear no blott or spot in us. Now for a time he executes not the office of a
teacher, but of a redemer. When he was sent to teach he faithfully discharged
his duty, and now diligently he fulfilleth the office of a rededemer, that as
a lamb he might be led to be slain. The Almighty God truly pronounced this
voice from heaven, saying, hear him, but if we compare the office of the
redemption with that, we shall find it much more excelent. Last of al, we
are admonished by the example of the Lord in this place, how many euels we
must suffer of the wicked and hypocrites. if we will follow our master

68. Saying, tell us thou Christ, who is he that smote thee.

M. The Evangelist saint Mark says that they did first cover his face.

The gift of Prophesy in Christ, so necessary for mortal men is derided, and
made a ieste. Therefore the miserable Jews are not without just cause left
altogether destitute of Prophets. They had also before time irreverently
handeled the word of prophesy: as Jeremy complains saying, And they cast ye
word of the Lord in my teeth and take me ever to the worste. Iere. 20.
C. But to this end al their mockes and iestes did te^de, namely, that there
was nothing more unmeet than that he should be the chief of all Prophets,
which having his face covered, could not arede and guess who it was that gave
him a blow on his face. But truly the providence of God did turn this
dallia^ce unto an other end: because the face of Christ being stricken with the
fiste, and defiled with spettell, God did repair and restore in us that Image,
which was corrupted and blotted out through sin.

69. But Peter sat without in the palace. And a damsel came to him, saying:
Thou also wast with Jesus of Galile.

But Peter sat without C. Now the Eua^geliste goes forward with the
narration of Peter, which he had begone before in ye 58. verse, after he had
declared what was done unto his Lord by Cayphas and his ministers. And the fall
of Peter which is here described, is a manifest example of our infirmity.
Moreover in his repentance we have a lively pattern of the goodness and mercy
of God, set before us. So that the history which is here declared of one
manne, does contain a general doctrine, and very profitable for the whole
Church, both to bring a careful fear to those that stand, and also to
lift up those that fall, by the hope and trust of pardone.

VVythout in the palace. A. That is to say, not within the vppermoste and
inward part of the house where Caiphas examined Christ, but in the lower
part namely in the palace. S. Mark has: And as Peter was beneath in the
palace.

And a damsel came to him Saint Mark says that this damsel belonged to
the hye Priste: Mar. 14. John 18.
and Saint John says that she was the dorekeper: and peradventure the same
that let him in.

C. Here therefore we see that there is no need of any great conflicte,
neither of great armis, or preparation, to overcome a man. For whosoever is
not stayed, and held up with the hand of God, falls by and by, at a small
pufte of wind, or at the falling of a leaf. Peter truly was no less
couragiouse and bold, than one of us, and even now declared no small token of
sloute mind: (howbeit with preposterous rashenes) yet notwithstanding he
looks not when he should be brought before the the tribunal seat of the
Judge, or when his enemies should seek his death: but being terrifyed at the
voice of a woman; he denies his master strait way: whereas before he thought
himself such a stout soldier, that he could not See overcome by death.

Let us remember therefore that we are so weak to sustain great force, that
in the only shadow of fight we fall. In peace and tranquillity, we are more
brag and bold then needs: But when we come to the trial, we show our
selves to be nothing but proud bo^sters: yea when Satan goes not about to
hurt us, even then also we imagine through vain fe^re before the time that
we are in great danger.

Saying, A. S. Mark and S. Luke have, When she saw Peter warminge himself,
she looks ^n him, and says.

Thou also vvast not Jesus of Galilae S. Mark has: VVast not thou also with
Jesus of Nazareth. And S John has: VVast not thou also one of this manes
Disciples? John. 1^


70. But he denied before them all saying: I wot nos what thou say.

But he denied The Euangeliste Luke has: But he denied him. C. Peter had
bosted before that he would stand as an invincible wrasteler in his masters
cause even to the death: but now at the voice of a poor wentche he is
terrifyed in so much that he gives over in the plain field. Behold here a
plain proof and trial of man's strength.

It is but a smoke truly what strength soever appears in man, which with a
blast of wind is by and by driven away. A man here filled not with virtue, but
with wind, promises to him self that he will easelye get the vyctory
against the whole world: But truly seeing only the shadow of his enemy, he
is made afraid by and by. C. So that God does iustlye recompense our distrust,
when he does despoyle us of al his power and virtue, that we might be afraid
of nothing, after we have cast away his fear. For if Peter had had in his
heart the sound and perfect fear of GOD, it should have been unto him a
strong and invincible bulwark whereas now he being naked and without all
defense, is very much afearde of no danger. Wherefore let us learn that we
are at no time, nor in no place strong without the Lord.

Before them all. C. This circonstance does make the falte more haynouse
because Peter in denyinge his master feareh not a great multitude of witneses.
And the holy Ghost thought good to express this, to the end the very sight
of men might stir us up to keep the confession of the says. For if we
deny Christ before the weak, because by our example they be shaken and
slide away, we do destroy so many souls as lies in us to destroy,

And if we do defraude Christ of his dew testimony before the wicked, and
aduersarys of the Gospel, we do make his holy name a jesting stock to the
to the whole world. To be short, as a strong and free confession does edify
and build all the Godly, and makes the wicked ashamed: even so the denial
and falling from the faith bringyngeth with it public ruin in the Church,
and the reproach of sound doctrine. Therefore, the more a man is in
estimation, the more let him take heed to himself, because he can not fall
from his degree, but he shall do the more hurt.

I vvot not what thou say. C. S. Mark and Saint Luke have: I know him
not, neither wot I what thou say.

This manner of denial does sufficiently declare that craft and subtilty does
profit such as are in misery nothing at all, which by delays, excuses, and
circonstances, seek to escape when they are called to give accounte of their
faith. Peter does not plainelye deny the whole doctrine of the Gospel: He
only denies that he knew the man: But because he does priuelye under the
parsone of Christ bury the light of the redemption offered, he is condemned
of foul and fylthy distruste.

He had heard a little before out of the mouth of the Lord that the
confession of faith was an acceptable sacrifyce unto God. Therefore that
denial is not to be excused, by the which GOD is robbed of his lawefull
woorship, and Christ of his dew honor. Let us know this therefore, that so
soon as men forsake the simple and true profession of Christ, he is
disapointed of his lawful testimony. He does not simplely answer to the
words of the maid, I was not with him: but I know not what thou say. He
knew well inoughe what the words of the maid mente: but to the end he
might avoid danger, and not deny by and by, he dissembled, ye he plainly
denied that he understood not what the damsel spoke.

We oftentimes being craftye do use this caution or prouiso, namely: Truth
can not always be spoken without danger? But this refuge pertayneth to
hypocrites and to such as are of corrupt disposition, not to seem to do the
thing, which in deed notwithstanding they are a doing. Saint Mark adds
to these things saying: And he went out into the porche and the cock crew.

71. When he was gone out into the porche an other wentche saw him, and
said unto them that were there: This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth.

When he was gone out into the porche. M. He seems to take heed unto
himself, because after the first temptacion he goes forth out of the
palace into the Porche: feellinge himself not to be in sauegarde in this
house of the hye Priest. He had done somewhat, if he had got him out of
the palace altogether: But he does nothing, which does not wholelye
withdraw himself from all occasion of evil. Peradventure he durst not
suddenly depart, although he went about to get away, least by his sodeyne
departing, he should with danger have bewrayed that, which before he
dissembled. M. This our Euangeliste says, that Peter went out into the
porche, in the which it is lykelye that the servants of the hye Priest had
made a fire, where at Peter warmed him self: or else that he entered into the
palace again. John. 18.
For Saint John writes thus: The servant and the ministers stood there
which had made a fire of coals, for it was cold, and they warmed them selves.

Peter also stood among them and warmed him. (...) After this he Describes
what Caiphas demanded of Christ, from the 19. verse unto the 25 verse: and
from this he retourneth to the second denial of Peter.

An other vventche savve him C. It may rather be gathered by ye words of
Mark, that it was the same damsel: for he makes no mention of any other. In
this notwithstanding there is no repugnancy or contrariety, because it is
probable that the same question which was demanded by one, was also demanded
by the rest, and affirmed to be true: yet, Saint John says, that this
question was not demanded by the damesell the second time, but by the company
of men that stood by: Whereby it is euidente that the voice which came from
the maid, was heard of those that stood by, who strayte way questioned with
Peter. Peter therefore was urged both of men and women.

This fellow was also with Jesus A. The Euangeliste S. Luke says: And
after a little while an other saw him, and said thou art also of them.

And Peter said: man I am not. But our Euangeliste says.

72. And again he denied with an oathe, saying: I do not know the man.

And again he denied. C. Horrible is the insensible dulnes of Peter, which
having denied his master, is not only moved with no repentance, but also
hardens himself with liberty.

If every man had asked him in order, he would have made no stay to deny
him a thousand times. Peter deni^ Christ.
We must note the circonstance which our Euangeliste expresses here,
namelye, that after he could not escape away by one simple denial, he does
with an oathe double the falte, and after that, being more vehement urged, he
began to curse. Whereby we gather that when the sinner has once gone
forward in sin, he is by and by carried from evil so worse: euenso they
which begin with small faltes do after that fall hedlonge into fylthy
sins, which at the first they abhorred. This happens daily unto many:
in the beginning the fall shall not be so great, but afterward comes a
custom, when the conscience is nusled and brought a sleep. And this is the
just vengeance of God, that so soon as we are deprived of the help of the
holy Ghost, Satan at the last rules with violence, in somuche that we
being addicted unto him wholye, he caryeth us hither and thither at his
pleasure. But this thing happens specially in the denial of the faith:
because when one through fear of the cross has swerued from the pure
profession of the Gospel if he see that the enemies be not yet satisfied, he
goes farther: and that which he durst not purelye confess, he utterly
forsweareth without any clokynge of the matter.

I do not know the man M. He denies more than was needful: For saying it
was only said unto him, Thou was with him, it had been sufficient to
answer that he had not ben one of his company: and not to add that he knew
him never: ye, and being not content with this he adds an oathe also. C.
This therefore is to be noted, that Peter fell almost three times in a moment.
Whereby we have to learn how slyppery and ready we are to fall, so often as
Satan dryueth us forewarde: and that continuallye except the Lord do houlde
us up with his hand. After that the force of the spirit of Grace was
extinguished in Peter, if he had been asked of Christ a hondered times, he
was ready a hondered times do deny him.

And although it was a foul thing in him to fall thryse, yet notwithstanding
the Lord spared him, restraining the tongues of the enemies, least they
should move any more occasion. Euenso it is necessaryd that he brydell Satan
daily, least he ouerwhelme us with an innumerable sort of te^ptatio^s. For
saying he ceasseth not by many practices to assalte us except the Lord having
regard to our infirmity do brydell the force of his rage, we should strive
with a huge heap of temptations. So that in this point we must extol and
magnifye the mercy of God, because he suffers not the hondereth part of
our enemies rage to fall upon us.

73. And after a while came they that stood by and said unto Peter, surely
thou art even one of them for thy speech bewrays thee.

And after a while A. Saint Luke expounds this After a while, saying. And
about the space of an hour after C. This is the third denial, by the the
which the unfaithfulness of Peter toward his master burste forth to the
full. For being not contented with an oathe, he falls to curssinge and
bannynge, by the which he gives his body and soul to destruction.

For he wishes the curse of GOD to fall upon him if he he knew Christ.

Came they that stood by A. Saint Luke makes mention but of one only,
saying: And an other affirmed saying: Verily this fellow was with him?

And Saint John says that one of the servant of the hye Priest (his
cosine whose ear Peter smote of) said unto him: did not I see thee in the
Garden with him? All these seem with one consent to cast Peter in the teeth
that he was one of Christ's company, and to make exclamation of it, that they
might oppress him.

For thy speech bevvrayeth thee Namelye that thou art of Galile, as was this
Jesus also.

For Saint Luke says that some of them said unto him: Verily this fellow
was with him, for he his of Galile. And the Damsel had said: Wast not thou
with Jesus of Galile.

Saint Mark has: And thy speech agrees thereto.

74. Than began he to curse and to swear, that he knew not the man. And
immediately the cock crewe.

Then began he to curse and to svvear. C. Peter being overcome with so many
acclamations, and outcryes against him, began to curse and to swear that he
knew not the man. The which curse was as much as if he hod said: God
destroy me if I know him.

Wherefore so much the more the goodness of God is to be wondered at, which
lifted up, and healed the Disciple from such mortal destruction. But the
Lord thought good in so excellent a person, to set forth an excellent
documente or lesson, that it might be the more excellent, and better esteemed
in the Church. No forte urged Peter so to forswere himself, sauinge that he
was forsaken of the Lord: and Satan also on the contrary part ceased not by
his endeavor to help him forewarde.

Halas how little or nothing is our strength? Let us therefore hereby learn
to promise nothing unto our selves, but wholely to depend upon God.

Moreover this place teaches that it is not by and by blapsemye against the
spirit, if any man falling through the infirmitye of the flesh, deny the
truethe which he knows. Peter truly had heard out of the mouth of the
Lord how detestable falsehoode was, to deny him before men: And what horrible
vengeance remains for them before God and his Angels, which for the
cowardly fear of the cross, do forsake the confession of the faith. Now
therefore he being before admonished, and knowing these things, casts
himself hedlong into mischefe: yet notwithstanding afterward obtained
pardone: whereupon it follows that he rather sinned of infirmity than by
incurable wyckednes. For he would willinglye have showed the duty of a
Disciple toward Christ, had not the sparks of true affection ben
extinguished through fear.

And immediately the tocke crevve. A. Mark and Luke have: And immediatlye whily
he yet spoke the cock crew.

For so soon as he was gone out into ye porche the cock crewe. S. John
has: Peter therefore denied again, and by and by the cock crewe.

And the Evangelists do therefore make mention of the crowing of the Cock, to
the end we might know, that Peter was admonished from above, even in the
very moment. And therefore our Euangeliste adds saying.

75. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him before the
cock crewe, thou shalt deny me thryse. And he went out, and wept bitterly.

And Peter remembered. C. When the cock crewe, Christ also looked upon Peter,
as witnesses Saint Luke saying. And the Lord turned back and looked upon
Peter. Aed Peter remembered the word of the Lord, etc. For at the first be
regarded not the crowinge of the cock as we may see in S. Mark. It was
necessraye therefore that Christ should look upon him, that he might
return unto him again.

Euenso, whosoever has once begone to fall and perish, he shall be reclaymed by
no voice, by no sign, nor by any admonition, until the Lord cast upon him
the eyes of his mercy.

This thing every one of us feel in our selves by experience, For which of
us does not paseouer and pre^ermit with deaf ears (as it were) the manifold
and sundry singinges of birds, (^^hich notwithstanding do stir us up to
glorify GOD) but also the voice of God it self, which plainelye and distinctly
sounds in the doctrine of the law and Gospel? Neither does this brutish
insensiblenes possess our minds for one day only, but it is perpetual,
until such time as he voutchesafeth to look upon us, which alone has the
hearts of men in his hands to turn them which way him lysteth.
Notwithstanding it is worthy to be noted that this lookynge was not after the
common manner of mennne: because so he had looked upon Judas before, who for
all that was never the better. But in beholdynge Peter, he Joined the secret
woorkinge of his spirit to his eyes, and so pierced his heart with the brighte
beams of his grace, that it took effect.

Wherefore let us know, so often as any manne falls, he has no beginning
of repentance, but from the countenance of the Lord.

For we are all void of sense and sedlynge in our sins, until the Lord
after a sort styre up our hearts with his countenad^^e, and does make us
remember both him and our selves, when he toutcheth our hearts with his
spirit, in so much that we may remember those things that we thought not of
before.

And he went out? M. That is to say into the common way, that he might
be neither in the palace nor in the porche.

C. But it is lykelye that Peter went forth for fear, because he durst not
weep before witnesses: in the which, his infyrmity does farther bewraye it
self.

Whereby we gather tht he deserved not remission and pardone by satisfaction:
But obtained the same through the fatherlye goodness and mercy of GOD.

^ntaunce ^s weak ^ forsaken ^od.
And by this example we are taught that althought our repentance do haulte,
yet notwithstanding we must hope well: because the Lord does not despise the
weak repentance, so that it be sincere. Notwithstanding the secret tears of
Peter did witness his true repentance before God and his Angels. For, being
out of the sight of men he sets before his eyes, God and the Angels: and
therefore these tears flow even from the bottom of his heart. ^ntant ^s.
The which thing is therefore to be noted, because we see that many power our
tears plentifully, so long as they are looked upon, but being out of syghte
their eyes wax dry by and by again. And there is no doubt but that those
tears which are no tears in the judgment of God, ^res of hy^tes.
do bring forth ambition and hypocrisy: Whereas this weaping of Peter is a
sign of repentance: for where the sin and offense is great, it is
necessary that there be tears and grief. And let us understand that we are
never truly converted, except we be earnestly sorrow: neither must we only
testify our repentance before God, but also before men. Even so S. Paul
teaches the Corinthians. Cor. 7
For godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation not to be repented of.
^estin.
Notwithstanding, it may be demanded whether true repentance requires
weaping. ^nswere.
We answer that the faithful do often times syghe vnfayneedly with dry
eyes, and do confess unto to the Lord their fault, to obtain pardon: but
we say that they are to incensible, and dull which in great sins, are
wounded with no sorrow and grief, and are not brought unto tears. Therefore
the Scripture, after it has accused the gylty, exhorts them to Sackcloth and
ashes.

The xxvii. Chapter.
WHen the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people,
held a counsel against Jesus to put him to death.
Wen the morninge Bu. The Euangeliste Mathewe now descends to the
description of those things which were done with our Lord in the judgment
haule, under Pontius Pilate, yt Judge. C. For when at the first the high
priest with his counsel had examined Jesus in the untimely season of the
night, at the length about the Sun rising, they determine to bring him
before the deputy. And in this they observe and keep the true form of
judgment, least their haste should be suspected, if they ran (as commonly it
is the manner in a tumulte) before the time unto Pilate. Notwithstanding, it is
probable, that Christ being led away from their sessions, they gathered by and
by a counsel, and that they decreed without any longer delay what they would
do. For before it was showed, what time Christ after he was departed from
them, came into the remembrance of Peter, namely after the Cock crowyng, and
when the day break was at hand. Wherefore the Evangelists do not mean that
they were removed from the place, but to only show, that they adjudged
Christ to death early in the morning, and that they ceased not one moment in
finishing their mischiefous purpose. But whereas Luke says that they were
gathered together in the morning, it ought not to be expounded of the very
beginning, but of ye last action which is afterward added: as if he should
have said, yt they as soon as it was day, pronounced their judgment of his
death because he confessed him self to be the son of God. But if they might
have certainly known his death, they would all in their fury have run upon
him at once with violent hand. But because Pilate was appointed chief judge of
life and death, they bring him before his tribunal seat: using their own
judgment before, only to entrap and tangle him. For the stoning of Steven,
Act. 7.
was done by a tumulte seditiously, the people running upon him: but it was
mete that the son of God should be condemned by a solemn order of the
earthly judge, that he might blot out the gilte of our transgression, in heaven.

And elders of the people. A. S. Luke adds the Scribes. To put him to death.
Bu. The priests truly in their counsel had adjudged Christ unto death, as
we have showed in the.xxvi. chapter going before. Whom also (as if he had been
condemned by law) they misused the most part of the night, most vilanously
by injury and vile reproach: yet notwithstanding they did not kyl him, because,
that power was reserved to the Romans. So soon therefore as it waxed day,
they devised how they might propounde their cause, (which they thought was
not very good) to the deputy, and by what arguments they might urge him if
he should stand against them, and also how they might induce and persuade him
to commit this horrible murder of an innocente.

2. And brought him bound, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the deputy.
And brought him bound. C. And anon (says S. Mark and S. Luke) the whole
multitude of them arose, Math 15. Luke. 23.
or their whole counsel, when they had bound Jesus, and led him away, and
delivered him to Pilate. This is that matter whereof they co^sulted in their
counsel held in ye morning. Iose. libe 18 Antiq. cap. 4.5.6. and 7.
To P. Pilate. being deputy. Bu. Of this man Josephus writes. He succeeded
Valerius Gratus under Tiberius, and was deputy of Judea ten years. About the
eight year of his government, he crucified Christ. And two years after
that being expired, he was put out of his office by Vitellius, deputy of
Syria, for the innocent Samaritanes that were slain, an other being put in his
place, and he constrained to go to Rome to pourge him self in the judgment of
Caesar against the accusation of the Samaritanes. But before he came to Rome,
Tiberius was dead, and Caius appointed in his room. Under this Caius (as
Eusebius makes mention in his ecclesiastical hystory) Pilate flewe him self.
Pilate flewe him self.
He was a man (as appears by his acts) that bare no great good will to the
nation of the Jews, because he suspected that they bare but a false heart and
feigned mind toward Caesar. This man do the high priests think to be very
fytte for their purpose, as one that would not suffer Jesus, which
ambitiously desired the kingdom to escape unpunished.

3 Then Judas (which had betrayed him) seeing that he was condemned, repented
him self, and brought again the thirry plates of silver, to the chief priests
and elders.

Then Judas which had betrayed him. Bu. Before the Evangelist Matthewe
describes those things that were done in the judgment haule, he incerteth
and puts in the history of the false repentance and horrible destruction of
Judas the traitor. For as in Peter we had a tipe of true repentance, even so
in Judas we have set forth unto us an example of false repentance. B. But this
aduerbe (Then) does often times in the Evangelists signify only the
consequence of narration and not of time. C. Eue^ so in this place, it does not
signify any certain moment of time: for by and by the Evangelist Matthew adds
that Judas seeing the reward of his treason to be rejected of the high
priests, Verse. 5
cast the same into the temple. But truly they came directly out of the house
of Caiphas into the judgment haule, and stood there until the condemnation
of Christ: they could scarsely therefore be found in the temple that day. It
is not necessary therefore to understand, that Judas brought the pieces of
silver, the self same time, that Christ was brought unto Pilate: even as this
also. Seeing that he was condemned. seems to signify that these things
happened either after the death of Christ, or else after he was condemned of
the deputy. Repented him self.

C. Judas is said to be lead with repentance, not that he repented but
because he did dislyke much of the wicked deed that he had committed: Even as
God oftentimes opens the eyes of the reprobate, that they may begin to
feel and abhor their wyckednes. For they which are seriously grieved, in so
much that they repent, they are not only called in Greek Metamelein, but
also Metanoien. Whereupon also comes metanoia, which is the true conversion
and tourning of man unto God. Judas therefore had conceived a grievous
yrkesomenes and horror, not to convert and turn him self unto God, but
rather that he being overwhelmed with desperatio^, might be an example of man
altogether rejected and refused of the grace of God. Cor. 7
S. Paul truly says that godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation
not to be repented of: but if any man stomble in the entery, confused sorrow
will profit him nothing at all. But rather God does lay upon the wicked this
just vengeance at the length, giving them unto Satan to be tormented without
hope of consolation, because they have obstinately despised his judgment. True
repentance is a disliking of sin, ^repen^.
being conceived of the fear and reverence of God, which also ingendreth of
it self a love and desire of righteousness. The wicked are far from this
effect, for they desire never to make an end of synning: yea so much as in
them lies they go about to delude and mock with God.

But the conscience does vex and torment them, be they never so vnwyllinge,
with blind horror, that although they hate not their sin, yet
notwithstanding they may feel the same with sorrow and grief to be heavy and
troublesome unto the^. Hereupon it comes to pass that their grief is
unprofitable, because they do not frankely and freely turn the^seleus unto
God: for they come not unto better, but being given to their filthy desire,
they languyshe in extreme torment which they can not avoid. By this means
(as we said even now) God takes vengeance of their obstinacy. For although
he draws his elect unto him, sharply chastiseing the^, because they wrastell
and strive with him, yet notwithstanding he heals in dew time, the wounds
which he has given them, that they may come of their own accord unto him,
by whose hand they know they are stricken, and by whose fear they are
terrefied. The former sort therefore of men, do no less fly than fear the
judgment of God without the hate of sin: and so being wounded with an
incurable stroke, they peryshe in the midst of their sorrows. If Judas had
heard the monition of Christ, there had been some hope of repentance: but
because he despised so gentle a calling to salvation, he is committed to the
government of Satan, that he may cast him into desperatio^. M. Let us
therefore behold in him the horrible judgment of God, although this was not
his last punishment, but a show only of that extreme judgment which once
he shall feel. Let us also consider in him the example of the reprobate, whom
Satan carries a long time from one wickedness unto an other, but at the length
their eyes being opened in so much that they see the haynousnes of their
wickedness, but feel not the mercy of God, he does bring them to this pass,
that desperately they cast aside salvation and all things else, and so run
headlong into helfier. And brought again the thirty plates of silver. This
seems to be a sign not of feigned but of true repentance: for it is not true
repentance, when the thing that was wickedly taken away is not restored
again. A. Whereupon Zache also says. If I have defrauded any man I restore
four foulde. Luke. 19.
But it proffited Judas nothing at all to restore the money here again to the
his priests, which was not truly converted unto God. To the high pristes
and elders. These be they to whom Judas sold the Lord Jesus.

4 Saying I have sinned, betraying the innocent blood. And they said, what is
that to us? se thou to that.

I have sinned betraying the innocent blood. M. He does here by plain words
confess his sins. And confession of sin pertains to repentance. A. Yet
notwithstanding Judas labors in vain, when he wantinge the company of
Christ, whom he had offended, went to the high priests and elders only. For
what comfort could this miserable traitor have at their hands? Surely such
comfort that shortly after he hanged him self. C. And yet notwithstanding, if
ye Papists did speak truly of repentance in their schools, Judas a pattern
of popish repentance.
nothing ca^ be desired in Judas, to who^ their whole definition does not
belong. For here we may behold the co^trition of the heart, the confession of
the mouth, and (as they say) the satisfaction of ye work. Whereby we gather
that they only take the rynde of bark, because they do omit the special
part, namely, the conversion of man unto God, when as the sinners being beaten
down through shame and fear, forsakes him self that he may submit him
self unto ryghteousnes.

Judas therefore confesses his sin here unto those, which gave him occasion
to si^ne: and not unto Christ, against whom he had sinned. Neither does he
prostrate him self before God, and being let by distrust, he prays not that
the Lord would forgive him. Notwithstanding, he gives testimony of the
innocensy of Christ, in betraying of whom he made him by the judgment of
men nocent and gylty. I have sinned says he in betraying the innocent blood:
putting here the blood for the life, the soul, and the whole man. As if he
had said, in betraying the innocent man. So great was the force of innocensy
in Christ, that although he did not believe him to be the son of the living
God, and bare no sincere, but a malicious heart against him, yet
notwithstanding he is constrained to ackowledge and confess, that a just and
innocent man is betrayed of him. For he acknowledges the greatness of his
fault, but he acknowledges not the greatness of the mercy of God. A. Behold
therefore how vain their repentance is, which join not faith to the
acknowledginge of sin. Caine carelessly commits homicide or murder, and
being admonished craves not pardon: But Adam after his fall, conceyueth faith
of the sede promised to come. Saul carelessly is carried to commit mischief, 1
King 3. 3. King. 12.
but when he is touched with the judgment of God, he commands him self to
be killed: But David conceyueth faith by the words of Nathan the prophet.
After this sort Peter and Judas sinned: but Peter believes, and Judas
dispayreth for want of faith.

What is that to us? see thou to that. C. Here is described the madness and
insensiblenes of the priests, who being admonished by the terrible example of
Judas, yet notwithstanding, return not to them selves. We grant truly that
they had an excuse in a readynes (as hypocrites commonly have,) by the which
they might distynguyshe and make a difference between their fault and Judas
fault: because they thought that they were not partakers of the mischief
although they had abused the fasehoode of the traitor. But truly Judas does
not only confess that he offended, but also declares the innocence of
Christ. Whereupon it follows that they sought the death of a just man,
and therefore to be gylty of crewell and wicked murder. And there is no doubt
but that God went about, to sear their consciences with a burning Iron,
because he had detected and uncovered their secret and hydden sore.

But let us learn so often as we see the wicked to be made afraid, that they
are so many prouocations to repentance, that if the obstinate do neglecte
them, they double their fault, and make it twyse so heinous. They say. M.
What have we to do whether thou have betrayed an innocent or no? In that thou
haste sinned in betrayinge the innocent blood, what is that to us, thou art
in the fault: wherefore there is no cause why thou shouldeste impute any part
thereof unto us: see thou thy self how thou may avoid it. Or, look thou
to that. C. We must also note that none can absolve and clear them selves
from the fault of one man, (be they never so many) if so be they have by any
means joined or entangled them selves with him: much less shall it profit
the authors of the mischief to separate themselves from their ministers and
scoutes, least they should be partakers of their punishment.

5 And he cast down the silver plates in the temple, and departed, and went
and hanged him self.

And he cast down. A. Here we have depainted unto us, as it were in a table,
the disposition and nature of hypocrites and wicked men. As Judas was most
secure, so also he was most impudent before that he acknowledged his fault:
he despised as well gentle as sharp admonitio^s: he though Satan, which had
put in his heart to betray the Lord, was not so horrible as he was commonly
painted forth, neither that helfier was so hoate as men commonly said it was:
he deferred his repentance until the time of crooked age: but so soon as he
felt and acknowledged the fault he dispaired.

And this is that carnal security and contempt of Gods judgments, which
greatly displeases him. When the wicked ought to fear, they live carelessly:
and when they should believe, then do they despair. As for example, Cayne,
Saul, Achitophel, and many others. Least therefore we should be overwhelmed
with the judgment of God, first a godly and holy fear of the Lord must be
conceived, the^ the greatness of Gods mercy must be considered with a true faith.

And went. namely from the high priests and elders of the people, where he
had no comfort given him, but rather occasion to despair: in so much that he
Hanged him self. E. Luke says, ^ct. 1.
that he being hanged brake a fonder in the midst, and that his bowels gushed
out. C. Satan sells al his intiseing snares for this price, with the which
he flattereth the wicked for a time, but at ye length tourning them into
madness, he causes the^ to cast away all hope of salvation, insomuche that they
find joy in nothing but in death. Judas him self casts away the thirty
pieces of silver, for the which he betrayed not only Christ, but his own
salvation also: neither does he only deprive him self of the use of that
money, but also casts away his life, with the abominable reward which he
had received for Christ's death. Even so, although God does not move his hand,
yet notwithstanding the d^siers of the wicked are made frustrate, in so much
that they having gotten their desiers, do not only reiecte themselves, by the
fruitio^ of their vain goods, but also do make thereof a snare and trappe to
catch themselves. And although they be their own executioners or hang men,
in punishing them selves, yet for all that they do thereby deminishe nothing at
all of the rygor of Gods wrath. A. But let us understand what the reward of
those men is, which sin for other men's sakes. If the subjects, or servants
sin against their Prince, and masters, they are justly mocked and deceived
of their hope. Furthermore. we must note that no external thing does excuse a
man from sin.

Judas was the Apostel of Christ, (tha^ the dignity whereof nothing can be
greater) yet notwithstanding, this did proffite him nothing at all, nay, it did
the more declare his ingratitude: whereupon his condemnation was the greater.
Only faith therefore which woorketh through love, only the observation of
the commandments of God, and only a new creature is acceptable unto God.
This miserable wretch Judas, being either overcome with impatience, or with
fear of shame, or else being led by the instincte and motion of Satan, hanged
him self. As we may read in the Acts of the Apostles.

6 And the chief pristes took the silver plates, and said: it is not lawefull
to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.

And the chief priests. M. This kind of men, had always hypocrisy and
counterfeyte holiness joined with exceadinge malice. By this means the Lord
punysheth such hypocrites, namely, in bewraying their wickedness, which they
go about with some color or other to hyde. For they think the money to be
polluted, in the mean while their own consciences accused them of the
murder. For the money which Judas cast into the Temple, was the very same
which he had received of them, for to betraye the Lord. So that the
Euangeliste here thought it not good to pretermitte with silence but to show
how they dispensed ye same with hypocrisy, specially, because the prophetical
Scripture was fulfilled by this deed.

It is not lavvefull to put them into the treasury. M. The Lattine text has
Corban, for this word treasury, the which word Corban is in some places by
the interpretours called an oblation, as in Leuiticus, Leuit. 1. Mark. 7.
where it is said: If a man among you bring an oblation. But Mark calls it a
gift. Hereuppon it grew that the Arc in the which the gifts that were
offered of the people, were wont to be laid up, was called in Hebrewe Corban,
or of the Chalde word Corbana. This Corban the Grecians call Gazophulakion
that is to say, a box or cheste, in the which the treasure was laid up. The
use of this box was in the temple, that it might be had to fetch out of the
same all things necessary to repair the temple. For the which matter read
the.xii. chap. of the fourth book of Kings. 4 King. 12. Mark. 12. Luke. 21.
That which these hypocrites judge here, is not false. For although these
things which were cast into Corban; did rather pertain unto the use of man,
than to Gods use, yet notwithstanding, because they were offered unto God, it
was mete yt they should be such things as might please God. Those things
could not neither can please God which are by any means defiled with
iniquity, or which are forbidden by his word. These pieces of silver
therefore were not lawefull because they were the price of blood, yt is to say
the price or sum which Judas had taken to betraye Christ to be slain.
Because it is the price of blood. or the price of murder, or by the which the
murder of a man is bought.

7 And they took counsel, and bought with them a potters field to burrye
strangers in.

And they took counsel. Hereby it evidently appears, that hypocrites
followyng only an outward show, do grosely mock with God. They feign and
persuade the^ selves to be pure in all other things, if so be that they do
not profane and defile their Corban: neither are they careful for the wicked
bargain by ye which they provoked the wrath of God to fall upon them, as well
as Judas did. But if it were not lawefull to put the price of blood into the
holy treasury, why is it then more lawful to take it out of the same? For that
which made them rich came of the offeringes of the temple, and that also
which they refuse, as a polluted thing, to put into the treasury, was taken
out of the treasury. Whereof came then the pollucion but of them selves? But the
more the wicked go about to hide their faults, the more the Lord does seek to
disclose them, and make them known. They hoped that their fault should be
covered with an honest cloak, if they bought a barren field to bury strangers
in: But truly the wonderful providence of God makes this fall out far
otherwise, so that the same field shall be an everlasting remembrance of that
treason which was before obscure and hyd. For they gave no name to the place,
but after that ye mattter was commonly known, that field was called by
public consent, the bloody field: even as though God had commanded their
reproach to be blased abroad by the tongues of al me^. They went about to make
God partaker of their wickedness, thinking that they did a godly work if
thereby they might redeem their wickedness: but God hates such manner of
oblatio^s. Notwithstanding to provide burial for such strangers as coming up
to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice from far, should there happen to die, was a
plausible and acceptable work. But because part hereof was provided for the
Gentiles, by this sign also hope of salvation was given to the Gentiles,
because they were included in the price of Christ's death. They bought the
Potters field, because it was best cheap, being barreyne, and no more fytte
for the use of the Potter.

8 Wherefore that field is called Haceldema, (that is to say, the field of
blood) unto this day.

C. The hypocrites goinge about to make a show of godliness do make a
perpetual memory of their wyckednes. Not that they gave this name unto the
field, (as we said even now) but because the common sort of people by the
instincte and of the holy ghost, not knowing what they said, made that
field a memorial by this token: in so much that when it should have been
named the field and burial place of strangers, it was called the field of
blood, that is to say a field bought with that money with the which the
death of a man was bought, the money being given to betraye Christ unto death:
in so much that the same which had a show of godlynes, and was ordained by
hypocrisy, might give place to the truth, and might be a memorial of
innocent blood bought by the priests: which thing wyllingly they would
have hyd.

9 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the prophet Jeremy, saying:
And they took thirty silver plates the price of him that was valewed, whom
they bought of the children of Israel.

Then was fulfilled. A. Now the Evangelist shows yt the wicked have served
to fulfill the providence of God: although they sought the accomplishing of
their own will. For as they crucifying Christ, and adiudging him to ye most
shameful death of ye cross, fulfilled unwittingly the scriptures and words
of God: even so, they being ignorant, fulfilled this place of the Prophet.

Which was spoken by Ieremye C. Whereas Ieremye is here put for Zacharye, some
think that it was done because the Evangelist meant it of Jeremy, ^remye. 32
who makes mention of the bying of a field in his 32. Chapter: but that place
ca^ in no wise agree with this. Wherefore it is certain that ye name of
Ieremye through error, is here put for Zachary because we read of no such
thing in Ieremye.

And they took thirtye silver plates, M. The words of the Prophet are these:
If ye think it good bring hither my price: if no, then leave. So they wayed
down thirtye silver pence the valewe that I was prised at. Zachary 11.
And the Lord said unto me: Cast it unto the potter (a goodlye price for me to
be valewed at of them.) And I took ye thirty silver pence, and cast them to
the potter in the house of the Lord. C. The which place, except it be rightly
applied, it may seem to be fasely wrested into a contrary sense: but if we
observe that rule which the Apostles followed in cytinge Scriptures, it shall
easlye be known that these words of ye Prophet are aptly applied unto
Christ. After the Lord complained that so long as he had done the duty of a
Sheepeherde in governing his people, he lost his labor, he says that he is
constrained with wearynes and grief to forsake his labor.

His sheepestaffe therefore being broken, he says he will be no more a
sheepeherde: afterward he adds that when he required a reward, there were
given unto him thirtye silver pence. By the which words he declares that he
was counted no less vile, than if he had been some rude and abiecte labourer.
For he compares the ceremonies, and vain shows, with the which the Jews did
counterpeise and way his benefits, to ye thirty pence, as to an unworthy and
slender hyer of some drudge or carter: and therefore he commands this sum
to be cast to the potter in the temple: as if he should say, This their
excellent gift, which should be no less reprochefull for me to receive, than
for them to offer, let them bestow in gods name upon tyles and brickes, by the
which they may repair the ruin of the Temple. Now, to the end it might more
certainlye appear that Christ is the God of hosts toward whom the people
even from the beginning had been evil disposed, and unthankful, when he
was manifested in the flesh, it was necessary that the same which at the first
was spoken figuratively, should be fulfilled in deed and by a visible mean in
his person. Therefore when he being constrained by their mallyce, forsook
them, and withdrewe his labor and travail from them, being unworthy of it,
they valewed him at the price of thirtye pence, that is they gave him that for
his reward. And this contempt of the son of God was even the fulness of
their impietye.

The price of him that was valevved Matthew does not repeat the very words of
the Prophet Zacharye, because he alludeth to the metaphor, under the which
the Lord does there complain of the ingratitude of the people. Notwithstanding
the sum, and effect is all one, that saying the Jews did owe themselves and
all that ever they had, as det unto the Lord, they could not recompense him
with a bondemans reward, without great contumelye and reproach: as though he
had deserved at their hands nothing more, for governing them so many ages,
than a Cowheard which is hiered but for a year. He complayneth therefore that
he is valewed at so vile a price, when that he is inestimable, and so
precious that nothing may counteruaile him. But whereas in the end he says,

Whom they bought of the children of Israel It is an obscure and intricate
kind of speech. For Judas bargayned with the priests, which bare the name and
person of the whole people.

10. And gave them for the potters field as the Lord appointed m^e.

And gave them for the potters field A. The Evangelist Mathewe seems to go
about rather to expound the sense of ye Prophet Zacharye, than to allege him
word for word.

As the Lord appointed me, C. By these words of the Prophet, Mathewe
proves that this was done, not without the providence of God: because, their
purpose tendinge to another end, unawares they fulfill the divine oracle. For
how could it come to pass that they should remember to bye the potters field,
except the Lord had framed their error, to the execution and fulfillinge of
his decree.

11. Jesus stood before the debitye, and the debity asked him saying, art thou
the king of the Jews? Jesus says unto him: Thou say.

Jesus stood before the debitye, M. The Evangelist retourneth to the Historye
of those things which were done before Pilate.

But the order of these things cannot be seen, except we ascribe the words
of the rest of the Evangelists to every place, yt there may be as it were
one text of four. For many things must be taken out of the other Evangelists
and be put into this Verse. And first of all the Evangelists Luke and John
write as concerning this place, thus: And the whole multitude of them arose,
and led him unto Pilate from Caiphas into the haule of Judgment. It was in
the morninge, and they themselves went not into the Judgment least they
should be defiled, but that they might eat Passover. C. The Romans called
as well the house of the debity, as the tribunal seat, where Judgment was
used, ye judgment haule. In that the Jews do abstain from al kind of
pollusion, that they might eat the Passover of the Lord according to the
commandment of the Law, their zeal is to be allowed: but yet there
remains two faults in them, and both of them to gross: first, because they
think not that they carye more pollution and filthe within themselves, than
they may draw unto them by their enteraunce, although into a profane place.
Secondlye, because they are to diligent in triflinge matters, and negligente in
the principal. Nothing (says S. Paul is clean to the unbelievers, and
unclean, Titus 1.
because their minds are defiled. But these hypocrites flowinge with malice,
ambition, deceites, crueltye, and with covetousness, with their stincke and
corruption, did almost infecte both Heaven and earth, and yet for all that,
they only stand in fear of defilinge themselves with external pollucions.
Therefore this is a foolish fancye not tolerable, yt they seek to please God
by abstayning from the external touching of unclean things only, and
forget the true puritye which is internal, and of the mind. Hipocrisy has
another fault, because carefully in obseruinge and keeping Ceremonies, it
careleslye omitteth, ye greatest matters. For God did not commit those rightes
and Ceremonies contained in the Law to the Jews to any other end, than this:
that they should use and accustom themselves to the study and love of true
holiness. Moreover it was forbidden in no place of the Law to enter into the
house of a man that was a Gentile: but there was a caution or prouiso geeuen of
the fathers, namelye, that no man through follye or rashness should bring
any corruption or filthe out of an unclean house. Math 23.
But these are good interpreters of the Law, which strain out a gnat and
swallowe a Camel. And this is ordinary and common to hypocrites, to think it
a more heinous matter to kill a flea than to murder a man. To the which vice
the other has some congruance and affinitye, namelye, that they preferred
human traditions before the holy commandments of God. Therefore yt they
might eat Passover aright, they seek to keep themselves clean. But they
include and shut uncleanness within the gates of ye Judgment haule, and are
not afraid (Heaven and earth bearinge testimonye) that they put an innocent to
death. To be short, they solemnise and celebrate the shadowed Passover with a
counterfeite and false reverence: but they do not only violate the true
Passover with hands defiled with sacrilege, but also go about so much as they
may to overthrow the same with eternal destruction. A. Saying therefore they
would not come in (as S. John writes) Pilate went forth to them and said: What
accusation do ye bring against this man. This heathen man Pilate does
willynglye suffer their superstition, which he derideth and contemns, but
in the ground and very issue of the matter he plays the part of a good
Judge, commaundinge them, if they have any accusation against the man, to
bring it forth. For he would not condemn Christ being brought unto him,
before he heard the accusations. They aunsweared and fayde: If he were not an
evil doer, we would not have brought him unto thee. The chief priests as
though they had full authority to condemn whom they made giltye, answer
nothing at all, but that he must stand to their fore judgment, for they do
croselye murmere against Pilate, because he does not geeue sufficient credit
to their honest and faithful dealinge. Why should not thou (say they)
willingly persuade thy self that he is worthy to dye whom we persecute? We
are the chief priests and lovers of the law, and Dysciples of Moses: let
this our authority be sufficient to content thee. Think thou that we do
err? Behold here how these wicked ones, whom God has advanced to a hye
degree of honor, being blinded as it were with their excellencye, do give
liberty to them selves to do what they list. Behoulde also what swellinge
pride remained in them. They would have Christ to be thought an evil doer,
because they accuse him: but truly if the matter had been handeled in deed,
what should his evil deeds have been found to be but only, the healinge
of the sick, the castinge of devils out of men, the making of those that were
sick of the palsy, to stand, the restoringe of sight to the blind, the
making of the deaffe to hear, and the restoring of life to the dead? The
matter truly was thus, and they were sufficiently convinced: but (as we said
even now) there is nothing more hard, than to make men yt are droncke with
pride to Judge with a sound and vprighte mind. Pilate therefore says unto
them: Take ye him and Judge him after your own law. There is no doubt but
that Pilate being offended at their rudenes and violence, casts in their
teeth that order of condemnation which they urged, to be contrary to the
common Law of all Nations, and to abhor the sense of man. And therewith also
he secretelye reprehendeth them because they bosted that they had the Law
given unto them of God. He speaks Ironice when he says, Take ye him. For he
meant not to suffer them to execute Judgment of life and death upon him: but
his words are thus much in effect: If the power were yours, he should
sodainelye be drawn unto death his cause not heard, is this therefore the
equitye of your law, to condemn a man for no fault? Even so the wicked,
falselye pretendinge the name of God, do submit his holy doctrine to ye
sclau^der and reproach of the enemies, and occasion given to the world to
speak evil. The Jews therefore said unto him: It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death. They are deceived which think that the Jews refused that
which Pilate offered unto them: but rather when they knew yt it was said to
them by a mock, (Take you him) they answer, It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death: as if they should say: Thou would not suffer this:
therefore seeing thou art a Judge, execute thine office. That the saying of
Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke signifyinge what death he should dye.
John. 18.
At the length Saint John adds that it ought so to be, that the same might be
fulfilled which was foreshewed of Christ, saying, Matthew. 19.
The son of man shall be delivered into the hands of the Gentiles. C. Pilate
therefore would not by and by accomplish and satisfye the request wickedlye
made of the Jews, neither deliver and innocent to death at their pleasure. And
therefore the Evangelist Luke says, Luke 23.
And they began to accuse him saying: We found this fellow perverting the
people, and forbiddinge tribute to be paid unto Caesar, saying that he is
Christ a king. M. This is that accusation, by the which they desyered to
stir up the mind of the debity against the Lord, and that, not without
craft. For although they went about to overthrow Christ with many and sundry
faults, yet notwithstanding it is certain that this accusation, that he
desyered the name of a king, was very wickedlye put up against him, to the end
they might thereby cause Pilate to envy him. And therefore they do expreslye
say that they found him alteringe the state of things peruertinge the
people, and forbiddinge tribute to be given to Caesar. This truly of all other
faults was most odious unto Pilate, who cared for nothing more, than to
defend and maintain the quiet state of ye people and government. M. The Jews
also knew that a profane man would be much moved, if they should say: We
found this man speakinge blasphemye against God, and to be a despiser of our
Temple. But they knew that Pilate and such as he was, counted sedition a
grievous fault, and not tolleble if any man should forbid tribute to be given
to Caesar, and a most grievous hatred, if any man should make himself a king
in the Roman Empire. A. Wherefore they do chieflye stand upon this, as
upon the special part of the whole accusation, namely that they might make
Christ giltye, of ambicious desyer of the kingdom. Even as at this day also
Satan by this pretense goes about to make the Gospel hated and suspected, as
though Christ in erectinge and settinge up his kingdom, would destroy all
the gouernementes of the world, and abolishe the rightes and laws of kings
and magistrates. And truly such is the blind pride oftentimes of kings, yt
they think Christ cannot reign without the loss of their power. Therefore
that action seems unto them always plausible and right, by the which Christ
is once unjustly burdened. M. For this cause, both the Prophets in the old
Testamente, and also the Apostles, and so many as at any time in the new have
sincerely preached the word of God, were not only accused of eronious
doctrine, but also of seditions, and are at this day also. Sedition is ascribed
to the word of God.
And for this cause we do see many princes to abhor out of measure the
doctrine of the truth, as though it were a seditious doctrine. But let us
return to our Evangelist.

Jesus (says he) stood before the Debitye C. Although this were a disordered
and unseemly sight, and far from the dignitye of the son of God, that he
should be drawn to the Judgment seat of a Heathen man, to plead his cause
for life in bonds as though he had been an evil doer: 1* Cor. 1
yet notwithstanding we must remember, that in the doctrine of the Cross
(which is folishnes to the Greeks, and a stomblinge block to ye Jews) there
is contained plentyfull salvation. For the son of God would be brought
bound before a earthly Judge, and there be made subject to the Judgment of
death, that he being desolued from giltines of sin, may come bouldly and
freelye to the celestial throne of God. Therefore if we consider what profit
we received by the Judgment of Christ under Pilate, the reproach of such
undeserved subjection shall by and by be put away. And truly the condemninge of
Christ offends none, but only either proud hypocrites or else insensible and
gross contemners of God, who are not ashamed of their own iniquity. Christ
therefore stood as one gilty, before a mortal man, and suffered himself
there to be accused and condemned, that we might stand before God void of
all fear. His enemies truly went about to put him to perpetual reproach and
shame: but we must rather consider the end to the which the providence of
God does direct us. For if we call to mind how terrible and fearful the
Judgment seat of God is, and that we could not be delivered from the same,
except Christ should have been made giltye in earth, we will never be ashamed
to glory and rejoice in bonds. Moreover so often as we hear that Christ
stood in sorrowful and base form before Pilate, let us thereby gather
occasion to believe, ye bearing our selves bold of the intercessor, we may
come into the presence of God, with cherefulnes. To the same end also it
pertayneth which follows by and by as concerning his silence. Christ held
his peace when the hye Priests urged him on every side, that by his silence
he might open our mouths. For herevppon comes that power unto us, whereby
we cry Abba, Romans 8.
father. And the Debitye asked him saying: Art thou the king of the Jews?
Howbeit it is probable yt there were many things spoken on both sides, whereof
the Evangelists make no mention, not withstandinge all other things set a
part, Pilate chieflye stands upon the matter of sedition: because if he had
found Christ in any point to be a troubler of the common state, he would
have condemned him without delay.

This is the cause why he asked if he were a king. M. S. John says: Then
Pilate entered into the Judgment haule again, and called Jesus, and said unto
him, Art thou the king of the Jews? Nothing could be done without
tumulte, because they were seditiouslye bente. He enters therefore into the
Judgment haule. And truly his purpose is to absolve and set Christ at
liberty: but Christ himself yt he might obey his father, offers himself to
be condemned: and this is the cause that he answers so sparinglye. For
saying he had a Judge so gentle an favorable and which heard him willingly,
it was an easy matter for him to defend his cause: but he considers to what
end he came into the world, and wherefore he is now called of the father.
Therefore he willinglye houldeth his peace, least he should escape death. And
as concerning this question which Pilate demanded here of Christ, namelye
whether he were a king, it was done by ye procurement of the Jews, who
burdened him with the same fault. But he did make this demand as
concerning the kingdom of Christ, because if he could clear himself of
that matter, he would set him at liberty. Jesus says unto him thou say In
S. John's Gospel, Christ makes this aunsweare: Speak thou this of thy
self, or has some other toulde it thee of me? The which aunsweee tends to
this end, that there is no cooller in that accusation. So that it contains
an ouerthwarte refutacion, as if he should say, This fault is vndescretely
objected to me, seeing there is no likelyhoode thereof whereby I might iustlye
he suspected. But Pilate seems not to take it well, that Christ should
demand why he suspected him. And therefore in displeasure and reproach, he
says, that if any thing were amiss, it was long of his own nation. I
(says he) sit a Judge: strangers do not accuse thee, but thine own country
men: there is no cause therefore why thou should make me partaker of your
discord and contencion. By me and the Romans ye might live quietlye: but
ye wearye and trouble your selves, yet I, according to my office, which I am
constrained to take, must see that peace and quietness be maintained. Thy hye
Priests accuse thee: what have thou done? A. A horrible sight to behoulde.
Christ stands bound before the Judge, being stricken with fistes, spitted
upon, lookinge for nothing but the sentence of death: and yet notwithstanding
what he had done it was not known. Whereby we lean yt there was nothing
true, or had any likelyhoode of truth, that could be laid to Christ's
charge, and yet for all that the unjust and most wicked sentence of death was
pronounced against him.

Jesus answers: My kingdom is not of this world. By these words he
confesses that he is a king: but he puts away and pourgeth the reproach
so much as was sufficient to prove his innocensye. For he affirms that his
kingedome does not withstand pollitique order: as if he should say, I am
falselye accused to be a troubler of things, and to renew matters in the
public state. I preached of the kingdom of God: but that is spiritual:
therefore there is no cause why ye should have me in suspicion of desieringe
a kingdom. But this defense of Christ was before Pilate: but the same is a
profitable doctrine to all the godly to the end of the world. 1. Corin 7
For if the kingdom of Christ were earthly, it should be unstable and
transitory, because the fashion of this world passes away: but now, saying it
is said to be Heavenly, it proves that the same shall abide for ever. Euenso,
if it should come to pass that the whole world should be destroyed, and that
there should be before our eyes, horrible motions and earthquakes: yet let
our minds having respect unto the kingdom of Christ abide firm and stable.
If we be cruelly vexed of the wicked, yet notwithstanding there abides for
us perfect salvation in the kingdom of Christ, which is not subject to the
pleasure of men.

Furthermore we are taught what the nature of this kingdom is. For if it
should make us blessed according to the flesh, and should bring unto us
riches, pleasures, and whatsoever could be wished for the use of this present
life, it would be but earthly and of this world, which has but a time: but
now although, to look unto, our estate be miserable, yet notwithstanding our
perfect felicitye does abide for ever. Hereby also we learn: who they are
which pertain unto this kingdom, namelye they which are renewed by the
spirit of God, and do meditate a heavenly life in holiness and righteousness.
Howbeit we must also note that it is not denied but that the kingdom of Christ
is in this world. For we know that it has the proper abydinge place in our
minds, even as Christ also shows in another place: The kingdom of God is
within you. Luke 17.
But to speak properlye, the kingdom of God dwellinge in us, passes
throughoute the whole world: because the condition thereof is altogether
diverse. Christ adds. If my kingdom were of this world, then would my
mynisters surely fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is
my kingdom not from hence. He proves that he desyereth not an earthlye
kingdom, because no man made any tumulte, nor took any weapon in hand. For if
any private man usurp unto himself a kingdom it is necessary that he get
power and force by factious men. In the kingdom of Christ, there is no such
thing: it follows therefore that he is no earthly king. Answer.
First of all we answer that they do unaptly and amiss which infer this
consequence, that the doctrine of the Gospel, and the pure worship of God
ought not to be defended by the sword, because Christ is not then defended in
his own person. For Christ only proves by the present deed, how friuolus
and vain it was which the Jews slaunderouslye brought against him.
Furthermore although godly kings do defend the kingdom of Christ with the
sword, yet notwithstanding this is done after another manner than earthlye
kingdoms are defended. For the kingdom of Christ as it is syirituall, so it
must be grounded in the doctrine and power of the spirit. After the same manner
also his buildinge is brought to pass: for neither laws, nor edictes of men,
neither punishments do reach so far as to the conscience. Notwithstanding
this does not let, but that Princes by accidens may defend the kingdom of
Christ: partly when they do appoint external discipline, and partly when they
do apply their defense to the Church against the wicked. But the wickedness of
the world brings to pass, that ye kingdom of Christ is more established by
the blood of martyrs, than by the defense of weapons. Pilate therefore said
unto him: Art thou then a king? Jesus aunsweared, Thou say that I am a
king. For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world,
that I might bear witness to ye truth. Although already Pilate understood by
the former aunsweare that he challenged some one kingdom to himself: Christ
notwithstanding, does now affirm the same again: and not content therewith,
he adds another sentence, which might be a confirmation and seal of that
other saying. Whereby we gather that the doctrine which concerns the
kingdom of Christ is not common, seeing he says that the same is worthy of
so great asseueration, or affyrmance. For it is a general sentence, For this
cause was I borne that I might bear witness of the truth: notwithstanding it
must specially be applied to the circomstance of this place. But the words
signify thus much, that it naturally belongs unto Christ to he true, and also
that for this cause he was sent of the father. Wherefore there is no danger
or fear that if we believe in him we shall be deceived: betause it is
impossible that he should set forth any thing but that which is true, to
whom ye office of teachinge and maintayninge truth was committed from above.
Whosoever is of the truth hears my voice. This sentence Christ added, not so
much to exhort Pilate (because he knew he should not profit) as he did it
to set his doctrine free from undeserved reproaches and slanders, to the which
it was subject: as if he should have said, This is counted a fault in me,
that I have professed my self to be a king, but truly this is an undoubted
truth, the which they receive reverently and without controversy which are of
a right Judgment and sound vnderstandidge. Howbeit, he says that they are
of the truth, not which naturallye behoulde that which is true, but in
respect that they are governed by the spirit of God. A. Christ preached these
things as concerning his kingdom before Pontius Pilate the Debitye, as
witnesses S. John. But the other three Evangelists say that Christ
aunsweared thus, Thou say it. C. The which answer is very ambiguous and
doubtful, yet notwithstanding it may be gathered out of John, that Christ
confessed freelye that which was objected against him: but yet that he did
therewith put away the fault, when he denies himself to be an earthly king.
But because he did not greatly seek to purge himself, (even as those that
are giltye are wont to do) the Evangelists do set down unto us his half
aunsweare: as if they should say that he denied not but that he was a king,
yet notwithstanding that he ouerthwartlye noted the slander, with the which
the enemies burdened him without a cause. Pilate says unto him, What thing
is truth? It seems to some that Pilate curiouslye enquired, as commonly
Heathen men do, which greedelye desyer the knowledge of secret things, and
being notwythstandinge ignoraunte why they desyer this. For they only seek
to feed their ears. But rather this voice seems to proceed of disdain.
For Pilate thought that it was no small iniurye done unto him, that Christ
should deprive him of all knowledge of truth.

Now let us behoulde in Pilate the common disease of men: for although our
own consciences do bear testimonye unto us of our ignorance, yet
notwithstanding there are very few which can abide to confess the same. And
herevppon it comes that the greater part do reiecte the true doctrine,
Afterward the Lord which is the teacher of the humble, in blindynge the
proud, geeueth them the punishmente that they deserve. Out of the same pride
comes that disdain, ^^sdaine com^eth of pride.
which will in no wise submit it self to learn, because every man seems
wise in his own conceyte. The matter is thought to be an oulde truth. But God
on the contrary part affyrmeth that it far exceeds the capascitye of man's
mind.

The like also happens in other matters. The special points of deuinitye
consiste of these, namelye, of the corrupt nature, of the mortification of the
flesh, of the renouation of life, of the free reconcilliation by the only
sacrifyce, of the imputaon of righteousness, by the which a sinner is accepted
of God, and of the illumination of the spirit.

(...) Paradox, (...) a sentence ^aunge and ^^ntrary to ye ^pinion of ^^st men.
Now, because every one of these is a Paradox, the common sense and reason of
men, does contemptuouslye reiecte them. Very few therefore do profit in the
schole of God: because there is scarce one among ten which takes any
heed to his first rules and principles. And how comes this to pass, but
only because they measure the secret wisdom of God, by their own
understanding? And that Pilate spoke in derison, it may appear by this that
he went forth by and by. To be short he is angerye and displeased with
Christ, because he bosteth that he brings forth the truth, which before
was hid. Yet notwithstanding this his displeasure does declare that the
wicked do never so frowardlye reiecte the doctrine of the Gospel, but that they
are touched with some force of the same. For although Pilate came not so
far, as to show himself apt to be taught, yet notwithstanding he is
constrained to feel some prick of conscience within him.

These things being ended, S. John and S. Luke say thus: And when he had
spoken these things, he came forth again to the Jews, to the hye
Priests, and to all the multitude and said unto them, I find not cause at all
in him.

A. Although Pilate were a wicked and unjust man, yet notwythstandinge he
would not adiudge an innocente to death, so long as his fame or office were
in no peril. Moreover, as the Evangelists do dilligentlye describe, that
Christ went not to his death by external force constrained, but by his own
free will, that he might fulfill his fathers commandment, even so they do
show that all sorts of men gave testimonye of his innocensye.

First the whole counsel in seekynge out false witnesses do prove him an
innocente. Judas the traitor openly confessed him to be an innocente. And now
Pilate also comes forth before all the people and declares him to be
innocent, beside many other testimonies which follow of Christ's innocensye.

What need we of much a do (says Pilate?) Although ye accuse him as a
seducer, as a seditious person, and as an ambitious desyerer of the kingdom,
yet notwithstanding I find nothing in the man worthy of any such
accusation.

Therefore he excuses him openly which was openly accused, because there
was no man which defended him. S. Mark adds: And the chief Priests
accused him of many things. But our Evangelist adds saying:

12. And when he was accused of the chief Priests and Elders he answered
nothing.

C. Why do the Evangelists say that Christ kept silence, whose aunsweare
we heard even now of their mouths? Sure this is the cause, namelye that
although he had a defense for himself in a redynes, yet notwithstanding he
wyllinglye abstayned: neither truly did he aunsweare at the first as
concerning the kingdom, because he desyered to be loused, but only that
he might prove himself to be that redeemer which was promised before time,
before whom every knee should bow.

13. Then says Pilate unto him: hear thou not how many witnesses they
lay against thee?

A. And Pilate (says S. Mark) asked him saying: Aunswerest thou nothing at
all? Behoulde how many things they lay to thy charge.

14. And he aunsweared him to never a word, insomuche that the debitye
marueyled greatly.

And he answered him to never a word, Those things which were necessary
to the matter in hand, were before freely confessed, and plainlye declared. In
the counsel of the chief Priests he confessed that he should sit the
Messiah at the right hand of the power of God. Then he declared before
Pilate what king he was. Why then was it necessary to declare greater
matters. He houldeth his peace therefore at the other slanders of the Jews
which were invented by the subtiltye of Satan. Insomuche that the Debitye
marueyled greatly. Pilate marueiled at this wonderful patience of Christ,
that Christ by houldinge his peace willingly would show forth his innocensye,
when as he might easelye have put away those vain and could slanders.

So great was the integritye of Christ, that it was manifest without the
defense of the Judge. And thus far truly the equitye of Christ is
commendable, that fauouringe the innocensye of Christ, he pricketh him
forward to defend himself.

But least we should marvel at the silence of Christ and count it
absurd, (as Pilate did) we must have respect unto the purpose of God, which
thought good to condemn his son, whom he appointed to be a sacrifyce for
our sins, who, although he were pure in himself, yet was he giltye in
our person. Christ therefore held his peace then, that he might be now
our defender, and by his intercession deliver us from giltines: he held his
peace, that we might boaste our selves to be just for his sake.

Furthermore it seems that Christ made no aunsweare for this cause, namelye,
for that he knew well anoughe that the Debitye could smell out that all
these things were feigned against him by a certain impotente hate, and that
they were no such manner of matters for the which the debitye might lawfullye
put him to death.

And in deed the debitye knew that the chief Priests did all these things
upon mallyce and envy.

Notwithstanding he marueiled (although he were a Heathen man, and knew
not what patience mente) that an innocent man could houlde his peace with
such great meekenes, being in danger of his life. But that was then
fulfilled in the Lord which was spoken before by the Prophet saying: Esaias. 53.
He shall be led as a sheep to be slain, yet shall he be as still as a
lamb before the shearer, and not open his mouth. In the mean time
notwithstanding that good confession appeared, not in words but in deed, 1.
Tym. 6
whereof S. Paul makes mention in his first Epistle to Tymothe, and in the 6.
Chapter.

The Euangeliste Luke adds saying: And they were the more fearce and said:
He moves the people, teaching throughout all Iewrye, and began at Galile,
even to this place. This is an old accusation against the teachers of the
truth or of true Religion. Elias received the like voice against him at the
mouth of Acab, Art thou he which troublest all Israel? But he answered
Acab again and said: 3. King
It is not I that troubles Israel but thou and thy fathers house, have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and have followed Baalim. Jeremy
In like manner it was said to Ieremye, Jeremy. 38.
This man verily labors not for peace of the people, but mischief. And the
Jews accused Paul before Felix in like manner, saying, We have found this
man a pestilence fellow, and a mouer of debate unto all the Jews in the whole
world, and a maintayner of sedition.

A. No man therefore ought to marvel if the faithful mynisters of Christ
are constrained to hear the like of the wicked. But when Pilate heard mention
of Galile, Luke 23.
he asked whether the man were of Galile or no. And as soon as he knew that
he belonged to Herodes jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod.

C. Because Pilate durst not louse Jesus, by reason of the tumulte of the
people, he gladlye took the occasion which was offered unto him, to send
him to the Judgment of Herod. This Herod was surnamed Antypas to whom the
Tetrarchye of Galile was left, when Judea was brought into part of the
province of Syria, Archelaus being sent away to Vienna.

And although Luke make mention a little after that Herod which before was
displeased with Pylate was now glad of this matter: yet notwithstanding
Pilate went not so much about to get his favor, as to put away all
occasion of envy by an honest pretense, and so to avoyde the necessity of
condemninge Christ. He rather desyered that another might condemn Christ
than he. A miserable conscience truly does always stand in fear. But
Herod whenne he saw Jesus was exceedynge glad. For he was desyerous to
see him of a long season, because he had heard mannye things of him, and
he trusted to have seen some miracle done by him.

C. Hereby it appears how greatly the pride of the wicked makes them
droncke and puts them clean out of their wits. For although Herod did
not know Christ to be the Son of GOD, yet notwithstanding he does compte
him as a Prophet. Wherefore it was to unreasonable and contrary to equitye
for him to be delyghted with his ignominye and sclaunder. But Christ being
now subject to his pleasure, he rejoices as a Conqueroure, as though
iniurye had been done unto him all the time that he had not seen Christ.

We do also see how the Prophets are loved of wicked and Heathen men, in
whom the power of God does shine.

Herod had desyered a long time to see Christ, why also did he not desyer
to hear him, that he might profit by his doctrine? Surely because he had
rather be a behoulder only of the deuyne power, than godly and humblelye to
reverence him as it became him.

And this is the disposition of flesh, so to seek God in his works, that it
will not submit it self to his gouernmente: so to desyer the sight of his
servants, that it refuses to hear him speakinge in them.

Yea Herod, although he hoped to see some miracle done by Christ, yet
notwithstanding he rather desyered to let him lie at his feet giltye, than
to admit him a teacher.

Wherefore it is no marvel if God do withdraw his glory from the wicked,
which look that he should be unto them as a player to make pastyme. And he
asked of him many questions: but he made him no aunsweare.

Now Christ sheeweth an example of that commandment, which he had given
before to his Apostles, namelye this, Matthew. 7
Geeue not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls
before Swyne, least they tread them under their feet and the other turn
against you and all to rent you. A. He came not to satisfye the will and
pleasure of the hye Priests, but that he might declare the name of God unto
men, which were geeuen to him of his father. But the chief Priests and
Scribes did greuouslye and sharpelye accuse him. The chief Priests and
Scribes (whose hypocrisye the Lord had often times detected) cried with great
noise continuallye against him, fearinge least he should escape their
hands. And Herod with his company despised him. C. It could not otherwise
be but that Christ should be despised of a proud man delightynge altogether
in pastime, in riches, and king like honor seeing yt he at that time was
altogether (to look to) in a base and contemptible form. Yetnotwithstandinge
the disdain of Herod is not excusable which did stop the way of the grace
of God: neither is there any doubt but that God to the end he might
punish his former sluggishnes, did, by his secret Counsel harden his heart
with this sight.

For he was unworthy to behoulde any spark of grace in Christ, because so
long time he had been blind in such perfect brightness, with the which
all his Dominion was lightened. Christ could have stricken Herod with some
fear, which came with great pomp: but let us remember what Christ had in
hand to do: for it was meet that he should be mocked and despised for our
sakes. So that we see this thing was not done without the purpose and will of
God. And the Euangeliste Luke ddth not only declare that Christ was not
despised of Herod alone, but also of all his rabble, that we might know how
that the honor due unto God, is very sildome times found in Kings courts.
Courtears do despise for the most part, the graces of God.
For saying all Courtiars for the most part are geeuen to pomp and pleasure,
their minds are altogether bent to vanity, insomuch that the spiritual graces
of God are either careleslye despised of them, or else obstinately resisted.

But by this contempt of Christ there is gotten to us a new dignitye,
insomuche that we are now precious unto God and Angels. Notwithstanding we
must note the example: for we do take nothing more grievously than to be made
a mocking stock: but saying we see that the same happened to the son of God,
let us not take it greuouslye, if Kings and Courtiers do mock and deride us,
but rather let us take it in good part, and in so doing we shall show our
selves to be companions of the son of God.

And when he had mocked him, he put a white garment upon him, and sent him
again to Pilate. It might be that he put this garment upon Christ, to the
end he might the better be seen of men: yet this is uncertain: but to what
end soever it were done, he mente to send him away with mockinge and
scorninge. And Herod and Pilate were made friends together that same day: for
before they were fallen at vareaunce. C. But in that Christ was a mean to make
them friends, let us hereby learn how co^temptible the sons of God are unto
the world. It is likely that both of them, being of ambitious minds, came
into contention about gouernmente and rule. But whatsoever was the origiginall
of their contention, neither of them both in earthlye matters, would geeue
place one to another, or would loose any thing of their right:
notwithstanding because Christ was nothing regarded Pilate does easlye and
without stay geeue him to Herod, and Herod in like manner forgeeueth Pilate.
Even so at this day we see, when Judges do contend among themselves for
thieves and other wicked persons, that the sons of God are contemptuously
handeled. Hate of piet^ makes the wicked from friends.
For the hate of pietye does oftentimes reconcyle the wicked one to another,
insomuche that they which had no fellowship between themselves before, do
conspyre together to put out the name of God. And Pilate called together the
hye Priests and the Rulers, and the people, and said unto them: ye have
brought this man unto me as one that peruerteth the people. And behoulde I
examine him before you, and find no fault in this man of those things whereof
ye accuse him: No nor yet Herod. For I sent you to him: and lo nothing
worthy of death is done unto him. I will therefore chastise him and let him
louse. Although the other Evangelists do set forth the innocensy of Christ
with diligence, yet notwithstanding Luke does most plainlye declare the same.
For the whole action of Pilate, and the delyueraunce which he so often
sought, does pertain to this end, that we might understand and plainlye
perceive Christ to be an innocente, and not to have deserved death in any
poincte, but that he offered himself to death willinglye. Neither does
Pilate handle this matter negligentlye. For at the first he does propounde
the head and principal part of the accusation: and than he declares what
he has found in Christ all things being considered and wayed, namelye
innocensye. And because he was not very skillful in the laws and customs of
the Jews, he sent Christ and his accusars to Herod which was skillful in
the customs of the Jews, referringe all the examination of the cause to his
Judgment. But neither this man (says he) fyndeth any thing in him worthy of
death. What therefore rests now but that I should send him away as an
innocent. By this place therefore the innocence of Christ does very well
appear: for the more they carried him about to accuse and condemn him, the
more was his innocencye confirmed.

At the first he was led to Anna, from Anna to Caiphas, from Caiphas to the
Counsel, from the Counsel to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, and from Herod
again to Pilate, who more and more sets forth and proclaymeth the
innocensye of Christ, bringinge Herod also for a witness. Therefore the Lord
brings the Counsel of the Heathen to naught, ^salme 33.
and makes the devises of the people to be of none effect, and casts out
the counsel of Princes. But the Counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever.
Proverb. 21.
That which the Lord has determined cannot be undone. Because there is no
wisdom, no understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord.

15. At that feast the Deputye was wont to deliver to the people a prisoner
whom they would desire.

At that feast M. The Euangeliste Luke in steed of Was wont has of
necessitye. Pylate sought by all means occasion, by the which he might
deliver the Lord that was not giltye, but innocente, whom he knew to be
delivered of envy. For this cause he taking occasion of the present feast,
tries what he may do. For he hoped that the common sort of people were so
incensed with hatred against Barrabas, that they would grant to any thing
rather than that he should live, than whose death, they desyered nothing
more.

R. But it appears that this custom of lousinge a prisoner at the feast of
Easter, grew rather of ambition and superstition among the Jews, than of any
lawful cause, and true godliness.

For if the heathen rulers brought in this custom of their own mind, they
seem not to have done it for any other purpose, than thereby to get the
favor of the Iewishe people, that they might seem to reverence the Law of
Moses as concerning the cellebration of Passover. But it is the part of a
good magistrate, to get and keep the love of subjects: not by neglectinge
their office, but by dylligente administration of public and commen laws:
among the which this also is contained, that the malefactors should seuerelye
be punished, to the end others might fear, and that honest men might live
in safetye. And the reverence of Moses law should have been declared by
another mean, than by the lousinge of those which were openly known to be
malefactors, and whom the very Law of Moses commands to be put to death.
But and if this custom were brought in (as it is most likelye) by the Jews
themselves, it does appear that the same was used specially for this cause,
that it might be a monument of the deliverance out of Egipte. Even so men are
commonly wont to worship God, even with evil deeds: and we do see what
came by this vain custom, namely, that Christ being an innocente should be
condemned to death. S. John writes that Pilate said, But ye have a custom
that I should let one louse unto you at Easter. Mathewe says here, Whom they
vvoulde, Mark has, Whom they had demanded.

16. He had then a notable prisoner called Barrabas.

C. What this Barrabas the prisonner was, the Euangeliste Mark does more
plainly describe, saying, Mark 15.
And there was one that was named Barrabas, which lay bound with them that
made insurrection, and that had committed murder. Luke 23.
Luke more plainlye says: Which for an insurrection made in the Cittye, John
18.
and for murder, was cast into prison. And S. John in one word says that he
was a thief.

17. Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, whether
will ye that I geeue louse unto you, Barrabas or Jesus which is called Christ?

Therefore when they were gathered together, C. Here both the extreme
crueltye of the Priests, and also the furious obstinacye of the people is
described us to us.

For it must needs be that they were far out of their wits, which
thought it not sufficient to conspyre the death of an innocent, but they must
louse also a thief in despite of him. Satan does so carrye the wicked
hedlonge, (after they begin once to fall) that they do abhor no vice, be it
never so detestable, but being blinded do heap one sin upon another. There
is no doubt, but that Pilate seekinge to make them yield for shame, chose out
the most wicked man, that Christ being compared with him, might be loused. And
the very haynousnes of the fault, of the which Barrabas was gilty, ought
worthily to deserve the hatred of the people, that Christ by this comparison at
the least wise might be delivered. But truly neither the Priests nor the
multitude are terrefyed with shame, but do require that a seditious person and
a murder may be committed unto them. Yet by the way we must note the
purpose of God, by the which it came to pass, that Christ, as the worst of
all men was given to the Cross. The Jews truly rage against him with blind
furor and madness: but because God had appointed him to be the sacrifyce for the
sins of ye whole world, he suffered him to be counted inferior to a thief
and murderer. But hereby there is no small occasion of bouldnes and sure
trust offered unto us, because Christ was therefore cast into such shameful
ignominye and reproach, that he might make us by his abasinge to assende into
the Heavenly glory. Therefore he was counted worse than a thief, that he
might join us to the Angels of God. This fruit if it be rightlye wayed,
shall be sufficient to put away the offense of the Cross.

18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

M. This must be understand by the Priests, as it may appear by the words
of Mark. Mark. 15.
They knew says he, that for envy they had delivered him. These two tokens
of a wicked mind are geeuen and noted in the writings of the Evangelists, to
be in the Priests, Scribes, and Phariseis. First, that they bare envy against
Christ, as we may see here in this place: John. 15.
Secondly that they hated him, as we may read in the fiftene of John.

19. When he was set down to geeue Judgment, his wife sent unto him
saying: have thou nothing to do with that just man. For I have suffered many
things this day in my sleep, because of him.

When he was set down to geeue Judgment, M. Only Mathewe makes mention
of this thing concerning the wife of Pilate, which was done when Pilate was
sittinge down on his tribunal seat to give Judgment of death against the
Lord.

Have thou nothing to do with that just man, As touching the Greek text
it is said, Thou have nothing to do with that just man. But the Hebrewe text
has: Have thou nothing to do with that just man. Behold and note here, how
the innocence of Christ deserved testimonye of every one, namelye of Judas, of
Pilate, of Pilates wife, of Anna, of the false witnesses, of the thief, of the
wise men, of the Chananites, of the Samaritanes, of the Centurione, and lastly,
of the thief hanginge on the Cross. For I have suffered many things C.
Although the meditacion and study in the day time, might be the occasion of
this dream, yet notwythstandinge it is without all doubt that the wife of
Pylate suffered these torments not naturallye (as many do at this day often
times) but rather by singular instincte and motion of God. Many have thought
that the Devil suborned this woman and craftelye coollered this matter in her,
that he might stay the redemption of mankind. The which is very vnlikelye
in all poinctes, when as by the motion and continual provocation of the
Devil, the chief Priests and Scribes, did so greatly seek and desyer to
destroy Christ.

Therefore we must thus rather think of it, that the innocencye of Christ
was proved by many means of God the father: to the end it might appear,
that he dyed not for his own, but for our sakes. And for that cause he
thought good to be absolved so often times by the mouth of Pilate, before
that he was condemned, that in his innocent damnation there might appear a
lawful satisfaction for our sins. But Mathewe very expressly and plainly
sets forth this matter, least any man should marvel why Pilate was so
careful and dilligent, to defend and contend in the tumult of the people, for
the life of a contemned man. And truly God constrained him by the terrors of
the dream which his wife suffered to defend the innocensy of his son: not
that he might deliver him from death, but only to declare that he was
punyshed for other men's faults, which he had not deserved.

As touching dreams which are like unto visions, read the first chapter
going before. M. although Pilate went about to deliver Christ, yet
notwithstanding, he profited nothing, because it was necessary that ye decre
and purpose of the father should be fulfilled: Neither will he that his
servant should so be delivered, that their cause might differ nothing from the
cause of thieves.

20 But the chief priests and Elders persuaded the people that they should
ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus.

But the chief priests. C. The Evangelist does here declare who were the
special authors of the mischief, to the end we might know that the common
people were not of their own accord ennemies unto Christ: who
notwithstanding are not excused by the provocation of the priests: but while
they obey the priests, they forget as well equity and modesty, as their
own salvation: Persuaded the people. They moved says S. Mark, and
persuaded ye people at ye length to ask Barrabas, and that because Christ
was already condemned by the authority of the priesthood and counsel, of
blasphemy: and that else the Romans would come and destroy them: A. Which
seemed to be a notable pretense to destroy Christ. And destroy Jesus. Bu. That
is, that they would crave Jesus to put him to death: the which they
afterward did.

21 The deputy answered and said unto them: whether of the twain will ye
that I let louse unto you? They said Barrabas.

The deputy answered. A. The Judge thought, by the grievous fault, that
Barrabas had committed, to turn the minds of the Jews and to persuade them
to deliver Christ. But they said. A. Luke more plentyfully declares this
thing saying: And all the people cried at once saying: away with him, and
deliver unto us Barrabas. C. Hereby we are taught how deadly and full of
mischief the authority of the wicked is, who can easelye draw the common
sort of people every way to all kind of mischief, then the which nothing
is more inconstante. But by the way we must note the purpose of the
Euangeliste, which was to show that Christ was by the voice of the people
earnestly craved to be put to death: not because he was hated of them but
because the greater part desyring to obey their Prelates ambitiously consented
to the wicked conspiracy of a few. A. This thing at the length Peter cast
in their teethe saying: The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the
God of our fathers, has glorified his son Jesus, whom ye delivered and
denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had judged him to be loused. Acts. 3.
But ye denied the holy and just, and desired a murderer to be given unto
you, and killed the Lord of life.

22 Pilate said unto them: What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called
Christ? They all said unto him, let him be crucified.

What shall I do then with Jesus. Bu. The Euangeliste Luke has: Pilate
spoke again to them, wylling to let Jesus louse: Luke. 23.
C. Because Pilate sees them to be so blinded in madness, that to their great
shame they let not to deliver a thief from death, he goes about to syfte them
by an other practyse, that he might bring them to a sound judgment: namely
that the death of Christ would bring ignominy unto them, because the fame of
Jesus was greatly known among all men, to be a king, and the anointed of
God.

As if he had said: If ye have no compassion on the man, yet at the least have
regard to your honor, because strangers will think that all ye by his
punishment are put to rebuke. But truly the rage of their cruelty by this
means, was nothing assuaged, but they went forward still to be more ennemies
to them selves than to Christ. Therefore Pilate seking more sharply to touch
them (as appears by Mark) says that they also called Jesus a king, meaning
thereby that this tyttle was as commen to him, as if it had been his syrname.

But truly all shame being cast aside, they cease not still to urge and
procure the death of Christ, which brought with it the reproach of all the
nation. For They all said unto him, let him be crucified. C. Here we may
perceive how great the obstinacy of the people was, which could not be
moved with so great affliction of Christ. The which thing truly happens
to all the reprobate, which being forsaken of God are very beasts, that it
may appear what the Image of God is in man, and the Image of the Deuell. And
although the Image of God in us be blotted out, yet notwithstanding some
proportion thereof does remain: But when we be forsaken of God, all
humanity is cast aside, and we seek for nothing else but murder rapyne, and
such like. When as neither the chief priests, nor the people found any cause
of death in Christ (as says saint Paul) yet notwithstanding they desyer with
wonderful obstinacy of Pilate that he would put him to death. Act. 13.


23 The deputy said what evil has he done? But they cried the more
saying: Let him be crucified.

The deputy said: what evil has he done? B. Saint Luke says that
Pilate asked the people the third time: to the end we might see how feign he
would have set Jesus at liberty: he adds also those things which do
more confirm the innocensy of the Lord. He said unto them, (says he) the
third time: What evil has he done? I find no cause of death in him. A
great argument truly of the innocensy of Christ. Pilate by this his question,
as a civil Judge, does in every point justify Christ to be an innocent, and
proclaymeth him to be just, to the end it might be more certain that all
this which he suffered was for our sakes. It follows in Luke I will
therefore chasten him and let him go. C. If any light offense were committed
without deserte of death, the Romayne governors were wont to punish and
beat such an offender with rods: and this kind of punishment was called a
chastisement or correction. Pilate therefore was unjust, which absoluing
Christ from all offense, punysheth him as one co^uicte of a small fault. For
he does not only affirm that he has found no fault worthy of death in
him, but he does also maintain his innocensy without exception. Why then
does he scourge him?

But thus are earthly men went to do (who^ the spirit of God does not confirm
in the constancy of truth) although they desire to embrace equity, yet
notwithstanding being constrained, they decline and yield to small injuries.
Neither do they only take this for a just excuse, that they have not greatly
offended, but also they do there by arrogate praise unto them selves, because
they have spared in some point the gyltle^^. In the mean time they do not
consider, that although extreme cruelty be laid aside, yet righteousness and
equity, which is more precious than the life of men, is no less violated and
broken with words than by the sword. As touching that which pertayneth to
the son of God, being after this manner abased might he have suffered ye
reproach of beating with rods, without any profit of out salvation: but he
could not suffer death without the accomplyshing of our salvation: for he
triumphed over our ennemies and his, upon the cross as on a glorious
chariot. And I would to God the world were not replenished with many Pilates
at this day. But we do see the same thing to be fulfilled in the members
which was begone in the head. For look with how great cruelty the Iewyshe
priests, cried to bring Christ unto the death, the popish clergy
prosecuteth his servant with the like at this day. Moreover although
Mathewe, Mark, and Luke, make no mention of his beating with rods, yet for
all that S. John expressly speaks of the same. For thus he writes: Then
Pylate took Jesus and scourged him.

John. 19.
Read the nyntene chapter of S. John. These things being ended, Pilate
brought forth to the Jews the Lord which was scourged, crowned with
thorns, spytted upon, buffeted, and mocked, hoping by that miserable sight,
to assuage very much the hatred and mallyce which they bare against him. C.
But truly their madness might not be appeased, until the author of life were
extinguished. For when the chief priests and ministers saw him, they cried
saying, Crucefie him, Crucefie him. Pilate says unto them: Take ye him and
crucify him: for I find in him no fault at all.

A. Again, he openly pronounces Christ to be an innocente. As if he should
say, if it be right to put a man to death, before just cause why be known
and found out, take you him your selves, for I find in him nothing worthy of
death. The Jews answered him, we have a law, and according to that law he
ought to dye: because he made him self the son of God. They declare that
they do by law persecute Christ, not of malice, or to satisfy their will.
For they perceived that Pilate thwarted and crossed them. But they speak as to
one ignorance of the law: as if they should say: According to our custom,
we must live and frame our doings, but our religion does not suffer any man
to boaste him self to be the son of God.

But this accusation did not altogether want his color, yet they erred
greatly in the Hypothesis. Hypothesis ^n argument ^^lled.
For the general doctrine is true, that it is not mete for men to take unto
them selves any part of the honor dew unto God, and that they are worthy of
death which take that unto them selves which is only proper unto God. But
the cause of the error was in the person of Christ, because they neither
considered what tytels the Scripture gave unto Christ, neither did they once
seek, whether that Jesus were that Messiah which was promised of God long
before: We do see therefore how they bring a false consequence, from a true
beginning: because they take it amiss. By the which example we are taught to
distinguyshe between a general doctrine and a Hypothesis or particular. For
many unskillful and light men, if they be once deceived by a pretenced truth,
they will also reiecte the principles of Scripture. The which liberty does to
much abound at this day. Let us remember therefore so to take heed of subtle
fallacies and colored arguments, that the principles which are true may
abide sound, and that the credit of the scripture be not taken away. Moreover
by this place we may easily refute the wicked, which do falsely and amiss
allege ye testimony of the scripture, and the principles that they take out of
the same, for false causes. Eue^ as the Papists do at this day, who greatly
extolling the authority of the church, do bring in nothing but that in the
which all the children of God do agree, namely that the church is the mother
of the faithful, the pyller of truth, that it ought to be heard, and that it
is governed by the holy ghost: the which ought not to be denied. But when they
will draw unto them selves, what right soever is due unto the Church, they do
wickedly and with sacrilege take that, no point whereof pertayneth unto them.

For it is necessary to consider the Hypothesis, whether they deserve the title
of the Church or no. For in this point they fail. In like manner when they
furiously rage against all the godly, they excuse them selves with this color
that they are ordained to defend and mainteyne the faith and peace of the
Church. But when we come more near unto the matter, we may evidently
perceive, that they have nothing less in their minds than the defense of
true doctrine, and that they are tooched with nothing less, than with the
care of concord: But that they do only fight for their tyranny.

A. Moreover, this accusation seems specially to have his original of that
disputation in the which Christ alleged the law, proving that he is the
chosen son of God, John. 10.
or else of his answer to the adiuration or charge of Caiphas the high
priest. Math. 26.
For there by plain words he confesses him self to be the son of God.
But when Pilate heard this saying, he was more afraid. In the which
words there may be double understanding.





And we must note, when he asks Christ saying, whence art thou? He
demands not of his country but in effect he speaks thus much: Art
thou a man borne in the earth, or art thou some God? So that Pilate being
strycken with the fear of God, stood in great doubt. For of the one side he
saw a tumulte beginning, on the other side fear stayed him. This example is
first of all worthy to be noted. For although the person of Christ was
deformed, yet notwithstanding, so soon as Pilate heard the name of God he is
thoroughly afrade least he should offend the majesty of God in a contemned
and abject person. If the reverence of God be so great in a Heathen man, must
they not neades be reprobates, which carelessly judge without fear, and make a
ieste and mock of divine matters? Notwithstanding, they shall feel in time to
come, to their destruction, how reverend the name of God is, the which at
this day they do so contumeliously, and disdaynefully scorn. It is horrible
to be spoken how proudly and cruely the Papists do condemn the manifest
and evident truth of God, and spyll innocent blood. And whereof comes such
dronken blyndnes, but only because they do not remember that they have to do
with God? Luke 23.
But Jesus gave him no answer. In that Christ answered not, it ought not to
seem absurd, specially if we remember that whereof wear admonished before,
namely, that he stood not before Pilate to defend his own cause (as the gilty
do which would be loused) but rather to submit him self to judgment. For he
having taken upon him our parson, must needs be condemned. And this is ye cause
why he abstayned from all defense. And yet for all that the silence of Christ
is not contrary to yt which S. Paul writes, saying: 1. Tim. 6.
I give the charge before Jesus Christ which under Pontius Pilate witnessed a
good witnessing. For he did there mainteyne and affirm so much as was
necessary for the Gospels sake, neither was his death any other thing, than a
sealing of the doctrine which he had already set forth. Christ therefore
wanted not a lawefull confession, but he held his peace, because he would not
be loused. Pilate says unto him: why speak thou not unto me? Know thou
not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to louse thee? Hereby it
appears that the fear with the which Pilate was suddenly moved, was vanyshed
away, and had no lively roots. For now having forgotten fear, he bursteth
forth into proud and unbridled contempt of God. For he threateneth Christ,
as though there were no Judge in heaven.

But this of necessity happens always to profane men, that having cast
aside the fear of God, return eftsone to their natural inclination. Whereby
also we gather that the heart of man is not without cause called deceitful,
Ierem. 17
by the Prophet Jeremy, for if there be in it any fear of God, there comes
forth also therewith mere impiety. Whosoever is not regenerated by the
spirit of God, although he seem to reverence his majesty for a time, he will
by and by bewraye by contrary deeds that he feigned this fear. Now we do
behold in Pilate the Image of a proud man, who was brought by his own
ambition, to madness. For while he goes about to extol his power, he depriueth
him self of the fame and praise of a just Judge. He confesses Christ to be
innocent, he makes him therefore like unto a thief, in boasting that he can
put him to death. It is necessary that wicked consciences, in the which neither
faith, nor the knowledge of God does reign, do swell and that there, sundry
affections of the flesh do fight one with an other. And God by this means
does very well revenge him self of the pride of men, when they pass their
bounds that they may usurp to the^ selves exceading power, condemning them
selves of unrighteousness, that they may bring unto them selves great shame and
reproach. Wherefore there is no greater blindness tha^ the blindness of pride: and
no marvel, because it resists the power of God, which it feleth and sees
to take vengeance. Wherefore let us remember that we do not rashly boaste or
triumph in vain things, least we be made a mocking stock. Specially let
them which are placed in the high degree modestly stay them selves, and not be
ashamed to submit them selves unto God, and to be subject unto his laws. Jesus
answered, Thou could not have any power at all against me, John. 19.
except it were granted to thee from above. Some generally expound these
words, that nothing is done in the world without the permission of God: as if
Christ should have said yt Pilate, which thought he could do all things,
could notwithstanding do no more tha^ God would suffer him. It is a true
sentence certainly, yt this world is governed by the will of God: and that what
soever the wicked go about, they can not for all that move their finger without
the help of the secret power of God: but their opinion is better, which
restrain this place to the office of a magistrate. for Christ does correct
the arrogance of Pilate in this place, because he so extolled him self, as if
his power were not of God: as if he had said Thou take al things to thy self
as though thou should never give an account to God: but truly thou art not
made a judge without his providence. Consider therefore that his heavenly
tribunal is above thine. There can no admonition be found more fit to supresse
their loftines which reign over others, least they abuse their right, tha^
this. The father thinks that he may do what him list to his sons, the
husband to the wife, the master to the servants, ye prince to the people:
but they are restrained when they have respect unto God, who would have them
rule and govern by a certain order and law. Therefore he that delivered me
unto thee has the more sin. Some men think that the Jews are more in
fault than Pilate: because they raged against the just, with wicked hatred
and malice, being private men and void of all power. But we think otherwise
by this circumstance, that their fault was the more grievous and less
excusable, because they constrained the power appointed of God to serve their
pleasure: for it is great sacrilege to abuse the holy ordinance of God to
every unlawful thing. He is by law a thief very detestable which fleieth the
poor traueiler with his hand: but he which under ye pretense of judgment
kills an innocent is more wicked. But Christ does not amplefie ye fault of ye
Jews to excuse Pilate: neither does he compare him with them, but does rather
accuse the^ to be all gilty a like: because they do together co^taminate and
defile the holy power. This is ye only difference, that he touches the Jews
directly, but touches Pilate ouerwthartly, which fulfilled their desire.
John. 19.
And from thence forth sought Pilate means to loose him. Although Pilate
behaueth him self not bouldly, and is more led by ambition than by the love of
righteousness, and therefore is in miserable doubt, yet notwithstanding his
modesty is to be praised, that being severely reprehended of Christ he is not
angery, nay, he seeks the more to deliver him. He is a Judge, and yet
notwithstanding he suffers the prisoner with a lowely mind to be his
correcter. One truly amongst a hundred shall scarce be found, which will
bear so quietly a reprehentio^ of his equal. But the Jews cried saying: if
thou let him go thou art not Caesar's friend, for every one which makes him
self a king is an enemy to Caesar. A. With this cry they run through
Pilate, and with this voice only ouerwhelme all his virtues. C. For they do
force him by threatening to condemn Christ. Neither could they obiecte any
thing more odious, or that could more terrefie, than when they urge him with
treason and falsehode against Caesar. Thou (say they) show thy self to
have no care for the government of Caesar if thou louse him which goes about
to trouble the whole multitude. This their wicked persuasion prevailed, and
brake the mind of Pilate, which was only beaten before with violent cries.
Neither truly does S. John prosecute and inculcate these circomsta^ces so
diligently in vain: because it pertains greatly to our profit to know,
that Christ was not condemned of Pilate, before that he was absolved three or
four times, of his mouth: that we might thereby gather that he was not
condemned for his own sake, but for our sins. And certainly by this his
obedience he brought to pass that his death was a sacrifice of a sweet savor
unto God, to put away our sins. After these things how greatly the people
and the chief priests required the death of Christ. Luke. 23.
S. Luke declares, saying: And they cried with loud voices, requiring yt he
might be crucefied. And the voices of them and of ye high priests prevailed.
Satan would have Christ to perish.
R. Behold here the unspeakable madness of the Jews against Christ that we
may know how that Satan desires nothing more vehemently than that Christ
may peryshe. We must also note the wonderful patience of Christ, to the end
we may know that the more Satan does rage against him, the more mightily he
is overthrown by his patience. S. John moreover adds: When Pilate heard that
saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down to give sentence, in a place
that is called the pauement: but in the Hebrewe tongue Gabatha. Hereby it
appears how diversely Pilate was distracted, eue^ as if one player should play
two parts. He sits down in the Judgment seat that according to the
manner he might pronounce sentence of death against Christ: and yet he plainly
declares that he does it against his will and conscience.

John. 19.
It was the preparing day of the Easter about the syxte hour. The Evangelists
in notyng the time do seem to disagree. The other three Evangelists say that
it was dark from the syxt hour, when as Christ did hang on the Cross. And
S. Mark plainly says that it was the third hour, when Judgment was given
upon him. C. But if we consider that which may be gathered by other places,
namely that ye day was divided into four parts, and that every part had his
name from that first hour of his beginning we may easily reconcile them.
All the myddel time from the rising of the Sun until the second part, was
called by them the first hour. The second part until noone, was called among
them the third hour. The syxte hour beginning at noone, contynewed until
the third or fourth hour after noone.

When the Jews therefore saw that Pilate prolonged the time, and that now
noone was at hand, Saint John says, that they made the more haste, and cried
more vehemently, least all the day should be spente. But this is no let or
stay, but that the Lord might be crucefyed about the end of the third
hour.

For it is evident enough to be seen, that so soon as he was condemned: he
was suddenly carried away: So great a desyer had the Jews to have him destroyed.
Therefore Mark speaks not of the beginning, but of the end of the third
hour. And this is more lykely that Christ did hang on ye Cross not above
three hours. But between the six and nynthe hour, it began to wax dark,
which continued until the nynthe hour, in the which Christ dyed. And he
says unto the Jews, behold your king. John. 19.


Christ is called a king here by Pilate Ironice, meaning that it was a
frivolous and vain sclaunder, with the which the Jews burdened Christ. As
if he should say: You contend that this man made him self your king:
Notwithstanding, behold him and mark him well, if he bear any such
countenance. They cried away with him, away with him. John. 19. Truth
obt^^neth no me^^


A. Truth obtayneth no mercy. A murderer does sooner obtain pardone of the
world, than a sincere minister of Gods word. Away with this monsterouse
fellow (say they): it is not mete that he should live. Even so the Jews
cried out against Paul, saying. Act. 22
Away with such a fellow from of the earth: It is not meet that he
should live. Crucifye him.

This kind of punyshement pleased the^ well, John. 19.
that the name of Christ should be extinguyshed and defamed with the
ignominy and shame of the Cross. But that which they counted the greatest
ignomie and reproach is to the elect instead of the greatest glory. Pylate
says unto them: Shall I crucify your king? Pilate deryding their obstinate
madness, says: Shall I bring so great reproache unto your king as to nail
him to the Cross? This will be a great shame unto you. The high priests
answered, we have no king but Caesar.

Here truly their horrible furor and madness bewrays it self, that the hye
Priests which ought to have been exercised in the law, do reiecte the
Messiah in whom the salvation of all the people was included, of whom all the
promises did depend, and in whom all Religion was grounded.

Certainly they deprived them selves of the grace of GOD and of all goodness, in
reiectinge Christ.

Let us see therefore how greatly they were out of their wits. Let us
Imagine that Christ was not Christ: yet notwithstanding they have no excuse
because they acknowledge no king but Caesar. For first of all they fall from
the spiritual kyngedome of God.

(...). 32.
Secondly they do prefer the tyranny of the Roman Empire, before the just
government, which was promised of God. Euenso the wicked to fly from
Christ, do not only deprive them selves of everlasting life, but also
bring unto them selves all kind of misery. This people truly of the Jews
did manifestlye forsake the frendeshipp and louinge kyndenes of God their
maker, and regarded not the God of their salvation.

Miserable men had rather have a manly to raygne over them than Christ the
king of all earthly kings. What shall come to pase therefore, but only that
it be said of them at the length which the Lord pronounces in saint Luke,
^^k. 19.
saying: Those mine ennemies (which would not that I should raygne over
them) bring hither, and flea them before me. Now it follows in our
Euangeliste Saint Mathewe.

24. When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing but that more business
was made, he took water and washed his hands before the people saying. I am
innocent of the blood of this Just person ye shall see.

When Pilate savve A. A horrible spectacle truly is this to behold: that a
Judge should so oftentimes pronounce a man to be innocente, and yet for all
that should be ready to condemn him. C. For as the mariners, having felt
the greater force of a tempeste, do give place and yield to the extreamitye,
and suffer them selves to be carried out of their course: Euenso Pilate saying
himself not able to stay the rage of the wicked people, lays aside the
authority of a Judge, and follows their outragiouse desyers.

But that more business vvvas made A. There are many which seem to excuse
Pilate. First because he having gone about a great time to resist, did
nothing but that which necessitye, or at least the wyckednes of the Jews
did drive him unto, and forced him to fulfill their desyr: then, all men being
in a tumulte, he thinks it better that one innocente should perish, than to
put many in danger of murder. For in seditions, as well the innocente as the
wicked, perish.

Beside this he thought that he ought to have a more special regard of
Caesar than of one abiecte man which was despised of all men.

Furthermore he thought it much better for him self, that a contemned
person should perish, than that himself should be in danger.

But there is a difference between the Judgments of GOD and the judgments
of men.

Peradventure Pylate had somewhat to cover the matter before men, but
before GOD he was and is without all excuse.

C. For if we way what person he did represente, weee must needs say that
he ought to have preferred any thing, than to have declyned from his office.

He took water and vvashed his hand, Pylate here uses a new kind of
condemnynge, for he does absolve him self before that he condemns Christ.
Furthermore he does not manifestelye condemn him: But does suffer him to be
comdened at their will. For he openly affirms Jesus to be Just and
innocente, which had deserved death in no point: And yet notwythstandynge
he suffers his accusers to do with him what they list.

Whereupon he unjustly condemned the Just, against his own conscience,
whom he knew ought to have been defended.

And as for the childishe ceremony which he uses, it does nothing at all
mittigate the falte: For how could a few drops of water wash away the
spotte of wyckednes which no satisfaction could blotte out?

How he it he had not special regard unto this, that he might wash away
his sins before God, but rather he gave a sign to the people of
detestation, as if he should have said thus, Behold ye urge and constrayne
me to commit unjust murder, the which I do tremblyngelye, and not without
horror: What shall then become of you, and what horrible vengeance hangs
over your heads, which are the special authors hereof?

B. This sign seems to be borrowed of the custom of the Jews, of the which
Moses writes thus: Let the elders of that City, which is next unto the
slain men, take out of the drove an Heyfer that is not labored with, and
strycke of the Heyfers neck: And all the elders of the City that come forth
to the slain manne, shall wash their hands over the Heyfer, that is beheaded
in the valley, and shall say: Our hands have not shed this blood, neither
have our eyes seen it.

Deuteronomy, 21.
Be merciful Lord unto thy people Israel, which thou haste delivered, and
lay no innocente blood unto thy people of Israells charge: And the blood
shall be forgeuen them

But what soever the purpose of Pilate was, GOD notwithstanding by this means
mente to declare the innocence of his son, to the end it might the better
appear that our sins were condemned in him.

The only and chief Judge of the whole world, is brought before the
tribunal seat of an earthelye Judge: He is condemned to the Cross as a
wicked persons: and he is also placed among thieves as though he were the
chief of thieves.

The baseness of such a sight, might at the first beholdynge thereof, not a
little trouble the senses of man, except we also remembered this, that the
punishment dew unto us was laid upon Christ, that the gilte of sin
being taken away, we may boldelye come into the sight of the heavenly
Judge.

Therefore the water which profited Pilate nothing at all to wash away the
spots of wyckednes, do serve to an other use at this day, namelye, to purge
our eyes from all impediments that they may plainelye and clearelye behold
the righteousness of Christ in the midest of damnation.

I am innocent of the blood of this Just manne. Bu. This word (blood) is
here put for death. Pilate says that he kills not Christ and yet he
condemns him, and delivers him to be killed: in the mean time washes his
hands as one that is innocente. Euenso hypocrites are always wont to bring
some cooler: but what do they profit by this means, but only bewray their
impudency unto me^. We ought diligently to note the testimony that he bears
again of Christ's innocence: because hereby the sure salvation of the faithful
is gathered.

Ye shall see He adds this, as puttinge all the faite from himself to the
Jews: as if he should say, I am not the cause of this man's death, but ye:
see therefore by what means ye may escape the vengeance that hangs over you.
So said the hye priests to Judas: What is that to us? see thou to that.

25. Then answered all the people and said; his blood be on us, and on our
children.

Then ansvvered all Bu. Wonderful was ye blindness and brutish madness of the
hard hearted and reprobate people of the Jews, being nothing terrified at so
great obtestation, and at so manifest testimony of a heathen Judge but
cryinge horriblely. His blood be on us and one our children They take unto them
selves all the euel, and do curse them selves, yea they derive and bring upon
their posteritye, all the falte and vengeance.

For blood is here put for the punishemente and vengeance taken for the
sheadynge of blood: So that their words signifye thus much in effect, If
any manne must be punished for the effusion of this blood, we desyere that
the same may fall upon us and on our children: as if they should say: We
know so certeinlye that this man has deserved to dye, that with safe
conscience we take all vengeance upon ourselves. There is no doubt therefore
but that the Jews do carelessly curse them selves, as though before God they
were excusable.

Hereby we gather how carefullye we ought to avoid all unadvised rashness in
all Judgments. For when men dare, neglectinge inquisition and diligent
search, take upon them this or that, as seems to them good, it is necessary
that they fall into madness.

And this is the just vengeance of GOD, with the which he punishes their
pride which disdain to make any choice of that which is good, and of that
which is evil, and which refuse to put a difference between equity and
unrighteousness.

The Jews thought that in killynge of Christ, they did unto GOD good
service: but whereupon comes this wicked error, but of wicked obstinacy and
of the contempt of God?

Wherefore they are justly cast into this madness, that they may bring the
last destruction to them selves. But as for us, when the woorship of God and
his holy ministers are handeled or spoken of, let us learn to open our eyes,
and reuerentlye and soberlye inquire of the matter, least that hypocrisye and
boldenes do put us out of our wits.

But as God would never have suffered this execrable voice to come out of the
mouth of the people, ecepte their impietye had been first desperate: even
so afterward, he punished the same justly, by horrible and strange means,
and yet notwithstanding wonderfully kept certain remnaunts of them to
himself, least that his covenant should be extinguished by the destruction
of all the people.

He had adopted unto himself the seed of Abraham, Exodus 19.
that it might be a chosen people, a ryall Priestehoode, and a holy nation:
now the Jews to the denying of so great grace, do conspire as it were with
one voice. Who would not say, that all ye nation is plucked up by the roots,
as it were, from the kingdom of God? But God in their wyckednes declares the
constancy and fyrmenes of his promise: and to the end he might show, that he
made not a covenant in vain with Abraham, he delivers those whom he chose
freely of his grace, from general destruction. Euenso his truth will always
have the vpperhande of all the letts and stays of humane incredulity. M.
Although therefore miserable and foolish mean do curse them selves and their
children, yet notwythstandynge the Lord did not condemn them, by the sentence
which they gave upon them selves, but received them which repented (as well
of themselves as of their children.

For Paul also was of them, and many thousands also which believed in Christ
at Jerusalem, as S. Acts 21.
James declares in the Acts of the Apostells.

To this effect also pertains that which is written in the Acts of the
Apostels, Acts. 2.4.
in the second and fourth chapters Notwythstandynge this vengeance which
they wyshed for, rests upon the posteritye of the Jews until this day.

26. Then let he Barrabas louse unto the^, and scourged Jesus and delivered him
to be crucified.

Then let he Barrabas louse M. This place is thus read out of the four
Evangelists. And so Pilate, willinge to content the people, gave sentence that
it should be as they required: And let louse unto them Barrabas whom they
desyered (who for insurrection and murder) was cast into prison, Math. 27.
Mark. 15. Luke. 23. John. 19.
and he delivered unto them Jesus to do with him what they would, and to be
crucified. The importunate suit of the Jews truly constrained Pilate to
deliver up Christ: and yet for all that it was not done as in a tumulte, but
according to a solemn manner he was condemned, because two thieves also, the
matter being known, were condemned to the cross.

C. Two things therefore are to be noted, namelye that an assente or
agremente was extorted from the Judge against his will, and yet
notwithstanding that he represented the person of a Judge in condemninge him,
whom he pronounces to be innocent.

For except the Son of GOD had been free from all sin we should not
look for redemption by his death, but should remain still in our sins.
God therefore would have his Son to be condemned after a solemn manner, that
by him he might deliver us from sin.

For if we seek to profit rightly in the meditation of Christ's death, we
must abhor our sins, for the greatness of our punishemente which he
suffered for sin.

So shall it come to pass not only that we shall be ashamed of our selves,
but also that we being wounded with grefe, shall seek for the medecin that
may heal the same. For our hearts were much more hard than stone, if we be
not wounded with the wounds of the Son of God: And except we hate and
deteste our sins, to put away the which the Son of God suffered so many
punishementes.

Neither must we fear that our sins shall come any more into the Judgment
of God, from the which he has redeemed us with so preciouse a ransom. For he
did not only suffer death to purchase life unto us, but also he took upon
him with the cross the curse that was dew unto us, that there should no
uncleanness remain in us any more.

And scourged Jesus and delivered him M. It is uncertain whether this
scourginge be that or no where of S. John makes mention: John. 19.
(the which also is noted in the 23. verse before, when Pilate would have
set Christ at liberty:) Or whether he were beaten the second time,
according to the manner of the Romans. For no man was put to death, or
crucified, but he was first scourged. It seems to some that this was the
scourginge, by the which he went about to deliver him, least he should be
crucified. For afterward the mockes and scorns are recited, which follow
the condemnation.

27. Then the soldiers of the deputy took Jesus into the common haule, and
gathered unto him all the company. Then the soldiers of the deputy Bu. Now the
Euangeliste describes as it were in lively coolers how the most meke Jesus
was handeled of the wicked after he was condemned by the mouth of the Judge,
to death.

A. All this was done, that when the people should see this sight, they might
be persuaded that nothing was done here without consideration, but by the
best order of true judgment.

28. And they stripped him, and put on him a purpell robe.

And they stripped him Saint Mark has: And they put of his own clothes.
Because he was condemned of desiering the majesty of a king, the soldiers, so
soon as Pilate had given Judgment that he should be crucified, would
before all other things, for the good will that they bare unto Caesar, mock
and deride Christ being condemned thereof. To the end therefore they might
show that a private man has usurped a mis unto himself the honor of a king
they take of his own apparel which was like to other men's, and put on him
garments belonginge to a king, as purpell, a crown, and a scepter, and
beside this they salute him with a kingelike salutation.

But because they did this to his reproach they put on him not a crown of
gold, but of thorns: and instead of a kingely Scepter they give unto him a
read, and with their salutation they spitt in his face and buffete him.

By this Image it is set forth how the Kingdom of Christ should be derided
in this world. But we must note the singular example of patience in Christ.

29. And platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and a reed in
his right hand: and bowed the knee before him. and mocked him saying, Hail
king of the Jews.

M. We do see here, that Christ suffered those things, which those that
were condemned commonly suffered. And they vexed him with these torments all
the time that his cross was a preparinge, which was not then made, specially
to deryde his kingedome: Of the which kingdom we must not judge according
to the outward show, nor yet according to the opinion of men. For what is
more contemptible?

30. And when they had spitted upon him, they took the reed and smote him on
the head.

And when they had spitted C. In that God did suffer his only begotten son
to abide all kind of reproach, we must know that it was no vain Ieste or
pastime. First of all therefore it shall be good for us to way what we have
deserved: and then, the satisfaction made by Christ, will erecte us and bring us
to a good and perfect hope.

Such is our uncleanness, that God does abhor it and all the Angels loathe it.
But to the end Christ might bring us into the sight of his father pure and
undefiled, he would have him self to be spitted upon, and to be defiled
withal kind of reproaches.

Wherefore that deformitye which he once suffered in earth, does now get
unto us grace in heaven: and does also renew the Image of God which was not
only defiled with the spots of sin, but all most clean blotted out.
Hereuppon also it comes to pass that the inestimable goodness of GOD does
shine unto us, because he suffered his only begotten Son to be thus wise
abased for our sakes.

By this documente Christ has declared his wonderful love toward us because
he refused no kind of ignominye and reproach for our salvation.

But these things do want rather a secret meditation and pondrynge in the
mind, than the eloquence of words. And by the way we are taught not to
esteem and Judge of the kingedome of Christ according to sense and reason of
the flesh, but by the Judgment of faith and the spirit. For so long as we
have a worldely Judgment thereof, it will not only seem unto us contemptible,
but full also of shameful reproaches.

Wherefore if the world at this day do mock and deride Christ, let us
learn to overcome such offenses with the excelencye of faith: Neither let us
care what reproaches the wicked give unto Christ, but rather have regard to
that excellent dignitye which the Father gives unto him, that he might not
only excel men, but all the Angels also.

31. And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe of him again,
and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucifye him.

Bu. The matter was governed by the providence of GOD, that the soldiers
afterward divided the garments of our Savior Christ, according to the
prophesy. For it is a common thing and oftentimes seen in the Iudmentes of
God, that the wicked are constrained to do all things that the truth of
Gods word may be fulfilled, and that specially when they resist the
purpose of God.

They seem also to do these things, that all men might know, but
specially they which embraced his doctrine, and esteemed him as a singular
teacher, that he was condemned as an heretic or a seditiouse person, and
therefore carried to his death: and so to terrifye them from his doctrine and
fellowship.

32. And as they came out, they found a man of Cyreen (named Simon) and him
they compelled to bear his cross.

And as they came out M. Saint John has: And they took Jesus and led him
away, and he bare his cross, and went forth into a place which is called,
the place of deads men's sculles: But in Hebrewe Golgotha.

After these things it follows in our Euangeliste Saint Matthewe: And as
they came out they found a man of Cyren named Simon. Saint John says in
this place that we have cited that Christ bare his cross: The other three
say that Simon of Cyren, being constrained bare his cross: in the which is
expressed the extreme crueltye as well of the people of the Jews, as of the
soldiers

There is no doubt but that they which were offenders and condemned to dye,
were wont to carye their own crosses to the place of punishemente: but none
were able to carry this burden but such thieves as were strong in body.

But the weakness of Christ's body, being not able to bare the cross, did
plainly declare that a lamb shouldde offered. And it may be that the
whyppynge of his body and the oppressynge of him with injury, did make him to
faynte under the burden of the cross. M. Least therefore they should be
constrained to stay and linger the time in the way, they constrained this
Simon which came out of the feelde and passed by to bear his cross after
him. For there was no man that would so much as toucthe the cross, of
such ignominy was the death thereof unto them.

A man of Cyren This manne seems to be a Jew, be inge a good and simple man a
Disciple of Christ, whose father perhaps came out of Cirenia to Jerusalem.
For the Acts of the Apostels do testify that the Jews were dispersed into
Lybia, Acts 2.
and unto Cyrene.

Named Simon S Mark and Luke add saying: coming out of the field, the father
of Alexander and Rufus: by the which words it seems that he was about some
rusticall business.

C. But this man being chosen by the wicked Jews to so vile an office, is now
made noble by the providence of God, in so much that he is commended in the
Gospel for ever. Neither is it superflouse, that the Evangelists do not only
make mention of his name, but also of his country and sons. By the which
the Lord does admonish us, that although we be of no estimation and
price, yet notwithstanding we shall have dignity and same by the cross of
his son.

Him they compelled to bare his cross Bu. Saint Luke says: And on him laid
they the cross, that he might bare it after Jesus. Simon therefore coming
behind, and bearinge the burden with Christ (as some say) helped the Lord
which went before. But where as Simon does not carye the cross of his own
free will but constrained, he bears the Image of our flesh, which never
submits it self wyllingly to the cross of Christ, but continuallye
strives against the same. Saint Luke says that much people and many
women followed him as he went by the way, which cried and lamented for him.

C. Although in the public place, all the people had condemned Christ with
one voice, yet notwithstanding we do see that some of them had not forgotten
his doctrine and miracles: euenso God preserved some remnante in the miserable
dissipation, when all the people were dispersed. But Jesus turned back unto
them and said: ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me but weep for your
selves, and for your children. Some think that the women were reprehended
because they did sheade tears foolishelye and with a rash affection: But
truly Christ does not simplely reprove the^, as though they did weep without
reason, but admonishes that they have a far greater cause to weep for ye
horrible judgment of God which was at hand: Luke. 23
as if he should have said that his death should be, not the end, but the
beginning of all evil to Jerusalem and to all that people.

And by this means he declares that he is not made so much subject to the
will of the wicked, but that God has a care for him. For it was euidente by
the pounishemente that followed afterward, that the Life of Christ was
precious to the Father, at what time al men thought that he was rejected, and
wholly cast of, of him. These words also declare the stout courage of
Christ's mind: (because he could not thus speak, except he went bouldly to
his Death, and void of fear) but it tends to this end, that he might
thereby declare that he was regarded of God, in that deformed and base estate:
and that the wicked, which now prowdely triumph, as Conqueroures, should not
enjoy their untimely mirth long, because there should come shortly after, a
sudden change. For behold the days will comme, Luke 22.
in the which they shall say: Happy are the Barraine, and the Wombes that
never bare, and the Pappes which never gave Suck.

He now denou^ceth, that no small plague is at hand, but such a one, as was
never heard of, in the which the Vengeance of God may plainly be discerned.

A. This Sentence agrees with that, which goethe before in the four and
twenty Chapter, Math. 24.
where it is said: Woe unto them that are with Child, and that give Suck in
those days.

For if they do this in a green tree, what shall be down in the dry? ^uk. 23.
By this Sentence Christ confirms, and proouethe that neither his Death
shall be vnpounished, neither that the Jews shall stand or continewe long,
whose wickedness was even now full ripe: yea, and half rotten. And by a
common similitude he proouethe, that it cannot be, but that the fire of Gods
Wrath must shortly consume them. We do know, that men are wont to
cast the dry wood first upon the fire. But if the moiste and green wood
be burned, mutche less at the length shall the dry wood be spared. And we
may expound it thus: If the green wood be brought before the time to the
fire, what shall becomme, think you, of that which is dry? As if Christ
should have said: The wicked (which are like unto dry wood) when they have
destroyed the Godly, shall also be destroyed of God them selves. For how shall
they, being ordained long ago to Destruction, escape the hands of the
Heavenly Judge, which take so great Liberty to them selves for a time, to
destroy the Good, and Innocente. But the sum of his words, is, that the
womenne do preposterously sheadde their tears, not having respect to the
horrible Judgment of God, which was at hand, to pounish the wickedness of
the people.

And here we may learn this, that when the sharpnes of the Cross is out of
measure grievous unto us, we ought to mitigate the same with this comfort,
that God which does now suffer His to be unjustly afflicted, will at the
length pour out the fullness of his Vengeance upon those that do afflicte
them.

The like manner of speech has the Apostle Peter, when he says: The time
is comme that Judgment must begin at the house of God. 1. Petr. 4.
If it first begin at us, what shall the end be of the^, which believe not
the Gospel of God? Hereby let us learn to offer our selves a sacrifice unto
God: if it be his good pleasure to make us hot by many afflictions, asd to
try our Faith, as it were, in the Furnace, and to make it more pure than
Goulde: let us not only take it patiently, but gladly. There should be no
affection of Godliness in us, if he should not make us hot. He doothe make
us hot therefore, and not burn us: but to ye wicked he is a co^suming fire.
And there were two evil dooers leadde with him to be slain. Luke 23.
R. This also they did to the contempt, and despite of Christ. For it was
necessary that the saying of the Prophet should be fulfilled, when he says:
He has neither beauty nor favor. Esaias. 53.
When we shall look on him there shall be no fairness: we shall have no
lust unto him. He is despised, and abhorred of men: he is such a man, as is
full of sorrow, and as has good experience of infirmities. We have reckened
him so vile, that we hid our faces from him.

33. And they came to the place, which is called Golgatha, that is to say, a
place of dead men's Sculles.

And they came B. This word, Golgatha, is a Chalde word, signifieinge a
Head: for which the Hebrews say, Gulgoleth, of the verb Galal, which
signifies to foulde, or wrappe in: of the which commethe Galgal, a Sphere, a
Circle, a Boule. Gulgoleth therefore is a name for the head, because of the
roundnesse thereof. But this place was without the gate, on ye north side of
Mount Syon, in the which Malefactors were put to death: for the which cause
the place was coumpted more reproachful: there would they have Christ to be
Crucified, that thereby his Death might be more odious. C. And although
Christ was brought unto this place, according to the custom, yet
notwithstanding we must have a further consideration of Gods purpose. For
he would have his son to be cast out of the City, as one unworthy of the
company of men's, that he might receive us with the Angels into his
Heavenly Kingdom Therefore the Apostle refers this to the Old ^^gure of the
Law. Number. 19.
For as God commanded the bodies of the beasts to be burnte without the
Tents, whose blood was brought into the Sanctuary for Satisfaction: even so
he says that Christ went out of the gate of the City, that, taking upon
him the Curse yt pressed us down, Heb. 13.
he might be made the outcaste, and by this means might purge us from our
sins. And the more ignominy and reproach that he suffered before the world,
the more acceptable and noble show he made in his death before God and the
Angels. For the filthiness of the place did not let, but yt he might set up
the glorious Ensign of his Victory: neither did the stink of dead Carkesses,
which lay thereabout, hinder, but that the sweet smell of his sacrifie might
spread it self through the whole world, and pearce even to the very Heaven.

34. And they gave him viniger to drink, mingled with Galle, and when he had
tasted thereof, he would not d^inke.

And they gave him viniger C. Although the Evangelists have not so curiousely
placed all things in their order, that the seasons of times may be certainly
noted, yet notwithstanding we may conjecture by a probable reason, that
before the Lord was crucified, a Cup of mingled Drink, according to the
manner, was given unto him: the Compoundes whereof (as sum think) were
these, namely, Myrre, Viniger, and Galle.

All Interpreters for the most part, do houlde opinion, that this drink was
not the same, which is mentioned in the 19, of S John, and of the which also
mention shall be made anon. This only we add, that it seems to us, that the
Cup was offered to the Lord, when he was ready to be crucified: But after
that the Cross was lifted up, a Sponge was wrapped about a Reed, by the
which they did reach Viniger unto him. But we will not curiously dispute
what time he called for Drink. Notwithstanding, if we compare, and confer
al things together, it shall not be unreasonable to say, that after he had
refused that bitter confection, it was given unto him again in mockery. For
Mathewe hereafter adds, that the soldiers, before they gave him drink with
a Sponge, mocked him, and said, that he could not deliver him self from
death. This drink was given unto Christ, to hasten his Death. But truly he
for his part patiently suffered all kind of tormente, in so much that he
desired not, for the pains sake, to have his death shortened. For this was a
part of his sacrifice, and of his obedience, to abide the prolonginge of pain,
even to ye vtmoste. But they are deceived which count the bitter gall that
Christ drunk, to be one of his cruel torments that he suffered.

Their conjecture is more probable which think, that this kind of Drink was
apt to expel the blood, and that therefore it was woonte to be given to
Malefactors, to the end their death might be the more speedy.

And when he had tasted thereof, Christ refused to drink of this, not so
mutche, because he was offended at the bitterness thereof, as to show, that
he went quietly to his Death, according to the will of his Father. Neither is
that contrary to this which S. John says, namelye, that the Scripture was
fulfilled, which said: When I was thirsty, they gave me Viniger to drink:
For it does both ways agree very well, that a remedy was given unto him, to
end the torments of the slow Death: and yet notwithstanding that Christ was
sharply afflicted by all means: in so mutche that the very Remedy was a
part of the grief. The order of the Story requires, that those things
which follow in the eighte and thirty verse, should be readde consequently
after this verse: but our Euangeliste shows between this and that, of the
partinge of Christ's garments.

35. When they had crucified him, they parted his Garments, and did cast
Lottes: That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet: They
parted my Garments among them: and upon my Vesture did they cast Lottes.

When they had crucified him, C. Saint Mark says in his fiuetiene chapter,
that he was crucified the third hour. For in this second part of the day
(which was now almost ended) the Sentence of Death was given against the
Lord. Those things which Mathewe goethe about to show, were done after
that the Thieves were nailed to the Cross of the which he speakethe
afterward in the eighte and thirty verse.

They parted his Garments, S. Mark has: They parted his Garments, castinge
Lottes upon them, what every man should take. Mark did not distinguishe the
Garments, by the name of Garments, comprehending the Coat, upon the which
only they cast Lottes, as more plainly may be gathered by the words of John,
saying: Then the Soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, they took his
Garments, and made four parts, ^n 19.
to every Soldier a part, and also his Coat: the Coat was without Seame,
wroughte upon throughout. They said therefore among them selves, let us not
divide it, but cast Lottes for it, who shall have it. That agreethe to the
place of Scripture, which he brings afterward, as concerning David But it
is certain that the Soldiers did this according to the Custom, because they
parted the spoil of him that was condemned, among them selves. And although
nothing happened to Christ in this behalf, but that which condemned men
suffered, yet notwithstanding this Narration is woorthye to be noted with
great diligence. For the Evangelists do set Christ, the Son of God before
us, despoyled of his Clothes, to the end we might know that Riches are
purchased unto us by this nakedness, which do deck, and bewtifie us in the
sight of God. It was the will of God therefore to have his Son unclothed,
that we being apparelled with his rightuousenesse, and all his graces, may
boldly appear before him with the Angels.

Christ him self suffered his Garments to be taken from him, like apraie,
that he might enritche us with the treasures of his Victory.

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken hy the M. S. John has only:
That the Scripture might be fulfilled. But our Euangeliste Mathewe names the
Prophet David, because of his excellency, who also expressethe the manner of
the Crucifiynge, which the Evangelists pretermit with silence. His words are
these: They pierced my hands, Psalm. 22.
and my feet: I may tell all my boanes, they stand staringe and lookinge on
me. They part my garments among them, and cast Lottes upon my Vesture. The
Prophet could not more plainly express the very History, which should be
so many years after.

But although the Evangelists do make no mention of the nails, with the
which Christ was fastened to the Cross, yet notwithstanding they declare in
the History of his Resurrection, that he showed his hands, and feet to his
Disciples: that is (as S John writethe) the ^rinte of the nails in his hands
and feet. They parted my garments among them. This thing which David
metaphorically and under a figure complained to be done to him self, was
fulfilled in very deed in Christ. For David, under the name of garments,
vnderstandethe his goods and honors: as if he should have said that he
being alive, was a pray to his ennemies, which entered his house by
violence, and made so little spare of his goods, that they took away his
wife. This cruelty he does amplify by a metaphore, wrytinge that his
garments were divided by lot. But seeing he was a shadow and Image of
Christ, he foreshewed by the spirit of prophecy, what Christ should
suffer. Wherefore this also was notable in his person, that the soldiers
made a pray of his garments: because hereby we do se the marks and signs
with the which he was noted long before. And also the offense is taken away,
which otherwise might arise by his nakedness: because he suffered nothing,
which the spirit of God pronounces not to belong trewely, to the person of
a redemer.

36 And they sat and watched him there.

M. They go not their way, but sit still by the cross, as kepers, or markers
what he would do: least peradventure, either the Disciples should come and
take him alive from the cross, or least he should come down from the same
by a miracle.

37 And set up over his head, the cause of his death written thus: This is
Jesus the king of the Jews.

And they set up over his head. C. The four Evangelists do declare that
Pilate did set the titell of the Lord upon the cross. Our Evangelist Matthew
writes somewhat obscurelye in this verse, when as the Greek word, which the
interpreter calls the cause, does signify both the cause, and also the
accusation, or the falte. S. John speaks more plainly, saying. And Pilate
wrote a tytell, and put it on the cross. He calls that a tytell, which our
Euangeliste calls the cause, and Mark and Luke a superscription of the
cause. For thereby the cause of the death is briefly showed, when malefactors
are led to their ponyshement: S. Luke says, that this titell was written in
Greek, Lattine, and Hebrewe. And it contained thus much, as may be gathered
by the four Evangelists. This is Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. C.
Peradventure it was a common custom among the Jews, to set tytelles over the
heads of those malefactoures yt were putt to death. But trewely this was
extraordinary in Christ, that the titell should be set over him without
ignominy. For it was the purpose of Pilate that he might be revenged of the
Jews (who by their obstinacy caused an innocent unjustly to be put to death)
to condemn the whole nation in the person of Christ: so that he set no
inscriptio^ of any falte that belonged unto Christ, over his head. But the
providence of God which governed Pilates style, had respect to a farther
matter. It was not the meaning and purpose of Pilate to celebrate Christ, as
the aucthour of salvation, the Nazarite of God, and the king of the chosen
people: yet notwithstanding God did so guide his mind, that not knowing his
proclamation of the gospel, he should set it forth. By the same secret
impulsion of the spirit, it came to pass that he should publishe the titell
in three several tongues. But this was no lawefull or ordinary preachinge of
the Gospel, because Pilate was unworthy to bear any witness to the son of
God: but that which should be done by true mynisters, was shadowed in
Pilate. To be short, he may be thought such a preacher of Christ, as
Caiphas was a prophet. M. But because this tytell did set forth the malice
of the people of the Jews, Ihon. 1^
which had killed the heir of the vineyarde, their lord and king, the hye
priests of the Jews, after a sort smellinge the same, requested of Pilate
that he would change the same titell that he had set over the head of
Christ: as S. John declares by these words, This tytell read many of the
Jews, for the place where Jesus was crucified, was nighe to the city. And it
was written in Hebrewe, Greek, and Lattine. Then said the high priests of
the Jews to Pilate: write not King of the Jews, but that he said I am king
of the Jews. C. They feel them selves to be towched (as it was said even
now) and therefore they desired to have the title altered, and such a one set
up which might burden Christ without infamy of the nation. But in the mean
time they declare how greatly they were infected with the hatred of the
truethe, which could not abide any one spark thereof. Euenso always Satan
stirs up his mynisters, which, so sone as any light of Gods word does
appear, go about by and by to extinguysshe the same, or at least to choke it.
Pilate answers, That which I have written, I have written. The cause of
Pilatee constancy was the providence of God. for there is no doubt, but that
they went about to alter his mind by diverse means. Let us know therefore
that his mind was held inflexible, by the power of God, which caused him to
say, That which I have written, I have written. M. For at other times he
followed the will of the Jews in all things, because they did those things
which pertayned to the executinge of the purpose of God: but those things
which they now ask, they desired to this end, that they might remove the
ignomynie of the cross from them selves unto Christ, and to put away that
reproach, that they had crucyfied their king, that he might not be counted
the true Messiah, but a wicked fellow, which boasted him self to be the
Messiah of the Jews. But as this was false and full of reproach to the
heavenly king, so it pertayned not to the purpose of God. Therefore by the
instinct of the holy ghost Pilate answers so constantly, That which I have
written, I have written. As if he should say, I will not change the tytell. You
would needs have me crucify your king: I have crucified him, It shall be your
shame hereafter, which constrained me to do this thing. B. Furthermore by
these few words, (Jesus king of the Jews) the true Gospel of Christ was
contained. For by them he was preached to be that true and undoubted Messiah,
which was sent a king unto the Jews. And so in the midest of the death of
the cross Christ began to triumph, as says S. Paul in the second Chapter
to the Colossians. Colloss. 2.
Now the Cross of Christ began to change his condition, and to be in steed
of reproach a kingely tribunal, much more excellent than all other thrones or
chayres of estate. Furthermore this title was written in Hebrewe, Greek, and
Lattine, to declare that this king should reign, not only over the Jews, but
also over the Gentiles. As co^cerninge the which matter read the second
Psalm, Psalm. 2. Esaias. 49.
and the 49. of Esaias. The Euangeliste Luke declares that the people stoude by
lokinge on him. And S. John writing of the mother of Christ which stood by
also, says, John.
There stood by the Cross of Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary
the wife of Cleophas, and Marye Magdalene. C. Christ did so obey God the
father, that he neglected not the duty of human pietye toward his mother.
He forgate himself truly, Christ was careful for her mother.
and all things else, in respect of his obedience that he ought to the
father, but this being done, he would not omit the duty which he did owe
to his mother. And here we must learn so to do our duty unto men, that we
may nevertheless be obedient unto God. It comes oftentimes to pass that
when God calls us to any thing, our parents, our wife, and our children do
call us to the contrary, insomuche that we cannot satisfye both at once. But
we must first prefer the commandments of God, his worship, and honor:
and afterward so far as it is convenient we must do our duty unto men.
Luke. 14.
According to this saying, He that hates not father and mother for me, is
not worthy of me. When we have obeyed God, then shall we rightlye have a
consideration of our Parents, of our wife and children.

Now on the other part, we have here to note the faith of the women. For it
was no small affection of love to follow Christ even to the Cross, and
except they had been endued with a constante faith, they would never have
bidden such a syghte. Now let us be ashamed if the horror of the cross do
stay us from followinge of Christ, saying we also have before our eyes, the
glory of the resurrection: when as the women could see nothing but ignomynie
and shame, and malediction. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, John 19.
and the disciple whom he loved, he said unto his mother: woman behold thy
son. After that he said unto the disciple, Behold thy mother. As if he
should have said to his mother, After this I will be no more conversant in the
^arthe, to do the duty of a son unto thee. I do appoynte therefore this man
in my room, to take upon him my duty. And this is the meaning when he says
unto John, Behold thye mother. For by these words, he commands him to count
her as his mother, and to care no less for her, than if she were his mother.
In that he calls her woman, and not Mother, some thynck that he did it,
because he would not thereby move her affecttion to grief. Othersom think
that he did it to declare, that the race of his human life being ended, he
did now leave of that condition, under the which he had lived, and entered
into the heavenly kingedome, where he should rule both men and Angels. And
this later conjecture is no less probable than the first. For we do know
that Christ always went about to bring the faythefull from the consideration
of the flesh, to the spirit, The which thing he ought specially to do at his
death. And from that hour the disciple took her for his own. John. 19.
R. That is to say, he took her as his mother, he reverenced her as his
mother, and he was obediente to her as if he had been her son, so long as she
lived. C. John in obeyinge the commandment of Christ, shows him self a
louinge Disciple to his master. Hereby also it does appear that the
Apostelles kept their famelies, for how could John else keep the mother of
Christ? contrary to the opinion of those, which think that the Apostels
left all, when they came to Christ.

38 Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and
an other on the left.

Then were there. C. This was done to put Christ to extreme shame, that he
should be hanged in the midst between two thieves, murderers, and robbers.
For they appointed unto him the chiefest place, even as if he had been the
captain of thieves. A. But the Greek word signifies not thieves, but
murderers, and which lurk in dens by the hiewaies side, to sley men, for
they were not wont to crucify thieves. Therefore to the end Christ might
sustain the greatter ignominy, he is placed in the midst, as though he had been the chief murderer. If he had been nailed to the cross alone, his cause
might have seemed the better, and to be separated from other malefactors: but
now he is not only placed with murderers, but also set in the chief room,
as though he had been the most detestable of all other. And it was necessary
that he should be thus ordered, that we might know how great punishemente
was due for our sins. There was no punisheme^t cruel enough for our
wickedness, which could be found out, if Christ had not dyed for us.
Therefore that he might deliver us from the pain due for sin, this kind of
satisfaction was necessary, that he might set him self in our room. And here
we may perceive how horrible the wrath of God is against sins, to pacify
the which, it was necessary that Christ, which is the Eternal
righteousenes, should be counted as a most unrighteous, and placed in the
order of murderers. For, because Christ was reckened among malefactors, Esaias.
53
we are counted innocent of the father, as witnesses the prophet, saying, By
the knowledge of him which is my righteouse servant: he shall iustefy the
multitude, for he shall bear away their sins. The Evangelist Ma^ke adds,
And the scripture is fulfilled, which says, He was counted among the wicked.
That place is red in the prophsie of Esaias, thus: Therefore will I give him the
multitude for his part: and he shall divide ye spoil with the strongest, Esaias:
53.
because he gives over his soul to death, and is reckened among the
transgressors, which nevertheless has taken away the sins of the multitude,
and made intercession for the misdoers. The Prophet therefore plainly
speakethe this as concerning Christ, that he shall deliver his people from
death, not by any great pomp, but by sufferyng the punishment which was
dew for their wickedness.

The Euangeliste says (as it was also foreshewed in the place of the
Prophet, before mentioned) that Christ prayed for his enemies, saying:
Forgive the^, for they wotte not what they do. The Lord had taught before
saying. Do good unto those that hate you, and pray for them which hurt
you. This his doctrine he approves in deed, and by this his prayer, he
prouyd him self to be the lamb most meek and gentell, ^^ay: 53.
which should be s^ayne in sacrifyce, for the sins of the world. And after
this manner the faithful ought to temper their affections, in sufferynge
euylles, namely, to wyshe well unto their persecuters, and yet for all that,
not to doubt but that God will defend and save their life. But it is lykely
that Christ did not pray for all in general without exception, but only for
the miserable people, which were carried by a rash zeal, not by obstinate
impiety. For there was no hope left of the chief priests and Scribes, so
that he should have prayed for them in vain. For they sinned against the
holy Ghost, because their own conscience did hear them witness, that Jesus
was Christ, promised in the law and prophets, whom nevertheless they
persecuted. Whereby we learn that we ought not to pray for those with whom
wylfull malice preuaylethe, and are carried with obstinate blindness, sinnynge
against the holy Ghost, if so be they may be discerned to be such.

And there is no doubt, but that this prayer of Christ was heard of the
Heavenly Father: and that hereuppon it came to pass, that many of the people
which had shed the bloudde of Christ, afterward drancke the same by faith.

39 They that passed by, reuyled him, wagging their heads.

They that passed by. Bu. Now comes the fullness of all iniurye done unto
Christ crucyfyed. They had first mocked him pryuatelye in the Court of the
high Pryestes, the heathen people also had mocked him pryuately in the
judgment house of the deputy: but now on every side; all degrees tryumphe
over him, without mercy and compassyon, he being ready to dye, and
sufferynge most cruel torments, as the high Pryestes, the Scrybes, the
people, the soldioures, the highest, the lowest: yea, the thief on the cross
deryded him: and (which was most sorrowful) no man did bewail him: even as
David had foreshewed, saying, I looked for sum to have pity on me, Psalm.
69.
but there was no man: neither found I any to comfort me.

B. C. All men know by experyence, how great grief it is unto man, if in
his great trouble, not only no man bewayleth him, but also all men rather
rejoice. Christ suffers most bitter torments in the body, his mind also
is trowbled, and he is afflycted with most sharp and slaunderouse reproaches:
by the which Satan went about to geeue him a deadelye wound, that he
might put his Faith in danger. In this syghte, as in a glass, God has
set forth how miserable our condition is, if we should want a redeamer:
For what so ever Christ suffered, it was for our ease and saluatyon: whereby
we ought daily to be moved to repentance.

This temptation truly was more sharp than all other torments, that all men
should vex him with contumelies and sclaunders, as though he had been
rejected and forsaken of God. B. And therefore David bearing the person of
Christ, ^othe specially bewail this among the rest of his euylles, saying,
All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: Psalm. 22.
they shote out their lyppes, and shake the head. C. And trewly there is
nothing that does more wound and pearce the minds of the godly, than when
the^ wicked to destroy their faith, do cast them in the feethe, that they are
destitute of the help and grace of God. This is that sharp persecution with
the which Paul says that Isaac was vexed of Ismaell.

Gala. 4.
Not because he persecuted him with the sword and force of arms: but because he
mockinge the grace of God, went about to overthrow his faith. And first of
all David felt these temptations* after that, Christ him self, least they
should tempte us to much at this day, by the newenes thereof. For the wicked
shall never be wantinge to rejoice at our miseries.

40 And saying, thou that destroyedste the temple of God, and did build it
in three days, save thy self. If thou be the son of God come down from the
cross.

Thou that destroyedst. C. Here they do reprove the doctrine of Christ in
vain, because he does not now declare the power in time of need, which
he said before he had: But trewelye except a desire to speak evil had
deprived them of their mind and judgment, the truth of his saying, a little
after, was euydente inoughe unto them. Christ had said, John. 2.
Destroy this temple; and I will raise it up the third day. Now they
tryumphinge before the time in the beginning of the ruin and fall, do not
tarry until the third day. Such is the insolencye and presumption of the
wicked against all the children of god, when as under the pretense of the
cross they go about to take from them the hope of the life to come. Where,
(say they) is that immortal glory which foolish beleuinge men do do of,
saying they now lie thus contemned and in misery? Are not some of them in
extreme poverty, othersome in banishment, others in prison, and some also
burnte to ashes? Thus does the corruption of the present external man blind
them, that they think the hope of restoringe to come to be vain and
rydiculouse. But we must look for ye dew time when the promised building
shallbe finished: neither must we take it greueously if we be now crucified
with Christ, because hereafter we shall be pertakers of his resurrection. Save
thy self. Bu. As if they had said: At the length it apeareth how notablelye
thou have lied: for now thou can not save thy self. Thy afflicted body cut
and torn with strypes, thou can not restore: so far unable art thou to
build again the Temple if it were destroyed. If thou be the son of God C. For
this cause the hye Priest with the rest of the Priests, Scribes, and Elders
of the people condemned Christ of blasphemye, in the Counsel. Now here they
triumph over him being crucified, as though he were convicted of blasphemye.
This voice, If thou be the son of God, is a great temptacion, and procedinge
from the devil, specially, if thou weye and consider how and when it was
objected unto him being afflicted, and complayninge that he was forsaken of
God. Satan se^keth to take from us go^ promises.
Euenso Satan seeks to take from us the promises of God. In like manner,
Christ being among beasts in the wilderness, and feelings the pain of
hunger, Satan said, Math. 4.
If thou be the son of God command that these stones be made bread. Come
down from the Cross, The wicked do require of Christ such a document of his
power, that by prouinge himself to be ye son of God, he may cease to be ye
son of God. For this cause he took upon him our human nature and came
into the world, that by the sacrifyce of his death he might reconcile men to
God the father. Therefore it was necessary that he should hang upon the
Cross, to show himself to be the son of God. And let us hereby learn to
confirm our faith, because the son of God to finishe the work of our
salvation* would abide till he had suffered, both the cruel torments of the
flesh, and also the horrible extremities of the spirit, yea, and death it
self. And least it happen unto us to tempte God, as these wicked ones did in
the same manner, let us suffer God to bide his power so often as it seems good
unto him so to do, that at his pleasure he may declare the same again in due
time. M. It was not needeful that Christ should declare himself to be the
son of God by desce^^ynge from the Cross, but it was needful that he
being deadde and buried, should rise again the third day, and thereby to
declare him self to be the son of God. Whereupon the Apostell Paul also
says, which is declared to be the son of God with power, ^om. 1.
and by the resurrection from the dead.

41 Likewise also the hie pristes mocking him with the Scribes and elders,
said.

M. These wicked Hypocrites begin to tryumphe so sone as the truth seemed to be
in danger: in the mean time notwithstanding everlasting glory is prepared by
the crose for Christ, but to them perpetual confusion. They thought that the
truethe of Christ was fastened with nails to ye cross with the body of
Christ: when as it is one thing for the preacher of the word to be fastened in
body to the cross, and an other thing for the truethe of Gods word to be
nailed thereunto. So Paul said: but the word of God is not bound. ^ Timo. 2.
This he spoke, he being in bonds. Furthermore, although the brightness of
the truth do seem for a time to be obscured, yet notwithstanding the cloud
being taken away, it is much more clear and bright than it was before: even as
after the resurrection of Christ his glory did shine brighter a great deal,
than it did at any other time before.

42 He sauid other, him self can he not save. If he be the king of Israel:
le^t him now come down from the cross and we will believe him,

He sauid other, him self can. C. This ingratitude was not to be excused, that
theye being offended at the present abasyng of Christ, regarded nothing at all
those miracles, which before time he had showed in their sight. For they
confess here that he saved others. By what power, or by what means? Why do
they not at the least in this part reverence the manifest work of god? Surely
the reason is this: because they wickedlye obscured and went about so much as
in them lay to extynguishe the light of God which shyned in miracles, they
are unworthy to have a right judgment of the infirmity of the cross. Because
Christ does not presently deliver him self from death, they reproach him with
impotencye* A, as if they should say, At the length it appears what those
great benefits bestowed upon the blind do profit thee: thou which healest
the lame, and all others that were troubled with disseases, art not now able
to help thy self. Where is now thy power? This is always the manner of the
wicked* to measure the power of God by the present aspecte, that whatsoever he
does not, they thinck that he can not do: and therefore they condemn him of
debillitie, so often as he does not satisfy their wicked desire. But we must
note this that Christ being able to deliver him self easelye from death,
did it not, because he would not. And why had he no care of his own salvation
for a time, but only because our salvation was more dear unto him? Why would
he not deliver him self, but only because he would save us al? This
temptation is like unto that which went before.

43 He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him: for he
said, I am the son of God.

He trusted in God. M. The prophet Dauyd foreshewed that these things should
be cast in his teethe, saying, He trusted in God, that he would deliver him:
Psalm. 22.
let him deliver him, if he will have him. These things are very greuouse and
hurtful if they be put into the ears and mind of him that is tempted and
forsaken, and feelynge nothing but the wrath of God against him. C. This is a
grievous temptation of satan, when he persuades that God has forgotten us:
because he does not help us at the very instante, and in due time. For
(says he) saying God has always a care to save and defend those that are
his, and does not only help them in dew time, but also preuente their
necessittie (as the Scripture oftentimes teaches) he seemethe not to love
those, whom he helps not. By this subtle persuasion, he seeks to make us
despair, and to thyncke that we trust to the love of GOD in vain, when as
his help does not manyfestlye appear unto us. And as he puts this kind of
subtyltie and deceypte into our minds, so he does craftily suborne his
mynisters, which may persuade us that our salvation is not regarded of God,
because he differreth help.

Therefore we may reiecte this as an evil argument, that they are not loved
of God, whom he seems to hate for a time: yea, there is nothing more absurd,
than to restrain and tie his love to every particular time. God trewely, has
promised that he will be our delyuerer: but if at any time he wincke at our
trouble, we must patiently abide his leisure. Wherefore the chief priests do
gather amiss, that Christ is not the son of God, because he is not
delivered from the cross: for hereby, he fulfilled the will of his father: and
herby he redeemed mankind from death and hell. But Christ against these
temptations of the wicked, comforted him self thus: Thou art he that took me
out of my mothers womb, thou waste my hope when I hanged yet on my mothers
breasts. I have been left unto thee ever sense I was borne: Psalm. 22.
thou art mye God, even from my mothers womb. O go not from me. etc.

44 The thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teethe.

The thieves also which were M. S. Austine thinks; as concerning this
place, that the plural number is here put for the singular. S. Hierome says
that it is a figure called Silepsis, because for one these two are said to
blaspheme. But it is manifest yt it is a figure called Synecdoche, Luke. 23.
because Matthewe and Mark do attribute that unto thieves which Luke says was
proper to one: for he writes thus, And one of the evil doers which were
hanged, rayled on him saying. If thou be Christ save thy self and us. Neither
ought this sayng to offend any man, because the purpose of the other two
Evangelists was nothing else, than to teach that Christ was rayled upon on
every side, insomuche that the thieves which were half dead did not spare
him. And although they do omit that notable storye of the other thief whereof
Luke makes mention, yet notwithstanding there is no absurditye at all in this
yt they show that Christ was derided of all estates, yea and of the thieves:
because they speak not particulerly of every person, but generallye. Luke
says that they said, If thou be Christ save thy self and us.

Bu. This was not the least reproach. For what innocent can bear and suffer,
to be contemned and rayled on of a wicked person, of a thief, and reprobate?
But yet the Lord did suffer it, and that with great patience. By suffering
whereof he has gotten honor unto us among the Angels, that they may
acknowledge us to be their brethren. But by the way, here is described unto us
a notable example of obstinacye in this reprobate man, not ceassinge with great
rage in the midst of his torment to spewe out horrible blasphemye. And thus
are desperate men wont to do, who when they cannot escape tormente (in the
which they are) they seek to be revenged by contumacy. But the other
answered, and rebuked him. Luke. 23.
In this miserable man is set before us a singular spectacle of the wonderful
and inspeakeable grace of God, both for that he is suddenly changed a little
before death into a new man, and brought from hell to heaven: and also because
he obtained remission of all the sins and wickedness with the which his whole
life was overwhelmed, insomuche that he was received up into Heaven; before
the Apostles, and first fruits of the new Church. First of all therefore in
the conversion of this man, we have a singular example and proof of Gods
grace: for he did not put of the beastlye crueltye, and proud contempt of
God by the proper instincte and motion of the flesh, Repentance comes no^
by the motion of the flesh.
and so came to his repentance: but he was brought thereunto by the hand of
God, even as also the whole Scripture teaches that repentance is his work.

And this grace excelled so much the more because it happened contracye to the
expectacion of all men. For who would ever have thought, that a thief,
being now at the last cast, should be, not only a true worshipper of
God, but also an excellent master of faith and godlynes to the whole world,
insomuche that we also may be glad to fetch the rule of true and lawful
confession from his mouth? And first of all truly he brought forth this
fruit of repentance, because with severe correction, he stayed the wicked
rage of his fellow. Secondely, he humbled him self by a true confession of
his wickedness, and attributed unto Christ the due praise of righteousenes.
After that he declared a wonderful faith, committynge himself and his
salvation wholly unto the defense of Christ, whom notwithstanding he saw
hangyng on the cross and nere unto death. Luke 23.
Fear thou not God, saying thou ar^e in the same dampnation? C. As if he
should have said, What a thing is this, that this damnation constrayneth
thee not to fear God? For hereupon the these does exaggerate and make the
obstinacy of his fellow more haynouse, that being brought to extremity,
and the last pange, begins not for all that to fear God. Desperate me^
(...) never the ^etter for punishment.
Hereby let us gather that theye are desperate, and altogether void of the
fear of GOD, which are amended nothing at all by punishementes, We are
righteously punished, Luke 23.
for we receive according to our deeds, but this man has done no evil. As
if he had said. There is great difference between this man's punishment and
ours: for the punishemente which thou and I suffer, is due unto us for our
evil deeds, but as for Christ, he has done no evil, whereby he should be
punished, nay rather he is put to death by the malice and cruelty of his
enemies. Here let us note that the thief has given us the same lesson of
repentance, which God requires of us all, when he confessed that he
received a just reward for his deeds. But this is specially to be noted,
that the cruelty of the punishment did stay him nothing at all, from the
pacient suffering of the bitter torments. Repentance ^^nfesseth sins.
Wherefore if we be truly sorry for our sins, let us learn willyngely to
uncover them without dissymulation, when need requirethe, and not to flee from
the ignominye which we have deserved. For this is the only mean, by the
which we bury our sins before God and his Angels, if we go not about to
colloure them before men. And he said unto Jesus: ^uk. 23.
Lord remember me when thou commeste into thye kyngedome. This prayer
contains a testimony of faith and repentance. The Euangeliste Luke
briefelye declares this matter, which is so excellent, that it cannot
sufficientely be set forth, according to the worthynesse thereof. For trewely
this example of faith is so notable, that the like has been sildome seen
sense the beginning of the world. The thief which was not only unlearned in
the schole of Christ, but also geuinge him self to murder, had gone about to
extinguishe all feling and understanding of that which was right, does now at
a sudden assende hyer than all the Apostels and rest of the disciples, in
teaching and instructing of whom, the lord him self had spente so much time,
and bestowed so great labor: and not only this, but also he worshipeth
Christ as a king, hanginge on the cross, he celebrateth his kingedome,
which seemed altogether miserable and deformed, and he pronounces him to be
the auctour of life which lay then a dyinge. What excellency, what dignity,
or what life did he perceive to be in Christ, that he should thus think of
his kingdom. This truly was even as if one should assend from the deep
goulfe of hell, to the top of heaven. He calls Christ lord, and makes
mention of his kingdom, whom he sees to be condemned, despised, and rejected
of all men. Who would not have said that he had been out of his wits? C.
This certaynelye was rydiculouse and a fable to flesh and blood, to attrybute
a kyngedome, more noble than all earthely empires, to a condemned and abiecte
person. Hereby we may gather, what parfecte and quick sight the eyes of
their minds have, who can behold life in death, strength in weakness,
glory in reproach, victory in destruction, and a kyngedome in bondage. Faith
was almost decayed in all men, there was no man but he was discouraged, only
the thief, stands to the battle openly. The Apostelles were dombe, their
faith say hid, but the faith of the thief declares it self against all
impedymentes.

Wherefore let us not be ashamed to learn of this scholemaster mortification of
the flesh, patience, the depenesse of faith, the constancy of hope, and the
desire of godliness: whom the lord has made our teacher, to beat down the
pride of flesh. For the more diligently we follow him, the nerer we approach
unto Christ.

A. This also is to be noted, that he did not only believe in Christ, but
did also call upon him, whersoeuer therefore faith is, there is commonly
invocation also. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, Luke 23.
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. We do se here that the thief prayed
not in vain for he was heard: neither was Christ only mindful of him, but
also performed his promise. Wherefore if Christ did draw the thief unto him
when he was upon the cross, how much more now shall he hear us from his
heavenly throne, upon the which he sits, his ennemies being overcome?
Whosoever therefore when he is a dying commits the custody of his soul with
a true faith unto Christ, he shall not be long differred to la^guishe in
extremity, but shall have his desire, and the same mercy granted unto him,
which Christ granted to the thief upon the cross. Away therefore with that
fond and folishe immagination of Sophisters and Papists, Remission takes
away the punishmente of the falte.
as concerning the reteyning of punishment, when the fa^te is remitted:
because we do see that Christ does also deliver him from punishment, whom
he absolueth from sin. Let us also note, with what keys the gates of the
kingdom of heaven were opened unto the thief. For there is no mention made
here of popish confession, nor of satisfactio^s: but Christ is content to
receive those, that come willingly unto him with faith and repentance:
Furthermore we do hereby gather, that as the death of Christ did by and by
bring forth his fruit, even so our souls, so sone as they part from the body
do live: otherwise the promise which our savior Christ made here unto the
thief with an oath, were but vain.

In Paradise: C. As touching the name of Paradise, we do know that the glory
of God is described unto us, under the figures of blessed and happy things,
that we may the better conceive of the same: even as also the punishements of
the wicked are described unto us by fire. Therefore Christ in this place,
calls the state and condition of eternal life Paradise. So that we ought to
content our selves with this, that whosoever by faith are ingrafted into the
body of Christ, are partakers of his life, and so after death do inioye a
blessed and quiet life, until the parfecte glory of the heavenly life be
fully revealed at the coming of Christ. One thing yet is to be noted, that
Christ promisethe not to the thief, to ease his present miseries, or to take
away any part thereof, he being in bodily pain. By the which we are
admonished, that we must not judge of the grace of God, according to the sense
and reason of flesh, and blood for it comes oftentimes to pass that God
does suffer those to be myserably aflicted, to whom notwithstanding he is
merciful. Therefore if we be miserably disquieted in body, we must take heed, least the sharpnes of the grefe do take away the taste and feelinge of the
goodness of God: but rather that we le^t this only consolation, to temper and
moderate our trouble, namely that so soon as God has taken us into his
favor, what trouble so ever we suffer, it is for the furtherance of our
salvation. And so it shall come to pass, that our faith shall not only have
the victory over all troubles and myseries, but shall also have rest with
patience, in the midst of punishments.

45 From the sixth hour was there darkness over the land unto the nynthe
hour.

From the syxt hour there was darcknes. B. Mark has. And when the sixth hour
was come. That sixte hour was the third part of the day, (which began at
one of the clock after none, according to our day) and all the same until
nine of the clock was wont to be called the syxte hour. Read the twenty
Chapter goinge before.

E. Hereby we see that Christ honge upon the cross almost three hours: for
Mark declares that he was crucified the third hour. There was darkness over
the land. Although in the death of Christ the infirmity of the flesh, did
hyde the glory of the deitye for a time, and although the Son of God, lay
deformed under reproach and contempt, yet notwithstanding the father of
heaven, ceased not to adorn him with heavenly tokens and signs. And also in
the last deiection and extremity, he erected and set forth certain proffers
and signs of his heavenly glory, which might stay and hold up the minds of
ye godly against the offense or stomblynge block of the cross. Euenso the
majesty of Christ was wonderfully declared by the darkness of the Soon, by the
earthquake, by the cleauinge of the Rocks, and by the rentinge of the veale:
even as if heaven and earth should show their dew reverence to their work
master and maker. But first of all it may be demanded to what end was the
eclipse of the Soon? Some interpreters do think that God sent darkness at
the death of Christ for a sign of detestation: as if God should hide his
face, the soon being darkened from the abominable wyckednes of all men.

Other some say that the visible Soon being extinguished, the destruction of
the Soon of righteousness was declared* Other some think it better to refer
it to the blinding of that nation, which followed a little after.

For the Jews being rejected and pu^t to death, were deprived of the light
of the heavenly doctrine, neither was there any thing left unto them, but the
darkness of desperation Notwithstanding it is more probable, that because that
people was blind at the clear light they were awakened and stirred up by
darkness, to consider the wonderful purpose of God in the death of Christ.

For the strange and unwonted conversion of the order of nature might
seriously have moved them, if they had not been to blind and obstinate, to
consider the renewing of the world to come. In the mean time a terrible
sight was showed unto them, that they might be afraid at the judgment of
God.

Over the land E. Not over the whole earth, but this darkness was over Judea
only, or Jerusalem. C. For if this darkness had been over the whole
world, it would have been thought a natural eclipse, and so not regarded of
men. But to have Judea covered with darkness, and the Soon to shine in other
places was a more notable miracle.

E. Tertullia^ does affirm in his Apologitico that this darkness of the Soonne
was written in the book of aunciente monumentes of the Romans.

For Pylate (as he writes in an other place had foreshewed all these
things unto Tiberius. Eusebius also in his Cronicles makes mention of this
darkness of the Soon and of the earthquaque, by the which many houses in
Bethania fell down, he bringynge in Phlegontis the writer of the Olympiades,
for his witness. There want not some which write that this darkness was over
the whole world, being led thereunto by the writing of Phlegontis and Orosius,
describynge peradventure those things, which were kept of his matter in the
monumentes of the Romans, being written and foreshewed (as we said eue^ now)
by Pylate, unto Tiberius.

C. But although this was brought forth by one or two writers, yet
notwithstanding the hystory of their times was so common that such a notable
miracle could not be buried in silence of so many which diligently observed
those things, which were not so well worthy to be remembered.

40. And about the nynthe hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli,
Eli, lama sabathany. That is to say, My God, my God why haste thou forsaken me?

And about the nynth hour M. The Apostell makes mention of the cry and
tears of Christ, saying: Which in the days of his flesh, when he had
offered up prayers and supplications with strong cryinge and tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death, Heb. 5.
and was heard because of his fear.

Ely, Ely, Lamasabathany M. The Chalde or Sirian word is Sabathany, for the
which the Hebrews writ, Azabathani, Thou haste forsaken me. It is the first
verse of the two and twentye psalm, in the which, David which bare the
person of Christ, complayneth himself. But there are many things in ye
psalm, which can not appertain but unto Christ: the which thing, that
Christ might show, he used this beginnynge. C. And although their appeared
more than humane force in the cry of Christ, yet notwithstanding it is
certain that he was forced thereunto by the vehemencye of grefe And certainly
this was the special conflicte, and more sharp than all other torments, that
in his extremities he was so little helped with the help and favor of his
father, that after a certain manner he thought himself to be forsaken. For
he did not offer his body only a price of our reconciliation with God, but
also suffered in soul, those punishements that were dew unto us: and so he
was made in deed the man full of sorrows of whom Esaias speaks. Esaias. 53.


And truly they are to foolish, which settinge a side this part of the
redemption, do only stand upon the external punishemente of the flesh.
For to the end Christ might make satisfaction for us, it was necessary that
he should be brought before the tribunal seat of God. And there is nothing
more horrible, than to feel the Judgment of GOD, whose anger is far above
all deaths. Therefore when a show of temptation was objected unto Christ, as
though God being his enemy he were given to destruction, he was horribly
afraid, in such wise that if any mortal manne hadd felt the like, he
had been swallewed up of the same a hondered times. Neither does he
faynedly complain himself to be forsaken of the Father.

And where as many do think that he so spoke it is very far amiss. For the
inward heaviness of the mind by his force and feruency constrained him to
burste forth into this cry. Neither was it an outward redemption only
which he made, but as he offered himself for us, so he would in deed for our
sakes suffer the Judgment of GOD. But some manne will say, it is an a^surde
thing that Christ should burst forth into the voice of desperation.
Answer.
faith did abide fyrme in his heart, by the which he did behold God
present, of whose absence he complayneth.

Moreover the Deitye gave place to the infirmity of the flesh* because the
work of our Salvation was in hand, that Christ might fulfill all the
parts of a redemer. There is also a difference to be noted between the sense
and feeling of nature and the knowledge of faith. Wherefore Christ might
conceive in his mind that he was forsaken of God, according to the manner of
the flesh, and also believe that God was merciful unto him. The which thing
sufficientlye appears by the two parts of the complainte. For he before he
expresses the temptation, he declares that he flees unto God, as unto his
God: and so by the bucler of faith he puts away that persuasion which came
into his mind that he was forsaken of GOD. Therefore Christ felt the heavy
burden of Gods seueritye, because he being stryken and afflicted by the
hand of God, felt all the signs and tokens of an angery and severe God.

He fought with desperation, yet he was not overcome thereby. For they which
are desperate can not call the Lord their God. When he says my God my God, be
triumphs over the temptation. Hereby we may gather no small comfort and
consolation, seeing that he striuynge with the power of the deuel, with the
horror of death, and with the pains of hell, got the victory over them, and
triumphed, least when we hereafter should enter into death we should take
the same as the curse of Gods wrath: and that we would not fear those
things, which our prince and captain has overcome: But that we might get
us to that victory, which this Christ has gotten for us.

47. Some of them that stood there when they hard that, said: this man
calls for Helias.

Some of them that stood A. Here the Euangeliste Mathewe teaches how this
voice was taken of the hearers, namely ridiculously and sclanderously.

This man calls for Helias. C. They which refer this to the soldiers,
being ignorante and unskillful of the Syriake tou^ge, and not accustomed or
acquainted with the religion of the Jews are deceived. For they think that
they were deceived by the likeness of words, Ely, soundinge somewhat like
Elyas. But truly it is probable that they erred not through ignorance: When
as rather they went about to mock Christ, and sclanderously to peruerte that
which he spoke. For Satan has no practice more mete to destroy the
salvation of the Godly, than when he dryueth them from the invocation and
calling upon God. Therefore he sets his ministers so much as he may, to
make us have a desyer to sin.

Euenso he caused the enemis of Christ, peruersly to laughe at his prayer,
meaning by this subtle practice to spoil Christ of all his power and
strength. And truly this is a very greuouse temptation, when we seem to
be so far from profit, that GOD does rather suffer his name to be
reproched, than to show him self to be favorable to our requests.

Therefore this scoff or barkinge voice signifyetth thus much, as if they
had said that he had nothing to do with God, because he calling upon
Helias, seeks an other refuge.

We do see that he was so dexed in every point, that being overwhelmed with
desperation, that he did cease for a time to call upon God.

B. Euenso in mockedge and reproach the enemies said before: He trusts in
God, let him deliver him if he will have him.

48. And strait way one of them ran and took a sponge and when he had
filled it full of vineager, he put it on a read, and gave him to drink.

And strait way one of them ran C. Hereby we may have a probable
conjecture, that when Christ had once refused drink it was offered unto him
again to trouble him.

Howbeit it is also lykely, that in the beginning galle was offered unto him
in a cup, before he was lyfted up on the Cross, and that afterward when
he honge upon the Cross the sponge was put unto his mouth: Chapit. 19.
A. As it may be gathered by the words of Saint John: For thus he writes:
After these things Jesus knowinge that all things were now performed: that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, he says I thirste. So there stood a vessel
by full of vineager. Therefore they filled a sponge with vineager, and wound it
about with ysope, and put it to his mouth.

C. When Saint John says that there stood a vessel by, he speaks as of an
accustomed thing: And it is lykely that this kind of drink was made to
hasten the death and to make it short, when miserable men had been tormented
long inoughe. But Christ calls not for drink, until all things were
fulfilled: whereby he declared the singular care and love that he had for
our salvation.

But how does he say in Saint John that all things are fulfilled,

And again, was not the resurrection, the fulfillinge of our salvation?

We answer that Saint John comprehended that which followed afterward.
Christ was not yet dead, Answer.
neither was he yet risen: But he saw that there remained nothing now to
let but that he must go forward to his death and resurrection.

A. The like manner of speech we have in an other place where it is said: I
have fynished the work which thou gave me to do: Where Christ speaks
of all the parts of his ministerye, John 17,
as though he had now also suffered death.

B. And so hereby he has given us an example of true obedience, that it might
not be greuouse unto us to live according to the good pleasure of GOD,
although it be to languishe in great sorrow and grefe.

49. Other said, let us see whether Helias will come and deliver him.

Mark. 15.
Other said let us see A. Saint Mark says that he spoke these words which
offered the sponge unto Christ with vineager: which place seems to be
corrupted, so that it must be read thus: Other said, let be, or suffer
thou, (in the singular number, as certain Greek books have) and not, suffer
ye. For he did not let other to give him drink, when he himself gave it:
And Saint Mathewe plainly writes, that other would not suffer him to give
it.

Will come and deliver him Saint John adds to these words saying: When
Jesus therefore had tasted of the vineager he says, it is finished.

A. Christ would not drink of the vineager which was offered at the first,
because he would tarry the time which the father has appointed: but when all
things were ended, he received it, and said, it is finished. By the which
saying we are taught that the whole sum of our salvation is contained in
his death. We have said before that his resurrection must not be separated
from his death: only the purpose of Christ is, to ground our faith upon
him alone, that it, swerue not out of the way. There is also in these words
contained a secret antithesis or comparison: because Christ sets his
death against all old sacrifices and figures: as if he should say:
Whatsoever was used in the law was of it self of no force, to put away
sin, to pacifye the wrath of GOD, and to get righteousness: But now at the
length Salvation is declared and offered. To this doctrine the abrogation of
all the rytes of the law is annexed. It is fynished therefore, because he
brought all things to pass by his cross and death, in so much that there
remains nothing now, but that we should enter into everlasting life and
felicitye by his death.

Why then should we fear? All things (I say) is finished, satisfaction is
made for sin, the wrath of GOD is pacifyed, death is swallowed up in
victory, the Kingedome of God is purchased, heaven opened, to be short, all
things necessary for our salvation are obtained. A. Even as therefore sin
when it is finished brings forth death, euenso the death of Christ being
ended, has brought forth life. For it became him for whom are all things,
and by whom are all things (after that he had brought many sons unto
glory) that he should make the Lord of their salvation perfect through
afflictions.

50. Jesus, when he had cried again, with a loud voice, yielded up the
ghost.

Jesus when he had cried again C. The Euangeliste Saint Luke which made no
mention of the former cry and complaynte rehearses the words of this
second cry: Hebru. 2.
which Saint Mathewe and Saint Mark prefermitte. For he says that he
cried, Father into thy hands I will commend my spirit.

R. This word spirit is here putt for the immortal essence of the soul.

C. By this cry Christ declared, that although he were very sore assalted
and shaken with violente temptations, yet notwithstanding his faith was not
shaken: but always abode in his place invincible. For there could be no more
euidente a triumph than that Christ does boaste that God is the keeper of
his soul, which all men thought to be destroyed And because he thought he
should speak unto those that would not here, he did very well turn him
self unto GOD, and laid down the testimony of his trust before him.

He would that men should hear that which he spoke: But although he
did profit nothing with men, he was content to have God only a witness. And
although he seems to take this form of prayer out of the third Psalm, yet
notwithstanding there is no doubt but that, according to the present
circonstance of the time, he made it serve his present turn. As if he had
said: I see verelye, Father, that I by the consent of all men am appointed
to dye, and that my mind after a sort is carried hither and thither. In the
mean time I feel no help to come from thee according to the flesh. Yet
nevertheless this shall be no let unto me, whereby I should the less committ my
spirit into thy hands, and quietly rest my self in the secret custody of
thy goodness.

Notwithstanding we must note that Christ did not commend his soul into
his fathers hands for the private respect that he had to himself, but
that he comprehended all the souls of his faithful as it were in one, that
they might be saved and kept with his. And he speaks in the future tence, or
time to come, saying: I will commend, as if he should say, Father I do
willinglye commit my soul into thy hands, because thou shalt be the
keeper thereof.

This cry does show again the vehemence of the affection. For there is no
doubt but that Christ at the length burste forth into this voice out of
the extremity of temptations with the which he was held, not without great
occasion.

C. Hereby therefore let them receive consolation, which are unjustly put
to death of the wicked, because when ye wicked are suffered to do all that ever
they can to the Godly yet notwithstanding they are constrained whether they
will or no, to leave their souls vntoutthed, that they may commit them with
rest into the hands of God, what soever happen to their bodies.

Math. 10.
So Christ said: Fear not them which kill the body, but can not kill the
soul. A. And the Apostell Peter says: Let them that are troubled
according to the will of GOD commit their souls to him with well doing, 1
Pet. 4. Act. 7.
as unto a faithful creator.

This was the cause that the blessed martyr Saint Steven cried saying at his
death, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. For this is the difference between the
death of the children of GOD and the reprobate, that the one does despair,
and the other commit their souls to the tuition of GOD, as a preciouse
Jewel to be kept, until the day of resurrection.

Yield up the ghost C. The Euangeliste Saint Luke has, And when he had
spoken these things. he bowed down the head (says Saint John) and gave up
the Ghost* namely to the father. All the Evangelists do diligently set
forth the death of Christ: And not without cause. For hereupon commethe the
hope of eternal life, and hereuppon comes reioycinge over death, because the
Son of God has suffered the same for our sakes, and fighting therewith has
gotten the victory.

A. Wherefore although these things are tou^ched in few words, yet
notwithstanding they are not negligently to be pretermitted, because hereby
we may perceive the whole sum of our salvation.

All the Patriarchs by faith had respect unto this hour. To this howere all
the sacrifyces of the law did tend. To this hour therefore we must also
have regard, which desyere the true and perpetual salvation.

A. Christ here declares his majesty, in that he puts away his spirit,
not when men will, but when he will. Whereupon Pylate merueyled afterward
that Christ was so soon dead. And the Lord himself said: No man takes
the same from me, John. 10.
but I put the same from me of my self: I have power to put it from me,
and I have power to take it unto me again. To the whice effect also it
pertayneth, when it is said, that ^owinge his head he gave up the Ghost.

51. And behold the Veil of the temple did rent into two parts, from the
top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stone, rent.

And behold the Veil of the C. Whereas Saint Luke joins the rentynge of the
Veil of the temple with the darkness of the son, as though it happened
before the death of Christ, we must know that it is an inuersion of order.
For the Evangelists (as we do oftentimes see) do not observe the special
moments and seasons of times

Neither was it meet that the veil should be rent, before the sacrifice of
satisfaction were ended: because then Christ, being the true and ternall
Priest, the fygures of the law being abolished, made away unto us by his
blood to the heavenly sanctuarye, that we should not stand now a far
of, but that we might come forth boldelye into the presence of GOD. For so
long as the shadowed worship did endure, the Veil was set before the
earthly sanctuary, which might keep away not only the fete, but also the
eyes of men, that they could neither come unto it, nor behold it.

But Christ having put out the hand writtinge that was against us, has
taken away all let, that bearinge our selves bold of the Mediator, Colos.
2,
we may be all a kyngelye priesthood. Therefore the rentinge of the Veale
was not only an abrogatinge of the ceremonies which were under the law, But
also a certain opening of the heavens, that God might now familiarelye call
and bring to him self the members of his soon.

In the mean time the Jews were admonyshed that external sacrifices had an
end, and that the old priesthood should be no more in use: But because the
substance and truethe of shadows was fulfilled, the figures of the law were
turned into spirit. For although Christ did offer a visible sacrifyce, yet
notwithstanding we must esteem of it spirituallye (as the Apostoll teaches)
that we may know the fruit and price thereof.

Hereby also we may discern* What difference there is between the Gospel
and the law: in the Gospel; all things are made manifest by Christ: but
Moses had the Veale set between.

A. Of the which matter read the third chapter of the second to the
Corinthians. And the path did quake, and the stones C. It is lykelye that these
things also were done when the Veale of the temple did rent. Here the earth
gives testimony unto Christ as the son had done before. These signs do
declare the obstinacy of that people, which could be moved, neither by the
quaking of the earth, nor by the rentinge of stones.

By these also it was declared that the world should be moved by the Gospel,
and that stony hearts should be rent through repentance.

52. And graves did open, and many bodies of Sanites which slepte arose.

And graves did open C. This also was a special miracle, by the which God
declared that his soon entered into the prison of death, not that he should
abide there shut up, but that he might bring out all those which were hold
captive. For at what time the contemptible infirmity of the flesh was seen in
Christ, the magnificente and divine power of his death, pierced even to the
the lower parts.

And this is the cause, why he being ready to be shute into one Sepulcher or
monument, opened other Sepulchers. Notwithstanding it is doubtefull whether
this opening of the Sepulchers happened before the resurrection.

For the resurrection of Saints, which is afterward added, followed (as it
seems) the resurrection of Christ. For it is very absurd that certain
interpreters do dream and imagine that they lay for the space of three days
breathynge and alive in the Sepulchers.

It is more likely a great deal, ye Christ being dead, the Sepulchers were by
and by opened: but when he rose, that certain of the godly, having recyued life
went forth and were seen in the City.

For seeing the breakyng of Sepulchers was a foreshewyng of new life, the
fruit and effect it self thereof, appeared the third day after: Because
Christ rising again, brought others with him to bear him company out of the
Sepulchers.

And many bodies of saynctes which slepte arose. ^estion.
It may be demanded why God would have a few to rise again, seeing the
felloweship of Christ's resurrection does pertayne a like to all the faithful.

^nswere.
We answer that it was so appointed, because the full time was not yet come
by the which the whole body of the church should be gathered unto his head, a
show only of the new life, which all men hope for, being declared and set
forth in a few.

^^lloss. 3.
For we know that Christ on this condition was received up into heaven, that
the life of his members might be hydden as yet, until it should be revealed
by his coming.

They are called saints in this place, which were dead in the faith of
Christ to come, by whose blood they presented them selves with a fyrme faith
before the father to be sanctified and purged from their sins. Which
slepte. A. As concerning this sleep, read the four and twenty verse of the
nynthe chapter before.

53 And went out of the graves after his resurrection, and came into the holy
city, and appeared unto many.

^stion.
And went out of the graves. C. It may be demanded what came afterward to
pass of the saynctes. For it seameth very absurd that they being once
admitted of Christ into the society of life, should return again to duste.

^swere.
But as the answer is not easy and ready to be made, even so it is but vain
curiously to labor in a thing not necessary to be known. It is lykely that
they were not long conuersaunt among men: because it was mete yt they should
be seen but for a short time, that in the^ the power of Christ might be made
manifest.

And seeinge he would confirm those that were alive in the hope of the
heavenly life in their person: it shall be no absurdity if we say, that
so soon as they had showed them selves, they rested again in their
Sepulchers.

And came into the holy city. C. In that the Euangeliste honourablely calls
Jerusalem the holy city, he does it not for the deserts of this city:
(for we know that it was then replenyshed with all kind of wyckednes, that it
might seem rather to be a den of thieves) but seeinge it was chosen of God,
it could not be defaced by no corruptions of men, until such time as the
reiectinge thereof were made manifest: or else it was profane in respect of
the wyckednes of men, and holy in respect of the worship of God, until the
destruction of the Temple, which happened not long after Christ was
crucified.

54 When the Centurion and they that were with him watchynge Jesus, saw the
earthquake, and those things which happened, they feared greatly, saying:
Truly this was the son of God.

When the Centurion. M. Mark and Luke speak severally thus of the Centurion,
When the Centurion which stood before him, saw what had happened (that is as
says Mark, that he so cried, and gave up the Ghost) he glorified God (as
says Saint Luke) saying, Verily this was a righteous man: Mark has, this
was the son of God. But this our Euangeliste writes jointly and together of
the Centurion, and of those which kept Jesus, with him.

C. The Euangeliste Luke makes mention that the Centurion with his Soldiers
acknowledged Christ to be the son of God, to amplefie the matter: because it
is marueyle that a profane man, and not brought up in the Law, but
altogether void of true godlynes, gave such a judgment of the signs which
he saw. The which comparyson does not a little serve to condemn the blyndnes
of the city, for it was a sign of horrible madness, that none of ye Jews
were moved saving the common multitude, and that a few, at the shaking and
tremblyng of the foundation of the world.

How be it, God in so great blyndnes; would not suffer the testimonies
which he had given of his son to be hid.

Bu. This Centurion was a Romayne, sent of Pylate the Deputy, and set to
ouersee Christ after he was condemned, least there should arise any tumulte
among the people.

They feared greatly. C. In that the Centurion is said to fear and also to
glorifye God, it ought not so to be expounded, as though he did fully and
wholly repent: For this was only a sudden and transitory motion, which
continewed but a short time. Even as often times it comes to pass that vain
men, and such as are given to the world, are strycken with the fear of God,
when he declares his fearful power: But because it takes not deep root, it
does by and by bring forth security, which quyte extynguysheth the same.

Therefore the Centurion was not so changed that all his lyfetyme afterward
he gave him self unto God, but he was only for a time a proclaymer of the
deytie of Christ. Saying, Truly this was the son of God. C. The Centurion
affirms him to be the son of God, and a righteous man, not that he
distinctly understood how Christ was begotten of the father, but because he
judged somewhat that was divine to be in him, and because he was constrained
by the miracles, he deameth that he was endued with the power of God. M. After
these things, Saint Luke adds saying, And all the people that came together
to that syghte, and saw the things which had happened, smote their breasts
and returned.

The strykynge of the breasts, was a sign of grief, and such that they
feared least the Lord should take vengeance on them for the blood of the
innocent man. For that sign is given, either when we repent us of our
sin, or when we fear the calamity which hangs over our head. And
certainly, the whole region is polluted, in the which Innocent blood is
shed.

55 And many women were there, (behouldyng him a far of) which followed
Jesus from Galile, ministering unto him.

Add many women were there. E. The Euangeliiste Saint Luke has: And all his
acquaintance and the women which followen him from Galile, stood a far of
behouldyng these things.

C. But these things are therefore added, that we might know that although
the disciples were dispersed here and there through flyghte, yet not
withstanding, the Lord kept some of them as witnesses. And although the
Apostell Saint John, went not from the Cross, yet for all that, there is no
mention made here of him: but the women only are commended of our Euangeliste
Saint Matthewe, which followed Christ even to the death, because the men
flying away with fear, their singular love toward their master, did the
more appear.

Notwithstanding, we do not gather by the forenamed place of Saynct Luke,
that all the men fled away, because he says that all his acquaintance stood
a far of. But the Evangelists do not without good cause chiefelye make
mention of the women: For thereby the Apostels are sharpelye reprehended:
because the women were less fearful than they.

We speak of the body it self. For, because one only abode as a remnaunte,
of him (as we said even now) the three Evangelists make no mention.

And this was a great shame to the chosen witnesses, to withdraw them selves
from that sight, upon the which the salvation of the whole world did
depend. So that when they should afterward publishe the Gospel, they were
feign to learn the special part of the history, of the women. Wherefore
except the providence of God had wonderfully prevented this evil, they had
depryued them selves and us to of the knowledge of the redemption. And although
there seems not to be so great authority and creedit to be given to the
women, yet nevertheless if we way with how great power of the holy Ghost
they were strengthened against that temptation, there shall be no cause why our
faith should waver, which rests in the true God, the author of testimony.

C. Therefore we must note their wonderful faith. It was a grievous
temptation, to see Christ reproached with such sclaunder, and at the length
to dye: It was also a horrible syghte to see his daed carcas. Their faith
therefore was not lightly tried.

But in that they stood a far of, it was a sign of womanly fear. For
although they did love the Lord, yet notwithstanding, their love was not
without the infirmity of the flesh.

Wherefore by this example we learn not to reiecte the weak and fearful by
and by, as though there were no love in them to the Lord. Which follovved
Jesus from Galile. C. This deserved no small praise in these women, that for
the desyer they had to learn, they forsook their own country, that they
might continually depend upon the mouth of the Lord: And also because they
neither spared labor, nor goods, to have the doctrine of salvation. For our
Euangeliste says: ^uke. 8.
Ministering unto him. What they ministered Luke declares saying: Which
ministered unto him of their substance. They mynistered not only to the
person of Christ, but to the Apostles also which followed him. This place
ought diligently to be noted.

The king of kings, which nourishes all things, being Lord of heaven and
earth, had nothing to sustain him self, but that which he had of those
that followed him. Cor. 8
Therefore the Apostell Paul says: For ye know the lyberallitie of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became
poor, that ye through his poverty might be made rich.

The which argument the Apostell uses to move the minds of the faithful to
give alms to the poor. Christ our Savior, by this his poverty gave
example, that they which receive spiritual things should be ready to give
part of their goods to their teachers: Otherwise it had been an easy
matter for the Lord to sustain him self and his disciples, without any help
of these women.

^atth. 10
He knew that the labourer was worthy of his hyer. Here also by the example of
these women, we are taught not to be wearye of well doing, and to perceuere
in the race which we have well begone. as they followed him being alive, so
now they prosecute him being dead.

56 Among which was Marie Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Ioses,
and the mother of Zebedes children.

Among which was Mary Magdalene. A. They which were best known are here
expressed by name.

The Euangeliste Saint Mark adds saying: And other women also, Luke. 8.
which went with him to Jerusalem. For as Luke says, he had healed many
of them from evil spirits and diseases. And what was done after these things
Saint John declares saying: The Jews therefore, because it was the preparynge
of the Sabbath, that the bodies should not remain on the Cross on the Sabbath
day (for that Sabbath day was a high day) besoughte Pilate: and so forth
until the eight and thyrty verse, in the which he declares those things,
whereof our Euangeliste Matthewe makes mention in the eight and fifty verse,
saying: He went to Pylate and begged the body of Jesus.

57 When the even was come, there came a rich man of Aramathia, named Joseph,
which also was Jesus Disciple.

When the even was come. C. Now the Euangeliste adds the buryall of
Christ as the myddell passage from the ignomynie of the Cross, to the glory
of the resurrection. God would have his son to be buried for an other cause
also, that so it might be the better declared that he suffered death in deed
for our sakes: but by the way this end is specially to be noted, that by
this means the curse began to be abolyshed, which he took for a short time.
For his body was not cast into ye pyt after the common manner, but was laid
honourablely in a Sepulcher of stone.

When the even was come. E. Or rather when it was toward the even, the Sun
being ready to set after the nynthe hour.

For the even was not come when Joseph desired the body of Jesus: Because
before the night began also, the preparinge of the Sabbath being not yet
ended, the Lord was laid in the Sepulcher.

For so soon as that even was begone, the great Sabbath began also: In the
which it was not lawefull to take down the body, or to burye it in the
Sepulcher.

No man ought to doubt but that this is the sense of the Euangeliste, both
the observation and custom of the Jews, requyringe the same, and also the
holy father Ignatius, writing in his Epistle thus: Before the Sun setting,
he was taken down from the Cross, and buried in a new Sepulcher.

C. Therefore we must understand, that Joseph came not in the twylyghte, but
before the Sun setting, that he might do this deed of Charity to his
master without the violatynge of the Sabbath.

For the beginning of the Sabbath was from that even: And from the death of
Christ, to the observation of the Sabbath were three large hours.

There came a rich man. M. The Evangelists do declare many things of this
Disciple of Christ, namely, that he was a rich man, that he was a good man,
honest, just, a Senatoure, that he looked for the kingdom of God, that he
was a Disciple of Christ, but secretlye, and that he agreed not to the
counsel and deed most wicked, of the Jews.

C. Now allthough this affection of Joseph, deserved great praise, for that
he sought to burye Christ so honorably, yet notwithstanding first of all
me must consider the providence of God, because among his servants he chose
a man, noble and of great dignity, which should begin with the honor of
the Sepulcher, to cover the reproach and ignomynie of the Cross.

And truly, seeing he put him self in danger and hatred of all men, and
adventured him self in great perils, there is no doubt, but that he was
made thus boulde by the secret instincte of the holy Ghost.

For although he were before one of the Disciples of Christ, yet
notwithstanding, he never durst openly and freelye confess his faith: But
now, when in the death of Christ, there was a sight to be seen of great
desperation, and which was able to break a stout courage, how comes he
to be so boulde, that being in great terror he fears nothing, and goes
farther than he may do with ease? Let us understand therefore, that the
son of God was buried by the hand of Joseph, by Gods appointment.

To this end also, the circumstaunces which are here noted ought to be
referred. M. First our Euangeliste says, that he was rich: not that he
did prevail any thing the more because he was rich, but to the end he
might show a reason as it were, why this Joseph so easily obtained the body
of Jesus at the hands of the Romayne Deputy. For great is the prerogative of
rich men with the Judges of this world.

And we know how filthy and infamous a work it was to take the carcas of
a crucefyed man, out of the hand of the Hangeman, or tormenter.

But we are taught by this example, that rich men are so far from excuse,
if they rob Christ of his honor, that they are rather gyltye of two
faults, when they convert those prouocations which should stir them up
into lettes.

We grant truly this thing to be very commen and oftentimes seen, that
they which seem to excelle others, pluck their neck out of the collar, that
they are to nyce and tender, and that they are to circumspecte and fearful:
But we must have an other manner of consideration, that except our riches
and honors be helps to the woorshyppes of God, we do wyckedly abuse them.

Moreover Joseph has perpetual praise because he agreed not to the Jews which
condemned Christ. Riches not used to the worship of God, are abused.
By the which example Senators and Magistrates being admonyshed, ought to
take heed unto them selves, least they sin against their conscience in
sheadynge of Innocent blood. A. Saint Luke adds, saying: which wayghted
also for the kingdom of God. Joseph is here praised for waytinge for the
kingdom of God. He is praised also for his ryghteousnes: But this waytinge
for the kingdom of God, was the very root and original of righteousness.

By the kingdom of God we must understand the promised renewynge in Christ.
For the integrity of order cannot stand, (which the Prophets said should
be at the coming of Christ) but when God does gather those men that are
dispersed under his Impery.

In this therefore Joseph is commended, that in a miserable state and subject
to destruction, he kept the hope of redemption which was promised of God.

Hereuppon also spryngeth the fear of God, and a desire to lead a godly life.
For it cannot be that any man should serve God, but he which assures him
self that he will be his delyuerer. Let us also note, that salvation in
Christ being offered to all the Jews alyke, and his promise commen to all
men, the holy Ghost witnesses that it was recyued but of a few, as we may
read here of Joseph. Whereby it appears that the inspeakeable grace of God
was wyckedly despised of all men for the most part through oblivion. All men
could talk in boastinge wise of the coming of Christ, but the covenant of
God was fixed in the hearts but of a few, that they might arise by faith to
the spiritual renouation. But I would to God the like miserable corruption
were not in these days. How many be there I pray you which wait for the
kingdom of God? Are not all me^ for the most part so fastened to the earth
as though there were no promised resurrection? But howesoeuer the greater part
forgettyng them selves, do streye to and fro, let us remember that this virtue
is proper to the faithful to seek those things that are above: and specially
now that the grace of God has bryghtly shyned through the Gospel, teaching
us that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, Titus. 2.
and that we should live soberly, and ryghteously, and Godly in this present
world, lookynge for that blessed hope and appearyng of the glory of the great
God. Of Aramathea. Saint Luke says that it was a City of the Jews. Some
say that it is the same which is called Ramatha, being sytuate on Mount
Ephraim, beside Lydda, which was called afterward Diospolis. Which also
was Jesus Disciple. Saint John says, that he was a pryuie Disciple of
Christ, for fear of the Jews.

This man, although he had heard Christ preaching, and was throughlye
persuaded that he was the Messiah, yet for all this he durst not confess
him so to be, least he should be cast out of the Synagoge. As concerning
the which, read the ninthe of John.

58 He went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus: Then Pilate commanded the
body to be delivered.

He went to Pilate. C. Saint Mark has: He went bouldly to Pilate. Here
we see that what bouldenes so ever man has, the same comes altogether from
God. Furthermore, we see that we ought not to despair of those, who
although as yet they do not openly profess the truth of the Gospel, yet
notwithstanding, they do in heart embrace the same, and are secret disciples
thereof.

When occasion is given, it may happen to them by the grace of God, that they
shall come forth, and openly declare that they consented not to the effusion
of Innocent blood, and to the resystynge of the truth, when his Disciples
which have already the profession of truth, shall fly for fear. And begged
the body of Jesus. He durst not take down the body of Christ by his own
authority or power. For the bodies of those which are put to death by the
magistrate, are also after death in the power of the magistrate.

Saint Mark adds saying: And Pilate marueyled that he was already dead,
and called unto him the Centurion, and asked of him whether he had been any
while dead. And when he knew the truth of the Centurion, he gave the body
to Joseph.

Saint John has: And Pilate gave him license. But our Euangeliste has: Then
Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. This was as it were a certain
preparation to prove the truth of Christ's resurrection: least the false
Jews should say that he feigned him self to be dead, and that he rose from
that cou^terfeyt and dissembled death: Therefore witnesses are brought in, that
he was certaynely dead. But it was done by the wounderfull permission of God,
that Pylate should grant the body of Christ unto Joseph.

59 And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean lynnen clohe.

And when Joseph had taken the body. A. Saint Mark has: And he bought a
lynnen clothe. God truly would bury his Christ, with a glorious burial,
although his death had nothing but ignominy: It was sumptuous and done with
cost, because it was a certain preparation to the glory of the resurrection.
And therefore the dead ought to be buried with some honest preparation to cover
their bodies, into the which they are put until the day of resurrection.

The Jews had many ceremonies in burying their dead, to whom so great light
did not shine: This only belongs unto us as well as to them, not to leave
the dead carcases upon the ground for birds and beasts, but to bury them in
the earth, where they may be kept until the day of Christ's coming, He
vvrapped it in a clean lynnen cloth. In that the body of Christ was wrapped in
a clean lynnen clothe, and laid up in a new Sepulcher, it was thereby
declared that some new thing was done which was not heard of before. For
Christ ought not to have been laid with other dead men, because he went to
open the way to a new life. The burial of Christ also does admonish us of
our duty: Of the which the Apostle writes, Romans 6.
saying, All we which are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized to dye
with him: where he teaches at large what it is to be buried with Christ,
and also to rise with him again.

Saint John also makes mention of a certain disciple of Christ, whose name
was Nicodemus, which did help Joseph in the burial of Christ: his words
are these: And there came also Nicodemus, which at the beginning came to
Jesus by night) and brought of Myrre and Aloes myngled together, about an
houndred pound wayghte. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in
lynnen clothes, with the odoures.

By the example of these men, is prescribed unto us what we owe unto Christ.
For both of them to make a plain declaration of their faith, took Christ
from the Cross, (but not without great danger) and brought him to the
Sepulcher. Greatly therefore is our negligence to be blamed if we defraude
him of the confession of our faith, now that he reigns in heavenly glory.

Saint John has: As the manner of the Jews is to bury. C. That the Jews
buried the bodies of the dead with sweet odoures and spyces, we may gather of
the burial of Jacob, of the which it is said: And Joseph commanded his
servants the Physicians to imbaume his father: and the Physicians embawmed
Israel forty days long, Gene. 50.
for so long does the embawmyng last. These Balmes and odoures were used to
keep the carcas for a time from corruption and stynke. After therefore Christ
had suffered most shameful ignominy upon the Cross, God would have his
burial to be honorable, that it might foreshewe the glory of his
resurrection. Joseph and Nicodemus, do bestow so great cost, that it might
seem superfluous: But we must consider the purpose of God, which led them by
his spirit to give this honor unto his son, that the sweet odoure of the
Sepulcher might take away the horror of the Cross. Moreover those things
which are extraordinary, ought not to be drawn into example.

Saint John also by those words before recited, does declare that this was
one of the ceremonies of the law. For it was necessary that the people of old
time, namely the Jews, should be stayed up by such little helps, who had
not such manifest testimony of his resurrection, that with constant faith
they might look for the coming of the mediator.

Wherefore we must note the difference between us, to whom the brightness of
the Gospel has shyned, and the fathers, to whom figures and shadows supplied
the absence of Christ. This is the reason: then, greater pomp of Ceremonies
was tolerable, which at this day cannot be used without fault. For they which
at this day burye the dead so sumptuouslye, do not only burye dead men, but
also they (so much as they can) pluck Christ himself the king of life, from
Heaven, and do shut him into the Sepulcher: because his resurrection has
abrogated those oulde Ceremonies. For the promise and the word of God is ye
soul as it were, which geeueth life unto Ceremonies: ye word being taken
away, all rightes what soever that men observe, are nothing but mere
superstition: because immoderate cost does extinguishe ye sweet odoure of
Christ's resurrection. Moreover S. John adds saying: And in the place where
he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new Sepulcher.
wherein was man never laid. There laid they Jesus therefore, because of the
preparinge of the Sabothe of the Jews.

Because the time was far spente, and the Sun settinge (which was the
beginning of the Saboth) was at hand, Joseph and Nicodemus chose this garden
as a fit and convenient place for their purpose.

60. And laid it in his new tomb, which he had hewn out even in the rock,
and rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed.

And laid it in his B. Luke and John do declare what Matthewe means by this
new Sepulcher, saying, In the which never any man was laid. C. Whereby we
gather that Christ was honorably buried. For there is no doubt but that
Joseph being a rich man, and grauntinge his Sepulcher unto the Lord, spared
not any other cost which was necessary for his burial. Which he had hevven
out The Evangelist Mark has: Which he had hewn out of the rock.

And rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher He rolled this great
stone to the door of ye Sepulcher, either lest some should spoil the dead
carcas, or else steal it away. But by this mean ye providence of God would
take away all vain suspicions, and make a way to the glorious resurrection
of Christ.

61. And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Marye sittinge over against
the Sepulcher.

And there was Marye Magdalene, A. The Evangelist Mark has: And Mary
Magdalene and Mary Iosephe beheld where he was laid. Luke has: The women that
followed after, which had come with him from Galile, beheld the Sepulcher, and
how his body was laid. She, whom Matthew calls the other Marye, is said of
Mark to be the mother of Joseph and the brother of James. S. Luke adds
saying: And they returned and prepared sweet odores and oyntmentes. Matthew
and Mark only declare that the women beheld how and where he was laid:
but Luke here expresses their purpose also, namelye yt they returned into the
Cittye to prepare sweet odores and oyntmentes, that two days after they might
celebrate his funeral. E. But when they prepared their sweet odores and
oyntmentes, Mark declares saying: And when the Sabothe was past, Mark. 16.
Marye Magdalene, and Marye Jacob, and Salome, brought sweet odoures, that
they might come and anoint him. For after that they had marked the place, and
saw how the Lord was put into the Sepulcher, the Sabothe came upon them. On
ye which Saboth they rested according to the commandment: but the Saboth day
being paste, they prepared by and by their sweet odoures, and oyntmentes.
Wherefore the words of Luke seem to be placed out of order, which should be
red thus: But the women returned and rested the Saboth day according to the
commandment, the which being paste they prepared sweet odoures and
oyntmentes.

62. The next day, that followed the day of preparinge the hye Priests and
Phariseys came together unto Pilate.

The next day that follovved C. In this narration, the purpose of Mathewe was
not so much to show with what obstinate madness the Scribes and Priests
persecuted Christ, as to represente unto us in a glass the inspeakeable
providence of God in prouinge the resurrection of his son. The crafty and
false Jews conspire among themselves, and do devise a way by the which they
might extinguishe the memory of Christ being dead. For they see that they
have profited nothing except they oppress the faith of the resurrection. But
while they go about to bring this thing to pass, they bring that other
thing, which they sought to hyde into the light of knowledge. For truly the
resurrection of Christ should have been more obscure, or at ye least, they
should have had more liberty to deny the same, except they had set witnesses
to keep the Sepulcher. Therefore we see that ye Lord does not only
frustrate the expectacion of crafty men, but also snaringe them in their own
devises causes them to obey his will. The enemies of Christ were unworthy to
behoulde his resurrection: but yet it was meet that their impudencye should be
reproved, and that the pretense of sclaunder should be taken from them, yea
that their own consciences might be convinced, least they should be excusable
through ignorance. For what greater testimonye of Christ's resurrection
could there be, than to find the Sepulcher emptye after Christ was put into
it, the soldiers watchinge ye same? The hye Priests and Phariseys came,
Behold here how these hye Priests these hypocrites, which were wont to
reprehend Christ for healing those that were sick, on the Saboth day, do
themselves violate the Saboth day, that they may prosecute their malice
against Christ.

63. Saying: Sir, we do remember that this deceyuer said, while he was yet
alive: After three days will I arise again.

A. This our savior Christ spoke in ye 16. Chapter goinge before. But they
might also have more plainly learned this thing at the mouth of Judas, who
heard the Lord himself say, that he would rise again the third day.

64. Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made sure until the third day,
lest his Disciples come and steal him away, and say unto the people: he is
risen from the dead. And the last error shall be worse than the first.

Command therefore that the Sepulcher C. There is no doubt but that this
cogitacion came into their minds by the instincte of the holy ghost, not
only because the Lord would take just vengeance of their wickedness, but also
because he mente to bridle their unclean tongues. And by the way we may also
see how greatly the wicked are blinded, when they are bewitched of Satan.
They call him a deceyuer, whose divine power and glory brightly shyned a little
before by so many miracles.

By such examples we are taught that we ought to consider the glory of God
betimes with godly modestye and diligence, when it declares it self, least
that brutish and horrible blindness follow our obstinacy. Least his Dysciples
come, Bu. Behold here the care of the wicked and the disquietnes of their
consciences, which fear least the great stone should be rolled away, and
the body of Christ taken out of the Sepulcher, by those men which were so far
from this bouldnes, that they rather stood in fear of them, and which so
hardly believed after the resurrection, Mark 16.
that Christ was risen again, that for this cause Christ reprehended the
hardness of their hearts.

And say unto the people he is risen, These hypocrites would seem to have a
great care for the simple people, when as in deed they went about nothing but
to provide for their own kingdom, mockinge the people in their hearts: as if
they should say: We fear least the people should be seduced. And the last
error shall be worse than the first This they add to move the mind of the
Judge: as if they should say, This also belongs to the public peace. For
except thou do this thing, the last error will be worse than the first to
bring trouble. They call the truth of the Gospel and the kingdom of God,
error, and the cause of trouble: and that falselye.

65. Pilate said unto them: ye have the watch, go your way and make it as
sure as ye can.

C. Pilate by these words declares that he geeueth them leave according to
their request, to set soldiers to watch the Sepulcher. Pilate might have
been iustlye angerye with these hypocrites, and have denied them their
pitition: but it was brought to pass by the secret counsel and purpose of
God, that he should not hinder that which they went about. For it did
greatly serve to the manifestinge and settinge forth of the Lords resurrection.

66. So they went and made the Sepulcher sure with watchemen, and sealed the
stone.

Bu. The Jews took a great many soldiers, made a very strong watch,
compassed the Sepulcher round about, shut the door of the Sepulcher with the
great stone so close as might be, and sealed the same, least there might be
some deceit also in the keepers. M. All things were done with great diligence
that Christ might be kept in the Sepulcher. With the like diligence many go
about at this day to keep the truth in secret. But as this keepinge of the
body of Christ appointed by the enemies, with the more dyligence it was
done, the more it confirmed the certaintye and glory of Christ's resurrection:
even so their violence also which go about at this day, to keep ye truth hidden
in darkness, the greater that it is, and the more it is confirmed with the
power of the Magistrate, the more a great deal it sets forth the power and
glory of the truth. C. By all these things truly which the Jews obtained at
the hands of Pilate, they were the more bound that they might not excuse them
selves by any cauilles. For although they durst rage and rail at Christ
without all shame after his resurrection, yet notwithstanding they sealed their
own mouths faster a great deal, with the signet of Pilate than they did the
Sepulcher. And thus far as concerning the Passion, and sumptuous burial of
Christ.

The xxviii. Chapter.
Upon an eueninge of the Sabothes, which dawneth the first day of the
Sabothes, came Marye Magdalene, and the other Mary to see the Sepulcher.
Upon the eueninge of the Sabothes, C. Now we be come to the conclusion of our
redemption. For herevppon comes the liuelye trust of our reconsiliatio^ with
God, because Christ is the conqueror of death and hell, that he might declare
the power of a new life to be in his hands. Wherefore rightly says the
Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 15.
that there shall be no Gospel, and that the hope of salvation is vain except
we believe that Christ is risen from the dead. For so at the last
righteousness was purchased unto us, and the enteraunce into Heaven made open:
furthermore, our adoption was confirmed, when Christ in rysinge again, and
declaringe the power of his spirit, has proved himself to be the son of
God. And although he manifested his resurrection otherwise than our fleshlye
sense and reason would require: yet notwithstanding this order and manner which
pleases him, ought to seem best of all in our eyes. He went out of the
Sepulcher without witness, that the void and emptye place might be the first
token: then he thought it good to show the women by the Angels that he was
alive: after that he appeared to them, and at the length to the Apostles, and
that oftentimes. And so he brought his Apostles by little and little,
according to their capascity, to more full and perfect understanding. But
whereas he began first with the woman, and did not only show himself unto
them, but enjoined unto them also the preachinge of the Gospel to the
Apostles, that they might be as it were their masters, he does it to correct
the sluggishnes of the Apostles, which through fear lay allmoste out of
heart, when as the women diligently made have to the Sepulcher: who for their
diligence received no small reward. For although their devise to anoint
Christ was not without fault, because they thought him to be as yet dead, yet
notwithstanding he forgeuinge their infirmity, did greatly advance them to
honor, resigninge unto them ye Apostolical office for a time which was
forsaken of the men. And so he sheewed that to be true which ye Apostle Paul
writes saying, 1. Cor. 1.
God has chosen the folishe and weak things of this world to confound the
wise and mighty.

Upon an eueninge of the Sabothes C. The Hebrews call the whole night the
eueninge. And whereas it is said, of the Sabothes, we must note that the
plural number is here put for the singular. Furthermore this word Sabothe,
signifies that day which was consecrated of the Lord: it signifies the
whole week also, that holy day only excepted: wherefore the day followynge
is called the first of the Sabothes. Whervppon ye proud Pharisey said: Luke 18.
I fast twyse in the Sabothe, (according to the lattine translation) or week.

He calls therefore the eueninge of the Sabothes, which dawneth or
begins his light the first of the Sabothes, the morninge or dawninge of that
day in the which Christ arose: the which he calls here the first of the
Sabothes, that is to say, the first day after the Sabothe in the week
followinge. The which he so calls because the Jews according to the
manner of the Scripture, began the day from the eueninge, Gene. 1.
according to this saying of Moses: And ye eueninge and ye morninge was made
one day. The Euangeliste Mark has: Early in the morninge the first day of
the Sabothe. S. Luke has: But upon the first day of the Sabothes very earlye
in the morninge, when it was yet dark. These three do sufficientlye declare
what the eueninge of the Sabothes is: even as if one should say, In that
night the morninge whereof was the beginning of the first day of the week.
All the Evangelists therefore do mean, that the Saboth being ended the women
consulted to meet betymes in the morninge to see the Sepulcher. Came Mary
Magdalene etc. Mathewe says here that there came only two of the Maryes to
see the Sepulcher. Mark ioyninge the third, says that they boughte sweet
odoures to anoint the body. And by the words of Luke it may be gathered yt
there came not only two or three but many. But this is very usual among
sacrede writers, among many to express a few. To see the Sepulcher, C.
These meant when they had found the body of Christ to anoint it with oyntmentes
and sweet spyces, as Iosephe and Nicodemus had done. Notwithstanding it may
be demanded how this diligence of the women, mingled with superstition,
pleased God. But there is no doubt, but that they taking the manner of
anointing the dead from the fathers, did apply it to this end, that they might
get consolation in the sorrow of death by the hope of the life to come.
Therefore they sinned in this, that they remembered not ye which their Lord
had said before as concerning his resurrection, but sought the lyuinge among
the dead.

2. And behold there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord
descended from Heaven, and rolled away the stone from the door, and sat upon
it.

And behoulde there was a great earthquake, C. The earthquake was made before
the women came to the Sepulcher: but truly not without the counsel of God.
For it was meet that there should be some testimonye of the resurrection of
Christ. Even as if a king should anoynte his son before the people, even
so God declared by ye resurrection, and consecrated his son a king. This
earthquake therefore was a token of divine power: it was also a type of the
earthquake to come, with the which ye earth shall be stricken, when it shall
give up the bodies of the dead. Moreover this wonderful sign was necessary
to stir up the minds of the women, that they should not conceive any human
or terestrial thing, but should lift up their minds, to the new work of God
and unlooked for.

For the Angel of the Lord descended C. The cause of the earthquake was the
coming down of the Angel from Heaven. If the force of an Angel be such
that his descendinge from Heaven should shake the earth, what shall we look
for at the coming of Christ to Judgment?

And rolled away the stone, The Angel came not because of Christ, as though
he could not come out of the Sepulcher without his help: but to the end
the women and ye Apostles might believe that Christ was risen, that the
Sepulcher was opened by ye Angel, that it might be showed to be empty. But it
is certain that he arose and went out of the Sepulcher, the stone lyinge
still in the mouth of the same. Howbeit there are some which say that Christ
arose and went forth of the Sepulcher without any miracle, by the work of the
Angel. But he which was able by his own power to raise himself in the
Sepulcher, was able also by the same power to go out of the Sepulcher the door
thereof being shut with a great stone, that he might be myraculouslye raised
without any work of the Angel.

3. His countenance was like lighteninge, and his raiment white as snow.

His countenance was like lighteninge A. As in the earthquake a certain
heavenly power of Christ was declared: euenso also in the apparel and form
of the Angel, ye brightness of the dietye, as it were by beams showed forth
it self, to the end the women might know that he was not a mortal man,
which being nigh unto them seemed like a man. For although neither the
brightness of the light, nor the whitenes of the snow, is nothing to the
glory of God in comparison: yet notwithstanding he teachinge himself to be
nere by external tokens, does call us unto him according to the weakness of
our capascitye. This one thing only we must know that visible signs of his
presence are offered unto us yt our minds may apprehende him, being invisible:
and that under corporal forms, a taste of his spiritual essence is offered
unto us yt we may seek him spiritually. Notwithstanding there is no doubt
but that a certain internal efficacye was joined to the external signs,
which did printe in the hearts of ye women the feelinge of the dietye. For
although they were made afraid in the beginning, yet notwithstanding by ye
order of the text it shall appear that they being encouraged again, were so
taught by little and little, that they felt the present hand of God. M. But
there are many appearinges of Angels mentioned in ye Scriptures, in the
which, such excellent brightness, and form, as is here described, is not to
be found: because there is a difference between this that was done in them,
and that, which was done in the resurrection of Christ. Moreover as they in
respect of their nature are not corporal, euenso unto men they are invisible
of themselves: Angels.
but to the end they may be seen and perceived of men, they take unto
themselves external forms, according to the commoditye and fitnes of the
present busynes or matter in hand: and they do take them, not to keep them
continually, but for a time, until they have discharged their ministry in
this world, for the which they were sent.

So Angels appeared to Abraham and to Lot in the form of wayfayringe men.
Genesis. 18. Genesis 19.
C. This is the only difference between the two Evangelists, that Mathewe
and Mark make mention but of one Angel only, when as Luke and John make
mention of two. But this show of repugnancye is easlye put away: because we
know how oftentimes the figure Synecdochen is used in the Scripture. Two Angels
therefore were seen first of Marye, after that of her fellows. But because
the other which did speak did specially turn their minds unto him, Mathewe
and Mark thought it sufficient to make mention of his imbassage.

Moreover where as Matthew in the verse going before, says that the Angel sat
upon the stone, it is husteron protaeron, or at least the order of the history
is neglected: because the Angel appeared not at the first, until the newnes of
the thing caused the women to be careful and to marvel.

4. And for fear of him the kepers were astonished and became as dead men.

And for fear of him M. This matter came far otherwise to pass than the hye
Priests looked for. They got watchmen, to fraye the poor and fearful
Dysciples from ye body of the Lord. But behold the contrary: for they which
were set to make other afraid and to keep the body of the Lord, are so unable
to hinder the resurrection of the Lord, that they are wonderfully terrefyed at
the appearinge of an Angel. The which thing ought to be a great consolation
and comfort unto us. And we must note the difference between the two kinds
of fear which Mathewe compares together. The soldiers were made afraid
being used to tumulte and so were overcome with fear, that they fell down as
it were half dead: but being cast down no power did lift them up. The
fear of the women was like unto this: but the consolation which by and by
followed, did restore their courage again which almost quailed, that they
might have a better hope. Fear pertains to the elect and reprobate.
And it is meet that the majesty of God should bring a fear and horror as
well to the godly as to the reprobate, that all flesh might fall down at
his presence. But when God himself has humbled his elect and brought them
under, he does straighte way mittigate their fear, least they should faint
being oppressed: and not only that, but by the swetenes of his grace also he
healed the wound that is geeuen: but as for the reprobate he does either
exanimate them with a sudden fear, or else he suffers them to languishe
under long torments.

But our Euangeliste Matthewe leauinge of to make mention of the watchme^,
goes forward with the narration which he had begone of the women coming to
the Sepulcher which found not the watchmen. For they being afearde ran,
while the women were a coming, to tell the hye priests what had happened.
And to the end all things which are written of so blessed and wholesome
resurrection by the Evangelists, may be the more easily understood we will
bring in and expound what soever any man does speak of the same, in that
order in the which the most diligente and best interpreters think all things
to be done. And first of all what the women thought while they were in their
iorneye, it may be gathered by Mark which says: And they said among
themselves, Who shall roll away the stone for us from the door of the
Sepulcher? And when they had looked, Mark. 16.
they saw that the stone was rolled away, for it was a great one. C. This doubt
Mark only expresses: but seeing the other three do show that the Angel
rolled away the stone, it may easelye be gathered yt they stood in a doubt,
not knowinge what to do until they were certifyed by the power of God. But
hereby we may learn, that they being carried by their zeal, came thither, not
certain of their purpose. They saw before that the Sepulcher was shut with a
great stone, which kept all men from coming therein: why did they not
consider this having leisure at home, but only because reason and memory
failed them through great fear? But because in a godly zeal they were
blinded, God does not impute this fault unto them. After these words it
follows in Luke and Mark, And they entered into the Sepulcher, and found not
(as says Luke) the body of the Lord Jesus. And it came to pass when they were
abashed at this thing, they saw (as says S. Mark) a young man, sittinge on
the right side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were afraid. B. The
Euangeliste says that he was a young man, not because Angels are men, but
because they appear unto us in the likeness of men being otherwise invisible:
wherefore they have oftentimes the names of men given unto them. But the women
being made afearde are comforted by the Angel with these words: Be not
afraid: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified: He is risen he is not
here. Behold where they had put him. But go your way and tell his Disciples
and Peter, that he goes before you into Galile: there shall ye see him as he
said unto you. And they went out quickly and fled from the Sepulcher: for they
trembled and were amassed, neither said they any thing to any man, for they
were afraid. A. These things for the most part are expounded in the 5. 6.
and 7. verses of this Chapter of Mathewe. But in that Christ here by his Angel
commands the women to show his resurrection to Peter by name, he seems
therefore to do it, because Peter thought himself unworthy to have any thing
to do with the Lord, for yt he had denied him: a deed truly which made him
worthy to be rejected for ever. To recreate and comfort him therefore in this
perplexity, he thought good to express his name, to the end he might be
fully certifyed, yt as yet he was reckened in the number of his Disciples. And
where he says: he shall go before you into Galile, we must not understand
that he went by and by before them after his resurrection, for (as it
appears in John) the Dyscipses were eight days at the least in Jerusalem.
And in the last Chap. it is red yt the Lord was seen of the^ as they were a
fishing. And he would go before them into Galile, and show himself there unto
his Disciples, either because he would bring his disciples and these women also
back again into Galile from whence they followed him to Jerusalem: or else to
instruct and confirm them, being as yet rude, in the knowledge of ye kingdom
of God, in Galile because he might do it there more freelye and safely than in
Jerusalem, where he might be in danger of the Phariseis and hye priests. C.
But now the first three Evangelists do pretermit that which S. John declares
of Mary Magdalene, namely that she having not as yet seen ye Angels came
again into the City, and complained weepinge that the body of Christ was
taken away. The which as soon as the two Disciples Peter and John heard, they
ran to the Sepulcher: into the which Peter entered, and then that other
Disciple. Notwithstanding both of them returned home again with doubtful and
suspended minds as yet, Mary stands still at the Sepulcher and weepinge. And
although S. John does make mention of Mary Magdalene only, yet for all that it
is likely yt other women also, of ye which the other three Eua^gelistes make
mention, yt were with her. At the first therefore they came to the Sepulcher,
the which when they found void, they tell the Dysciples saying, They have
taken ye Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we know not where they have laid
him. After yt she returned to the Sepulcher with ye other women, whom Peter and
John followed, who saying the Sepulcher to be emptye returned home with
suspended minds. But Mary and the other women abydinge there still; and
behoulding ye Sepulcher again, two Angels appear unto her, of whom we have
spoken already: and do testifye unto them yt Christ is risen and do commau^de
them to tell it unto the Disciples, but namely unto Peter, which even now
entered into the Sepulcher, and perceived yt Christ was risen. At the length
when these women returned into ye City to tell these things unto ye
Disciples, they were confirmed again as they went, yt they might ye more
bouldly affirm the Lord to be risen, for Christ appears unto them and
saluteth them. Howbeit John makes mention of Mary Magdalene only. And Mark
does not say yt Christ met with them, but says only yt he appeared to Mary
Magdalene betymes in the morninge. But Luke makes no mention of this vision at
all: but this pretermission ought not to seem absurd unto us, seeing that the
Eua^gelistes do oftentimes use the same. As touching the difference between
Mathewe and Mark this is to be considered, yt Matthew by a figure called
Synecdochen does extend that unto al which was proper to one. This Marye
Magdalene was of Galile, and was not the sister of Martha and Lazarus as some
folishly have thought. For Mary the sister of Martha was not syrnamed
Magdalene: but is always called in the Scripture Mary the sister of Martha,
that there might be a difference between her and the other Mary's. Of this
Mary Magdalene Luke writes thus: Luke. 8.
And also certain women which were healed of evil spirits and infirmities.
Mary which is called Magdalene (out of who^ went seven devils.) Whereby we may
behold ye great goodness and mercy of God, who respects no persons, but
gives, most honor where most unworthiness is, to beat down the pride of
flesh.

5. The Angel answered and said unto the women, fear ye not. For I know that
ye seek Jesus which was crucified he is not here.

The Angel ansvvered A. To answer here, is put for to speak, according to
the manner of ye Hebrews, for they demanded no question whereby answer should
be said to be made. He makes mention of one Angel only, because but one and no
mo, spoke unto ye women: Luke speaks of two, as appears by these words:
Behold two men stood beside the^ in bright garments. And as they were afraid
and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them Fear ye not M.
It was the office of the Angel to give testimony of the resurrection of Christ.
But goinge thereabout he does before all other things comfort the women that
were afraid: but he had made the wicked watchmen afraid. For the resurrection
of Christ is a terror to the wicked, and to the godly a great consolation.
Whereupon he says: Fear ye not. As if he should say, Be not ye afraid as
those watchmen were which are gone away. For I know This is ye reason why they
ought not to fear, as if he had said, I know that ye are friends and such as
believe in Jesus, I know that for the love of Jesus ye are come hither:
wherefore there is no cause why ye should be afraid of me, for I am here not
an enemy, but your friend. C. In Luke there seems a sharp reprehensio^ to
be added, thus: Why seek ye the living among the dead?

6. He is not here: he is risen as he said. Come see the place where the Lord
was laid.

He is not here: M Now ye Angel by plain words bears testimony to the
resurrection of the Lord. Bu. As if he should say, the body of Christ which was
crucified and buried is not now in the Sepulcher, As he said C. He puts them
in mind of the words of Christ, Bu. as if he should have said, Christ is
the truth. The truth cannot lie. And he said that he would rise again. Therefore
he is risen in deed. C. We do se here that the Angels are sent to confirm the
doctrine of Christ. Math. 17.20.26. Mark. 8.10 14. Luke. 9. and 18. John. 2.
A. And that Christ had foreshewed his resurrection, the Evangelists do
testify in diverse places. Come se the Bu. To the end they might be the more
fully certifyed of all things, he wills them to have experience, and to see
with their eyes. For he shows them the empty monument Where the Lord was
laid C. Behoulde how the Angels here call Christ the Lord. A. Euenso in
another place it is said, Luke 2.
A savior is borne unto you this day, which is Christ the Lord, Luke. 24.
in the City of David. S. Luke adds saying: Remember how he spoke unto
you, when he was yet in Galile, saying: that the son of man must be delivered
into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

7. And go quickly, and tell his Disciples, that he is risen again from the
dead. And behoulde he goes before you into Galile: there ye shall see him, Lo
I have toulde you.

And go quickly C. Here God does adorn the women by the Angel with
extraordinary honor, because he commits unto them the charge and embassage
of the special part of our salvation. Notwithstanding this office was
accidental extraordinarye, and enjoined to them but for a time. They are
commanded to tell that unto the Apostles which they afterward, according to
the office enjoined them preached to the whole world: but they do not this as
Apostles. Therefore they do amiss gather a law by this commandment of the
Angel, Baptism ought not to be ministered by women.
which do permit to women the office of baptizing. Let us be contented with
this, ye Christ in them set forth the treasures of his grace, in that he made
them once to be the teachers of the Apostles: notwithstanding so, that he
would not have that to be drawn into example, which was done by a singular
privilege. If any man obiecte and say that there was no cause why women
should be preferred before the Apostles, which were no less carnal and
incensible than they: we answer that it is not in us but in the will and
pleasure of the Judge to put a difference between these and them. Furthermore
we say that they deserved to be more sharpelye reprehended, which were not
only taught before other me^, but also were ordained to be teachers of the
Church throughoute the whole world, being called the light of the world, and
the sault of the earth: so foully did they fall. The women therefore were sent
to the Disciples to their reproach because they were so slow to believe. And
behold he goes before you into Galile. C. In that the Angel calls the
Disciples into Galile, it seems therefore to be done, that Christ might make
himself known to many. For we know that he was long conuersau^t in Galile.
And he thought it good to give space unto his Dysciples that even in the very
departure they might better remember themselves. Furthermore ye custom and
vsinge of ye places helped them to know their master For it was meet that they
should be confirmed by all means, least they should want any thing whith
pertayned to ye assurau^ce of their faith Lo I have told you, C. By this kind
of speech the Angel does affirm that it is true which he said, B. as if he
should say, Go your way and take experience of that which I have said: if ye
distruste it is your own fault: as for me, I have declared that unto you which
I know to be true. C. This the Angel speaks, not of himself, although he
were the first author, but subscribeth to the promise of Christ: and therefore
in Mark he does only put him in mind of the words of Christ. Luke says
that they reme^bered the words of the Lord By the which we are taught yt
although they did profit very little in the doctrine of Christ yet
notwithstanding the same did not perish, but was choked until it began to
grow in due time. A. Euenso the Disciples saw many things in Christ and heard
those things of him which they understood not by and by, but after that he was
risen again from death.

8. And they departed quickly from the Sepulcher, with fear and great joy,
and did run to bring his Dysciples word. And as they went to tell his
Disciples.

And they departed quickelye C. This ought to be understood of the second
return into the City, in the which Mary Magdalene, and the rest of her
fellows told the Disciples yt Christ was risen: which they had learned as
well by the testimony of the Angel, as by the sight of Christ himself. But
before Christ sheewed himself, they ran to the Dysciples as they were
commanded of the Angel. And as they were goinge they were confirmed again.
Christ making him self manifest unto them: as it shall be said in the next
verce following. The women therefore run to the Disciples, With fear and
great joy, C. By these words Mathewe means yt the women were greatly
comforted at the voice of the Angel, yet notwithstanding yt they were stricken
with fear, yt they burn between joy and sorrow. ^pirituall ^ye.
M. So that we do see two affections almost contrary one to the other to be
mixed together, namely joy and fear: But spiritual joy is such, yt we
cannot truly rejoice in the Lord, except the flesh be cast down and humbled.
We must mortify the flesh: otherwise we cannot be partakers of the immortal
and spiritual joy. Hereupon it comes yt so often as God appears and gives
some feeling of his presence, we are made afraid, and almost discouraged. They
went therefore with joy, for the resurrection of Christ which they had learned
of the Angel: and with fear, for ye straungenes of the vision, and greatness
of the miracle. They were not as yet fullye certifyed in mind of the
resurrection of Christ, and yet notwithstanding they received no small joy and
comfort by the words of the Angel. For if they had had a sound and perfect
faith, it would have put away fear, and greatly quieted them: but now fear
mingled with joy, plainlye declares that they were not satisfied by the
testimonye of the Angel. For they being in the midst of sorrow, and
hearing this tydinges (which they never looked for) of the Angel, they could
not believe for the great joy. The like we read of the Dysciples in Luke, yt
they could not believe for very joy (that is for ye desire of the Lord) and
for the straungenes of the miracle. Luke. 24
C. Here therefore Christ did wonderfully declare his mercy in taking away the
doubt and fear, which was a great let to the faith of these women.

9. Behoulde Jesus met them saying: All hail. And they came and held him by
the feet, and worshipped him.

Behoulde Jesus met them M. The Lord had a consideration of his Disciples,
insomuch that he would not have his resurrection sheewed to his Dysciples by
these women upon the report only of the Angel: but offers himself also to
be seen, yt now not only the testimonye of the ears, but also of the eyes
might certify them. And for ye certainty of his resurrection, he would have ye
same declared not only of the Angels to the women, and of the women to ye
Disciples, but also offer himself both to yt the women and to ye disciples to
be seen and felt: Saying: all Hail M. Or rejoice and be glad. There is no
doubt but yt he spoke in Hebrew according to the manner of the country, and
said, Salom, that is to say, Peace. Here the manner of salutacion is commended
unto us: the words thereof being common both to the godly and wicked also:
notwithstanding in deed and effect proper only to the godly. He is not a
true friend which loves not truly and in God. 1. John. 5
Therefore S. John exhorts us to love one another, not in word only, but in
deed and verity. And they came and held him by the feet, C. This thing
seems not to agree with the words of John, John. 20.
where he says that Mary was forbidden to toutch Christ. But these two places
may be easelye reconciled, that the Lord saying Mary to be to busye in
embrasing and kissinge his feet, commanded her to go from him: because it was
meet that superstition should be corrected, and the end of his resurrection
also declared: from the which, partly earthly and gross affection, and partly
folishe zeal, did withdraw her. But the Lord at his first meeting suffered
them to toutche his feet, least any thing should be wantinge that might
certifye them of his resurrection. Therefore by and by Mathewe adds, And
worshipped This was a sign of certain knowledge. We read not that they
said any thing, John. 20.
A, sauinge that S. John says that Mary said Rabboni. But this their deed is
as much as Thomas expressed afterward in a word saying, My Lord, and my God.
This worship was a sign of reverence which they gave unto the majesty of
Christ. Hereby we may learn what our duty is: namely to prostrate our selves
before the Lord. And as for the resurrection of Christ, it ought to make us
acknowledge his power, which in deed ought to stir us up to reverence him.

10. Then said Jesus unto them: be not afraid, Go tell my brethren that they
go into Galile, and there shall they see me.

Then said Jesus unto them, C. We gather that fear was evil because Christ
delivers the women from the same again. For although it came of admiracion,
yet notwtstandinge it was contrary to a quiet trust. Therefore to the end
they might lift up themselves to Christ the Conqueroure of death they are
commanded to be of good cheer. But by the same words we are tought, that
we do then truly know the resurrection of the Lord, if with an undoubted
faith, we have bouldnes to boaste that we are made partakers of the same
life. Christ therefore takes from them fear, not joy. For his resurrection
brings not any occasion of fear to the believing, but of true and perpetual
joy. These words therefore bring great consolation to a fearful conscience.
Go and tell He geeueth them ye same commandment that the Angel did C. And by
this embassage, he gathers ye dispersed Church together, and erecteth it
being decayed. For as the faith of the resurrection at this day does specially
quicken us, even so it was necessary yt life should be restored to the
Dysciples from whence they were fallen. My brethren Here is to be noted ye
inspeakeable clemency of Christ that he voutched safe to call those his
brethren which were run awayes, and such as left him in distress. Neither is
there any doubt, but that by so gentle appellation, he went about to mittigate
the sorrow with ye which he saw them greuouslye disquieted. But because
Christ did call his Apostles only by this name, let us know that this
imbassage was sent by Christ, that it might afterward come unto us. Wherefore
we must not hear the story of the resurrection could lie, saying Christ by
the bond of brotherlye amity does gentlely inuit and call us by his own
mouth to consider the fruit thereof. But whereas certain interpreters by the
name of brethren understand the kinsfolk of Christ, the order of ye text does
sufficiently confute their error: because S. John does plainly declare yt Mary
came unto the Dysciples: and Luke says that the women came to the Apostles. C.
Whereby we gather yt Christ spoke of them. Moreover it seems yt Christ
borrowed this sentence out of that Psalm, where it is said, Psalm. 22*
I will declare thy name unto my brethren. For it is without al controversy yt
the same prophesy was fulfilled in this place.

That they go into Galile, A. The women having received the commandment of
Christ, go to tell the Apostles: as it may be gathered by the words of Luke,
where he says, It was Marye Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Mary Iacobi, and other
yt were with them, which told these things to the Apostles. Moreover S. Luke
adds saying, Luke 24
And their words seemed unto them feigned things, neither believed they them.
Foul was the blindness with the which the Apostles were stayed, yt they could not
call to mind that it was fulfilled which they had heard before of their
master. If the women had spoken any thing to them yt they had never heard of
before, they had been ye more excusable, not to believe readily in a matter so
incredible: but it must needs be that they were now to dull which count that
for a fable or dream which they had heard so oftentimes declared and promised
by the son of God, ye same being now reported to be fulfilled by eye
witnesses. Hereby it appears yt they were so overthrown by temptacion, yt
all the taste almost and remembrance of Christ's words was quight out of
their mind. Luke adds also, saying. Then arose Peter and ru^ne to the
Sepulcher, and looked in and saw the lynnen clothes laid by them self, and
departed, wonderinge in himself at that which had happened. And by this
circumstance the Euangeliste Luke, does exagerate and make the hardness of the
Apostles hearts more haynouse, when as notwithst^ding Peter had seen already ye
Sepulcher to be emptye, and was constrained by the manifest sign of his
resurrection to wonder.

11. When they were gone, behoulde some of the kepers came into the cittye,
and showed unto the hye priests all the things that had happened.

When they were gone, Bu. That is to say, In the mean time while the Angel
and the Lord himself spoke with the women, the souldiars were come into the
City. It is not only credible, but the matter it self also shows that ye
soldiers which were appointed to keep the Sepulcher, were so corrupted with
money, that they were ready at the commandment of the hye priests to make a
lie. They knew well anoughe that the hye priests feared nothing more, than
that Christ should obtain his fame the third day after he was risen
again they knew therefore that they were sent thither, to keep the Carcas,
and thereby to extinguishe his fame. These men therefore seekinge for their
gain, perceiuinge the fruit thereof to perish, devise a new way to get
money. Some of the keepers came, The hye priests knowinge themselves to be
giltye, are constrained to corrupt the soldiers with large sums of money,
and to hyer them to cover their shame.

And shevved to the hye Priests Bu. It came not to pass without the counsel
and providence of God yt the resurrection of Christ should be showed to the hye
Priests, which were the cause of his death, and that neither by the women nor
by the Dysciples, but by the kepers of the Sepulcher. For although they were
not made joyful of this tydinges of the resurrection, yet notwithstanding it
was necessary after their wickedness, that they should know before, this
truth of Christ's resurrection, which they resisted all that they could with
lies, that rejecting the truth against their own consciences, they might be
condemned.

12. And they gathered them together with the Elders, and took counsel, and
gave large money unto the soldiers.

M. Behoulde their counsel, they seek not those things which are Gods,
but their own. A. The Priests were covetous, and gredy of money, yet
notwithstanding, the desire that they had to destroy Christ does overcome
covetousness. Euenso before they were ready to geeue money to Judas the
traitor, and at other times they devoured wydowes houses, and were oxcedinge
covetous.

13. Saying, Say ye that his Disciples came by night, and stoale him away
while ye slepte.

M. This thing they had before craftelye put into the head of Pilate, saying:
Least the Disciples come by night and steal him away. But (truly) they
profit nothing with those which have any understanding at all. Could the
Dysciples gather an hoaste to carry away the body of Christ without the
soldiers will? Furthermore can they which are a sleep see? So God geeueth
power to his word, that the wicked should not see.

14. And if this come to the rulers ears, we will persuade him, and save you
harmeles.

And if this come to the rulers ears Bu. That is to say, If the matter be
brought before the Judge. They promise unto them security, because they were
able to do much with the debitye. As if they should say, If this lie be brought
before your deputy, We will persuade him, and save you harmeles. that is,
We will satisfye and content him, and take such order with him that ye
shall not need to fear any danger.

15. So they took the money, and did as they were taught. And this saying is
noysed among the Jews unto this day.

So they took the money, Bu. The covetous soldiers take the conducte and
priest money, and are not afraid to lie, as they were taught. To whom they are
like at this day which are not ignorant of the truth of the Gospel, yet
notwithstanding taking money of the hye priests, teach the lyinge
inuencion of men, and do lie against their consciences for money.

By the industry of these men it comes to pass that ye smalest lies do
continue a long time, and are kept in the Church, and can find no
authority by the pretense of continuance. And this saying is noysed, B.
Namely that the Desciples stoale away the body of Jesus while the watchemen
slepte. As if he should say, This lie being published abroad by the watchmen,
is so received of ye Jews, that they will not otherwise believe unto this day.
C. This was the full measure of Gods vengeance to blind the Jews, because by
the perjury and falsehoode of the soldiers, the resurrection was buried under
foot, and so vain a lie received. And hereby it appears yt they were
deceived by volu^tary error, which did not think that Christ was risen again,
even as the world willingly offers it self to be mocked by the deceivers of
Satan. But (truly) if any man had but opened his eyes, he neded not any long
inquisitio^. The armed soldiers say that the body of Christ was taken from
them, by a weak, fearful, small, and unarmed company of men. By what cooller
do they pretend this? They say yt it was done when they were a sleep. But if
they suspected the Dysciples, why did they not make after them? why did they
not raise hew and cry? This therefore was a childish excuse: the which should
not have been unpunished, if ye deputy had been just and of a stout courage.
But because Pilate winked at this matter, it had the more credit. Howbeit this
seems very much that God should suffer this rumor to spread abroad to
extinguishe the glory of his son, notwtstandinge we must attribute this
matter to his just vengeance which deserves all honor. Moreover because all
of them had stombled at the stone of offense, it was necessary that their eyes
should be darkened least they should perceive the purpose of God which went
about to blind them altogether, Esaias 6.
as it was foreshewed by the prophesye of Esaias. For God would not have suffered
them to be deceived by such rash belief, but only to deprive them of the
hope of salvation, of whom the redeemer himself, was despised. B. This of all
other is the most just Judgment of God, 2. These. 2.
yt they which refuse to believe the truth might believe lies. When we see
therefore lies and false signs to be believed, it is a sign of reprobation,
and of the vengeance of God. Unto this day, B. The Scripture commonly uses
this kind of speech when it signifies ye durable co^stancy of any thing. As
when it is said: Joshua. 4.
And Joshua set up twelve stones also in the midst of Jordan, etc. and there
have they continued until this day. In like manner it is written, And therefore
it is yt the priests of Dagon tread not on ye thresholde of Dagon unto this
day. 1. King. 5.


C. But although this lie prevailed among the Jews, being devised of the hye
priests, and wickedlye published by the soldiers, yet for all that it did not
let but that ye truth of the Gospel might have free passage, even to ye
vtmoste parts of the earth, even as always it has and does overcome all the
stoppes and stays of the world. For the godly do always houlde this as a sure
bulwarcke, namely that Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification. Romans 4.
B. The same day in the which the women sheewed the resurrection of Christ to
the Disciples, the Lord offered himself to be seen of the two Dysciples as
they went to Emaus. After this, Luke 24.
when the ^ores were shut, Resurrection of Christ. John. 20.
he stood in the midst of his Dysciples and wished them peace, sheewed his
hands and his feet, and did eat with them to certifye them of his
resurrection. Mark 16
To the which, the words of Mark are to be joined, when he says, And he
cast in their teeth their unbelief and hardness of heart: because they believed
not them, which had seen that he was risen again. Beside this, he gave
unto them the holy ghost (as S. John declares) and says unto them, Peace be
unto you, etc. Furthermore he taught them that all things which were written
of him were fulfilled, and opened their minds also yt they might understand
the Scriptures, that it must needs be that Christ should suffer and rise
again.

16. Then the eleven Disciples went away into Galile, into a mountain, whereas
Jesus had appointed them.

Then the eleue^ Disciples went M. To the end they might see Christ they
went into Galile, as the Angel had said unto the women in the seventh verse
before.

To the which place when they came, they went not by and by up to the
mount, as our Euangeliste here seems to show: but they went to the sea of
Tiberias (that is to the lake of Genesar) to fyshe. To whom as they were a
fisshing, Christ appeared, as says S. John, in these words: Afterward did
Jesus show him self again at the Sea of Tiberias. etc. From the first verse
until the fourtenth verse beginning thus. This is now the third time that
Jesus appeared to his disciples, after he was risen again. The first
appearaunce was upon the day of his resurrection: The second, eight days
after: The third, at this fysshing even now mentioned.

After these things, the same S. John makes mention of the talk that Christ
had with Peter after dynner: In these words. When they had dyned, Jesus says
to Symo^ Peter: Simon Ioanna, love thou me more than these? and so forth
until the.xxv. verse. Therefore our Euangeliste only makes mention of this
fourth appearing. Into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them* C. Although
mention was not made of this mountain in any other place, yet notwithstanding,
we gather that is was noted unto Mary, and a place appointed unto her. But what
mountain this was, it is uncertain: It is not that upon the which he stood
within forty days after, when he ascended up into heaven. For that is not
far from Jerusalem, but this is in Galile. It is likely that this mountain
was chosen as a solitary place, and that the Lord was oftentimes seen in the
same.

17 And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.

And when they savve him. R. This is that great appearing, by the which
Christ would prove and ratefie his resurrection with most certain
arguments, in the mount of Galile, before the greatest part of his
disciples: that if we will not believe one woman bearing testimony of the
resurrection of Christ, if we will not believe many, if not Peter, if not
Thomas, if not the eleven: We may yet at the least believe the five hundred
brethren, to whom Christ openly appeared in the mount. The Apostel Paul
seems to remember this when he says: and that he was seen of Cephas, then
of the twelve. After that, was he seen of mo then five hundred brethren at
once: 1. Cor. 15.
of which many remain unto this day, and many are fallen a sleep. They
worshipped him. M. The women are said to do the like in the nynthe verse
going before. It is not in vain that the Evangelists make mention of this
worshipping. For they show that the declaration of the resurrection in Christ
was of such estimation to the Apostels and faithful, that thereby they were
moved to worship him as the God and Lord. Romans 1.
For he is declared to be the son of God by the power of the resurrection.

But some doubted M. It is marvel that some here should doubt as yet, having
so often times before seen Christ. But it ought not to seem absurd unto us if
the relics of fear which remained behind, caused some of them to doubt
and waver a new. For we know, that so often as Christ appeared, they were
afearde and amassed, until they had better remembered them selves, and been a
while conuersaunt with him. Wherefore the meaning is, that certain in the
beginning doubted until such time as Christ had been more nere and familiar
with them: but when he was certainly known unto them, they worshipped him,
because in deed the brightness of his glory, was manifest unto them. These
things being ended they returned to Jerusalem, where the Lord commanded
them to abide, as witnesses S. Luke saying: And behold, I will send the
promise of my father upon you. Luke. 24.
But tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be indewed with power from
an high.

18 And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying: All power is given unto me in
heaven, and in earth.

Ann Jesus came and spoke unto them. C. There is no doubt but that Christ by
this sentence took all doubt from them. Saying: All power is given to me
Before the Euangeliste does show how the office of teaching was enjoined by
Christ to the disciples, he says that Christ began to speak of his power:
and not without cause. For he had need to have no small authority, but great
and divine power which should command eternal life to be promised in his
name, and the whole world to be brought under his government, and a doctrine
to be publyshed, which pluckyng down all pride of flesh should humble
mankind.

And certainly, by this beginning Christ did not only erecte his Apostles, to
the bold trust of executinge their office, but also stablyshed the faith of
his Gospel throughout al Ages. The Apostels (truly) would never have been
persuaded to take in hand so hard an office, except they had known that
their revenger did sit in heaven, to whom all power was committed. For without
such defense, it was impossible to profit any thing at all. But truly when
they hear that he is Lord of heaven and earth for whom they work, by this
one thing they are sufficiently armed to ouercomme all lettes. But and if the
condition of those which preach the Gospel seem base, and co^temptible to
the hearers, let them learn to lift up their eyes to the author thereof, by
whose power the majesty of the Gospel ought to be wayed. And so it will come
to pass that they dare not despise him speaking by his ministers. Therefore
that the Apostels might know that they are not sent of man, but of him which
has full power, he says, Al power is given to me, In heaven, and in earth,
Christ does here plainly make him self both Lord and king, as well of
heaven as earth: because he making men subject unto him by the preaching of
the Gospel, appoints the seat of his kingdom in earth, and regenerating
those that are his, into a new life, and inuitinge them to the hope of
salvation, opens the heavens, that he may take them up into blessed
immortality with the Angels, which before were drowned in death.

And we must remember that Christ being equal with the father, was never
destitute of power, so that it was given unto him now in our flesh, or in the
person of a mediator. For he speaks not here of the power which he had
before the creation of the world, but of that which he now received being
made the judge of ye world. B. Of this therefore he admonishes his
disciples, to the end they might the more wyllingly take in hand the
preachinge of the Gospel, when they should know them selves to be his
imbassadours which had power of all things.

19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizinge them in the name of
the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost.

Go ye therefore and teach A. Mark, as it were expoundinge these words
says, Go ye into the whole world. Bu. By yt which words Christ does set
forth and express the bounds and lymits of his kingdom, excludinge no
nation. The sum of these words is, that by publishinge the Gospel every
where, they may bring all nations to the obedience of the faith: and that
they may seal and confirm their doctrine, with the seal of the Gospel. M.
By the force of this word it came to pass that this embassage of ye Apostles
pierced throughoute the whole world, and prevailed against all tyran^es. For
such is the power of ye word of Christ, that being once spoken, it sets it
self against all the deceites of Satan and the world. Otherwise how was it
possible for this new and strange doctrine to be brought into the whole world
of simple men and of no power, and the impietye of the whole world to be
revealed and condemned, except his virtue and power, had aided this imbassage.

And teach The Euangeliste Mark expresses what they should teach, saying:
The Gospel. And a little hereafter in our Euangeliste there is added a
restrainte, namely, that they should teach to observe those things which the
Lord had commanded. A. Neither is it said only to Peter, (whom the Papists
would make the head of the Church, and Christ's vicar) Preach ye, and teach
ye: Mynisters of the woor^^ ought to preach.
but to all the Apostles a like: therefore all the mynisters of ye world ought
to preach and teach. And this office was appointed and commanded of Christ
himself. What the Gospel is, we have showed in the first Chapter goinge
before. Neither does Christ command any other thing to be taught than
that which he had already preached as we may see in the fourth Chapter
goinge before. And in another place he says, Christ went about all Cities
and Towns teachinge in their Sinagoges and preachinge the Gospel of the
kingdom. Matthew 9.
Also he affyrmeth that he is sent to this end, when he says, I must
preach the Gospel of the kingdom to other Cities, Luke. 4.
for, this cause was I sent. And to this end he sends his servant. C.
Whereby we gather that the Apostleship is not a vain title, Apostleship is
not an idle office.
but a laborious office: therefore there can be nothing more absurd, than for
men to live idly and to reiecte this office of teachinge, which usurp unto
themselves this honor. The Pope of Rome and his rabble proudly boast of this
succession, as though he were equal with Peter and his fellows: But they have
no more care to teach, than had the priests of Pan, Bacchus, or Venus. But
with what face can they presume to come into their place, Peter's successor must
be a preacher.
whom they hear to be ordained preachers of the word? Although theyve
impudente, yet by this one thing they are forced to yield, that none can be a
successor of the Apostles, except he be a preacher. For who soever teaches
not, does in vain take unto him the name of an Apostle. A. And this preachinge
of the Gospel which Christ here commits to the mynisters of his word, has
also ye preachinge of repentance joined with it, as S. Mark teaches saying
that Christ preached thus: Mark 1.
The time is come, and ye kingdom of God is at hand, Repent and believe the
Gospel. And again he says to his Apostles. Thus it is written, and thus it
behooved Christ to suffer, Luke. 24.
and to rise again from death the third day, and that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name among al Nations. To
preach the Gospel therefore is to exhort all men to repentance, Romans 4.
and to pronounce remission of sins to all those that repent, in the name of
Christ, who dyed for our sins and rose again for our justification. For he
which shall repent, and believe the Gospel sheewinge remission of sins, shall be
saved.

But as for those that teach not this Gospel, but rather their own dreams,
who dare say that they are ye ministers of Christ, and that they are sent, and
ought to be received? All Nations C. Here Christ without all exception makes
the Gentiles equal with the Jews, and admits both of them without
difference to the societye of the covenant. And thus was the Prophesye of Esaias
fulfilled where he says that Christ is given a light to the Gentiles that he
might be the salvation of God to the utmost part of the earth. Esaias. 4.9.
And this was the meaning of Mark when he said. To all creatures, because
after ye peace was preached to the househoulde, the same was sent to strangers
and such as were far of.

M. Therefore the doctrine of salvation, and the grace of Christ's kingdom
must be offered to all men. The father has so disposed it, and for that cause
he sent his son into this world, and gave him power of all things: that
the world might be saved by him. Wherefore the Gospel must be preached to men
and women, to oulde and young, to the wise and foolish, yea to all estates,
not in the lattine tongue (as certain deceyuers and false teachers have
taught) but to every one in his own tongue. False teachers preach in an
unknown tongue.
A. And this is to be noted that if all Nations must be taught, according to
this commandment of Christ, it follows that all men throughoute the whole
world were naturally in error and ignorance, and that neither the Jews by
the doctrine of the law, nor the Gentiles by the study of Philosophye could
come to the knowledge of the truth. The law and the Prophets did foreshewe
the coming of Christ, but they were not able to set forth this light of the
grace of Christ. For the vale honge yet before the hearts of the Jews, by the
which also at this day, they are kept from the knowledge of the truth. So
that the whole world without the light of the Gospel is in darkness, and in
the works of darkness: and so under the kingdom of Satan which is the
prince of darkness. Therefore Christ says that his Apostles are the light of
the world, Matthew. 5. Ephe. 4. Ephe. 5.
that is to say the mynisters of the light of the Gospel.

Baptizinge them C. Christ commands those to be baptized which subscribe
to the Gospel, Baptism is a pledge before God, and a sign before men.
and profess themselves to be Dysciples: partly that baptism might be unto
them a pledge before God, and partlye an outward sign of faith before men.
For we know that God by this sign declared the grace af his adoption,
because he does ingrafte us into the body of his son, that he might count
us of his flock. But as God by this sign confirms his grace unto us,
euenso, whosoever offer themselves to baptism, do in like manner bind their
faith as with a sure pledge.

M. What Baptism is and what it is to baptize, Math. 3
read the third Chapter goinge before. Christ did not here institute
Baptism, for it may appear out of John, John. 4
that he baptized his Disciples before.

And he does therefore make mention of Baptism here, that the Apostles might
know what they should do with those which repented and believed the Gospel:
namelye to baptize them in the name of the father of the Son and of the holy
ghost, and to appoint them to keep those things which he himself has
commanded.

C. Hereby again we gather that none are lawful mynisters of Baptism but
they which also minister the word.

Whereas therefore it has been permitted to private men, and to women also to
minister Baptism, it is contrary to the institution of Christ, and a mere
profanation of the Sacrament. Moreover Doctrine is set in ye first place,
because until God geeue life unto the terrestrial elemente by his word, it is
not made a sacrament to us. Wherefore let us know that it comes to pass by
the virtue of doctrine, that the signs take unto them a new nature: even as
the external wasshinge of the flesh, begins to be a spiritual pledge of
regeneration, the doctrine of the Gospel goinge before. And this is the true
consecration, in steed whereof the Papists bring in their magical
exorcismes. And therefore in Mark it is said: He which believes and is
baptized shall be saved.

By which words Christ does not only exclude hypocrites from the hope of
salvation, which being void of faith, have only ye external sign: but also
joins baptism, to the holy bond of doctrine. B. Baptism therefore is
joined to preachinge, as the seal of preachinge, by the which the faithful
are assured, that their sins are forgeeuen by Christ, and is geeuen to them
for a testimony, that they are counted of the house should of God. C. But
because Christ does command to teach before baptism be ministered,
Anabaptists, who for that cause deny the baptisinge of Infantes, until they
come to that age that they may be taught and believe.

This may easily be answered, Answer.
if a man way the order of the commandment. Christ commands the
embassage of eternal salvation to be carried to all Nations: he confirms the
same by adding the seal of Baptism. And the faith of the word is justly set
before baptism, seeing the Gentiles were altogether alienate from God, neither
had they any fellowshippe with the chosen people. For otherwise the figure
should lie, which should offer remission of sins and the gift of the holy
Ghost to ye vnbeleeuinge, which were not as yet the members of Christ. But
we know that they are gathered and brought to the people of God, which
before were dispersed. Neither is baptism after this sort separated from
faith, or doctrine: because although young infantes for want of age are not
able by faith to comprehend the grace of God, yet notwithstanding God speaking
to their parents, does also comprehend them. As well may be proved by this
place, I will be thy God, Gene. 17
and the God of thy seed after thee. A. By this place also many do gather that
we could not be saved without baptism. Romans 10.
But as S. Paul says that the confession of the mouth is necessary to
salvation: euenso Christ here speaks of baptism. Baptism is necessarily
required, because it is the pleasure of God to have us baptized:
notwithstanding we must not hereby gather that we cannot otherwise be
saved. Faith also is necessarily required to understand the word. Romans 10.
For faith comes by hearing. Can not God for all that give us faith by some
other mean? He can no doubt: but this is the mean which he has appointed.

In the name of the father, C. This place teaches that the full and perfect
knowledge of God (which was only obscurely shadowed under the law and the
Prophets) sprange forth at the length under the kingdom of Christ. The
fathers of oulde time (truly) durst never have called God their father, except
they had taken this trust from Christ their head: neither was the eternal
wisdom of God, (which is ye well of light and life) altogether hidden from
them. But by the beginning of the Gospel, God was more plainlye revealed
under three persons: because then, the father in the Son, by his lively and
express Image, manifestlye declared himself: but Christ himself shyninge
through the whole world by the brightness of his spirit, so set forth this
spirit and himself, that the world might know him. But mention is not here
made of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, without cause: for
that the force of Baptim cannot otherwise be apprehended, than to begin at the
free mercy of God the father, which reconcileth us to himself by his only
begotten Son: then, we must behold Christ with the sacrifice of his death:
and last of all we must remember the power of the holy Ghost, by whom he does
wash and regenerate us, and make us partakers of all his benefits.

So that we see God cannot be rightlye known, except that our faith do
distinctly conceive three persons in one essence, and that the efficacy and
fruit of baptism does come hereof, because God the father does adopt us in his
son, and does bring us unto righteousness, being purged by the spirit from
all the filthy spots of the flesh. Therefore to be baptized in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, is to enter, and consecrate
those which are baptized into the faith and Religion of one God: that they may
believe the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, to be one God, to whom alone
they ought to trust: and that the Son and the holy Ghost are nothing else
but the very essence of God: acknowledginge the father, who has adopted them:
The Son, by whom they are accepted, and the holy Ghost by whom they are
regenerate. Furthermore hereby the godhead of the persons is proved against
all heretics. For if we be Baptized in the name of the Son, then the Son
is God: if in the holy Ghost, the^ the holy Ghost is God. The Evangelist Mark
adds saying, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved: but he which
believes not shall be damned. C. This promise was added to draw all mankind to
the faith: as was also the threatninge of dampnation to the unbelieving to
terrefye them. Baptism is joined with faith of the Gospel, to the end we
might know the mark of our salvation to be ingraued in the same. For except it
were effectual to testifye the grace of God, Christ improperly had said that
they shall be saved which believe and are baptized. Moreover he cannot be
sanctified inuisiblelye which contemns and regards not the visible
Sacraments, not that they are so necessary (as we said before) that we
cannot be saved without them, but because thereby we show our obedience to God
who has ordained this thing.

And he which believes not shall be damned. Mark. 16.
C. Christ by this part does declare that the obstinate, in rejecting the grace
offered unto them, do bring unto themselves the greater punishment. The Lord
himself in another place, expounds what it is to be damned, saying, He
that believes on the Son has everlasting life: John. 3.
he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God,
abides on him.

20 Teachinge them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And
lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.

Teachinge them to observe C. This is the other part of Christian doctrine,
that when we shall believe the Gospel, and believing the grace of Christ and
remission of sins: shall apprehende true salvation, we might obey the
commandments of the Lord, and may keep those things which are taught by
the Apostles, as if they were commanded of the Lord.

Moreover by these words Christ does declare, that he does not wholly resign
unto them his office, as though he would cease to be the master of his
Church.

For he sends forth his Apostles with this exception, that they thruste not
unto men their own inuentio^s, but that they do pure lie and faithfullye
dispense from hand to hand (as it were) that which he himself has
commanded. And I would to God the Pope would submit the right which he
arrogateth to himself to this rule. For we would easlye grant him to be the
successor of Peter or Paul, if so be he would not tyrannicallye reign in the
consciences of men. But saying the maistershippe and auctoritye of Christ
being refused, he infecteth the Church with his vain trifles, it does
sufficientlye hereby appear, how far he is from the Apostolical office. In
fine let us note, that such are appointed teachers of the Church, not which
bring forth what seems unto them good, but which depend upon the mouth of
their master only, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
that they may bring Dysciples unto him, not to themselves. Ye know (says the
Apostle Paul) what commandments I have given you by the Lord Jesus. And S.
Peter says, 1 Peter. 4.
If any man talk, let him speak as the words of God. M. But Christ speaks
not here of one or two commandments, but of all his doctrine, which we have
set forth unto us by his Apostles, and Evangelists. A. Whereupon the Apostle
Paul going about to show how faithfully he had done his duty, says, I have
spared no labor, Acts. 20.
but have showed you all the counsel of God. M. We must also note that the
Lord says not, Teaching them to know and understand, but To keep all those
things which I have commanded For although the knowledge of the doctrine of
Christ be required of the faithful, yet notwithstanding the end in learning
is not here prescribed to a Christian, that he may only know those things
which are good and right, but that he may keep them also and show them in
deed And lo I am with you alvvaye It was a hard office which he committed
unto them, to bear the which, good were able in no point. And it is likely
that the Dysciples were not a little terrefyed by the consideration of it. C.
Therefore he does encourage them with the trust of his heavenly aid,
promisinge unto them his presence every where and at all times throughout the
whole world, his help and grace also even to the end and finishinge of their
embassage. For before he promised that he would be with them, he declared
that he was the king both of Heaven and earth, which with his hand and power
governs all things. Therefore in this word (I) there is a great Emphasis and
force contained, as if he had said, that if the Apostles would discharge their
duty bouldly they must not have respect what they themselves were able to do
but must leave to his invincible power, under whose banner they fight. Bu. As
if he should say, So long as you do these things, the world will be against
you as it has been against me. For my spirit agrees not with the spirit
of this world, and my doctrine is altogether contrary to their affections,
which love those things that are of this world. So that with many tumultes men
will rise against you: but there is no cause why ye should despair, although
ye be not noble but simple, weak, and few in number: I have overcome the
world, and you by my help, and my example shall overcome. By my power, not by
your own, shall ye overcome what soever seems fearful to you in this
world. And although I will carry up shortly this body into Heaven, (which
thing is good for you that it be so) yet not withstandinge I will never
forsake you, for after that I shall cease to be with you in body, then more
effectually will I be with you in spirit. C. Therefore the manner of presence,
which the Lord promises to his Dysciples, ought spiritually to be understood:
because it is not needful that he should descend from Heaven to help us,
because he can help us by the grace of his spirit as it were stretching his
hand from Heaven. Even unto the end of the world, These words do declare
that this was spoken not to the Apostles only: because the Lord does promise
his help to continue not to the end of one age only, but also to the
consumation of the world. His words therefore are in effect as if he should
say, How weak soever the mynisters of the Gospel be, and what need soever
of things necessary they suffer, I will be their aid, and defender, insomuch
that they shall have the victory over all the conflictes of the world. Luke.
24 Acts 1.
M. The order of the Historye does require that we add those things, which
the Euangeliste Luke writes, as concerning the Assencion of Christ, in the
latter end of his Gospel, and in the Acts of the Apostles. He says
therefore, And he led them out into Bethanye, C. Because Mathewe had greatly
exalted the kingdom of Christ above the whole world, he makes no mention of
his Assention into Heaven. Mark makes mention of the Assention, but where,
and how he assended, he speaks nothing at all. But Luke very plainly
sets forth this matter, for he says that Christ led his disciples forth
into Bethany, that he might assende from the mount Oliuet into his heavenly
throne.

R. For the Euangeliste Luke says in an other place, Acts. 1.
that when the Lord was assended, the Apostels returned to Jerusalem, from
the mount Oliuet. C. As he would not be seen of all men after his
resurrection, Acts. 10.
(as witnesses Peter) so he would not have all men to be witnesses of his
assention into heaven: because he would have this mystery of the faith to be
known rather by the preaching of the Gospel, tha^ to be seen with the eyes.
R. But what talk the Apostles had with Christ in the mount. S. Luke writes
in these words saying: Lord, will thou at this time restore the kingdom of
Israel? But he said unto them, Acts 1.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the father has put
in his own power. It follows in Mark and Luke. So when the Lord had
spoken unto them, he lifted up his hands and blessed them. C. And so he taught
them that to bless, (which office was committed to the priests under the law)
did truly and properly be long unto him. Number. 6.
Seeing therefore he was the only author of all blessing, yet to the end his
grace might be the more familiar, he would have the priests from the
beginning to bless in his name, as mediators. So Melchisedech blessed
Abraham. Gene. 14 Heb 7. Nvm. 6.
And for this matter there is a law given, which lasts for ever.

To the same end pertains that which is written in the Psalms, Psalm. 118.
where it is said, We have wyshed you good luck, ye that be of the house of
the Lord. And the Apostle says, Heb. 7.
that it is a sign of excellency to bless others. For the less (says he) is
blessed of the greater. Now when Christ the true Melchisedech and the
everlasting priest declared him self, it was necessary that the same which
was shadowed in the figures of the law should be fulfilled, even as the
Apostell Paul also teaches, that we are blessed of God the father in him,
Ephe. 1.
that we may be rich in all celestial benefits. Therefore he once blessed
the Apostels solemly, that the faithful might come unto him, if they desired
to be partakers of the grace of God. So that he lifting up his hands and
blessing them and their ministry, declares by a certain sign that he wysheth
us well, that we might receive consolation by this blessing, so long as the
Gospel is preached.

It follows, And it came to pass as he blessed them, he departed from them,
Luke. 24. Acts. 1.
and was taken up an hie, and a cloud received him out of their sight, into
heaven.

After Christ had done all those things which were appointed to him of his
father, and which pertayned to our salvation, it was not needful that he
should be any longer conuersaunt in earth. He therefore, being taken up into
heaven, has taken out of our sight the presence of his body, not that he
seasseth to be present with the faithful, which as yet are pilgrims on the
earth, but that he might govern heaven and earth with a more present power.
The heavens are said to be the seat of God, who notwithstanding fulfilleth
all things. The heaven therefore into the with our Lord is ascended, is the
invisible glory of the father: where the son of man, which was before so
contemned, and rejected of his enemies, reigns for ever in power and glory
having all things subject unto him, and fulfilling all things in his elect,
by his holy spirit.

And we obtain two specallye fruits by this assention. For in that he
ascended into heaven for our sakes, he has opened away for us to come
thither, that the gate may stand open for us, which before was shut by reason
of sin. Furthermore he is an advocate and intercessor with God for us, as it
is said in the Epistle to the Romans. Romans 8. Heb. 7.


And sits at the right hand of God. C. This kind of speech signifies that
he is taken up an high, that he might excel Angels, and all other creatures,
that the father by his hand might govern the world, and that before him
every knee might bow. C. This similitude is taken of the manner of princes,
which have their counselors and assistentes, to whom they give several
offices of government. Eue^ so Christ is said to be received up to the
right hand of the father, solemly to receive possession of the administration
committed unto him and to keep the same till his coming to judgment. And
therefore ye Apostel says. The father has set him on his right hand, in
heavenly things, above all rule, and power, and might, and dominion, and
above every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in the world
to come: Ephe. 1.
and has put all things under his feet, and has made him above all things
the head of the congregation, which is his body, and the fulness of him which
fylleth all in all.

Therefore this is as much as if he should be called Gods vicar, which takes
upon him his person. After these things the Euangeliste Luke declares how
the disciples behave them selves, and what they did when the Lord was taken
from them, saying.

Luke. 24. Acts. 1.
And when they had worshipped him, they beheld as he was taken up an high, and
a cloud received him up out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly
up to heaven as he went, behold two me^ stood by them in white apparel,
which also said: ye men of Galile, why stand ye gasing up into heaven? This
same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, even as ye
have seen him go into heaven.

C. This sentence consists of two parts. The first is, that Jesus is
received up into heaven, least men any more by a foolysh desire should pluck
him down into the earth. The second is, added for a consolation, as concerning
his second coming. R. The sum and effect is, that although Christ be now
taken up into heaven, and will not at this time reveal the public majesty
of his kingdom in this world, that his excelent treasures might be perceived
and felt by humane sense: yet notwithstanding he ascended not into heaven to
dwell there alone, and to enjoy the celestial glory always him self
invisible, and to suffer the world after his old manner to pass from time to
time: but rather that he might come in his time into this world visibly, and
with great power to set al things in a better order: that is, to give unto the
Godly and faithful, everlasting felicity, and to the wicked and contemners
of the Gospel perpetual damnation.

And by these two parts joined together, a strong argument to confute the
Papists and all others which affirm that the carnal presence of Christ is
joined with the signs of bread and wine, may be gathered. For when Christ is
said to be taken up into heaven the distance between heaven and earth is
manifestly noted. We grant (truly) that this word (heaven) is diversely
taken: some times for the air, some times for the whole compass of the Sphere,
some times for the glorious kingdom of God, when as his majesty has his
proper seat, howsoever it fulfilleth the world. For the which cause, Paul
places Christ above the heavens, Ephe. 4.
because he is above the world, and in that mansion place has the highest
room of immortality, because he is above all Angels, of whom he is the
head. But this lets not that he should not be absent from us, and that by
the name of heavens a separation from the world may be signified. And how
soever they cauil, it is plain that heaven, into the which Christ is taken,
is apposed and set against the compass of the whole world. Therefore if he be
in heaven (as no doubt he is) he cannot be in the world. But first of all we
must note the purpose of the Angel, that we may give the better judgment of
his words.

The Angels go about to revoke the disciples from the carnal presence. And to
this end they say that he shall not come again until the second time, which
is at the general judgment. But they think that they have made a good
distinction, when they say that he shall then come in a visible form, but now
daily in an invisible form. But there is no disputation here about the form:
only the Apostels are admonished, to suffer Christ to abide in heaven, until
the last day appear. As Peter also admonishes in an other place saying,
Act. 3.
When the time of refreshing comes, which we shall have at the presence of
the Lord, when God shall send him, which before was preached unto you, that
is to wit Jesus Christ, which must receive heaven until the time that all
things which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since
the world began, he restored again. Therefore according to the commaundemene
of the Angel let us not with our feigned inuencions pluck Christ out of
heaven before the time, but let us consider that according to the presence of
his spirit he is every where, and according to the presence of his flesh, at
the right hand of God in heaven. For this matter read the.xxvi. chapter
going before.

Act. 1.
Then returned they to Jerusalem with great joy from the mount Oliuete. R.
Although the Disciples had lost the sight of the Lord, (...) they return to
Jerusalem with great joy, John 16.
They felt then that it was true which the Lord had said, namely that it was
good for them, that he should depart from them in the flesh. While he was
with them in the flesh they were altogether carnal, and sauored nothing, but
that which was fleshel^^ but when he departed as touching the flesh, and was
present with them in the spirit they were wonderfully affected with joy, and
began to extol and magnify the name of God. They obey the commandment of
Christ in going to Jerusalem which said unto them before. But abide ye in
Jerusalem until ye be indewed with power from above. It was very dangerous
for them to be in Jerusalem among the midst of Christ's enemies, yet they
obey. Surely if we way the circumstances well, we shall see that they
returned all most to present death. For how should they spare the disciples,
which so cruelly put Christ to death. But the power of the spirit of Christ
filled them with such joy, and made them obedient to do their office.

Acts. 1.
And when they were come in, they went up into a parler, where abode both Peter
and James, and John, and Andrewe, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomewe and Matthew,
James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James.
These al continewed with one accord in prayer and supplication with the women,
and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.

It is like that the Apostles gathered the^ selves together into this parloure
and securite place, that they might there abide until they had received the
holy Ghost. But fond and foolish are the Papists which go about to prove
the supremacy of Peter, because in this place he is named first among the
rest of the Apostles. And if so be we should grant that he was the chief
of all the Apostles, yet it does not follow, that he was chief of the whole
world.

But if he be therefore chief of the Apostels, because in the cataloge or
rehersall of names he is put in the first place, we will also by the same
reason conclude that the mother of Christ was inferior to all other women,
because she is named in the lowest room. The which thing* I am sure, they
will in no wise admit, and if they would, it were to absurd. Wherefore
except they mean to make all men laughe and ieste at their Popish supremacy,
let them cease to prove it by such sclender and childishe reasons. But to
return to our purpose. The Euangeliste Luke says, that all the Apostels of
Christ were assembled together in prayer. R. Continual prayer (truly) was
necessary for them: for at that time they were set in the midst of many and
grievous temptations: partly, because the holy Ghost came not presently upon
them after they came from the mount Oliuet: and partly because they might look
every moment when the armed soldiers should beset the house in the which they
were.

C. They pray therefore that Christ would send his spirit upon them, as
he had promised. Whereby we gather that the same is a true faith which does
move us and stir us up to call upon the name of God.

And were continually in the Temple lauding and praising God. Luke. 24.


C. The Euangeliste Luke means that the Apostels for exceading joy burst
forth openly into the praise of God, and were daily in the temple. The Apostels
at the first for fear pryuely kept them selves in secret, but now with
bouldnes and joy they come abroad.

And while they thus wayghted for the coming of the holy Ghost, they chose
Mathias in stead of Judas Iscariothe, as Luke declares in the Acts. At the
length when the fifty days, or Pentecost was ended (that is to say, seven
wekes after the resurrection) the holy Ghost was sent upon them: as
witnesses Saint Luke, saying: When the fifty days were come to an end, they
were altogether with one accord in one place.

And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had been the coming of a
mighty wind, and filled all the house where they sat. And there appeared unto
them cloven tongues: and so forth until the thirtene verse.

They being therefore baptized and confirmed by the holy Ghost, and thereby
being made more strong, prepared the^ selves by and by to discharge their
office: as the Euangeliste Mark declares by these words: Mark. 16.
And they went forth and preached every where: the Lord working with them,
and confirming the word with miracles followyng.

Wherefore let us by the example of the Apostels glorify the name of God
which plentifully has powered his holy spirit upon us, which has
sanctified us by the same spirit, and given unto us free remission of our
sins by the death of his son Jesus Christ whom he raised again from
death, and has exalted to the right hand of his glory in heaven that he
having taken possession thereof (...), we hereafter might be partake^s of the
same. In the mean time, The God of peace yt brought again from death our
Lord Jesus, the great shepehearde of the Sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting testament, make us (...) all good works, to ^^ his will and bring
to pass^ that the thing which we do may be pleasant (...) his ^^ght^, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom ^e praise forever, w^ (...) Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE IN THE ORDER of an Alphabete contayninge all the special notes for
the most part in the Exposition goinge before.
A.
ABraham saw Christ by faith. Folio. 284. Abomination of the heathen. Folio.
96. Absolution. 407. Accomptes must be made for our talentes. 600. Adoption
has made us sons. 344. Adulterye. 99. 417. 421 Affections are not naturallye
in. God. 140. Affections of man's mind are sinful. 654. Affinitye between God
and man, by Christ. 17. Affliction perrtayneth to the mynisters of Gods word
84. Affliction makes us to come unto Christ 186. Affliction is the badge of a
Christian man 215. 244. Affliction is a stombling block to some 287.
Affliction brideleth ambition 447. Alms must be given to the pore 607. Alms
a true sacrifyce 623. Alms deeds 112. 114. Ambition is restrained by ye
spirit of God 440. Ambition keeps us from Gods kingdom 395. Ambition is a
deadly disease 528. Anabaptists deny pollitique government 506. Anabaptists
103. 450. Anabaptists kiss in toke^ of love 111. Angels know not all things
583. Angels make no revelations contrary to the salvation of me^ 583. Angels.
742. Angels have no power to save 50. Angels are Gods mynisters to keep us 63.
373. 580 Angels needed not a reconciler. 380. Angels are the kepers of the
faith full. 400. Antechristes 571. Antechrist of Rome craftily stays up his
kingdom 352. Antechrist of Rome takes away the foundation of ye Church. 365
Anger may be found in the elect 95. Anger of two kinds 34. Anger must be
without sin 252. Anger may be perceived by certain signs. 95. Apostleship
is not an idle office 752. Auriculer confession 44. 153. Arrian heritique 584.
B.
Baptizme 50. Baptizme general and special 53. Baptizme was the beginning of
the Gospel 55. Baptizme ought not to be denied to infantes 426 Baptizme is a
pledge before God and a sign before men 752. Baptizme ought not to be
mynistered by women 745. Backebytinge 180. Benefits temporal 110. Blasphemy
217. Blasphemy is to dye without repentance. 264. Blasphemy against ye spirit
264. Blasphemy that proceeds of ignorance is remissible 265. Blessedness
pertayneth to the pacient 75. Blindness is the cause of destruction 337.
Blindness comes of false persuasion 446. Bindinge pertayneth to the Gospel
363. Bouldnes ought to be in a Preacher 308. Bread is but the ordinary mean to
preserve life 61. Brotherly love 172. Burial is to be reverenced 313. Burial
pertayneth to saints. 313.
C.
Cause why the virgin Marye did marrye 13. Cause of natural diseases 13.
Calling external, and internal 72. Calling of three sorts 500. Caiphas a
corrupted priest 618. Care excessive 134. 205. 213 Care distrustful 135. Cares
of this life are a hinderance to the faithful 593. Careless servants 600.
Carnal Gospellers 161. 286 Ceremonies ought not to be preferred before Gods
word 251. Ceremonies are put away 91. Chanonistes geeue the temporal sword to
the Pope 665. Charity must be preferred before pollitique laws 419. Charity
108. Chastity in Popery is mere bauderye 423. Chastity of three sorts 423.
Chastity is no virtue. 424. Christ has made us the sons of God 118. Christ
is true savior both of body and soul 151. Christ is our Physician 152. 180
Christ is merciful 161. Christ became pore for our sakes 163. Christ's
coming brings tormente to the wicked 169. Christ does not reiecte us for
all our infirmitye 187. Christ being in heaven cares for his Church 198.
Christ is a sword to the wicked 224. Christ is a stomblinge block to the
wicked 231. Christ is the Image of the father 244. Christ alone is our help in
trouble 245. Christ was made a servant for us. 255. Christ's Church is
defiled with many hypocrites 290. Christ God and man 320. Christ the son of
man 355. Christ suffered, because he would, 375. Christ a mediator 380.
Christ the Judge of the whole world 407. Christ a spiritual king 460.
Christ comes to us not we to him Christ is the son of David, and the son
of God 516. Christ has two natures 518. Christ the head of the Church 545.
Christ is the stone of offense 561. Christ's burial a sauoure of life 624.
Christ, what it signifies 143. Christ is not our savior without we believe.
14. Christ a lawful mediator 17. Christ cannot be destroyed by the wicked 32.
Christ was exercised with ye cross from his infancy 37. Christ the bright
son of righteousness 39. Christ went into the wilderness 57. Christ suffered
willingly 57. Christ our Conqueror 61. Christ is our light 69. Christ is our
only stay in trouble 77. Christ fulfilled the law Christians worse than
Publica^s. 111. Contemners of the Gospel 139. Contempt of the Gospel 208.
209. 568. Concupiscence 100. Confession of Christ is required of all men 222.
Confession of Christ is the effect of faith 467. Confession of sins is a true
sign of repentance 44. Confidence in God 467. Constancye in John the Baptiste
46. Consciences that are gilty, ever accuse themselves 307. Continencye is the
gift of God 422. Covetousness 126. Covetous men forsake the service of God 130.
Covetousness crept into the Temple of Jerusalem 469. Covetous men possess not
money but are possessed of money 601. Covetousness a monsterous beast, 621.
Courtears for the most part despise the graces of God 699. Corruption of
nature is cause of debate 225. Corruption in man's heart Corban the box of the
Temple, 332. Correction of three sorts 402. Cross 226. Creatures made by God
are pure 334. Cruel men shall be cruellye handeled 412. 413. 414. Cruel men are
a fear to themselves 77. Curiositye 183. Curious searching of Gods, secrets
may not be 583. Custom ought not to be preferred before the Gospel 419.
D.
Daunsinge is not commendable 310. Day of Judgment 147. Death is compared to
sleep 191. Death is a perpetual destruction to the wicked 227. Death after
our resurrection has no more power over us 509. Demoniakes 161. Denyars of
Christ 223. Defense of our selves must be without anger 665. Deliverance
comes to the godly in time of need 493. Destroyers are oftentimes called
builders. Desperate men are the worse for punishment 424 Devils obey Christ
387. Diligence ought to be in mynisters of the word 72. Diligence in
hearing gods word 302. Disciples of Christ were rude when they were called at
the first 71. Discipline ought to be in the Church 604. Discipline of the
spirit puts away evil 608. Dysdaine comes of pride 696. Distrust
brings into peril 324. Dissension is a deadly thing 260. Dissemulation 73.
Diuorcementes are forbidden 417. Diuorcementes 101. Doctrine without authority
is of small force. 200. Doubtinge puts away faith 467. Dreams
supernatural, and natural 13.
E.
Error that comes ignorantlye is sone put away 53. Error increases, godlynes
being away 307. Error being grounded, truth is abolished 351 Error of the
Rabbines 383. Error of the Scribes 383. Error of the Anabaptists 392. Error in
interpreters 421. Error in Hierome 422. Increase comes by Gods blessinge 347.
Equitye 141. Esseyes 45. External profession is nothing, 147. External
repen^^nce must be avoided 239. Excommunication 406. Eradication of the wicked
336. Eternal life cannot be boughte 299, Eternal dampnation 414.
F.
Faith doubts no peril in the coming of Christ 193. Faith must be
confessed with the mouth. 222. Faith is not gotten by man's wisdom 241.
Faithful men are the brethren of Christ 275. Faith comes by hearing 340.
Faith cannot be beaten down 342. Faith in the woman of Chanaan, 343. Faith
obtayneth all things 345. Faith is the gift of God 359. Faith of three sorts
387. Faith is of more power than fasting and prayer 388. Faith 188. 536.
Faithful me^ have the Lord their watchman 140. Faith has his effect 159. 160.
Faith being away our prayers are not heard 159. Faith brings all things to
pass 172. 190. Faith in the Parents profits infantes 173. Faith and grace
are joined together in the work of salvation. 189. Faith only obtayneth
remission of sins 189. Faith turns ye curse into a blessinge 608. Faith is
helped by Sacraments 643. False Religion 8. False teachers 143. False
Prophets shall be punished 146. 557. False Christ's 571. False teachers, teach
in ^n unknown tongue 574. False witness 674. Fame of Christ 73. Familiar
things are not esteemed Fast in Lent 59. Fast of Papists 59. 126. Fast of
Christ most myraculous 59. Fasting must be voluntarye not constrained 184.
Fasting helps prayer. 389. Feigned worship of God is abominable 334. Fear
in the Apostles 166. Fear in general is not evil 166. Fear is contrary to
faith 188. Fear always remains in the wicked 309. Fear takes away
oftentimes ye senses of man 322. Fear puts away trust 323. Fear and vain
glory are always joined with impiety 479. Fear of hell is even in the elect
608. Fear pertayneth to the elect and reprobate 743. Felicity consists not
in meat and drink. 61. Feastinge is not without many evils 310.
Forewarning of dangers is profitable 210. Fortitude of the faithful 445.
Fortune is condemned 221 Flattery begileth simplicity 267. Flatterers 452.
Flattery in friendship 662.
G.
God never fails those that are his 29. Godly deeds perverted by ye wic^ed
30. Gods spirit cannot be seen 54. Gods spirit is of great force 57. Gods
word is our weapon to beat down Satan 61. Gods providence 62. 63 132.
171. 220. God alone must be worshipped 66. Gods promises are immutable 90. God
is every where 104. God is liberal to all men 110. God is our father 118.
Gods kingdom. 120. Gods will 120. Gods blessing increases all things 122.
God must be served with all our heart 130. God is ready to grant our
requests 139. Gods countenance is terreble to the wicked 171 Gods gifts
ought not to be sold 204. Gods Justice 239. God has no respect of persons,
God is Lord of the whole earth, 241. Gods purpose cannot ^ltered 243. Gods
election 272. God is not the author of evil 398. God turns all things to the
best 415. God the author of all goodness. 428. God a prseent help in trouble.
439. Gods grace is sweet to those that enjoy it. 439. God needs not man's
help 483. God is a God of the lyuinge 511. Gospel is a general calling 498.
Gospel is a reconcilliation between God and man 364. Gospel is the keye of
life 362. Gospel came from God 234. Gospel consists of two parts 40.
Gospel is a fan 51. Gospel is hated because it is sharp salt 84. Gospel is
subject to slau^ders. 89. Gospel is a precious pearl. 139. Good works ought to
be in Christians 87. Good works may not be done for vain glory 87. Good
works are said to be ours by imputacion 87. Good works are not the cause
of salvation 373. Good works are a seal of our faith 374. General
Judgment 499. General counselles 409. General day of Judgment 409. Glory
prepared for the righteous. 297. Grace made the Gentiles the sons of God 343.
H.
Hatred must be avoided 109. Harlots envy those that reprove them 311. Help
comes from the Lord in time of need 213. Hell fire 608 Hell gates shall not
prevail against faith 361. Herod feared to put John to death. 309. Herodes
blindness 23. Hermits 40. Hell fire 96. Health of the body is more set by than
souls health 73. Jerusalem the sanctuary of God. 16. Hope brings
consolation 190. Hope has her fruit 52. Honor due unto Parents 331 Holiness
without brotherly love is hypocrisye Holiness consists not in outward shows
183. Hypocrisy pretends religion 348. Hypocrisy most abominable 469.
Hypocrites turn the truth of God into a lie 470. Hypocrites are hardly brought
to repentance 481. Hypocrites have a pretense 27. Hypocrisy 27. 150. Hypocrites
fear to be detected 45. Hypocrites are secure 48. Hypocrites have a cloak 73.
Hypocrisy in geuinge alms 112. Hypocrites of diverse kinds 113 Hypocrisye is
ambitious 115. Hyerlinges 146. Humillity 156. Humillity in Christ hid his glory
from the reprobate 38. Humillity and the reward thereof 395. Humillitye
pertayneth to all estates 451. Hum^llity is joined with the prayers of the
godly 652.
I.
Idolatry 66. Idle words 268. Idle prelates are not sent 442, Impaciente
persons cannot bear the yoke 75. Images ought not to be in the Church 379.
Immoderate care 131. Impudencye in Papists 85. Inconsta^cy 232. Ignorance in
the Apostles is not an example for blind guides to follow 71. Ignorance is
the original of excessive care 134. Ignorance peruerteth all good works 196.
Ignorance ought not to be in a teacher 301. Ignorance is the cause of error.
58. Ignorance is not the mother of devotion 242. 334. Inheritance of the godly
77. Indifferent things ought not to be tied to necessity 328. Indulgences 91.
Iniurye 98. Injury must be borne 108. Infidels have no profit by gods
benefits 457. Infidels are always unprepared for the Lords coming 593.
Ingratitude in the Gaderenites. 171. Ingratitude makes us to forget God 323.
Ingratitude is the cause that we are overcome in temptacio^ 353. Ingratitude
punished 496. Invocation 595. Infantes received of Christ 425. Infantes are
made partakers of the grace in Christ 426. Iosephes zeal 12. John the
Baptiste. 39. John the forerunner of Christ 41. John Baptist led an Austere
life. 43. John's constancy 46. John Baptistes modesty 53. John the Baptist is
called Helias 383. Judgment 94. 136. 536. Judgment does not overthrow
remission of sins 268. Judgment of hypocrites 499. Judas a pattern of
Popish repentance 686. Just punishment is not persecution 82. Ire is the
root of murder 94. Justification comes by faith. 457.
K.
Kingdom of Heaven what it is. 40. Kingdom of Christ 459. Kingdom of Heaven
may be shut up two ways 530 Kings ought to be liberal 451.
L.
Law abolished by Christ's coming 14. Liberallity 108. Liberty preached by
Papish monks 110. Liberallity pertayneth to kings. 451. Lies stay us from
repentance. 570. Love is the fulfillinge of ye Law. 96. Love of our neighbor
109. 514. Love was, and is, more plentiful in the heathen, than in Christians
110. Love is a token of adoption 110. Love not guided by reason 367. Love
pertayneth to Christians. 403. Lorship pertayneth not to pastors 451. 452.
Luxurye. 43. Lunatikes 385.
M.
Man's merits are condemned 7. Man's life consists not in bread. 61. Man's
felicitye consists not in meat and drink. 61. Man's merits are nothing 82.
83. Man's unsavory nature must be seasoned by Gods word. 84. Man's natural
affections resist God 120. Man's labor without gods blessinge is nothing 121.
Man's afections must be guided by gods spirit 129. Man must tarrye the Lords
leisure 160. Man's mysery 170. 273. Man's mind is blind 322. Man's life is a
continual warrefare 347. Man's soul is immortal 372. Man's merits deserve
dampnation 440. Man has a certain time appointed either of life or death 659.
Manicheis 324. Magistrates office 80. 589 Magistrates are under the power of
God 157. Magistrates either spiritual or temporal may have the name of
Lords 528. Martyers 227. Mary the mother of Christ ought not to be worshipped
276. Mass contrary to the institution of Christ 636. Matrimony 416 Matrimonye
cannot be broken at man's pleasure 420. Matrimony ought not to be broken but by
fornication 420. Matrimony is a necessary remedy against sin 423. Means not
lawful 665. Merciful princes make the subjects to dwell without peril 37.
Mercy 78. 536. Merits bring us not to everlasting life 427. 442. 604.
Meekenes 77. Mekenes consists in sufferance. 462. Men see not their own
falts 137. Meats defyle not a man 338. Misconstruinge of the place of the
Prophets 33. Mynisters must be deligent 72. Mynisters of Gods word, are the
light of the world 86. Mynisters of Christ ought not to be discouraged by
reproach 197. Mynisters of Christ are faithful laborers 198. Mynisters of
Christ 450. 486. Mynisters of the word are steewardes 589. 751. Mynisters of
Christ must be called 596. Mysteries of God pertayne not to the reprobate 138.
Miracles 148. Miracles serve to set forth Gods glory 327. Moderation must be
used in reprehention 663 Modesty in John the Baptist 53. Modesty 152. Moses
chair 521. Moonkes and friars go in sheep clothinge 143. Monks and friars
crucify them selves in vain 227. Monkishe perfection 432. Moonkes maintained
in ydlenes 432. Monks are makers of pro^elits. 533. Murder is committed by
haired. 94. Murder has three steps 94. 95. Murmuringe is not in the
faithful 443.
N.
Necessary care 131. Necessity has no law 248. Nectarius bishop of
Constantinople took away auriculer confession 154. Negligence in stewardes of
gods househoulde. 301. Newters 263. New things please men be they never so
bad 304.
O.
Obedience and faith in Joseph 18. Obedience is acceptable to God. 32.
Obedience due to Maiestrates 505. Obedience is a trial of gods promises 64.
Obedience 157. 178. Obstinacy in the reprobate 237. Obstinate ^^^denes 302.
Observation of the Sabothe 246. Occasions of evil ought to be avoided 320.
415. Offenses 231. 335. Offenses of two sorts 337 Offenses of diverse kinds
397. Offenses Active and P^e 398 Oppressors of the truth are inexcusable 23.
Oppression of Gods spirit surmounteth man's reason 29. Opinions must have Gods
word for their warrante 401. Ordinarye means must be used. 64. Oaths 103.
P.
Patience is blessed* 75. Patience is in the godly 107. Patience perseuereth to
the end. 21^. Patience 289 Papists confess Christ with the mouth and in
deed deny him 25. Papists take from us Gods word 61. Papists say that the
Scripture is doubtful 63. Papists deny God only to be worshipped. 66.
Papists say that concupiscence is no sin. 100. Papists worship God with
outward shows only 623. Papists allege traditions 328 Papists give the
glory of God to saints 540. Papisticall repentance 47* Parrables have their
use 277. Parables do not in all points agree 412. Passover of the Jews a
type of Christ's supper. 616. ^ersian worship 29. ^eace makers 79. ^^ace is in
Christ's truth 225. Persecution 80 Persecution for righteousness 81.
Persecution may lawfully be fled. 216. 567. Perfection consists not in
straitnes of life 237. Perfection 432. Perseverance and constancy 563. 215.
258. 325. 440. Perseueraunce proves our election 501. Peter denies Christ
681. Peter's successor must be a preacher 752. Peter's infirmity is common to al
men 324. Peter was the mouth of the Apostles 357. Peter signyfyeth a stone 359.
Peter dyed at Rome 395. Peter was called Satan 368. Peter's infirmitye 378.
Phariseys 44. Pilate slew himself 685. Pope would be worshipped 29. Popish
pride 48. Pope and Satan in ambition and lyinge are alike 65 Popes
excommunication is not to be feared 81. Pope is a raueninge wo^^e 145. Popish
^ast 59. Pore in spirit 7^. Punishments prepared for the wicked 300. Pouertye
is appointed to exercise charity 624. Potentates of this world are enemies to
God 212. Plagues are Gods messengers. 161. Prayer 115. 139. 423. Prayer is the
exercise of our faith 116. 117. 118. 119. Prayer is but a vain ceremony^
without faith 139. Prayer must have constancy 140. Prayer in secret 320.
Prayer must be used in all places 321. 409. Prayer to saints 341. Prayer
helps faith 389, Prayer is the only refuge of sinners 413. Prayer in time of
need 455. Preachinge is in vain without the internal word of the spirit
18. Preachers must teach with consideration 44. Preachers must abound in
knowledge 301. Preachers of Gods word must avoid flattery 309. Predestination
336. Providence of God in Dreams. 13. Prodiga^^tye 108. Pride by nature in man
204. Pride is the mother of reproach 399. Presumption and excessive care are
joined together 133. Presumption. 64. Pureness of heart is the mother of all
virtue 78. Purgatory of the Papists 99. Publicans 111. 179. Purgatory pedlers
266. Purgatory 414.
R.
Rash Judgment ought to be avoided 500. Rash Judgment comes of light
credit 620. Rash Judgment 136. Rash zeal 46. Rabbines 14. Repentance 40.
47. 182. Repentance is not the cause of remission of sins 283. Repentance is
declared by remission of sin 44. Repentance has ber fruit 47. Repentance
Papistical 47. Repentance is the work of God. 410. Repentance is a holy thing
411. Repentance confesses sins 724. Repentance comes not by the motion of
the flesh 723. Reprehension is bitter to the wicked 25. Reprehension does not
profit the obstinate 625. Reprobates are captives to Satan 28. Reprobates are
chaste 51. Reprobates shall be tormented 296. Reprobates repent^ not from the
bottom of the heart. 595. Reconcilliation 97. Redemption could not be without
the destruction of Satan 262. Regeneration of two kinds 437. Religion is the
keye of the kingdom of Heaven 530. Remission takes away the punishment of the
falte 725. Remission of sins puts away satisfactions 123. Remission of
sins by the Gospel 363. Remedies against contencion 98. Revelation that is
heavenly agrees with the Scriptures 29. Reverence pertayneth to Gods word 9.
Reward 83. Resurrection of Christ 749 Riches are subject to rust 127. Riches
are a let unto us 178. 231. 298. Riches keep us from Christ 433. Riches of
themselves are good 434. Rytches not used to the glory of God are abused. 735
Righteousness of two sorts. 428 Robbery houldeth up the Popes seat. 548
S.
Sabothes have their use. 248 Sabothes ought ought rather to be broken than the
rule of Charity. 255 Sacrament a visible sign, 637 Sacraments must not be
despised, Saduceis. 45 Salvation by Christ only. 14 Salvation comes only by
the free mency of God. 604 Salutation. 206 Sampson a figure of Christ. 38
Satan and the Pope desyer to be worshipped of Christ. 29 Satan the enemy of
mankind. 57 Satan is the cause of evil temptations. 60 Satan makes us to
distruste Gods promises. 60. 722 Satan can not hurt without God suffer. 63.
170 Satan signifies an adversary. 65 Satan is a tyraunte. 168 Satan and his
kingdom are subject to Christ. 169 Satan hates no creature but man. ^^^
Satan continually warreth against Christ. 214 Satan is an unclean spirit.
272. Satan enters not into the faithful. 273 Satan is an ennemy to Gods
word. 286 Satan is the head of the ungodly. 545. 609 Satan possesses the
reprobate. 626. Satan would have Christ to peryshe. 707 Satisfaction cannot
be made by us for sin. 412 Satisfaction for all sins made by Christ. 644
Saints may not be sought unto for help. 211 Scriptures are read amiss by the
wicked. 25 Scribes. 327 Security. 211 Seducers preach not the word of the
Lord. 228 Sedition is ascribed to the word of God oftentimes by the wicked.
693. Severity. 402 Symplicitie of Godlynes ^0 Sycknesses are plagues for
sin. 188. Sin stopped the way to Gods grace. ^2 Sin makes us detters
unto God. 122 Sin is the cause of cor^orall diseases. 173 Sins are not
forgue^ by man. 175 Sinners ought not to be despised. 181. Sins are remitted
two manner of ways. 411 Sins are put away by the mercy of God. 413 Sins
are put away by the sacrifice of Christ. 617 Sinagoges. 73. 113 Spirit of God
cannot be seen. 54 Spirits good and evil. 322 Spiritual joy. 746
Slouthfumes does arise of to much trust. 441 Sufferance. 106 Subjects must
obey their prince 506. Supremacy of Rome. 201 Superstition in immitation of
saints. 187 Superstitious wearing the Gospel about the neck. 525
Superstition has his original of the flesh. 572 Superstition in the fast of
lent. 59 Suspicion of rebellion must be avoided. 3^2 Streying sheep are not
rejected of the Lord. 646
T
Tears of repentance. 684 Tears of oypocrites. 684 Temperance. 43 Te^ptatio^s
come not by chance. 58 Temptations proceade from the affections of man. 58
Temptations are a trial for a time. 66 Temptations that are evil come of
Satan. 60 Temptations of Satan kyndell our affections. 124 Three causes of
our salvation. Threateninges make the wicked to rage more and more. Tribulation
ought to bring us unto Christ* 155 Tribute. 390 Traditions thrust in by men.
327 Traditions of three sorts. 328 Traditions of men tie the consciences of
Gods people. 330 Tradition defenders are pernicious enemies. 332 Traditions of
men bring in hypocrisy. 352 Transubstantiation. 638 Trouble tries our faith.
^66 Two parts of deliverance. 14 Two things to be studied of every Christian.
30. Two kinds of anger. 34 Two things were specially done by Christ. 73 Two
sorts of contemners. 139 Two ends of man's life. 142 Two manner of fruits. 144
Two things ought to be in a preacher. 308 Truth at all times may not be
spoken. 366 Truth must always be defended. 478 Truth obteyneth no mercy.
707 Truth ought to be preferred before custom. 94 Truth ought to be used in
bargening. 105 Truth at the length overcomes. True faith. 150 True
followers of Christ. 165 Tyrants fear more than other men do. 24 Tyrants
are subtle. 212 Tyrants have no power over the soul of man. 219 Tyrants
that are enemies one to an other, become friends to destroy Christ. 253
Tyrants ever stand in fear. 307 Tyranny in Papists. 421 Time to receive the
word of God. 39 Tithes. 537 Tithes, a part of Gods worship. 537.
V
Vain glory in giving alms must be put away. 112 Vain is this life. 219
Vain trust. 430 Vengeance comes at the last to the wicked. 36 Vengeance
ought not to be required by the faithful. 109 Virtue is not included in the
word Jesus. 14 Vice must be punished with justice, modesty, mercy and anger. 12
Ungodly men are blinded in the light. 279 Unfeigned remission. 415 Unity in
marriage. 417 Unity. 410, 576 Unlawful manes ought to be avoided. 62
Untimely heaers. 286 Voice of God children pearceth the heavens. 36 Vows
rashe^ made. 312 Vows mona^ticall. 313 Vows mad^^y Papists. 425 Voluntary
seuice is most acceptable to Go. 513 Usury. 102
VV
Watching. 587 Watchinge without prayer profit nothin^. 656 Wedlock* a
necessary remedy against sine. 423 Wedlock. 102. 417 Whoredom dissolueth the
knotte of matrimony. 420 Whisperers must be avoided. 620 Wisdom cannot
withstand God. 27 Wisdom comes not by our own industry. 71 Wisdom and
innocence ought to be in us. 211 Witnesses ought to be had in matters of
wayght. 404 Worldlinges at the coming of Christ fear the loss of
promotion. 23 Worldly wisdom is not comparable to the foolishnes of the
cross. 31 Worldly felicity. 75 Wordlinges look for gain. 108 Worldly men
forsake heaven. 129 Wordly wisdom. 242 Worldly cares are a let to fructify.
287 Worldlynges. 291 Worldly pleasure is obscure in respect of the glory to
come. 297 Worldly sightes bewitche our senses. 289 Worthy receivers of ye
gospel. 206 Works do not justify. 269 Wolves of this world. 210
Z
Zeal that is rash. 46. 195. 367. 324. 667. Zeal of the godly. 80 Zeal
without knowledge. 153 Zeal according to knowledge. 252 Zeal pertayneth to
the godly. 468 Zeal ought to be guided by the word of God. 665
The meaning of all those figures which are before in the exposition added for
the better understanding of the Reader, wheresoever he fyndeth them.
MEtoymia, is a figure called denominatio^, as when Bacchus is or wine, or
Venus for lechery. Antithesi, is a comparison or contrariety. Fol. 196 Irotia,
is a figure in speaking, when a man dissembleth in speech that which he
thinks not: as in scoffing calling that foul which is fayr^ or that sweet
which is sower. Hyperbo^, is excess in aduau^cing or depressing. A Metaphor,
is a transferring of words from their proper signification. Prosopopaeia, is
a figure used whereas personages are supposed or feigned to speak as one man to
an other. Synecdoche, is a figure when part is used for the whole, or the
whole for part. 462 Hypotyposis, is a figure called illustratio^, by the which
the form of things, is so set forth in words that it seems rather to be
seen with the eyes than heard with the ears. Hysteron proteron, is a figure
used when any thing is declared out of order preposterously. A Paradox, is a
sentence strange and contrary to the opinion of most men. Hypothesis, is as
argument so called.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in printing.
Leaf. 15 collum. 1. for joined, read ordyned. Leaf. 49. ^l. 2. line. 6.
read and because thingratitude. Leaf. 50. cl. 2. for properly read proper.
Leaf. 67. co^ 1. line last save one, read must ways. Leaf. 67. col. for
reprove them, read repro^d them. Le. 68. co. 1. G^nefar rea. Genesar. Le. 68.
col. 2. ^oth the ways, read both ways. Leaf. 137. co. 1 ^ine. 1. read which
shall punish. Leaf. 140. col. 2 ^ine. 10. read that he will hear it. Leaf.
140. col. 2. ^rent, re. pare^tes. Leaf. 142. col. 2. line last, read declaring
that it is. Leaf. 144. co. 2. line 33. there, read therefore. Leaf. 153. col.
1. lin. 20. for mystery, read ministry and office. Leaf. 154. col. 1. li. 13.
the, read they Leaf. 160. col. 2. line. 31. his disciples the disciples. Le.
163. col. 1. li. 5. same re. Sun. Leaf. 164. col. 1. lin. 2. salt, re.
falte, Leaf. 169. col. li. 11. exhorted, read extorted. Le. 177. co. 1. li.
17. says, re. faith. Leaf. 258. col. 1. these blind men, read this
blyndeman. Fol. 263. col. 2. lin. 4. before the end for Luke ware read luke
warm Fol. 263. col. 2. line. last. for Crisse, read Christ. Fol. 327. col.
1. line last save four for greater, read great. Fol. 335. col. 2. for
Israelles read Israelites. Fol. 352. col. 1. for did oppressed, read did
oppress. Fol. 504. leave out the first line for it is twyse printed. Fol. 675.
col. 2. for endued but by death, read ended but by death. Fol. 659. for they
should have understood, read they should not have vndrrstoode. Fol. 689. co.
2. read by the instinct and motion of the holy Ghost.

