THE Most Honorable Tragedy of Sir Richard Grinuile, Knight.

Bramo assai, poco spero, nulla chieggio.

At London, Printed by I. Roberts, for Richard Smith. 1595.

To the right Honorable his singular good Lord, Charles, Lord Montioy.
THE zeal (most excellent Lord) which in my soul has ever been devoted to
your service, intangl'd with your honorable favors to mine unable deseruings,
has given fire to my heart, and wings to my youngling Muse, to raise her leaden
humor above the ordinary pitch of her dull Anthems, and sing of a subject, the
height of whose action, might, if I had might, make my verse most mighty,
grant then (renowned Lord) that thine eyes may lighten on my lays, and thy
graces keep from scandal my poor wydowed Orphan: pyttie renowned Grinuile,
in his death-renowning hour, and excuse his rough Poet, whose senses are
vnshapt, for more softer melody, so shall he live happy, and I vnfaultie;
both satisfied.

Your Lordships eternally, Ieruis Markham.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, Robert, Earl of Sussex.
GReat Lord, to whom infinitiues of fame
Flock like night stars about the silver Moon,
That give new fire to learnings late quenched flame,
Saving the Muse by stony times undone,
Let me find favor in thine honored sight,
Daring my rimes unto thy sacred hand:
And whilst their accents talk of valures might,
Yield them some splendor from thy valures brand,
Thou in their lines, they in thine eyes shall see,
Nothing but honors uncontrolled mind,
Thou lending, they exacting still from thee,
Substance, that might to mightines does bind,
And for his sake whose praise my Muse has sought
Favor my work, the image of thy thought.
I. M.

To the right Honorable, Henry Wriothesly, Earl of South-hampton, and Baron
of Titchfielde.
THou glorious Laurel of the Muses hill,
Whose eyes does crown the most victorius pen,
Bright Lamp of Virtue, in whose sacred skill,
Lives all the bliss of eares-in chaunting men,
From grauer subjects of thy grave assayes,
Bend thy coragious thoughts unto these lines,
The grave from whence mine humble Muse does raise
True honors spirit in her rough deseignes;
And when the stubborn stroke of my harsh song,
Shall seasonlesse glide through almighty ears,
Vouchsafe to sweet it with thy blessed tongue,
Whose well tuned sound stills music in the spears,
So shall my tragic lays be bleft by thee,
And from thy lips suck their eternity.
I. M.

To the honorable Knight, Sir Edward VVingfield.
WHen Alexander read Achilles praise,
With honors envy, and a lofty heart,
He shed stout tears, in ruth of stony days
Which to his acts no Music could impart,
So all my all, essence of what I am,
Though our Achilles praise play in thine eye,
Fear not records for thine inrouled name,
Which shall out-liue immortal Poesy,
A thousand Sirens in the worlds last age,
Shall sing of thee, thy valor, and thy skill,
And to their lines, lay Angels ears in gage,
With soueraign charms sent from a sovereign quill;
Mean while, vouchsafe to grace my work and me,
Gracing the soul beloved of heaven and thee.
I. M.

The argument of the whole Tragedy.
SIr Richard Grinuile, lying at anchor near unto Flores, one of the westerlie
Islands of the Azores, the last of August in the after noone, had inteligence by
one Captain Midelton of the aproch of the Spanish Armada, being in number
fifty three sail of great ships, and fifteen thousand men to man them. Sir
Richard, staying to recover his men which were upon the Island, and disdayning
to fly from his Countries enemy, not being able to recover the wind, was
instantly inuirond with that hudge Navy, between whom began a dreadful
fight, continuing the space of fifteen hours, in which conflict, Sir Richard
sunck the great San Phillip of Spain, the Ascension of Siuel, the Admiral of
the Hulks, and two other great Armados; about midnight Sir Richard received a
wou^d through the body, and as he was in dressing, was shot again into the
head, and his Surgion slain. Sir Richard mayntained the fight, till he had not
one corn of powder left, nor one whole pike, nor forty living men; which
seeing, he would have sunk his own ship, but that he was gaine-stood by the
Master thereof, who contrary to his will came to composition with the
Spaniards, and so saved those which were left alive. Sir Richard dyed aboard
the Admyrall of Spain, about the fourth day after the battle, and was
mightelie bewaild of all men.

Faults escaped in the printing.
IN B. the second page, the third stanza, and the first line, for night
eternal, read nights eternal.

In F. page eight, the second stanza, and the last line, for Abraham's, read
Abr'ams.

Also, in the next stanza following, and the third line, for bard, read barred.



The most Honorable Tragedy of Sir Richard Grinuile, Knight.
To the fairest.
A Heavenly fire is crope into my brain,
A heat divine and all celestial,
A burning fury spreads through every vain;
A turret-climbing thought maiesticall,
All these infuse a spirit-giuing rain,
Unto my humble wits great festival.
Whose reed unpleasing hermonie has found,
Thus to transform her into warlike sound.
Of wonders, miracles, and famous chivalry,
Of Honors Image, and of Virtues iarres,
(Things past belief, yet pure in certainty)
Of Death dead-slaine by Death, of glorious scarres,
Of mortal, made immortal Dietie,
And all containd in Valures stainelesse wars,
My homely Muse stretching her oaten string,
Vnlearn't to thunder, mildly means to sing.
Rest thee dread boy, the night eternal Lord,
Fair feathered Cupid thy Licaenas joy,
Of thy tryumphant Chariot richly stord,
With bleeding hearts that breathing sighs destroy,
Nor thee, nor of thy kingdom I record,
Nor lovers tears, nor love, nor loves annoy.
Nor ought that in the vast world may be found,
Where tears in sighs, and sighs in tears are drowned.
Fit subjects those for Poets golden quills,
Such as have trod the true Pierian race,
Whose sacred brains those numbers tuned distills,
Which gives conceit the child of heaven her grace.
But now this flame that all my body fills,
Is Englands weeping joy, and Spaynes disgrace.
Fearful alarums, and the wet worlds sack,
Swells in my song, the Dirge for glories wrack.
To thee fair Nymph, my love, my life, my gaze,
My souls first mouer, essence of my bliss,
Thought-chast Dictinna, Natures only maze,
Heaven of all what ever heavenly is,
More white then Atlas browe, or Pelops blaze,
Complete perfection which all creatures miss.
More lovely then was bright Astioche,
Or Iunos hand-mayd sacred Diope.
To thee which never lifts thine eyes to heaven,
But hearts of Kings are showred in the same,
Fairer then Sun, Moon, Stars, or Planets seven,
True brand of Virtue, Honors living flame,
O thou whom hate adors, whose praise is even
Matched with the glories of the greatest name,
Thou like thy self, or better much by ods,
Nere made without a Parliament of Gods.
To thee this labor of my Sunne-burnt brain,
Ill limn'd memorials of diuinest rage,
I offer as oblations to detain,
Thy life-inspiring sight, (my peaces gage)
From those celestial mirrors which remain,
Objects made happy in thy looks suffrage,
Of Grinuile, arms and honors sovereign,
My sower Muse shapes this Nectar seeking strain.
Even of that man and his almighty mind,
Boundless like heaven in magnanimity,
Converting all things of what ever kind,
Within his body held society,
To glad-some stars in cleerest skies assigned,
VVanting but only true eternity.
Of him I sing (Fairest) but read I pray,
Thine eyes makes happy, all yt thine eyes suruay.
And with her thou great Sovereign of the earth,
Only immatchlesse Monarchesse of hearts,
From whose fair eyes issued the Muses birth,
Murderd by Iron-age, and barbarous darts,
Yield from thy beams plenty to my wits dearth,
That I may sing valures almighty parts,
And Chronicle those tropheys to thy throne,
Which from this I Will, and his great spyrit shone.
And thou dear Soul, the portraiture of Fame,
For whom Jove made a new fourth Hirarchie,
Of whose lost drops millions of virtues came,
Extold in heaven beyond the third degree,
Now give thy self a light in this self flame,
That thou may live beyond posterity;
And whilst I of th'vnconquered conquest write,
Sit on my hand and teach me to indite.
The Tragedy of Sir Richard Grinuile.
THat time of year when the inamored Sun
Clad in the richest roabes of living fires,
Courted ye Virgin sign, great Naturs Nun,
Which barrains earth of al what earth desires
Even in the month that from Augustus won,
His sacred name which unto heaven aspires,
And on the last of his ten trebled days,
When weary labor new refresh assayes.
Then when the earth out-brau'd ye beauteous Morn,
Boasting his cornie Mantle stird with air,
Which like a golden Ocean did adorn
His cold dry carcass, featurelesse, vnfaire,
Holding the naked shearers scithe in scorn
Or ought that might his borrowed pride empaire,
The soul of virtue seeing earth so rich,
With his dear presence gilds the sea as mitch.
The sea, which then was heavy, sad, and still,
Dull, vnapplyd to sportiue wantonness,
As if her firstborn Venus had been ill,
Or Neptune seen the Son his love possess,
Or greater cares, that greatest comforts kill,
Had crowned with grief, the worlds wet wilderness,
Such was the still-foote Thetis silent pain,
Whose flowing tears, ebbing fell back again.
Thetis, the mother of the pleasant springs,
Grandam of all the Rivers in the world,
To whom earths veins their moistning tribut brings,
Now with a mad disturbed passion hurld,
About her cave (the worlds great treasure) flings:
And with wreathed arms, and long wet hairs vncurld,
Within her self laments a loss, vnlost,
And mones her wrongs, before her joys be crossed.
Thus whilst divining sorrow ceaz'd her heart,
Grinuile (o melt my spyrit in that name,)
As sings the Swan her funeral depart,
And waves her wings, the ensigns of her fame,
So he, with virtue sweetning bitter smart,
Which from the seas long toyling service came:
For why, six Moons, and so often times the Sun,
Was past, and had one half the signs ore-runne,
Ere he the earth, our common Mother saw;
Now early greets black Flores banefull I Will,
(Flores, from whence afflictions self does draw
The true memorialls of a weeping style;)
And with Caisters Querristers which straw
Descant, that might Death of his darts beguile,
He tunes saluting notes, sweeter then long,
All which are made his last lives funeral song.
Skillesse in deaths great Parliament he calls
His fellow mat's, and minions to his fame,
Shows them long looked for land, and how it brauls,
Repulsing back the billows as they came,
Much he triumphs, and passed grief for-stals
With present joy (sorrow lights pleasures flame:)
And whilst his hopes of Happy-fortune sings,
Misfortune by, controls them with her wings.
Desird relief, and ever welcome rest,
The elements that form the weary man,
Began to hold a counsel in his breast,
Painting his wants by sickness pale and wan;
With other griefs, that others force oppressed,
Aduising stay, (as what is but they can,)
Whilst he that fate to come, and past, nere feared,
Concludes to stay till strength decayed repaird.
Then casts he Anchor hulling on the maine,
And all his shyps poor Citizens recounts,
An hundred just were free from sickness pain,
Fourscore and ten death their redress accounts,
So that of all both sick and sound unslain,
Unto two hundred wanting ten amounts.
A slender army for so great a guide,
But virtue is unknown till it be tried.
Those whom their hearts enabled to attempt,
He puts a shore to make supply for need;
Those whom long sickness taught of death contempt,
He visits, and from Jove's great Book does reed
The balm which mortal poison does exempt;
Those who^ new breathing health like sucklings feed,
Hie to the sands, and sporting on the same,
Find liberty, the lives best living flame.
Look how a troop of Winter-prisoned Dames,
Pent in the enclosure of the walled towns,
VVelcoms the Spring, Usher to Summers flames,
Making their pastimes on the flowrie downs,
Whose beauteous Arras wrought in natures frames,
Through eyes admire, the heart with wonder crowns,
So these wood-walled Citizens at sea,
VVelcome both Spring and Summer in a day.
The warring byllowes, seas artillery,
With long held siege, had bruz'd their beaten keele,
Which to repair the most, most busied be,
Laboring to cure, what want in labors feel;
All pleased with toil, clothing extremity
In Hopes best robes, that hang on Fortunes wheel.
But men, are men, in ignorance of Fate,
To alter chance, exceeds human state.
For when the Sun, towred in heavens head,
Down from the silver mountain of the sky,
Bent his bright Chariot on the glassie bed,
Fair crystal, gilded with his glorious eye,
Fearing some usurpation in his stead,
Or least his Love should too-long daliance spy
Tweene him and Virgo, whose attractiue face
Had newly made him leave the Lions chase,
In that same myd-daies hour came sailing in,
A thought-swift-flying Pynnase, taught by wind,
T'outstrip in flight Times euer-flying wing;
And being come where Virtue was inshrinde,
First vaild his plumes, and wheeling in a ring,
With Goat-like dau^cing, stays where Grinuile shynd,
The while his great Co^maunder calls the name,
Which is adored of all that speaks the same.
The great commander of this little Bark,
Which like an Eglet arms the Eagles side,
Was Midleton, the aim of Honors mark,
That more had proved then danger durst have tried,
Now seeing all good fortunes sunshine dark,
Thrice calls Sir Richard, who as often replyde,
Bidding him speak, and ring his news aloude,
Ill, not apald, nor good could make him proud.
O then (quoth Midelton) thou soul of all
What ever boasts in magnanimity,
Thou, whom pure Virtue her best part does call,
Better then valor, stronger then dietie,
Whom men adore, and all the gods exhall
Into the books of endless memory,
I bring thee tidings of a deadly fray,
Begun in Heaven, to end upon the Sea.
The glorious Senate of the Skies was set,
And all the gods were royaliz'd in state,
When Happy-fortune and Ill-fortune met,
Striving who first should enter Heavens gate,
The one made mad the others fame to let,
Neither but stirred with rage to wonder at,
Confusedly, as water-floods do pass
Their common bounds, such their rude entrance was.
The gods disturbed, admire their strange aproch,
Censuring their angers by their gloing eyes,
Ill-fortune was attended by Reproach,
Good-fortune, Fame and Virtue stellefies;
One swears the other does her right incroch,
Which is the elder house, none can devise:
The gods divide, yet in the end agree
The Fates shall judge each others pedigree.
Good-fortune, draws from heaven her hye descent,
Making hie Jove the root of her large tree;
She shows from him, how many god-heads went,
Archangells, Angels, heavens posterity:
From thence, she shows the glorious third she lent
To Monarks, Emperors, and Kings in fee,
Annexing as Colatteralls to her line
Honor, Virtue, Valor, and Endles-time.
Naithlesse, Ill-fortune will be elder borne,
She says, she springs from Saturn, Jove's wronged Sier,
And heaven, and earth, and hell her coat have borne,
Fresh bleeding hearts within a field of fire;
All that the world admires, she makes her scorn,
Who farthest seems, is to Ill-fortune nier,
And that just proof may her great praise commend,
All that Best-chaunce begins, Ill-chaunce does end.
Thus they dispute, guilding their tongues report
With instances, and argumentall sawes,
Ill-fortune, bids let all the world resort
And show within their Chronicles and laws,
The man whose liues-line never did consort
With sharp affliction, deaths first grounded cause,
Then will she yield, else, is she victor still,
Worlds good is rare, perpetual is their ill.
Even as the racket takes the balls rebound,
So does Good-fortune catch Ill-fortunes proof,
Saying, she will her in her self confound,
Making her darts, Agents for her behoof;
Bow but thine eyes (quoth she) whence ha'ts abound,
And I will show thee under heavens roof
Th'vnconquered man who^ no mischaunce importunes,
Crown of my kingdom, deaths man to misfortunes.
At this, the casments of the sky broke open,
Discovering all what is girdled in her frame,
Whilst Happy-fortune through her eyes large scope
Like a Cosmographer comments on the same;
Three parts with praise she past and future hope,
Then to the fourth, the Western world she came,
And there, with her eyes festrawe paints a story,
Stranger then strange, more glorified then glory.
See (said Faire-fortune, to her foul shapt Foe)
How on the sourge which beats against the I Will
Of Flores, whence thy cursed oblations grow,
A winde-taught capring ship which air beguiles,
(Making poor Cephatus for-lorne with woe,
Curse art, which made art framed sail such smiles)
Richly imbrodred with the Iems of war,
In thy dispight commands a lucky star.
In that fair vessel lives my garlands flower,
Grinuile, my hearts immortal artery;
Of him thy dietie had never power,
Nor has he had of grief one simpathie;
Success attends him, all good hap does shower
A golden rain of perpetuity
Into his bossome, where mine Empire stands,
Murdring the Agents of thy black commands.
Say, and say true, (for what but thou will say,)
That ever Grinuils fortunes came before thee;
Or ever prostrate at thine Altars lay,
Or with one wreath of Cipresse did adore thee?
Prove one black storm in all his Summers day,
Whose threatening clouds compeld him to implore thee,
The^ will I stain my milkwhite veil with weeping,
And as thine handmaide dye in sorrows keeping.
As wounds the lightning, yet preserues the skin,
So did these words split Lucklesse-fortunes heart,
Her smiling Superficies, locked within
A deep exulcerated festring smart;
Here she perceived her first disgrace begin,
And wordlesse from the heavens takes her depart.
Yet as she flewe, her wings in flying cried
On Grinuile shall my fame and power be tried.
At her departure all the heavens were glad,
Triumphing in Ill-fortunes banishment,
Apollo set new Anthems as Jove bad,
Which sphere tunes made more then most excellent;
No light in heaven but with new fire was clad,
Making next Jove, Good-fortune president,
Enrowling in the Books of destenie,
This memorable famous victory.
Only the Fat's su'd for her back repeal,
(For they Ill-fortune loved exceeding well)
Many her deeds and Tropheis they reveal,
And all her lives black legend, weeping tell;
Yet all they speak, cannot in heaven prevail,
Which seen, in spite they follow her to hell,
And there inhoused with their mother Night,
All four devise, how heaven and earth to spite.
Hence sprang the loves of Jove, the Sons exile,
The shame of Mars and Venus in a net;
Iunos forsaken bed; Saturns compile
Of frantike, coffeehouse, which beset
All heaven with arms; Diana hence had while
To court her sleeping boy; whilst Thetis let
Phoebus embrace her in her Neptunes stead,
Who made complaints, breach of his bridal bed.
Yet not content with these disparagments,
Much greater mischiefs issues from their minds,
Grinuile, thy mountain honor it augments
Within their breasts, a Meteor like the winds,
Which thrall'd in earth, a reeling issue rents
With violent motion; and their wills combinds
To belch their hat's, vowed murdrers of thy same,
Which to effect, thus they begin the same.
Fast to Iberia flies untoward chance,
Iberia, which we vulgar Christen Spain,
Upon whose Sunne-burnt continent does dance
Western Ducallidon, the greatest maine,
Thither she packs, Error does their advance
Her coale-blacke standerd in the hands of pain;
And as escapt from rauishment or bale,
With false tears, thus she tunes a falser tale.
Great Empire (said she) blessed in thy birth,
Beauteous created for-head of this round,
That with thy smiles first lent to heaven mirth,
And bout thy temples all perfections woond,
Lodgd in th'immagin'd corners of the earth;
Thou whom our centers Monarchesse art crowned,
Attend my suite, baptisd in mournful tears,
Who but ere while triumphed on the spheres.
Nor for my self more then thine own decay
Which blindfold pleasure clouds as they arise,
Be gracious, and retort the domefull day,
Which thee and me to shame would sacrifice.
Lo, on the great west-walling boistrous sea,
Which does embrace thy gold-inclosing eyes,
Of many sails one man, of one poor I Will,
That will my fame, and all thy fair defile.
His numberless great infinits of fame,
Have shut against me heavens great crystal door,
The clouds, which once my feets dust had to name,
Hang ore my forhead, threatening evermore
Death to my praise, life to my infant shame,
Whilst I with sighs mediate a new restore.
And in my self behold my pleasures past,
Swimming amongst the joys I cannot taste.
Th'ambrosian Nectar-filled banqueting,
No more shall I communicate, or see,
Triumphs in heaven, Jove's masks, and reuelling,
Are cleene exempt, both from my joys and me.
The reason, for my love to thee I bring,
Trimming thy locks with Iems of dietie,
Making the gods a dread a fatal day,
Worse then the Giants war or Centaurs fray.
Poor goddess, robbed of all eternal power,
Whose broken Statues, and down razed Fan's,
Never warmed altars, ever forgotten hour
Where any memory of praise is taken,
Witness my fall from great Olympus tower;
Prostrate, implore balm for received bane,
And dyre revenge against heavens impiety,
Which else in shame will make thee follow me.
Behold these robes, maps of my fortunes world,
Torn, and distaind with eye-scornd beggerie;
These rags divide the Zones, wherein is hurld
My lives distemprate, hot cold misery;
These tears are points, the scale these hairs vncurld,
My hands the compass, woe the emperie:
And these my plaints, true and auriculer,
Are to my Globe the perpendiculer.
Look how I am, such art thou like to be
If arms prevent not heavens intendiment,
Grinuile, which now surfeits with dignity,
Burd'ning the Sea with my disparagement;
Chiding the wanton winds if greedelie
They kiss his sails; or else too slowly vent,
Like Jove, which bad the day be and it was,
So bids he Conquest war; she brings to pass.
The sole encouragement he gives his power,
Is Prophet-like presaging of thy death,
Courage he cries, even in the dying hour,
And with his words, recalls departing breath;
O (says he to his Mat's) you are my glories tower,
Impregnable, walled with vnuanquisht faith,
You are the hands and agents of my trust,
I but the heart reuoluing what we must.
Live Saints, til we have ripped the womb of Spain,
And wounded Error in the arms of hell,
Crushing the triple Myter in disdain,
Which on ye seauenfold mounted Witch does dwell,
Angels rewards for such dissignes remain,
And on heavens face men shall your stories tell;
At this they shoute; as eager of the pray,
as Ants in winter of a sunshine day.
Thus like triumphant Caesar drawn in Rome,
By winged Valor, and unconquered Chance,
He plowes the Sea, (o were it made his tomb)
Whilst Happy-fortune pypes unto his dance.
Yet may thy power alternat heavens doom,
So pleases thee thy forward will t'aduaunce,
And cheer ye sinews of thy mighty arm,
Whose out-strecht force shall quell his proud alarm,
Then give new fuel to thine honors fire,
Least slight regard wealth-winning Error slay,
And so old Saturns happy world retyer,
Making Trueths dungion brighter then the day;
Was never woe could wound thy kingdom nyer,
Or of thy borrowed beauty make display,
Because this vow in heavens book does remain,
That Errors death shall consumate thy reign.
Now, for my god-heads remnant lives in thee,
Whose lost success breeds mine eternal end,
Take for thine aid, afflicting Misery,
Woe, mine attendant, and Despair my friend,
All three my greatest great Triumuerie,
Blood-bath'd Carnifici, which will protend
A murdring desolation on to that will,
Which me in thee, and thee in me would kill.
Here, with her fixed Comet-blazing eyes,
The damned Augurs of untimely death,
She ends her tale, whilst from her hearts cave flies
A storm of winds, no gentle sighing breath,
All which, like evil spirits in disguise,
Enter Iberias ears, and to her says,
That all the substance of this damned story,
Was zealous true, coynd for her Spanish glory.
Sworn to believe, for ill, in ill affies,
Spain then enamored with the Roman trull,
Calls all her forces, more then Atomies,
And tells Ill-fortunes story to the full;
Many Parenthises she does devise,
And frost-relenting words does choycely cull,
Bewitching those whom often she had deceived,
With such like Hemlock as her self received.
The first and greatest one, commanding, all
The soul of mischiefs old created mother,
Was Don Alphonso Bassan, proud in brall,
The Marquis Sancta Cruces only brother:
Him she coniures by typ's imperial,
And all that falsehoods seeming truth could cover,
To undertake this hie (she termd it) act,
Which craves a curse of all that reads the fact.
Her self (she said) and all the flowers of Spain,
Should under his, as heavens Ensign war:
Thus from her hearts foul dunghill flies amain
Gross vapors, metamorphosd to a star;
Her words in fumes like prodogies retain
His heart, by her tongues witchcraft bound so far,
As what she will, that will he undertake,
Be it to war with heaven for her sake.
The seeming Nectar of her poisoning speech,
So well she saw surprise his licoras sense,
That for to rear her ill beyond ills reach,
With selfe-like tropes, decks self-like eloquence,
Making in Britan Dona such a breach,
That her armed wits, conquering his best wits fence,
He vows with Bassan to defend the broile,
Which men of praise, and earth of fame shall spoil.
To him she gives the Biscaynnoys for guard,
Mechannicall Artificers for death,
And those which of affliction never hard,
She tempers with the hammer of her breath:
To every act she gives huge lyp-reward,
Lavish of oaths, as falsehood of her faith;
And for the ground of her pretended right,
It Is hate, which enuies virtue in a Knight.
These two to her fast bound in vassailage,
Unto the Marquis Arumburch she flies,
Him she prouokes, him she finds apt to rage,
Imprisoning Pitties tears in flintie eyes;
To him the power of Civil for a gage
She does bequeath; bidding his prowess rise,
And cleanse his Countries face from widows tears,
To which he posts, like lightning from the spears.
Lastly, to make up mischiefs perfect square,
To Luis Cutino she takes her flight,
Him she commands, he to her homage swear
To guide a Navy to this damned fight,
Of Hulks and Fly-boats, such as durst to dare.
She gives him sovereign rule, and public right,
And then uniting all four powers in one,
Sends them to sea, to calm Misfortunes moan.
And now behold (divine for valiancie)
Like flying Castells sail they to this strand;
Fifty three sail, strong in artillarie,
Best men of war known in the Spanish land;
Fifteen Armados, Kings of sovereignty,
Which led the lesser with a mighty hand:
And these in four battalions hither fly,
With whom three days I saild in company.
Then gentle Grinuile, Thetis parramoure,
Dearer then Venus, Daughter of the flood,
Set sails to wind, let not neglect devour
Thy gracious fortunes and thine Angel good,
Cut through the maine, compel thy keele to scour,
No man his ill too timely has with-stoode
And when Best-chaunce shall have repaird thy fortune,
Time for this flight may just revenge importune.
Here Midelton did end the passing peale
Which gave the warning to a dismal end,
And as his words last knell began to fail,
The damned Navy did a glimmering send,
By which Sir Richard might their power reveal,
Which seeming conquerlesse, did conquests lend:
At whose appearance, Midelton did cry,
See where they come, for fame and pity fly.
This certain story, of too certain ill,
Did not extinguish, but gave honor fire,
The amazing prodigy, (bane of my quill,)
Bred not astonishment, but a strong desire,
By which this heauen-adopted Knights strong will,
Then hiest height of Fame, flew much more hier:
And from the boundless greatness of his mind,
Sends back this answer through his lyps refined.
Thanks hardy Midelton for thy dilate,
Perswasiue presage to avoid my death,
But if thou wed my fortunes with my state,
This saving health shall suffocate my breath,
To fly from them that holds my God in hate,
My Mistres, Country, me, and my sworn faith,
Were to pull of the load from Typhons back,
And crush my self, with shame and servile wrack.
Nor if my heart degenerate should yield,
To entertain an amorus thought of life,
And so transport mine honor to the field,
Where seeming-valure dies by cowards knife,
Yet zeal and conscience shall new forces build,
And others souls, with my soul holds strife;
For half my men, and all that draw sound breath,
Are gone on shore, for food to conquer death.
If I forsake them, certain is their end,
If I obtain them, doubtful is our fall,
Upon my flight, shame and their sacks depend,
Upon my stay, hope of good hap does call,
Equal to me, the meanest I commend;
Nor will I loose, but by the loss of all:
They are the sinews of my life and fame,
Dismembered bodies perish cripple-lame.
This said, he sends a cock-boate to the shore,
To summon back his men unto their ship,
Who com'd a board, began with some uproar
To way their Anchors, and with care to dip
Their hie reuolues in doubt, and evermore
To paint deaths visage with a trembling lip,
Till he that was all fearelesse, and fear slew,
With Nectard words from the^ all dangers drew.
When Midelton Saw Grinuills hie reuolue,
Past hope, past thought, past reach of all aspire,
Once more to move him fly he does resolve,
And to that purpose tips his tongue with fire;
Fire of sweet words, that easelie might dissolve
And moisten flint, though steeld in stiff attire,
Had not desire of wonder, praise, and fame,
Extinkt the sparks, and still keep dead the flame,
Greater, and better then inarked he,
Which in the worlds huge deluge did survive,
O let thy wings of magnanimity,
Not vainelie flatter, Honor to acchiue,
Against all conceit impossibility,
By which thou murderst Virtue, keep alive,
Nor in thy seeking of divinity,
Kill not heavens fame by base mortallitie.
O Grinuile, thou have red Philosophy,
Nature and Art has made thee excellent,
And what thou read'st, has grafted this in thee,
That to attempt hie dangers evident
Without constrain or need, is infamy,
And honor turns to rashness in the event;
And who so darrs, not caring how he darrs,
Sells virtues name, to purchase foolish stars.
Dear Knight, thou art not forced to hazard fame,
Heavens have lent thee means to escape thine ill,
If thou abide, as true as is thy name,
So truly shall thy fault, thy death fulfill:
And as to love the life for virtues flame,
Is the just act of a true noble will,
So to contemn it, and her helps exclude,
Is baseness, rashness, and no Fortitude.
He that compard man's body to an host,
Said that ye hands were scouts, discovering harms,
The feet, were horsemen, thundering on the coast,
The breast, and stomach, footmen, huge in swarms.
But for the head, in sovereignty did boast,
It Captain was, director of alarms,
Whose rashness, if it hazarded an ill,
Not he alone but all the host did spill.
Rash Isadas, the Lacedemon Lord,
That naked fought against the Theban power,
Although they crowned his valor by accord,
Yet was he find for rashness in that hour:
And those which most his careless praise affoard,
Did most condemn what folly did devour;
For in attempting, prowess is not meant,
But wisely doing what we do attempt.
Then since it is valor to abandon fight,
And base to darre, where no hope is to win,
(Renowned man, of all renown the light)
Hoyst up thy sails, delay attackts thy sin,
Fly from ill-boding stars with all thy might,
Unto thy heart let praise and pity in.
This said, and more desirous much to cry,
Sir Richard stayed him, with this rich reply.
Captain, I praise thy warlike eloquence,
And sober Axioms of Philosophy,
But now is no time for school points difference,
When Deaths black Ensign threatens misery;
Yet for thy words sound of such consequence,
Making flight praise, and fight pale obloquie,
Once ere I die, I Will cleanse my wits from rust,
And prove my flying base, my stay most just.
Whence shall I fly? from refuge of my fame,
From whom? even from my Countries mortal foe,
VVhither? but to the dungeon of my shame,
Why shall I fly? for fear of happy woe,
What end of flight? to save vild life by blame,
Who is it that flies? Grinuile? Captain no,
It Is England flies, fair I Will of happiness,
And true divine Elizas holiness.
Shall then my life's regard taynt that choice fair?
First will I perrish in this liquid round,
Never shall Sunne-burnt Spaniards tongue endeare
Iberian ears with what shall me confound,
The life I have, I for my Mistress bear,
Cursed were that life, should it her scepter wound,
And trebble cursed be that damned thought,
Which in my mind has any fayntnes wrought.
Now, for Philosophy defends thy theme,
Even self Philosophy shall arm my style,
Rich buskined Seneca, that did declaime,
And first in Rome our tragic pomp compile,
Says, Fortitude is that which in extreme
And certain hazard all base fears exile:
It guides, says he, the noble mind from far,
Through frost, and fire, to conquer honors war.
Honie-tongd Tullie, Mermaid of our ears,
Affirms no force, can force true Fortitude,
It with our bodies, no communion bears,
The soul and spyrit, sole does it include;
It is that part of honesty which reares
The heart to heaven, and ever does obtrude
Faint fear, and doubt, still taking his delight
In perrills, which exceeds all perrills might.
Patience, Perseverance, Greatness, and Strong Trust,
These pages are to Fortitude their king,
Patience that suffers, and esteems just
What ever woe, for virtue fortunes bring;
Perseverance, holds constant what we must,
Greatness, that still effects the greatest thing,
And aimed Trust, which never can despair,
But hopes good hap; how ever fatal dear.
The Roman Sergius, having lost his hand,
Slew with one hand four in a single fight,
A thing all reason ever did with-stand,
But that bright Fortitude spread forth her light.
Pompey, by storm held from th'Italyan land,
And all his sailours quaking in his sight,
First hoisted sail, and cried amidst the strife,
There Is need I go, no need to save my life.
Agis that guilt the Lacedemon street,
Intending one day battle with his foes,
By counsel was repeld, as thing unmeet,
The enemy being ten to one in shoes;
But he replied, It Is needful that his feet
Which many leads, should lead to many bloes:
And one being good, an Army is for ten
Foes to religion, and known naughty men.
To him that told Dienecus, his foes
Covered the Sun with darts and armed spears,
He made reply, Thy news is joy in woes,
We Will in the shadow fight, and conquer fears.
And from the Polands words my humor floes,
I care for naught but falling of the Spheres.
Thunder afrights the Infants in the schools,
And threatenings are the conquerers of fools.
As these, my case is not so desperate,
And yet, then these, my darre shall be no less:
If this in them, for fame was wondered at,
Then this in me, shall my desiers express;
Never shall Greece, nor Rome, nor Heathen state,
With shining honor, Albions shine depresse,
Though their great circuits yields their acts large bounds,
Yet shall they never darr for deeper wounds.
And thus resolved, dear Midelton depart,
Seek for thy safety in some better soil,
Thy stay will be no succor in my smart,
Thy loss will make them boast of better spoil.
And be assured before my last breath part,
I Will make the Sun, for pity back recoyle,
And clothe the sea within a scarlet pale,
Judge of their death which shall my life exhale.
This ship which now intombs my iealious soul,
Honestly envious of aspiring laud,
Is called Revenge, the scourge which does control,
The recreants that Errors right applaud,
Shall like her self, by name and fame enroule
My spyrits acts, by no Misfortune awed,
Within eternal Books of happy deeds,
Upon whose notes, immortal Virtue reeds.
Say if I perrish, it was mine honors will,
My Countries love, religion, and my Queen,
And if that envy glory in mine ill,
Say that I dyed, conquering, unconquered seen.
Say fifty three strong shyps could not fulfill,
Against one poor maiden vessel their foul teene,
But that in spite of death, or misery,
She fought, and foyld, and escaped captivity.
Reply not Midelton, mine ears are closd,
Hie in heavens for-head are my vows ingrau'd,
I see the banefull Navy now disclosd,
Begone betime, Fate has thy fortune saved;
To me good stars were never yet opposd,
Glory has crowned me when I glory craved,
Farwell, and say how ever be my chance,
My death at honors wedding learnt to dance.
This said, away sails Midelton with speed,
Sad, heavy, dull, and most disconsolate,
Shedding stout manly tears at valures deed,
Greeuing the ruin of so great estate;
But Grinuile, whose hope ever did exceed,
Making all death in dangers fortunate,
Began to provide to quell this great uproar,
Then which the like was never heard before.
His fights set up, and all things fit prepared,
Low on the ballast did he couch his sick,
Being fourscoore ten, in Deaths pale mantle snared,
whose want to war did most their strong hearts prick.
The hundred, whose more sounder breaths declard
Their souls to enter Deaths gates should not stick,
He with divine words of immortal glory,
Makes them the wondered actors of this story.
Nothing he left unsaid that tongue could say,
To breed contempt of death, or hate of thrall,
Honors reward, fame for a famous day,
VVonder of ears, that men half gods shall call;
And contrary, a hopeless certain way,
Into a Tyrants damned fists to fall,
Where all defame, base thoughts, and infamy,
Shall crown with shame their heads eternally.
In this great thunder of his valiant speech,
From whence the eares-eyes honors lightning felt,
The Spanish Navy came within the reach
Of Cannon shot, which equally was dealt
On either side, each other to impeach;
Whose volleys made the pitying skies to melt,
Yet with their noise, in Grinuills heart did frame,
Greater desire, to conquer greater fame.
And now the sun was past his middle way,
Leaning more lovely to his Lemans bed,
And the noones third hour had attacht the day,
When fifty three against one were basely led;
All hearts were fierd, and now the deadly fray,
Began tumultuouslie to ouer-spread
The sea with fire, the Element with smoke
Which gods, and monsters from their sleep awoake.
In four great battles marched the Spanish host,
The first of Civil, led in two great squares,
Both which with courage, more then can be most,
Sir Richard forced to give him way with cares;
And as the Seamen term it in our coast,
They sprang their luffe, and under lee declares
Their many forces feebled by this one,
Whose thoughts, save him, are rightly due to none.
And now he stands amidst the thickest throngs,
VValld round with wooden Castles on the wave,
Fifty three Tigers greedy in their wrongs,
Besiedge the princlie Lion in his cave:
Nothing sees Grinuile which to hope belongs,
All things are fled that any hap could save;
Bright day is darkened by incurtaind light,
And nothing visits them but Canons night.
Then up to heaven he lifts his lofty heart,
And cries, old Solon, I am happy made.
All earthie thoughts clean from his spirits part,
Virtue and Valor all his senses lade,
His foes too few, too strong he holds his part,
Now does he wish for millions to invade,
For being conqueror, he would conquer all,
Or conquered, with immortal honor fall.
Never fell hayle thicker then bullets flew,
Never show'rd drops faster then showring blows,
Lived all the Woorthies, all yet never knew
So great resolve in so great certain woes;
Had Fame told Caesar what of this was true,
His Senate-murdred spirit would have rose,
And with fair honors envy wondered then,
Cursing mortality in mighty men.
Whilst thus affliction turmoyld in this brall,
And Grinuile still imployd his Actor death,
The great San-phillip, which all Spain did call
Th'vnuanquisht ship, Iberias soul and faith,
Whose mountain hugenes more was tearmd then tall,
Being twice a thousand tuns as rumor says,
Came rushing in, becalming Grinuiles sails,
Whose courage grew, the more his fortune fails.
Hotly on either side was lightning sent,
And steeled thunder bolts dinge men to hell,
Unwieldy Phillip, backed with millions lent,
Worse cracks of thunder then on Phaeton fell,
That with the days fire fierd the Element;
And why? because within her ribs did dwell,
More store of shot and great artillarie,
Then might have served the worlds great victory.
Three tire of Cannon lodged on either side,
And in each tire, eleven strongly lay,
Eight in her chase, that shot forth right did bide,
And in her stern, twice eight that howerlie play;
She less great shot, in infinets did hide,
All which were Agents for a dismal day.
But poor Revenge, less rich, and not so great,
Aunswerd her cuffe for cuffe, and threat for threat.
Anon they graple either to the other,
As does the ban-dogge with the Martins skin,
And then the womb of Phillip did uncover,
Eight hundred Soldiers, which the fight begin:
These board Sir Richard and with thronging smother
The day, the air, the time, and never linne,
But by their entrance did instruct eight more,
To do the like, on each side four, and four.
Thus in one moment was our Knight assaild,
With one huge Argosie, and eight great ships,
But all in vain, their powers naught preuaild,
For the Revenge, her Canon loud-dogs ships,
Whose bruzing teeth, so much the Phillip quaild,
That foundring in the greedy maine, he dips
His damned body in his watrie tomb,
Wrapped with dishonor in the Oceans womb.
The other eight, fighting, were likewise foild,
And driven perforce unto a vild retraite,
None durst abide, but all with shame recoild,
Whilst Valures self, set Grinuile in her seat;
Only Don Luis Saint John, seeing spoild,
His Countries honor by this strange defaite,
Single encountered Grinuile in the fight,
Who quickly sent his soul to endless night.
George de Prunaria, a Spanish Knight,
Ever held valiant in dispight of fate,
Seconded Luis, and with mortal might,
Writ on Sir Richards target soldiers hate,
Till Grinuile, wakned with his loud rung fight,
Dispatched his souls course unto Plutos gate;
And after these two, sent in post all those
Which came within his mercy or his blows.
By this, the sun had spread his golden locks,
Upon the pale green carpet of the sea,
And opned wide the scarlet door which locks,
The easefull evening from the laboring day;
Now Night began to leap from iron Rocks,
And whip her rustie wagon through the way,
Whilst all the Spanish host stood mazed in sight,
None darring to assail a second fight.
When Don Alfonso, General of the war,
Saw all his Navy with one ship controld,
He toare his hair, and loudlie cried from far,
For honor Spaniards, and for shame be bold;
Awaken Virtue, say her slumbers mar
Iberias ancient valor, and infold
Her wondered pulssance, and her glorious deeds,
In cowards habit, and ignoble weeds.
Fie, that the spyrit of a single man,
Should contradict innumerable wills,
Fie, that infinitiues of forces can,
Nor may effect what one conceit fulfills;
VVoe to the womb, ceaselesse the teats I ban,
That cherrisht life, which all our lives joys kills;
VVoe to our selves, our fortunes, and our minds,
Aghast and scarrd, with whistling of the winds.
See how he tryumphes in dispight of death,
Promethean like, laden with living fire,
And in his glory spits disdainful breath,
Loathing the baseness of our back retire;
Even now me thinks in our disgrace he says,
Foes to your fames, why make you Fate a liar,
When heaven and she have given into your hand,
What all the world can never back demand?
Say that the God of War; Father of Chivalry,
The Worthies, Heroes, all famed Conquerours,
Centaurs, Giants, victorious Victory,
Were all this Grinuils hart-sworne paramours,
Yet should we fightlesse let our shyps force fly;
Well might we crush his keele With rocklike powers,
And him with them ore-whelme into the maine,
Courage then hearts, fetch honor back again.
Here shame, the fretting canker of the mind,
That fires the face with fuel from the heart,
Fearing his weapons weakness, est assignd
To desperate hardines his co^founding dart,
And now the Spaniards made through words stone blind,
Desperate by shame, ashamd despair should part,
like damned scritchowles, chimes to dead men's hours,
Make vows to fight, till fight all lives deuours.
And now the tragic scene of death begins,
Acts of the night, deeds of the ouglie dark,
When Furies brands gave light to furious sins,
And gastlie silence gaping wounds did mark;
Sing sadly then my Muse (tears pity wins)
Yet mount thy wings beyond the mornings Lark,
And wanting thunder, with thy lightnings might
Split ears that hears the dole of this sad night.
The fire of Spaynes pride, quenched by Grinuils sword,
Alfonso reinkindles with his tongue,
And sets a batelesse edge, ground by his word,
Upon their blunt hearts feebled by the strong,
Lo animated now, they all accord,
To die, or end deaths conflict held so long;
And thus resolud, too greedelie assay
His death, like hounds that hold the Heart at bay.
Blacker then night, more terrible then hell,
Louder then thunder, sharper then Phoebus steel,
Under whose wounds the ouglie Python fell,
Were bullets mantles, clowding the hapless keele,
The slaughtered cries, the words the canons tell,
And those which make even rocky Mountains reele,
And thicker then in sun are Atomies,
Flew bullets, fire, and slaughtered dead men's cries.
At this remorsles Dirgie for the dead,
The silver Moon, dread Sovereign of the deep,
That with the floods fills up her horned head,
And by her waine the wayning ebbs does keep:
Taught by the Fat's how destenie was led,
Bids all the stars pull in their beams and weep:
For it was unfit, chaste hallowed eyes should see
Honor confounded by impiety.
Then to the night she gives all sovereign power,
The Eternal mourner for the days divorce,
Who drowned in her own hearts killing shower,
Viewes others torments with a sad remorse.
This flintie Princess, aim cries to the hour,
On which to look, kind eyes no force could force.
And yet the sight, her dull heart so offended,
That from her sight a foggie dew descended.
Now on our Knight, raines iron, sword, and fires,
Iron wrapped in smoke, swords bathed in smoking blood,
Fires, furies king, in blood and smoke aspiers
The consumation of all living good;
Yet Grinuile, with like Agents like expires
His foe-mens dat's, and evermore withstood
The Assaults of death, and ruins of the war,
Hoping the splendor of some luckie star.
On either side him, still two Gallions lay,
Which with continual boardings nursed the fight,
Two great Armados, howrelie plowed their way,
And by assault, made known repellesse might.
Those which could not come near unto the fray,
Aloof discharged their volleys against our Knight.
And when yt one shrunk back, beat with disgrace,
An other instantly supplied the place.
So that their resting, restless him containd,
And their supplies, denied him to supply:
The Hydra of their mightines ordaind
New spoil for death, when old did wounded lie:
But he, Herculian-like one state retaind,
One to triumph, or one for all to die.
Heaven had only lent him but one heart,
That heart one thought, that thought no fear of smart.
And now the night grew near her middle line,
Youthfully lusty in her strongest age,
When one of Spaynes great Gallions did repine,
That one should many unto death engage,
And therefore with her force, half hold divine,
At once euaporats her mortal rage,
Till powerful Grinuile, yielding power a tomb,
Splyt her, and sunck her in the salt waves womb.
When Cutino, the Hulks great Admiral,
Saw that huge Vessel drencht within the surge,
Envy and shame tyerd upon his gall,
And for revenge a thousand means does urge:
But Grinuile, perfect in destructions fall,
His mischiefs with like miseries does scourge;
And renting with a shot his wooden tower,
Made Neptunes liquid arms his all deuouer.
These two ore-whelm'd, Siuills Ascension came,
A famous ship, well manned, and strongly dressed,
Vindicta from her Cannons mouths does flame,
And more then any, our dread Knight oprest:
Much hurt she did, many she wounded lame,
And Valurs self, her valiant acts confessed.
Yet in the end, (for war of none takes keep)
Grinuile sunck her within the watery deep.
An other great Armado, brusd and beat,
Sunck near S. Michaels road, with thought to escape,
And one that by her men more choicely set,
Being crazed and widowed of her comely shape,
Ran against the shore, to pay Ill-chaunce her debt,
Who desolate for desolations gape:
Yet these confounded, were not mist at all,
For new supplies made new the aged brall.
This while on Grinuile ceazed no amaze,
No wonder, dread, nor base astonishment,
But true resolve, and valurs sacred blaze,
The crown of heaven, and starrie ornament
Decked his divine part, and from thence did raze
Affects of earth, or earths intendiment.
And in this broyle, as cheerful was his sight,
As Jove's, embracing Danae by night.
Look how a wanton Bridegroom in the morn,
Busily labors to make glad the day,
And at the noone, with wings of courage borne,
Recourts his bride with dancing and with play,
Until the night which holds mean bliss in scorn,
By action kills imaginations sway,
And then, even then, gluts and co^founds his thought,
With all the sweets, conceit or Nature wrought,
Even so our Knight the bridegroom unto Fame,
Toild in this battles morning with unrest,
At noone triumphed, and daunst, and made his game,
That virtue by no death could be deprest;
But when the night of his loves longings came,
Even then his intelectuall soul confessed
All other joys imaginary were
Honor vnconquerd, heaven and earth held dear.
The bellowing shot which wakened dead men's swounds,
As Dorian music, sweetened in his cares,
Ryuers of blood, issuing from fountain wounds,
He pytties, but augments not with his tears,
The flaming fire which merciless abounds,
He not so much as masking torches fears,
The doleful Echo of the souls half dying,
Quicken his courage in their banefull crying.
When foul Misfortune houering on a Rock,
(The stony girdle of the Florean I Will,)
Had seen this conflict, and the fearful shock,
Which all the Spanysh mischeifes did compile,
And saw how conquest licklie was to mock
The hope of Spain, and fauster her exile,
Immortal she, came down her self to fight,
And do what else no mortal creature might.
And as she flew the midnights waking star,
Sad Cassiopea, with a heavy cheer
Pusht forth her forehead, to make known from far,
What time the dryrie dole of earth drew near,
But when she saw Misfortune armed in war,
With tears she blinds her eyes, and clouds ye air,
And asks the gods, why Fortune fights with man?
They say, to do, what else no creature can.
O why should such immortal envy dwell,
In the enclosures of eternal mould?
Let Gods with Gods, and men with men rebel,
Unequal wars t'vnequall shame is sold;
But for this damned deed came she from hell,
And Jove is sworn, to do what dest'nie would,
Weep then my pen, the tell-tale of our woe,
And curse the fount from whence our sorrows flow.
Now, now, Misfortune fronts our Knight in arms,
And casts her venom through the Spanysh host,
She salues the dead, and all the living warmes
With vital envy, brought from Plutos coast;
Yet all in vain, all works not Grinuils harms;
Which seen, she smiles, and yet with rage imbost
Says to her self, since men are all too weak,
Behold a goddess shall thy life's twine break.
With that she taks a Musket in her hand,
Raft from a dying Soldier newly slain,
And aiming where the vnco^quered Knight did stand,
Dischargd it through his body, and in twain
Deuids the ever holy nuptial band,
Which twixt his soul, and worlds part should remain,
Had not his heart, stronger then Fortunes will,
Held life perforce to scorn Misfortunes ill.
The bubling wound from whence his blood distild,
Mourned to let fall the hallowed drops to ground,
And like a iealious love by rival illd,
Sucks in the sacred moisture through the wound;
But he, which felt deaths fatal doom fulfilld,
Grew fiercer valiant, and did all confound,
Was not a Spanyard durst abord him rest,
After he felt his deaths wound in his breast.
Hundreds on hundreds, dead on the maimed fall,
Maimed on sound, sound in them selves lie slain,
Blessed was the first that to his ship could crall,
For wounded, he wounds multituds again;
No sacrifice, but sacrifice of all,
Could stay his swords oblations unto pain,
Nor in Phillippie, fell for Caesar's death,
Souls thicker then for Grinuils wasting breath.
The Nemian Lion, Aramanthian Bore,
The Hircanian Tiger, nor the Cholcean Bulls,
Never extended rage with such uproar,
Nor in their breasts mad monstrous fury lulls;
Now might they learn, that ever learnt before,
Wrath at our Knight, which all wrath disanulls,
For slavish death, his hands commanded more,
Then Lion, Tiger, Bull, or angry Bore.
Had Pompey in Pharsalia held his thought,
Caesar had never wept upon his head,
Had Anthony at Actiome like him fought,
Augustus tears had never drowned him dead,
Had brave Renaldo, Grinuiles puissance bought,
Angelica from France had never fled,
Nor madded Rowland with inconstancy,
But rather slain him wanting victory.
Before a storm flew never Doves so fast,
As Spaniards from the fury of his fist,
The stout Revenge, about whose forlorn wast,
Whilome so many in their moods persist,
Now all alone, naught but the sourge imbrast,
Her foes from handie combats clean desist;
Yet still incirkling her within their powers,
From far sent shot, as thick as winters showers.
Anger, and Envy, enemies to Life,
Strong smouldring Heat and noisome stink of Smoke,
With ouer-labouring Toil, Deaths ouglie wife,
These all accord with Grinuiles wounded stroke,
To end his lives date by their ciuell strife,
And him unto a blessed state inyoke,
But he repeld them whilst repel he might.
Till fainting power, was taken from power to fight.
Then down he sat, and beat his manly breast,
Not mourning death, but want of means to die;
Those which suruiu'd coragiouslie he blessed,
Making them gods for god-like victory;
Not full twice twenty souls alive did rest,
Of which the most were mangled cruelly,
Yet still, whilst words could speak, or signs could show,
From death he maks eternal life to grow.
The Maister-gunner, which beheld his eyes,
Dart fire against death triumphant in his face,
Came to sustain him, and with courage cries,
How fares my Knight? worlds glory, martial grace?
Thine honor, former honors ouer-flyes,
And unto Heaven and Virtue bids the bace;
Cheer then thy soul, and if deaths wounding pain it,
Abraham's fair bosom lies to entertain it.
Master, he says, even heers the opned door,
Through which my spirit bridgroome like must ride,
(And then he bard his wounded breast all gore)
To court the blessed virgin Lamb his bride,
Whose innoncence the worlds afflictions bore,
Streaming divine blood from his sliced side,
And to that heaven my soul with courage flies,
Because vnconquerd, conquering it dies.
But yet, replied the Master once again,
Great virtue of our virtues, strive with Fate,
Yield not a minute unto death, retain
Life like thy glory, made to wonder at,
This wounds recovery well may entertain
A double triumph to thy conquering state,
And make thee live immortal Angel blessed,
Pleases thee suffer it be searched and dressed.
Descend then gentle Grinuile down below,
Into my Cabin for a breathing space,
In thee there let thy Surgion stanch our woe,
Giving recuer to thee, our wounded case,
Our breaths, from thy breaths fountain gently flow,
If it be dried, our currents loose their grace:
Then both for us, and thee, and for the best,
Descend, to have thy wound bound up and dressed.
Master, replied the Knight, since last the sun
Looked from the hiest period of the sky,
Giving a signal of the days mid noone,
Unto this hour of midnight, valiantly,
From of this upper deck I have not run,
But fought, and freed, and welcomd victory,
Then now to give new covert to mine head,
Were to revive our foes half conquered.
Thus with contrary arguments they war,
Diverse in their opinions and their speech,
One seeking means, the other a will to darre,
Yet both one end, and one desire reach:
Both to keep honor living, plyant are,
He by his fame, and he by skillful leach,
At length, the Master winnes, and has procurd
The Knight descend, to have his woundings curd.
Down when he was, and had displayed the port
Through which his life was martching up to heaven,
Albe the mortal taint all cuers retort,
Yet was his Surgion not of hope bereuen,
But gives him valiant speech of life's resort,
Says, longer days his longer fame shall even,
And for the means of his recovery,
He finds both art and possibility.
Misfortune hearing this presage of life,
(For what but chimes within immortal ears)
Within her self kindles a homebred strife,
And for those words ye Surgions doomes day swears
With that, her charged piece ( Atropos keen knife,)
Again she takes, and leueld with dispairs,
Sent a shrill bullet through the Surgions head,
which thence, through Grinuils temples like was led.
Down fell the Surgion, hope and help was rest,
His death gave manumition to his soul,
Misfortune smyld, and even then she left
The mournful Ocean, mourner for this dole;
Away she flies, for all was now bereft,
Both hope and help, for life to win deaths gole;
Yet Grinuile vnamaz'd, with constant faith,
Laughing dispisd the second stroke of death.
What fool (says he) ads to the Sea a drop,
Lends Etna sparks, or angry storms his wind?
Who burns the root when lightning fires the top?
Who unto hell, can worse then hell combind?
Pale hungry Death, thy greedy longings stop,
Hope of long life is banefull to my mind:
Yet hate not life, but loathe captivity,
Where rests no trust to purchase victory.
Then up he came with feeble pace again,
Strength from his blood, blood from his wounds descending,
Says, here I lived, and here will I sustain,
The worst of Deaths worst, by my fame defending,
And then he fell to war with might and maine,
Valor on death most valiantly depending,
And thus continued aye coragiously,
Until the day chaste shadows from the sky.
But when the mornings dewie locks drunk up
A mistie moisture from the Oceans face,
Then might he see the source of sorrows cup,
Plainly prefigur'd in that hateful place:
And all the miseries that mortals sup
From their great Grandsire Adams band, disgrace;
For all that did in circle him, was his foe,
And that incircled, model of true woe.
His masts were broken, and his tackle torn,
His upper work hewed down into the Sea,
Naught of his ship above the sourge was borne,
But even leueld with the Ocean lay,
Only the ships foundation (yet that worn)
Remaind a trophey in that mighty fray;
Nothing at all above the head remained,
Either for covert, or that force maintained.
Powder for shot, was spent and wasted clean,
Scarce seen a corn to charge a piece withal,
All her pykes broken, half of his best men slain,
The rest sore wounded, on Deaths Agents call,
On the other side, her foes in ranks remain,
Displaying multitudes, and store of all
What ever might avail for victory,
Had they not wanted hearts true valiancie.
When Grinuile saw his desperate drierie case,
Merely dispoyld of all succes-full thought,
He calls before him all within the place,
The Master, Maister-gunner, and them taught
Rules of true hardiment to purchase grace;
Shows the^ the end their travails toil had bought,
How sweet it is, swift Fame to ouer-goe,
How vile to diue in captive overthrow.
Gallants (he says) since three a clock last noone,
Until this morning, fifteen hours by course,
We have maintaind stout war, and still undone
Our foes assaults, and drive them to the worse,
Fifteen Armados boardings have not won
Content or ease, but been repeld by force,
Eight hundred Cannon shot against our side,
Have not our hearts in cowards colors died.
Not fifteen thousand men araungd in fight,
And fifteen hours lent them to atchiue,
With fifty three great ships of boundless might,
Have had or means or prowess to contriue
The fall of one, which maiden virtue dight,
Kept in despite of Spanish force alive.
Then list to me you imps of memory,
Borne to assume to immortality.
Since loosing, we vnlost keep strong our praise,
And make our glories, gaynours by our ends,
Let not the hope of hours (for tedious days
Unto our lives no larger circuit lends)
Confound our wondered actions and assayes,
VVhereon the sweet of mortal ears depends,
But as we live by wills victorious,
So let us die victours of them and us.
We that have merciless cut Mercies wings,
And muffeld pity in deaths mistie vale,
Let us implore no mercy; pittyings,
But from our God, dear favor to exhale
Our souls to heaven, where all the Angels rings
Renown of us, and our deep tragic tale;
Let us that cannot live, yet live to dye,
Vnthrald by men, fit tropheys for the sky.
And thus resolved since other mean is reft,
Sweet Maister-gunner, split our keele in twain,
We cannot live, whom hope of life has left,
Dying, our deaths more glorious lives retain,
Let not our ship, of shame and foil bereft,
Unto our foe-men for a prize remain;
Sink her, and sinking with the Greek we will cry,
Best not to be, or being soon to dye.
Scarce had his words taken wings from his dear tongue,
But the stout Maister-gunner, ever rich
In heavenly valor and repulsing wrong,
Proud that his hands by action might inritch
His name and nation with a worthy song,
Towered his heart higher then Eagles pitch,
And instantly endeavors to effect
Grinuiles desire, by ending Deaths defect.
But the other Master, and the other Mat's,
Disented from the honor of their minds,
And humbly praid the Knight to rue their stat's,
Whom misery to no such mischeife binds;
To him th'aleadge great reasons, and dilat's
Their foes amazements, whom their valures blinds,
And maks more eager t'entertaine a truce,
Then they to offer words for wars excuse.
They show him diverse gallant men of might,
Whose wounds not mortal, hope gave of recuer,
For their saks sue they to divorce this night
Of desperate chance, called unto Deaths black lure,
Their le^gthned lives, their countries cares might right,
And to their Prince they might good hopes assure.
The^ quoth. the Captain, (dear Knight) do not spill,
The lives whom gods and Fat's seek not to kill.
And where thou say the Spaniards shall not brave,
To Have taken one ship due to our virgin Queen,
O know, that they, nor all the world can save,
This wounded Bark, whose like no age has seen,
Six foot she leaks in hold, three shot beneath the wave,
All whose repair so insufficient been,
That when the Sea shall angry work begin,
She cannot choose but sink and dye therein.
Besides, the wounds and brusings which she bears,
Are such, so many, so incurable,
As to remove her from this place of fears,
No force, no wit, no mean, nor man is able;
Then since that peace prostrate to us repaires,
Unless our selves, our selves make miserable,
Herculeen Knight, for pity, pity lend,
No fame consists in wilful desperate end.
These words with emphasis and action spent,
Moved not Sir Richard, but enraged him more,
To bow or yield, his heart would near relent,
He still impungs all thought of life's restore;
The Maister-gunner, ever does consent
To act his wish, swearing in beds of gore
Death is most lovely, sweet and amiable,
But captived life for foulenes admirable.
The Captain, seeing words could take no place,
Turns back from them unto the living few,
Expounds what pity is, what victors grace;
Bids them them selves, them selves in kindness rue,
Peace if they please, will kindly them embrace,
And they may live, from whom wars glory grew;
But if they will to desperate end consent,
Their guilty souls too late shall mourn repent.
The silly men, which sought but living joys,
Cries to the Captain for an honored truce,
Life they desire, yet no life that destroys
Their won renownes, but such as might excuse
Their woes, their wounds, and all what else anoyes
Beauty of laud, for other they refuse;
All which the Captain swears they shall obtain,
Because their foes, in doubtful states remain.
O when Sir Richard saw them start aside,
More chaynd to life then to a glorius grave,
And those whom he so often in dangers tryde,
Now trembling seek their hateful lives to save,
Sorrow and rage, shame, and his honors pride,
Choking his soul, madly compeld him rave,
Until his rage with vigor did confound
His heavy heart, and left him in a swound.
The Maister-gunner, likewise seeing Fate
Bridle his fortune, and his will to die,
With his sharp sword sought to set open the gate,
By which his soul might from his body fly,
Had not his friends perforce preserved his state,
And locked him in his Cabin, safe to lie,
Whilst others swarmed where hapless Grinuile lay,
By cries recalling life, late run away.
In this too restless turmoile of unrest,
The poor Reuenges Master stole away,
And to the Spanish Admiral adrest
The doleful tidings of this mournful day,
(The Spanish Admiral who then oprest,
Houering with doubt, not daring t'end the fray,)
And pleads for truce, with souldiour-like submission,
Anexing to his words a straight condition.
Alfonso, willing to give end to arms,
For well he knew Grinuile would never yield,
Albe his power stood like unnumbered swarms,
Yet daring not on stricter terms to build,
He offers all what may alay their harms
Safety of lives, nor any thrall to weild,
Free from the Gallie, prisonment, or pain,
And safe return unto their soil again.
To this he yields, as well for his own sake,
Whom desperate hazard might indamage sore,
As for desire the famous Knight to take,
Whom in his heart he seemed to deplore,
And for his valor half a God did make,
Extolling him all other men before,
Admiring with an honorable heart,
His valor, wisdom, and his Soldiers Art.
With peaceful news the Master back returns,
And rings it in the living remnants ears,
They all rejoice, but Grinuile deadly mourns,
He frets, he sighs, he sorrows and despaires,
He cries, this truce, their fame and bliss adiourns,
He rents his locks, and all his garments tears,
He vows his hands shall rent the ship in twain,
Rather then he will Spanish yoke sustain.
The few reserved, that life esteemed too well,
Knowing his words were warrants for his deed,
Unkindly left him in that monstrous hell,
And fled unto Alfonso with great speed.
To him their Chieftaines mightines they tell,
And how much valor on his soul does feed,
That if prevention, not his actions dim,
Twill be too late to save the ship or him.
Bassan made proud, vnconquering t'ouer-come,
Swore the brave Knight nor ship he would not lose,
Should all the world in a petition come:
And therefore of his gallants, forty chose
To board Sir Richard, charging them be dombe
From threatening words, from anger, and from bloes,
But with all kindness, honor, and admire,
To bring him thence, to further Fames desire.
Sooner they boarded not the crazed Bark,
But they beheld where speechless Grinuile lay,
All smeard in blood, and clouded in the dark
Contagious curtain of Deaths tragic day;
They wept for pity, and yet silent mark
Whether his lungs sent living breath away,
Which when they saw in ayrie blasts to fly,
They strived who first should stanch his misery.
Anon came life, and lift his eyelids up,
Whilst they with tears denou^ce their Generals will,
Whose honored mind sought to retort the cup
Of Deaths sad poison, well instruckt to kill:
Tells him what fame and grace his eyes might sup
From Bassans kindness, and his Surgions skill,
Both how he loved him, and admired his fame,
To which he sought to lend a living flame.
Aye me (quoth Grinuile) simple men, I know
My body to your General is a pray,
Take it, and as you please my lyms bestow,
For I respect it not, it is earth and clay:
But for my mind that mightier much does grow,
To heaven it shall, despite of Spanish sway.
This said, ore-come with anguish and with pain,
He swounded, and did never speak again.
They took him up, and to their General brought
His mangled carcass, but vnmaimed mind,
Three days he breathed, yet never spoke he ought,
Albe his foes were humble, sad, and kind;
The fourth, came down the Lamb that all souls bought,
And his pure part, from worser parts refind,
Bearing his spirit up to the lofty skies,
Leaving his body, wonder to wonders eyes.
When Bassan saw the Angell-spirite fled,
Which lent a mortal frame immortal thought,
With pity, grief, and admiration led,
He mournfully complaind what Fat's had wrought,
VVoe me (he cries) but now alive, now dead,
But now invincible, now captive brought:
In this, unjust are Fat's, and Death declared,
That mighty ones, no more the^ mean are spared.
You powers of heaven, rain honor on his hearse,
And tune the Cherubins to sing his fame,
Let Infants in the last age him rehearse,
And let no more, honor be Honors name:
Let him that will obtain immortal vearse,
Conquer the style of Grinuile to the same.
For till that fire shall all the world consume,
Shall never name, with Grinuils name presume.
Rest then dear soul, in thine all-resting peace,
And take my tears for trophyes to thy tomb,
Let thy lost blood, thy vnlost fame increase,
Make kingly ears thy praises second womb:
That when all tongues to all reports surcease,
Yet shall thy deeds, out-liue the day of doom.
For even Angels, in the heavens shall sing,
Grinuile vnconquerd died, still conquering.
O vtinam.
FINIS.
WHat became of the Revenge after Sir Richards death, diverse report diversely,
but the most probable and sufficient proof says, that within few days after
the Knights death, there arose a great storm from the West and North-west,
that all the Fleet was disperced, as well the Indian Fleet, which were then come
unto them, as all the rest of the Armada, which attended their ariuall; of
which fourteen sail, together with the Revenge, and in her two hundred
Spaniards, were cast away upon the I Will of S. Michaels; so it pleased them to
honor the burial of that renowned Ship the Revenge, not suffering her to
perrish alone, for the great honor she atchiued in her life time.


