The dumb Knight.

A historical Comedy, acted sundry times by the children of his Majesty's
Revels.



LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for John Bache, and are to be sold at his
shop in Pope's Head Palace, near to the Royal Exchange. 1608.

To the understanding Reader.
RVMOR that Hydra headed Monster, with more tongues then eyes, by help of his
intelligencer envy has made strange misconstructions on this dumb Knight,
which then could not answer for himself: but now this publication does vnty
his tongue, to answer the objections of all sharp critticall censures which
heretofore have undeservedly past upon him. And for my part (I protest) the
wrongs I have received by some (whose worths I will not traduce) with a mild
neglect I have laughed at their follies; for I think my self happy, because I
have been enuyde, since the best now in grace have been subject to some
slanderous tongues that want worth themselves, and think it great praise to
them to detract praise from other that deserve it; yet having a partner in the
wrong, whose worth has been often approved, I count the wrong but half a
wrong, because he knows best how to answer for himself: But I now in his
absence, make this Apology, both for him and me. Thus leaving you and the
book together, I ever rest yours.

Jews Machin.
Act. 1.
Sce. 1. Music,
Enter the King of Cypres, Phylocles, Florio, and attendants in arms. Cypr.
INnough, these loud sounds deafes my passions
How long shall love make me a slave to hope,
And mix my calm desires with tyranny?
O Phylocles it is heresy I hold,
Thought and affection cannot be controld.

Phy. Yet mai't be bent and suppled with extremes,
Since few dare see the end of violence
What makes the skillful Leech to use the fire,
Or war her engines, or states policy,
But to recover things most desperate?
Revolt is recreant when pursuit is brave,
Never to faint does purchase what we crave

Cyp. True my Phylocles, yet my recreant soul,
Slaued to her beauty, would renounce all war,
And yield her right to love, did not thy spirit
Mixed with my longing, fortify these arms.
But I am now resolud and this sad hour,
Shall give an end to my disemprature.
Summon a parley.

Enter a loft, the Queen of Sicille, the Duke of Epire, Alphouso and
attendants. Queen. What says our tyrant suitor, our disease in love,
That makes our thoughts a slave unto his sword:
What says my Lord?

Cyp. Madame attend me, this is my latest summons,
The many suns my sorrows have beheld,
And my sad nights of longings, all through hope,
T'enioy the joy of earth, (your own dear self)
Are grown so infinite in length and weight,
That like to wearied Atlas, I enforce
These wars as Hercules, to bear my load:
Briefly I must enjoy you, or else loose
The breath of life, which to prevent, behold,
My sword must be my Cupid, and with feathered steel,
Force pity from your breast, your Cities walls,
Chidden with my Canons, have set open a path
And boldly bids me enter, all your men of war,
Feebled with famine, and a weary siege,
Take danger from mine actions, only your self,
Strong in your will, oppose even destiny:
And like the giants war offend the heavens,
Which to prevent, do but descend and give
Peace to my loue-suit, and as overcome thereby,
I Will yield my self your prisoner, and be drawn,
A thrall in your triumphant victory.
If otherwise, behold these fatal swords,
Shall never be sheathed, till we be conquerours:
And not respecting innocence nor sex,
The cries of infants, nor the prayers of age,
All things shall perish, till within my arms
I fould your self my thrall and conqueror.

Qu. Thou may be master of my bodies Tomb
But for my soul and mind, they are as free
As their creation: and with Angels wings
Can soar beyond thy reach; trust me king of Cypres
Those coals the Roman Portia did devour,
Are not burnt out, nor have th'Egiptian worms,
Yet lost their stings, steel holds his temper still,
And these are ransomes from captivity.
But art thou noble, have thou one royal thought?

Cyp. Approve me by your question.

Qu. Then briefly thus:
To shun the great effusion of their bloods,
Who feel no touch in mine affections,
Dare you to single combat, two to two,
Refer your right in love?

Cyp. Who are your combatants? we love equality.

Qu. This is the first, the Epyre duke, a man,
Sprung from the line, of famous Scanderbag:
The next Alphonso, sprung from noble blood:
Who laden with rich lusitanian prize,
Has rod through Syracusa twice in pomp.

Cyp. Their likings to the motion.

Ep. They are like wrath,
Never unarmed to beat weak injury.

Alp. Nay more, we are the sons of destiny:
Vertu's our guide, our aim is dignity.

Phy. S'foot king, shall not forsake them: this I see,
Love, fight, and death, are ruled by destiny.

Cyp. My spirit speaks thy motion.
Madame, although advantage might euade,
And give my love more hope, yet my bent will,
Bowd to your pleasure, does embrace your law,
We do accept the combat, and our self
Will with that Duke try fortunes, this my friend,
The more part of my self, me dearest Philocles,
One of an Angels temper, shall with that that Lord
Try best and worst the place, the time, the sword.

Epy. They are your rights, we claim as challengers.

Cyp. And we would lose that vantage, but since fame
Makes virtue dulat, we embrace our rights:
The place before these walls, the hour next sun,
The pollax and the hand axe for the fight.

Qu. It is enough,
My hostage is my person and my love:

Cyp. And mine my hope, my faith and royalty.

Epy. They are of poysse sufficient, and one light
Shall at one instant, give us day and night.

Exeunt. Queen, Mariano, Alphonso. Cyp. She Is gone my Philocles: and as she
goes even so,
The sun forsakes the heavens to kiss the sea,
Day in her beauty leaves us, and methinkes,
Her absence does exile all happiness.
Tell me my Philocles, nay pray thee tell me true,
Even from that love
Which to us both should bend one sympathy:
Discharge an open breast, do thou not think,
She is the mirror of her beauteous sex?
Unparalleled, and vncompanioned.

Phi. Envy will say she is rare, then truth must vow,
She is beyond compare, since in her looks,
Each motion has a speaking majesty,
She is herself, compared with her self:
For but her self, she has no companion.
But when I think of beauty, wit and grace,
The elements of active delicacy,
Those all eie-pleasing harmonies of sight
Which do inchant men's fancies, and stir up
The life blood of dull earth, O then methinkes,
Fair Mariana has an equal place
And if not outshine, it shows more beautiful.

Cyp. More then my Queen?

Phi. More in the gloss of beauty, less in worth,
Of wisdom and great thoughts, the one I find
was made for wonder, the other for admire.

Cyp. Thine equal praises makes my facnies rich:
And I am pleased with thy comparisons,
Things of like nature live in best consent,
Beauty with subjects, majesty with Kings,
Then let those two Ideaes lively move,
Spirit beyond all spirit, in our breasts,
That in the end of our great victory,
we may attain both love and majesty.

Phy. Although my first creation and my birth,
My thoughts and other tempers of my souls,
Took all their noble beings from the sword,
And made me only for the use of wars:
Yet in this combat, something methinkes apeares,
Greater then greatest glory, and does raise
My mind beyond her self,
S'foot methinkes Casars Pharsalia,
Nor Scipios Carthage, nor Emilias acts,
Were worthy chaires of triumph, they ore men's
Poor mangled bodies, and fire-wasted climes,
Made their triumphant passage, but we two
Must conquer thoughts and love, more then the gods can do.

Cyp. True, and therein
Consists the glorious garland of our praise,
But we neglect the affairs of preparation. Florio be it your charge
To see th'erection of the squared lists,
Fit ground for either army, and what else,
Belongs unto such royal eminence.

Flo. How near will your majesty's hand the lists extend
Unto the Cities walls?

Cyp. So as the dullest eye,
May see the heedfulst passage in the fight.

Flo. What square or circuit?

Cyp. Threescore pace each way.

Flo. Your majesty shall have your will performed.

Phy. Do, and you do us grace; and now thou sun,
That art the eye of heaven, whose pure sight,
Shall be our guide, and Jove's great Chronicler,
Look from thy sphere,
No guilt of pride, of malice or of blood,
Puts on our armor, only pure naked love
Tutors our hopes, and does our actions move.

Cyp. Enough my Philocles, thine orizons are heard.
Come lets away.

Exeunt. Enter Lollia, the wife of Prat the Orator. Lol. Now fie upon it, who
would be an Orators wife, and not a Gentlewoman if she could choose? a Lady is
the most sweet lascivious life, conieyes and kisses, the tire, O the tire, made
castle upon castle, jewel upon jewel, knot upon knot, crowns, garlands,
gardins, and what not? the hood, the rebato, the french fall, the loose bodyed
gown, the pin in the hair, now clawing the pate, then picking the teeth,
and every day change, when we poor souls must come and go for every man's
pleasure, and what is a Lady more then another body? we have legs and hands,
and rouling eyes, hanging lips, sleeke brows, cherrie cheeks, and other
things as Ladies have, but the fashion carries it away.


Enter Mistress Collaquintida. Col. Why how now Mistress Prat? in the old
disease still, will it never be better, cannot a woman find one kind man
amongst twenty? O the days that I have seen, when the law of a woman's wit,
could have put her husbands purse to execution.


Lol. O Mistress Collaquintida, mine is even the vnnaturallest man to his wife.


Col. Faith for the most part, all scholars are so: for they take so upon the^
to know al things, that indeed they know nothing: and besides, they are with
study and ease, grown so unwieldy, that a woman shall near want a sore
stomach that is troubled with them.


Lol. And yet they must have the government of all.

Col. True, and great reason they have for it, but a wise man will put it in a
woman's hand, what? she will save what he spends.


Lol. You have a pretty ruff, how deep is it?

Col. Nay this is but shallow, marry I have a ruff is a quarter deep, measured
by the yeard.


Lol. Indeed, by the yeard?

Col. By the standard I assure you: you have a pretty set too, how big is the
steel you set with?


Lol. As big as a reasonable sufficient; pity of my life, I have forgot my
self, if my husband should rise from his study, and miss me, we should have
such a coile.


Co. A coil, why what coil? if he were my husband and did but thwart me, I
would ring him so many alarums, sound him so many brass trumpets, beat him so
many drums to his confusion, and thunder him such a peale of great shot, that I
would turn his brain in the pan, and make him mad with an eternal silence.


Lo. O mistress Coloquintida, but my husbands anger is the worst fauouredst
without all conscience of any man's in all Sicilie, he is even as peevish as a
sick munkie, and as waspish as an ill pleased bride the second morning.


Co. Let your wrath be reciprocal, and pay him at his own weapon: but to the
purpose for which I came, the party you wot of, commends him to you in this
diamond, he that met the party you know, and said the parties party was a
party of a partly pretty understanding.


Lo. O the Lord, Alphonso.

Co. The very same believe it, he loves you, and swears he so loves you, that
if you do not credit him you are worse then an infidel.


Lo. Indeed mistress Coloquintida, he has the right garb for apparel, the
true touch with the tongue in the kiss, and he dances well but falls heavily:
but my husband woman, my husband, if we could put out his cattes eyes, there
were something to be said but they are ever peeping and prying that they are
able to pierce through a millstone: besides: I may say to you, he is a little
jealous too, and see where he comes, we shall have a coil now.


Enter Prate the Orator. Co. Begin you to pout first, for that's a woman's
prevention.

Pra. What Lollia I say, where are you my house looks you, my men lack you, I
seek you, and a whole quest of inquiry cannot find you, fie, fie, fie, fie,
Idleness is the whip of thrift, a good huswife should ever be occupied?


Lo. Indeed I have much joy to be occupied in any bodies company.

Prate. Why, what is the matter?

Lo. Why Orators wives shortly will be known like images on water stairs,
ever in one wetherbeaten suite, as if none wore hoodes but Monks and Ladies,
nor feathers but fore-horses and waiting gentlewomen, nor chains but prisoners
and Lords officers, nor perriwigs but players and hot brains, but the
weakest must to the walls still.


Prate. Go to, you shall have what you will.

Lo. Nay nay, 'twas my hard fortune to be your wife, time was I might have done
otherwise, but it matters not, you esteem me as you do your self, and think
all things costly enough that couers shame, and that a pair of silken
foresleeues to a satin brestplate, is a garment good enough for a capitol:
but is master Wrangle, master Tangle, or master Trobleare of that opinion? in
faith sir no.

There Is never a gallant in our state
That goes more rich in gaudy bravery:
And yet I hope for quality of speech,
Audacious words or quirkes or quidities,
You are not held their much inferior.
Fie, fie, I am ashamed to see your baseness.

Co. Indeed master Prate she tells you truly; I wonder that you being a
proper man and an Orator will not go brave, according to the custom of the
country.


Prate. Go to neighbor, he that will rise to the top of a high ladder must go
up, not leap up: but be patient wench, and thou shall shortly see me gallant
it with the best, and for thy self my Lollia,

Not Lollia Paulina, nor those blasing stars,
Which makes the world the Apes of Italy:
Shall match thy self in sun-bright splendency.

Lo. Nay, verily for my self I care not, it is you that are my pride, if you
would go like your self I were appeasd.


Prate. Believe it wench so I will, but to the purpose for which I came, the
end of this great war is now brought to a combat, two to two, the Duke of
Epyre and Alphonso for our Queen against the King and Prince Philocles: now
wench if thou will go see the fight, I will send and provide thee of a good
standing.


Lo. Indeed, for you have nere a good one of your own.

Prate. What, President I say?

Pre. Anon, anon sir.

Prate. Why when I say, the villains belly is like a bottomless pit, ever
filling and yet empty, at your leisure sir.


Enter President Prates man eating. Pre. I can make no more haste then my teeth
will give me leave.


Prate. Well sir, get you without the town, to the place for the combat, and
provide me for my wife some good standing, to see the conflict.


Pre. How master how, must I provide a good standing for you for my mistress?
truly Master I think a mary bone pie, candi'd erringoes, preserved dattes, or
marmaladd of cantharides were much better harbingers, cock sparrowes stewed,
doves brains or swannes pizels are very prouocatiue, roasted potatoes or boild
skerrets are your only lofty dishes, me thinks these should fit you better
then I can do.


Prate. What Is this, what is this I say? provide me a standing for my wife upon a
scaffold.


Pre. And truly Master, I think a private chamber were better.

Prate. I grant you, if there were a chamber convenient.

Pre. Willing minds will make shift in a simple hole, close windows, strong
locks, hard bed and sure posts, are your only ornaments.


Prate. I think the knave be mad, sir you chop logic, blockhead, you
that have your brain pan made of dry leather, and your wit ever wetshod:
pack about your business, or I Will pack your pen and inckhorne about your cares.


Pre. Well sir, I may go or so, but would my mistress take a standing of my
preferment, I would so mount her, she should love strange things the better
all her life after.


Prate. Why when sir.
Exit President. And come sweet wife, nay neighbor let us have your company
too.

Exeunt. Enter at one door a Herald, and Floria marshall for the King, with
officers bearing the lists, at the other door a herald and Caelio marshall for
the Queen. Cae. Holla, what are you?

Flo. High marshall for the King, your Character.

Cae. I likewise for the Queen, where lies your equal ground?

Flo. Here underneath these walls, and there and there ground for the
battles.


Cae. Place there the Queens seat,
And there and there chaiers for the combatants.

Flo. Place here the lists, fix every joint as strong
As 'twere a wall, for on this foot of earth
This day shall stand two famous monuments,
The one a throne of glory bright as gold,
Burnisht with angels luster, and with stars,
Plucked from the crown of conquest, in which shall sit
Men made half Gods through famous victory:
The other a rich tomb of memorable fame,
Built by the curious thoughts of noble minds,
In which shall sleep these valiant souls in peace,
Whom Fortunes hand shall only overthrow.
Heaven in thy Palm, this day the balance hings.
Which makes Kings Gods, or men more great then Kings.

Cae. So now let the heralds give the champions sign
Of ready preparations.

Exeunt Herralds. The cornets sound, and enter at one end of the stage a
Herald, two pages, one with pollaxes, the other with hand axes, the Duke of
Epyre, and Alphonso like combatants, the Queen and Mariana and Prate, Lollia,
Coloquintida and President aloft. Flo. What are you that appear, and what
deuoyre
Draws you within these lists?

Epy. I am the Duke of Epyre, and the mine,
Which does attract my spirit to run this marshall course,
Is the fair guard of a distressed Queen,
Would wedde to hate and in equality and brutish force,
Which to withstand I boldly enter thus,
And will defaile, or else prove recreant.

Flo. And what are you or your intendiments?

Alp. I am Alphonso marshall of this realm,
Who of like tempered thoughts and like desires,
Have grounded this my sanctimonious zeal,
And will approve the Dukes assertions,
Or in this field lie slain and recreant.

Flo. Enter and prosper as your cause deserves.

The cornets sound, and enter at the other end of the stage a Herald, two Pages
with axes and pollaxes, then the king of Cypres and Philocles, like combatants
and their Army. Cae. What are you that appear, and what deuoyre
Draws you within these lists?

Cy. I am the King of Cypres, who led on
By the divine instinct of heavenly love,
Come with my sword to beg that royal maid,
And to approve by gift of heaven and fate
She is a one to me appropriate:
Which to maintain I challenge entrance here,
Where I will live a King or recreant.

Cae. And what are you or your intendiments?

Phi. I am less then my thoughts, more then my self,
Yet nothing but the creature of my fate,
By name my nature only is obscured,
And yet the world baptized me Philocles.
My entrance here is proof of holy zeal,
And to maintain that no severe disdain,
False shape of chastity, nor woman's will,
Neglectiue petula^ce, or uncertain hope,
Foul vizard coins, nor seducing fame
Should rob the royal temper of true love
From the desired aim of his desires,
Which my best blood shall witness, or this field
Intombe my body made a recreant.

Cae. Enter and pro sper as your cause deserves.

Draws 2 swords. Flo. Princes, lay your hands on these swords points
Here you shall swear by hope, by heaven, by love;
And by the right you challenge in true fame,
That here you stand not armed with any guile,
Malignant hate, or usurpation
Of philters charms, of nightspels characters,
Or other black infernal vantages,
But even with thoughts as pure
As your pure vallures, or the suns pure beams,
T'approue the right of pure affection;
And howsoever your fortunes rise or fall,
To break no faith in your conditions,
So help you Jove.

Al. We swear.

Qu. How often does my maiden thoughts correct
And chide my froward will, for this extreme
Pursuit of blood! believe me, feign I would
Recall mine oaths vow, did not my shame
Hold fast my cruelty, by which is taught
Those gems are prized best, are dearest bought,
Sleep my loves softnes then, waken my flame,
Which guards a vestall sanctity; Princes behold,
Upon those weapons sits my God of love,
And in their powers my loves severity.
If them you conquer, we are all your slaves,
If they triumph, we will mourn upon your graves.

Ma. Now by my maiden modesty I wish
Good fortune to that Philocles, my mind
Presages virtue, in his eaglets eyes.
S'foot he looks like a sparrow hawk, or a wanton fire
A flash of lightning, or a glimpse of day,
His eye steals to my heart, and lets it see
More then it would, peace, blab no secrecy,
He must have blows.

Flo. Sound cornets, Princes respect your guards.

Here they fight, and Philocles overthrows Alphonso, and Epyre overthrows
Cypres. Phi. I crave the Queens conditions, or this blow
Sends this afflicted soul to heaven or hell.
Speak madame, will you yield or shall he die?

Epy. Neither bold Prince, if thou but touch a hair,
The kings breath shall redeem it: madame your love
Is safe in angels guarding, let no fear
Shake hands with doubtfulnesse, you are as safe
As in a tower of Diamonds.

Phi. O it is but glass,
And cannot bear this axes massinesse.
Duke, thy brave words that second thy brave deeds,
Fills me with emulation, only we two
Stand equal victors; then if thou have that tie
And bond of well knit valor, which unites
Virtue and same together, let us restore
Our captives unto freedom, and we two,
In single combat try out the mastery.
Where whosoever falls each other, shall subscribe
To every clause in each condition.

Epy. Thou art the index of mine ample thought,
And I am pleased with thine election.
Speak madame, if ever I deserved grace,
Grace me with your consent.

Qu. It Is all my will.
Thy noble hand erect and perfect me.

Phi. What says his majesty?
My stars are writ in heaven, nor death nor fate
Are slaves to fear, to hope or human state.

Cyp. I neither fear thy fortune nor my ruin;
But hold them all beyond all prophecy.
Thou have my free consent, and on thy power
Lies my lives date or my deaths hour.

Epy. Then rise and live with safety.

Phi. Alphonso, here my hand,
Thy fortune lends thy peace no infamy.
And now thou glorious issue of Jove's brain,
That burnt the Telamonian Rauisher,
Look from thy sphere, and if my heart contain
An impure thought of lust, send thy monsters forth
And make me more then earthly miserable.

Here the cornets sound, they fight, and Philocles ouercomes the Duke, the
Queen defends. Phi. Yield, recant or dye.

Epy. Thine axe has not the power to wound my thought,
And yields a word my tongue could never sound,
I say thou art worthy valiant, for my death,
Let the Queen speak it, it is an easy breath.

Qu. Not for the worlds large circuit, hold gentle Prince,
Thus I do pay his ransom, low as the ground,
I tender mine unspotted virgin love,
To thy great wills commandment, let not my care
My woman tyranny, or too strict guard,
In bloody purchase take away those sweetes
Till now have gouernd your amazd desires:
For trust me king, I will redeem my blame,
With as much love, as Philocles has fame.

Cy. Thus comes a calm unto a Sea-wract soul,
Ease to the pained, food unto the starved,
As you to me my best creation.
Trust me my Queen, my loves large chronicle
Thou never shall ore read, because each day
It shall beget new matter of amaze:
And live to do thee grace eternally,
Next whom my Philocles my bounteous friend,
Author of life, and sovereign of my love,
My heart shall be thy throne, thy breast the shrine,
Where I will sit to study gratefulnes
To you and you my Lords, my best of thoughts,
Whose loves have showed a dutious carefulnes,
To all free thanks and graces, this unity
Of love and kingdoms, is a glorious sight.
Mount up the royal Champion, music and cornets sound.
Let shouts and cries make heaven and earth rebound.

Exeunt. Epy. How like the suns great bastard ore the world,
Rides this man mounted engine, this proud prince
And with his breath sindges our continents
Sit fast proud Phaeton, for by heaven i will kick
And plunge thee in the sea: if thou wilt needs ride,
Thou should have made thy seat upon a slave,
And not upon mine honors firmament.
Thou have not heard the God of wisdoms tale,
Nor can thine youth curb greatness, till my hate,
Confound thy life with villain policy.
I am resolved since virtue has disdaind
To cloth me in her riches, henceforth to prove
A villain fatal, black and ominous:
Thy virtue is the ground of my dislike:
And my disgrace, the edge of enuies sword,
Which like a rasor shall vnplumbe thy crest;
And rob thee of thy native excellence,
When great thoughts give their homage to disgrace
Thers's no respect of deeds, time, thoughts or place.

Act. 2.
Sce. 1. Music.
Enter Prat, Lollia, Colloquintida, and President. Prat. COme wife, me thought
our party stood stiffly to it.

Pres. Indeed they were stiff whilst they stood, but when they were down,
they were like men of a low world, a man might have wound their worst anger
about his finger.


Lol. Go to sir, you must have your fools bolt in every bodies quiver.


Pre. Indeed mistress, if my master should break his arrow with foul
shooting or so, I would be glad if mine might supply the whole.


Prat. I find you kind sir.

Pre. True sir, according to my kind, and to pleasure my kind Mistress.


Prat. Go to sir, I will not have your kindness to intermeddle with her kind,
she is meat for your master.


Pre. And your man sir, may lick your foul trencher.

Col. I but not eat of his mutton.

Pre. Yet I may deep my bread in the woole, Mistress Colloquintida.

Prat. Go to sir, you will be obscene, and then I shall knock you; but to
the combat, me thought our side were the more proper men.


Lol. True, and therefore thoy had the worse fortune: but see here is the Lord
Florio.


Enter Florio. Flo. Master Orator, it is the King and Queens majesty's
pleasure, that you presently repair unto the Court, touching the drawing out
of certain Articles for the benefit of both the kingdoms.


Prat. My Lord, I will instantly attend their majesty's.

Flo. Do, for they expect you seriously.

Exit Florio. Prat. Wife you can have my service no longer. Sir, President,
attend you upon your mistress home: and wife, I would have you to hold your
journey directly homeward, and not to imitate princes in their progress, step
not out of your way to visit a new gossip, to see a new garden-house, to smell
the perfumes of Court ierkins, or to handle other tools then may fit for your
modesty: I would not have you to step into the Suburbs, and acquaint your
self either with monsters or motions, but holding your way directly homeward,
show your self still to be a rare houswife.


Lol. In Faith, In Faith, your black outside will have a yellowe lining.

Prat. Content thee wife, it is but my love that gives thee good counsel. But
here comes one of my clients.


Enter Drap, a country Gentleman. Drap. Sir, master Orator, I am bold to
trouble you about my suit.

Prat. Si, Mr. country gentleman, I am now for present business of the kings.

Dra. You may the better remember me.

Pra. Hey day, I shall mix your business with the kings.

Dra. No but you may let his majesty know my necessity.

Pra. Sir, sir, you must not confine me to your seasons, I tell you I will
collect mine own leasures.


Enter Veloups a Citizen. Ve. Master Orator, is it your pleasure I attend you
about my dispatches?


Pra. Sir, it is my pleasure you dispatch your self from mine encumbrance, I
tell you I am for instant business of the Kings,


Ve. Sir, I have borne mine attendance long.

Pra. Bear it till your bones ache, I tell you I cannot bear it now, I am for
new business.


Dra. Ve. Yet the old would be dispatched, it was first paid for.

Prat. If you be gentlemen do not make me mad.

Dra. Ve. Sir, our suits are of great weight.

Prat. If you be Christians do not make me an Atheist, I shall profane if you
vex me thus.

Enter the Lord Mechant. What more vexation? my Lord, my Lord, save your breath
for your broth, I am not now at leisure to attend you.


Me. A word good Mr. Orator.

Prat. Not a word I beseech your Lordship, I am for the Kings business, you
must attend me at my chamber.


Exit Prat. Me. Dra. Ve. And every where else, we will not leave you.

Exeunt. Pre. Now methinkes my master is like a horse-leech, and these suitors
so many sick of the gout, that come to have him suck their blood: O it is a mad
world.


Lol. Go to sir, you will never leave your crabtree similies; but pity of me
who have we hear?

Enter Alphonso. O it is the Lord Alphonso.

Alph. Mistress God save: nay your lip I am a stranger; and how does Mistress
Colloquintida, O you are an excellent seasoner of city stomachs.


Col. Faith my Lord I have done my best to make somebody relish your sweet
meats; but hark you my Lord, I have struck the stroke, I have done the deed,
there wants nothing but time, place and her consent.


Alp. Call you that nothing?

Col. A trifle, a trifle, upon her, upon her my Lord, she may seem a little
rough at the first; but if you stand stiffly to her, she will fall; a word with
you Mr. President.


They whisper. Alp. Mistress Prat, I am a soldier, and can better act my love
then speak it, my suit you know by your neighbor, my love you shall prove by
my merit, to both which my tokens have bin petty witnesses and my body shall
seal and deliver upon thee such a brave confirmation, that not all the Orators
in Sicill shall be able to cancel the deed.


Lol. Truly my Lord, methinkes you being witty should be honest.


Alph. Nay wench, if I were a fool, there is no question but I would be honest;
But to the purpose, say wench, shall I enjoy, shall I possess?


Lol. To enjoy my love, is not to possess my body.

Alp. Tut wench, they be words of one signification, and cannot be separated.


Lol. Nay then I should wrong my husband.

Alp. S'foot, thou should but do for him as he does for the whole world; why
an Orator were a needle name, if it were not to defend wrong: then wench, do as
he does, write by a president.


Lol. O my Lord, I have a husband,
A man whose waking jealousy suruiues,
And like a Lion, sleeps with open eyes;
That not a minute of mine hours are free
From the intelligence of his secret spies.
I am a very toward Danae
Through whose roof, suspicion will not let,
Gold showers have passage, nor can I deceive,
His Argus eyes, with any policy:
And yet I swear I love you.

Al. Death of affection, if thou love me, as thou say thou do,
Thou can invent some means for our delight.
The rather since it ever has been said,
That walls of brass withstand not willing minds:
And women when they are prone make love admired:
For quaint endeavors, come instruct thy wit:
And find some scale to our hie hight of bliss.

Lol. Then breefly thus my Lord.
To morrow does the Senate sit to judge,
Causes both criminal and of the stave;
Where of necessity my husbands place,
Must be filled by himself, because his tongue,
Must guild his clients causes, Now if you please,
All that self hour, when he is turmoil'd,
About those serious trifles, to vouchsafe
To visit me, his absence and my care
Shall give us liberty of more delight.
You know my meaning, and I am ashamed
My love should thus betray my modesty;
But make the use according to your fancy.

Alp. What hour assures his absence?

Lol. Eight is the latest time.

Alp. This kiss leave my faith with thee, farewell.
Thou Have given me double glory from thy breath,
Nothing shall lose me time but certain death.

Exit Alp. Pre. Truly Mistress Collaquintida, you are an excellent piece of
sweet gall.


Lol. Well sir, will you lead the way homeward?

Pre. To your bed chamber mistress, or your privy lodging.

Exeunt. Enter Philocles alone. Phi. Night clad in black mournes for the loss
of day,
And hides the silver spangles of the air,
That not a spark is left to light the world,
Whilst quiet sleep the nourisher of life
Takes full possession on mortality.
All creatures take their rest in soft repose
Save malcontents, and we accursed lovers,
Whose thoughts perturbed, makes us passions slave:
And robs us of the juice of happiness.
Dear Mariana, shapt in an Angels mould,
Thou thral'st my senses, and inflam'st my blood,
Love, power, by wisdom cannot be withstood.
But see the morning star breaks from the East,
To tell the world her great eye is awak't
To take his journey to the western vales:
And now the court begins to rise with him.
Here passes over the stage a Physician, a Gentleman Usher, and a waiting
maid. There goes the Physician, the waiting maid,
And a fine straight legged Gentleman Usher,
The preface to a kirtill all puff past.
One that writes sonnets in his Ladies praise,
And hides her crimes with flattering poesy.
Enter Marian. But peace amazement, see the day of life,
Natures best work, the worlds chief paragon.
Madame one word.

Ma. I; so now farewell.

Phi. You do mistake me.

Ma. That your self can tell,
You ask't me one word, which I gave, said I,
A word of least use in a virgins breath,
Urge not my patience then with fond reply.

Phi. Dear Lady lend an ear unto my voice
Since each were made for others happiness:
My tong's not oild with courtly flatterings,
Nor can I paint my passions to the life;
But by that power which shapt this heavenly form,
I am your bond-slaue, forced by loves command,
Then let soft pity with such beauty dwell.
Madame I love you.

Ma. As I am a virgin so do I.

Phi. But Madame whom?

Ma. My self, no Lady better.

Phi. But will you love me?

Ma. No by my chastity.

Phi. I hope you do but jest.

Ma. Nay i will keep mine oath,
Men shall abandon pride and jealousy
Ere i will be bound to their captivity,
They shall live continent, and leave to range,
But men like to the moon, each month must change.
Yet we must seek that naught their sight displeases,
And mix our wedlock sweetes with loathd diseases:
When we consume our selves and our best beauty,
All our reward is why, it was but our duty.

Phi. Judge not so hard of all for some offenders;
For you are subject to the self same crimes,
Of men and women always have been had
Some good of each.

Ma. But for the most part bad:
Therefore i will have none at all but die a perfect maid.

Phi. That humor like a flower soon will fade,
Once did mine own thoughts sing to that delight,
Till love and you reformd my barbarousnesse:
Therefore dear Lady, pity my wounded heart.

Ma. A Surgeon here for this loue-wounded man.
How deep's your vlcerd orifice, I pray you tell?

Phi. Quite through my heart.

Ma. It Is strange and look so well;
Yet Ladies eyes have power to murder men,
And with one smile to make them whole again.
Achilles lance to a hair, but do you love me prince?

Phi. Deerer then my soul.

Ma. Would I could love you.

Phi. Madame so you may.

Ma. As yet I cannot, therefore let me go.

Phi. O do not leave me, grant me but one request,
And here I vow by that diuinest power,
The salt-seas glorious issue, whose bright sphere
Rules my sick heart, and knows my chaste intent,
That if you please t'impose on me that task
Which neither men nor monster can atchieue,
Which even Angels have a dread to touch,
Deeds which outstretch all possibility,
S'foot more then can be thought, and i will effect,
Or else i will perish in the accomplishment.

Ma. Let your request fit virgin modesty,
And you obey your vow, I am content
To give your thoughts contented happiness,

Phi. It Is but a kiss I ask, a minutes joy.

Ma. Now Cupid help thee, is thy grief for this,
Keep thy strong vow, and freely take a kiss.

He kisses her. Phi. I have obtaind my heaven, and in this touch,
I feel the breath of all delitiousnesse:
Then freely give the sentence of my work,
Muster up all the engines of your wit,
Teach Juno rules beyond malitiousnesse,
What ear it be, i will die but i will perform it.

Ma. Thou shall not kill thy self, nor fight with monsters,
Nor bring the great Turks berd to show thy zeal:
Thy life thou shall not hazard for my love,
Nor will I tie thee to an endless task,
But even with ease, and gentle rangled knots,
Thou shall vntwind thy clew of miseries,

Phi. Let it have passage, madame give me my doom.

Ma. Then Philocles knit silence to my words,
And mark thy doom: for thus my strickter will
Loads grief upon thy vainer leuity.
Hence for the space and compass of one year
Thou shall abjure the liberty of speech,
Thou shall not speak for fully twelve months space,
For friend nor foe, for danger nor for death;
But live like air, with silent emptiness.
Break thou this vow, i will hold thee for a villain:
And all the world shall know thy perjury.

Phi. Be heaven and earth a witness of my vow,
And mine eternal silence, I am dumb.

Ma. Why so, now shall I not be troubled with vain chat
Or idle prate of idle wantonness:
For love I cannot, therefore it is in vain,
Would all my suitors tongues I thus could rain,
Then should I live free from faind sighs and groans,
With O take pity, it is your servant moanes,
And such harsh stuff, that frets me to the heart:
And sonnets made of Cupids burning dart.
Of Venus lip, and Iunoes majesty.
Then were I freed from fools and foolerie.
In May the cuckoe sings, then sheel'e come hither,
Her voice and yours will rarely tune together.

Exit Mariana. Enter Florio. Flo. Prince Philocles, the king would speak with
you:
Speaks louder and louder. Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you,
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you.

Philocles strikes Florio and fels him. Flo. The pox rot off your fingers for
this blow,
It is coronation day, through all my scull,
There Is such a fatal ringing in my brain,
Has woone the selt, has laid five fingers on;
But it was a knauish part of him to play so.
Hear me you Gods for this my open wrong,
Make short his fingers as you have his tongue.

Exit Flo. Enter Meshant alone: Me. It Is not man's fortune, envy or neglect,
Which makes him miserable, but it is mean fate,
Even sole predestination, a firm gift,
Fixed to his birth, before the world was made,
For were it otherwise, then within our lives,
We should find some distractions, errors change.
And other toies of much uncertainty:
But my mishaps are fixed so to my blood,
They have no sire but my creation:
The Queen out of suspicion that my love,
First set an edge upon the Kings desires,
And made him woo her with a victors sword,
Casts me from favor, seazes all my lands,
And turns my naked fortunes to the cold.
The King made proud with purchase of his wish
Neglects my sufferance for him, and ore looks,
The low-tide of my fortunes; lest my woes
Should speak my wrongs to his ingratitude;
The whilst those lords whose supple hams have bowed
To do me formal reverence, now despise
And slight me in their meanest compliments:
O it is a torment more then hell yet knows
To be an honest flatterer, or to live
A saint in Limbo, which that I may prevent,
I Will be nor best nor worst, but all indifferent.
But here comes a noble man, I must turn petitioner.
Enter Florio. My Lord, may I not see the king?

Flo. You may not.
His majesty is now down pressed with seriousness:
As for your suit it is with Prat the Orator.
I heard his highness give him a special charge
For your dispatch with favor.

Me. O but he does neglect,
And sleights me like his weak orations,
And by your Lordships leave, I do not think
His wisdom worthy of the conference.

Flo. Nay if you will correct the kings coin you are not for my conference,
Fare you well.


Exit Florio. Me. Why, and fare you well, S'foot this is more then strange,
That being grieved I may not say i am paind.
Enter Alphonso. But here comes another: Mine honorable Lord
May I not have some conference with the king?

Alp. You may not, business of greater weight
Imports both him and us: nay pray you cease;
As for your suit it is with the Orator.

Me. Yet methinkes twere meet

Alp. That you would rather trouble him then me.

Me. Its strange.

Alp. Its strange indeed, to see you wrong your ease.
I am not now for idle conferences, adieu.

Exit Alph. Me. Why this is court grace to men in misery,
And thus these taile-lesse Lions with their roar,
Affright the simple heard: O I could now
Turn rebel against their pride.
Enter Epire. But here comes the Duke:
My gracious Lord, vouchsafe to hear my griefs.

Epy. For Gods love cease your trouble, we are all
Troubled with griefs of stranger qualities.

Me. Words are no heavy burden.

Epy No, had I no other weight;
But we are all down pressed with other poise:
As for your suit it is referred to Prat:
And he must give you fair dispatch with favor;
Which if he slight for envy or for bribe,
Repair to me, and I will not forget
To give you ease, and chide his negligence.
Mean space I pray you leave me, for we all
Are troubled now with greatest miracles.

Me. Your grace does do me comfort, and I will
Study with service to deserve your favors,
And so I take my leave.

Exit Mershant. Enter 2 Doctors. Epy. Your own content^ts follow you.
Now gentlemen what news within, can this dumb wonder speak?
Have you cut off those lets that tied his speech.
And made your fame to sound through Sicille?

1 Doct. All hopeful means that man or art can find,
Have we made trial of, but it is in vain:
For still my Lord, the cur'es invincible.

2 Doct. Those Organs nature gave to move the tongue,
He fully does possess as well as we;
Which makes us think his sudden apoplexe,
Is either will, vow, or a miracle.

Epy. I should think strangly, had we strange things on earth;
But wonders now are most familiar:
But here comes his majesty, now we shall see
If this dumb beast can speak before the king.

Cornets, and enter Cypres, Queen Philoclas, Mariana and attendants. Cyp. My
best of friends, my dearest Philocles,
Thy griefs run in my spirit, make me sad,
And duls my sense with thine affliction.
My soul with thine does sympathize in woe,
And passion gouerns him that should rule all.
What say our Doctors is there no hope of help?

1 Doct. No hope my Lord, the cure is desperate.

Cyp. Then I am king of grief, for in his words
Found I more music then in quires of Angels,
It was as silver as the chime of spheres.
The breath of Lutes, or jove's deliciousness:
Next to my Queen, he is my joy on earth:
Nor shall the world contain that happy good
Which with my tears I will not woo for him.
My Lord of Epyre, let it be straight proclaimed
Through all the cities in our kingdoms verdge,
That who so will avow to cure this prince,
And bring his work to wished effectualnesse
Shall have ten thousand crowns and our best love;
But if he fail in his great enterprise,
His daring is the loss of present life,
Since no man hitherto could do him good,
The next shall help him or else loose his blood.

Epy. Your Majesty shall have your will performd.

Ma. Not all so soon dear brother, what if a woman now
Should turn Aesculapius and restore
This dumb Hypolitus? nay do not look strange,
I dare auow and undertake the cure.

Epy. You sister, are you in your wits?

Ma. Faith of the out side of them brother, yet a womans tongue
Whose burden still is superfluity,
May lend a man an ages complement.

Cy. Madam I would not have you with the bark
Play your self into day net, this great cure,
I fear is far beyond your Physics help.

Ma. My Lord, you know not how Apollo loves me,
I have been thought as fair as Oenon was,
And dare be bold to claim this miracle.

Cy. Mariana attend, glory and ruin compass thee about
This hand shall raise thee to a golden throne,
And grace thee with all styles of dignity;
This cast thee down.
Lower then lives misfortune and orewhelme
Thy beauties with thy grave, perform be great,
Fail and be worse then worst calamity.

Que. Stay gentle friend, my love does bid thee stay,
Attempt not, and be safe from misery.

Epy. Sister you shall not graspe with mischief thus,
My blood does challenge interest in your ill,
And I conjure you from this desperatnes.

Ma. Brother content your self, words but augment our strife,
I will perform or else my pawn's my life.

Cy. Proceed fair virgin.

Ma. Vouchsafe me priuacy: now Venus be my speed,
Speak gentle Philocles, thine oaths bond I untie
And give thy vows a free infranchisment,
Thy well kept league has showed thy strength of truth,
And does confirm me in my vertuousnesse:
Thy martyrdom and sufferance is too long,
And I restore it to new liberty.
Then speak my Philocles, speak gentle Prince
To her whose love respects and honors thee.

Cy. How now, what virtue from thy charms?

Ma. No hope is left, dear Philocles regard my miseries.
Untie that wilful let which holds in speech,
And make me happy through thy noble pity.
I see the face of mine ill shapt contempt,
Where like with like has quit most injury:
Then speak my Lord, utter one Angel breath
To give me joy, and save me from strange death.
What not a word, has this small silence brought
An utter detestation to thy speech?
Will thou nor hear, nor speak, nor pity me,
The gentle Gods move thee to more remorse.

Cy. What, wilt not be?
Fond maid thou have drawn affliction on thy head,
And thrald thy self to worst calamity:
Till morrow sun thy incantations use,
But then effectlesse, all hopes desperate,
Were thou my bosom love thou die the death,
Best ease for madness is the loss of breath.

Exeunt all but Phi. and Ma. Ma. O Philocles I am no courts disgrace,
No cities Prostitution, countries shame,
Nor one shall bring Troys fire unto thy house,
Turn not away hard hearted Mirmidon,
See, on my knees I Will follow thee in court,
And make the world condemn thy cruelty:
Yet if my tears may mollify thy heart,
Receive them as the floods of strangest rides,
Turn not thy face from her that doates on thee,
Love now has made me subject to thy will,
And pale disdain has taken revenge on me.
Behold my nerves I Will wear upon this earth,
And fill this roof with lamentations.
What do thou smile, has fury so much sway
As even to banish poor civility?
Then be thy self, and break thine itching spleen:
For I disdain thy ransomes victory,
Life thou art weary brought, welcome my death,
Sweet because wished for, good because my choice:
Yet when I am dead, this of me shall be said,
A cruel Prince murdered a loving maid.
And after ages to th'unborne shall tell,
Thy hate, my love, thy envy and my hell.
Nay do not speak I charge thee, go let nothing move thee,
Death is my glory, since thou will not love me.

Exeunt. Act. 3.
Scena. 1. Music.
Enter the Duke of Epyre and Alphonso. Epy. Grief which controles the motions
of our thoughts,
Raines in my blood and makes me passions slave,
My sisters misery torments my soul,
And breaks my gall when I but think of her:
She was bewicht with spelles to her misfortune,
Or else borne hapless under a lowering star,
And it is her fate to be thus miserable:
O Philocles had thou no other scale
To mount thy heaven but by our miseries,
Must all the noble fame of our great house
Waste down her royal pillars to make steps
For thee to climb to glory? well I see
Thou plots our shames in thy great dignity.

Alp. Patience great Lord, me thinks these ill raisd storms
Have not more violence then may be borne,
Come we will both go sue unto the King.
We there will kneel and pray eternally,
And never rise till he remit his dome:
It shall be so, I will unto the King,
To beg great favor for a small offense:
But if she die for this, then King take heed,
Thee and thy fortunes by this hand shall bleed.

Exeunt. Enter Chyp, Shauenig and others with a Scaffold. Chy. Come my hearts,
lets make all things ready for the execution, here is a maiden head must be cut
off without a featherbed.


Sha. Its a sign she deals with sharp tools and a cruel heads man.

Chy. If I had been her judge, she should have been tossed to death in a
blanket.


Sha. No, I would have had her smothered in a featherbed.

Chy. They say she would not plead at her trial.

Sha. No that's true, for she had a great desire to be pressed.

Chy. And I have known some of her sex, have got that favor to be pressed for
speaking.


Sha. Then she was unwise to hold her tongue being a woman.

Chy. What is her crime that she must loose her head?

Sha. Because she lived honest, contrary to the statute.

Chy. There is a great number of my neighbors wll never suffer for that fault.


Sha. No nor thou neither if the truth were known, for my part I shun that
danger.


Chy. I think we are all out of danger of the law for that crime.

Sha. I know I am free, for I am a knave if I have not forgot what wench had my
maiden head.


Enter Florio. Flo. Make room there, his Majesty is coming to the execution.

Chy. Come, now all things are ready: lets away.

Exeunt. Enter Epyre and Alphonso. Epy. Mercy is banished courts, the King like
flint,
Hardens his royal temper against our plaints,
And makes our woes most unavoidable.
What inauspicious star raignd at her birth,
That heaven thus frowns upon her misery;
And my good Lord, now innocence must die.
As white as vntroade snow, or culuer down,
Kings words are laws, and cannot be withstood;
Yet it is false greatness, which delights in blood.

Alph. Patience my Lord, I do not think this ill
Is yet so big as unrecoverable.
The king does hold you in most choice respect,
And whom kings love, they study to oblige.
Then call your reason home, make not this civil ware,
To suffer makes woes lesser then they are.

Epy. How well the sound can salve the sicke-mans grief!
But O how ill he can digest his pills!
O my good Lord, you shall not lose a sister,
That is the joy and comfort of your breath,
It Is not your blood shall issue from her wound,
But mine that runs in rivers from her tears:
And rounds my face in her calamity.
Well, let her perish, since her soul is clear,
And for her death, i will make a massacrie.

Enter Cypres, Queen, Philocles, Mariana bound, a guard of halberts and an
Executioner. Cyp. Your suits are bootlesse: for my vows have glewd
And closd mine ears that they retain no sound
Of your entreaties, and even now the time
Does run upon his latest minutes, and
Save but by speech, there is no recovery.

Qu. Have mercy good my Lord, O let my tears intrude
Betwixt your vows and her calamity.
In her you take from me my best of life,
My joy, my comfort and my play-fellow.

Cyp. Content you madame, for my vow is past,
And is like fate still vnreuocable:
Ascend poor model of calamity.

Ma. As lightly burdened with the weight of crimes,
As spotesse infants, or poor harmless lambs,
Thus I ascend my heaven, this first step lower,
Mounts to this next, this, thus and thus has brought
My bodies frame unto its highest throne;
Here does her office end, and hence my soul
With golden wings of thought shall mount the sky,
And reap a palace of pure sanctity.
Farewell my soueragine, madame within your thoughts
Make me a tomb, and love my memory.
Brother farewell, nay do not mourn my death,
It is not I that die to spot our house,
Or make you live in after obloquy.
Then weep no more, but take my last adieu,
My virtues not my faults preserve with you.
Lastly, to you that are my last of hope,
Nay do not hide your eyes, I love them still:
To part friends now is greatest charity.
O be thy days as fruitful in delights,
As Eden in choice flowers, thine honors such
As all the world may strive to imitate.
Be master of thy wishes: only this,
When the sad nurse to still the wrangling babe,
Shall sing the careful story of my death,
Give me a sigh, from thy hearts purest breath:
And so farewell.

Exec. Madame kneel here, forgive me for your death.

Ma. With all my heart, thou art but laws poor hand,
Thus to my death I bow, and yet arise,
Angels protect my spirits in the skies.

He offers to strike. Phi. Hold, or thine own hand shall be thine own
destruction.

Cyp. Never did music sound with better voice.
Unbind the Lady.

Flo. The fear of death has brought her to a swound.

Cyp. Endeavor her recovery.

Epy. Sister, dear sister call thy spirits back;
Sister, O sister, hearken to my woes,
Recover breath and live with happiness.

Qu. She stirs, give way to air that she may breath.
Speak Mariana, thy woes are cancelled:

Ma. You are not charitable unto my moanes,
Thus to afflict me with a double punishment:
One death for one poor fault might well suffice,
They are most wretched who twice lives and dies.

Phi. Madame to save your life I kill my soul:
And speckle that which was immaculate.
Black perjury that open eied disease,
Which is the plague sore of society,
Brands me with mischief, and protests I hold
Nothing within me but unworthiness:
And all these ils are your creation.

Ma. Which to wash off; lo here I yield my self
An humble sacrifice to love and thee:
All my best hopes, my fortunes and my love,
My faith, my service, and my loialtie,
Shall as thy slaves attend on thy commands,
And make me famous in my suffrages.

Cyp. Receive her Philocles, for it pleases us.

Phi. But not me my thrice royal sovereign.
I Will rather wed a sooty blackamoore,
A Leaper, monster, Incubus or hagge,
A wretch deformd in nature, loathed of men
Then her that has bemonster'd my pure soul,
Her scorn and pride had almost lost her life,
A maid so faulted, seldom proues' good wife.

Qu. What is the reason you not love her now,
And were so passionate in love before?

Phi. Not that I love her less, but rather more,
Run I this backward course; only my vow,
Since vnperform'd craves satisfaction;
Which thus I reconcile, when this fair maid,
Shall with as strong a love, as firm a zeal,
A Faith as constant, and a shame as strong,
Requit my care, and show as ample proof
In mine extremes, as I have in her death,
Then will I love, enjoy and honor her.
Till when, I will not think a loving thought;
Or give the easy temper of my mind
To loue-sicke passion, or delitiousnesse.
Only with those which do adore the sun,
I Will give her all respect and reverence,

Ma. I am well pleased, and with a doubtful foe,
You have good reason thus to capitulate,
Then hang your colors forth, exte^d your thought
Muster your strongest powers, of stricktest wit,
And when your reasons best artilleries bent
Love not my love, if it be not excellent.

Cyp. I have not seen a war breed better wit,
Or passion draw on more delightfulness:
Proceed in your contention, for we boast,
That love is best, which is approved most.
But now to revels, since our tragic scene
Is turned to comicke mirthfull constancy;
In stead of mourning we will dance and banquet
And fill our empty veins with all delights:
For often we find that storms and sorrows prove
The best forerunners of a happy love.

Exeunt all but Epyre. Epy. He will, but he will not, loves but cannot like,
Will and affection in this Prince are like
Two buckets which do never both ascend:
Or those star twins which shine not in one sphere.
O Philoceles, I see thy soul grows fat,
And feeds upon the glories of my same;
But I Will forestall thine Epileptique fits;
And by my plots breed thy destruction.
Revenge now rules as soueragine of my blood,
And others ruins shall advance my good.
Which once attaind to, I will prove ambitious,
Great men like Gods, are nere thought-vitious.
Now Philocles stand fast, King guard thy crown,
For by this brain, you both shall tumble down.

Exit. Enter Veloups and Drap. President sitting at his deske. Ve. This is his
chamber, lets enter, heeres his clarke.

Pre. Fondling, said he, since I have hemmed thee here,
Within the circuit of this Iuory pale.

Dra. I pray you sir help us to the speech of your master.

Pre. I Will be a park, and thou shall be my Dear:
He is very busy in his study.
Feed where thou will, in mountain or on dale.
Stay a while he will come out anon.
Graze on my lips, and when those mounts are dry,
Stray lower where the pleasant fountains lie.
Go thy way thou best book in the world.

Ve. I pray you sir, what book do you read?

Pre. A book that never an Orators clarke in this kingdom but is beholden
unto; it is called maids philosophy, or Venus and Adonis: Look you
gentlemen, I have diverse other pretty books.


Drap. You are very well storde sir, but I hope your master will not stay long.


Pre. No he will come presently.

Enter Meshant. Ve. Who have we here? another Client sure, crows flock to
carcasses; O it is the Lord Meshant.


Me. Save you Gentlemen; sir is your master at any leisure?

Pre. Here sit thee down where never serpent hisses,
And being set i will smother thee with kisses.
His businesses yet are many, you must needs attend a while.

Me. We must attend, vm, even snailes keep state
When with slow thrust their horns peep forth the gate.
We must attend, it is customs fault not mine
To make men proud, on whom great favors shine,
Its somewhat against my nature to attend.
But when we must, we must be patient,
A man may have admittance to the king
As soon as to these long roabes, and as cheap.
Come gentlemen shall we walk?
Thus are the pauement stones before the doors
Of these great tongue guilt Orators, worn smoth
With clients dancing for them.

Ve. It Is strange to see how the world waits upon them, therein they are the
only men now.


Me. O only; they of all men in request.
Your physician is the lawier for your health:
And moderate unruly humors best.
Others are no body compard with him:
For all men neglect their health in regard of their profit.

Dra. True, and that's it makes these men grow so fat,
Swell with rich purchases.

Me. Yea with golden fees,
And golden titles too, they can work miracles,
And like creators, even of empty nothing
Erect a world of goodly livings, fair demeanes,
And gallant manors, heapt one on another.

Ve. They gain indeed excessiuely, and are not like us citizens
Exposed to hazard of the seas and traffic.

Me. Why here is a fellow now, this Orator
Even Prat, you would little think it, his father was
An honest proiner of our cuntry vines;
Yet he is shot to his foot-cloath.

Drap. O he is; he proind him well and brought him up to learning.

Me. Faith reasonable learning, a smattring in the Latin tongue,
A little Rhetoric, with wrangling sophistry,
Were his preparatiues unto his art.

Ve. After these preparatiues (if you call them so)
The physic wrought well for a few years practice,
Brought him in wondrous credit, and preferments
Came tumbling in: O such a sudden rise,
Has fortune for her minions, blame him not then,
Though he look high on it.

Me. Nay for his pride, of weaker souls tearmd state,
It hurts none but himself.

Dra. Yet to my seeming it is very strange,
That from so base beginning, men can breath
Such soaring fames.

Me. Srange; it is not strange a whit,
Dunghils and marrish bogs, dart store of vapors,
And viscous exhalations, against heaven,
Which borrowing luster there (though basly bred)
Seem yet like glorious planets fairest stars:
To the weak eyes of wondering ignorance,
When wise men know they are but Meteors.
But here comes the Orator.

Enter Prate. Prat. What President I say, come and attend me to the senate
house.

Pre. I am ready sir, if you have Copia verborum, I have Copia rerum in a
buckram bag here.


Prat. Your Lordships pleasure.

Me. Master Orator, it is not unknown my suit

Prat. Nay your Lordship must be brief, I not attend
The shallow sleight of words, your suit, your suit.

Me. The restoration of my lands and honors.

Prat. They are confiscat.

Me. My lands confiscat, and my body free?

Prat. My Lord, my Lord, the Queen's more merciful.

Me. Sir, you forget my place.

Pra. Sir you forget your faith,
It Was known unto the Queen, the state and us,
Your malecontented spirit, your disease in duty:
Your diligent purturbance of the peace:
Your passages, occurrences and --

Me. Sir.

Prat. Sir me no sirs.
Do not I know you were the chief of those
Which raisd the wars in Sicill? and long since
Wrought in the kings loves bloody business.
Did not you hold fair quarter and commerce
With all the spies of Cypres? fie I am ashamed,
Blind impudence should make you be so bold,
To bear your face before authority.

Me. But hear me.

Pra. I will hear no reply, go home, repent, pray and die.
Come Gentlemen, what is your businesses?

Ve. Your confirmation to his highness grant, touching our trade with Spain,
in which if it please you to assist us, we have a thousand crowns which shall
attend you.


Pra. O I have you in my memory, the suit is great:
And I must squeisse forth more then a thousand crowns.
Well attend me to the senate, you shall have fair dispatches

Exeunt all but Meshant.. Me. I not attend the shallow sleight of words,
Go home repent, pray and die.
Excellent precepts for an Orators chamber.
Where speech must bath a handful deep in gold,
Till the poor giuers conduit being dry,
The wretch goes home, does curse, repent and die.
It is thy counsel Orator, thy tale breath
Good only but to season infamy.
From this reproach, this incarressing humor
Has taught my soul a new philosophy.
I will go home and there repent all good
Done to thy name or thy profession.
I will go home and there new frame my self
More thirstily pernicious to thy state,
Then war or vnabated mutiny.
As for my prayers Orator, they are for thee;
Thou have a pretty, lovely, witty wife:
O may thou live, both to be known and know
Thy self the greatest cuckold in our land;
And yet not dare to amend or greiue at it.
May thou embrace thy shame with thankful arms,
Hug thy disgrace, make thy black poison wine,
And cap and crouch to thy dishonor,
May thy remembrance live, upon my knees I pray,
All night in belmens mouths, with Pasquill in the day.

Enter Alphonso vnbrac't. Alp. Day be my speed, night shall not cloak my sin,
If I have naught to do, its by the Sun,
The light gives leave to all mine Idleness.
Quick business and open eyes cease on mine orator,
Whilst I create him horny presidents.
Enter Coloquintida. But heeres my bed broker. Now my great armefull of good
intelligence, where is my Mistress?


Co. Fast locked in her bed with a close ward to devour thee my brave
Paraquito; but hushed no words, there is a calm before the tempest.


Alp. Tut, tell me of no storms, but direct me to her bed chamber, my noble
firelock of a flesh pistol.


Co. Follow thy colors my brave worthy, mount up thy standard, so enter and
prosper.

She puts Alph. into the Orators house. Thou have a rich room, safe locks,
sweet sheets, a choice armefull, with o the rare, rare thought of imagination.


Me. What Is this, what is this, does this Lord Alphonso turn the
Orator to an Antilop? it is more then excellent,
And from the juice of this despite I suck
Delight more great then all my miseries,
Observe, dear eyes observe.

Co. Nay go thy way for a Camel or a Camelion, thou may compare with all
Europe, Afric and Asia, and one that will change tricks, though thou were
worthy to be schoolmaster either to Proteus or Aritine: what an excellent gift
did God give unto man when he gave him woman, but how much more when that woman
was made fair? but o the most of all when she had wit to use every member of
her creation. Well I Will stand to it, theirs nothing but beauty, use and old age
that puts weomen of my rank out of request, and yet like old bucklers though
few of your gallant cauileres will wear us, yet many of your stale Ruffins
will employ us, and that's our comfort still.


Me. Was ever heard a baude more damnable?
A very mountebanke of wench flesh, an Emperick,
A dog-leech for the putrefied sores,
Of these Iust-cankerd great ones, O I could
Even mad my self with railing at their vices.
Prate knocks at the door. But hark one knocks, O for the orator,
Heavens I beseech thee, O for the orator.

Co. How now, who knocks so rudely at the door?

Pra. It Is I I say, open the door, I am in have.

Me. It Is he, just heavens it is he, fore God the orator.

Co. Soul of my bawdie office, how are we betrayed,
Anon, anon sir, what Mistres Prate I say?
Arise for shame, your husbands at the door,
I come, I come, Lord God how dull you are
When danger's at your heels, rise quickly.

Pra. Open the door, or I will break it open.

Co. I come, I come, I think he is mad with have,
What John, what Thomas, Robert, where is these knaves,
What Julian, Mary, Sislie, near a maid within.

Lo. For Gods love stay, i will find the key straight way.
Enter Lollia and Alphonso in his shirt. O mistres Coloquintida, what shall
become of us?

Co. Nay I am at my wits end, and am made
Duller then any spurgald, tired Jade.

Alph. Sfoote if he enter, I will break his neck.

Lo. Not for a world dear love, step into my closet.

Alp. Did ever slave come thus unluckily?

Lo. Nay now is no time for passion, good Lord in.

Exit Alph. and enter Prate. Co. Fie I have almost broke my heart with running.

Lo. How now dear husband, what has moved this have?

Pra. I think I was not blessed this morning when I rose: for through my
forgetfulness I have left behind me in my study the breuiates of all my causes,
and now the Senate is feign to dance attendance on my leisure, fie, fie, fie.


Exit Prate. Lo. Nay if he smell nothing but papers, I care not for his dry
foot hunting, nor shall I need to puff pepper in his nostrils, but see he
comes again.


Enter Prate, and stumbling at his wives bed, sees Alphonsos rich apparel
lying thereon. Pra. I think the Devil have laid his horns in my way.

Me. Yes, and if you had wit you might conjure him out of your wives closet.


Prate. Sancte benedicite, what have we here, has the golden snake cast his
skin upon my bed, go toe wife, I smell I smell, me thinks your plain rug
should not agree with this rich counterpoint.


Lo. Husband, either I have fitted you now, or else I shall never fit you
whilst I breath.

You often have told me, that like those of your rank,
Who both adorn their credits and them selves,
Yea even their causes with their costly clothes,
Your self in like sort would strive to imitate,
And now my neighbor here has brought this suite,
Which if you please to buy, it is better cheap
Then ere it was made by full five thousand crowns.

Prate. Say thou me so wench, a kiss for that in faith,
Fore God it is a delicate fine suite, rich stuff, rare work, and of the
newest fashion; nay if the Senats business were never so hasty, I will stay to
try it on, come, help good wenches help, so there, there there.


The Orator puts on Alphonsos apparel. Me. Sfoote will the ox put on the
Lions hyde,
He will, he will, it is more then excellent,
So guild the tomb which holds but rottennes,
Laughter I fear will burst me, look how he struts,
O God that ever any man should look
Upon this maumet and not laugh at him,

Prate. Fit fit: excellent fit as though,
The body it was made for wore my mould,
Wife I will have it, we will dispute no price.

Enter Velons. Ve. Master Orator, the Senate are set, and can dispatch no causes
through your absence, therefore they earnestly entreat your presence.


Pra. I come, I come, good friend go say I come,
And wife see that you pay for this suite, what so ere it cost.

Ex. Pra. Me. Not above making you cuckold, that's the most.

Lo. What is he gone?

Co. He is.

Enter Alphonso in his shirt. Lo. Why then come forth poor naked Lord.

Alp. What is he gone, may the Devil and his horns both follow him.


Lo. He is gone: but yet he has discovered your treason.

Alp. How?

Co. Yes, and in revenge thereof has vowed, that in this naked sort as you
are, you shall do penance through the City for your sin of unchastity.


Alp. I pray thee leave thy woman's phrase, and speak like a man, plainly,
plainly.


Lo. Then plainly thus, he is gone and has taken away your apparel.


Alp. Upon what accident?

Lo. This, when your negligence had left your clothes upon my bed, he espied
them, taskt me for the owner, I in excuse told him it was a suite brought by my
gossip to be sold, he straight like a child proud of a new coat, presently
puts it on, presently is sent for to the Senate, and at this present has left
you that the world may behold your naked doings.


Alp. I would it were washed in the blood of a Centaure, that when he puts it
off, his skin might follow it, but how shall I get to my chamber?


Lo. Truly I know not, except you will wear a smocks vpper-coate.

Alp. What a petticote, you mad me with your mirth.

Lo. Then seriously thus, as he has taken your clothes, you must take his, and
let the world know you have had more then fiddlers fare, for you have meat,
money and cloth.


Alp. Sfoote how shall I look in this Devils suite, sure I shall grow sick to
see my shape.


Lo. Well extremity must then be your physic, but come, you shall attire your
self in my chamber.


Exit Alp. Co. and Colo. Me. Are these the winding turns of female shames,
Loose woman's gamboles, and the tricks of sin?
And are we borne to bear these suffrages?
O he that's tide unto a brothell bed,
Feels his worst hell on earth, and may presume
There is no sickness like his pestilence:
Well, what the issue of this jest will prove,
My wit but yet conceiues and after time
Shall perfect it and give it liberty,
In such sort, that if it true fire strike,
A world of Apes shall study for the like.

Ex. Enter the Duke of Epire alone. Epy. My thoughts are troubled, Joy forsakes
me quite,
And all my meditations are revenge:
Ambition and fell murder join in me,
And aid each other to untwine a state,
And make whole millions prove unfortunate.
Now must I practice court art flattery,
And wisely temporise with blackest deeds:
I Will smile and stab now weep, then laugh, then frown,
And with sly tricks of state kill all suspicion.
Devils must seem like Angels, says ambition,
The blackest thoughts I Will study to excel,
Crowns and revenge have made men diue to hell.
My plot is current and it cannot miss,
Whilst wisdom winds me on the clew of bliss.
The King shall kill the Queen, that acted right,
I soon will turn his brightest day to night.
He Is simple, honest, and loves downy rest,
Then he must fall, it is policy in state
To hurl them down are blessed with happy fate.
Thus each shall scourge himself with his own rod,
Who is all policy, auowes no God.
Who is within there hoe?

Enter Florio. Flo. Did your grace call?

Epy. I did, where is the King?

Flo. He is in his privy chamber playing at chesse.

Epy. Go straight and tell him I must speak with him,
And say my business does import great haste.

Flo. I go my Lord.

Epy. Be a blessed Mercury, now mount thee up my spirit,
And show thy self a Politician,
Let slander rule thy tongue, envy thy heart,
And let destruction be thy period
Of what thou speakst; for this my maxim is,
But rule no heaven, and but revenge no bliss.

Enter Cypres, Florio and attendants. Cy. Here comes the King, my Lord we must
be private,
Remove your hearings from our conference,
Now speak my Lord, speak freely as to heaven.

Epy. First with my knee I kiss this prostrate earth,
And humbly beg, that which my tongue shall speak,
So it proceed from love and vassallage,
May bear a pardon or forgetfulness.

Cy. You have it, arise, discharge an open breast.

Epy. O my dread Liege, my speech will make you sad,
(And Kings do seldom relish their distastes)
And from that sadness such a storm will rise
As will even droune up all credulity.
O that my loyal heart could cover sin,
Or that my tongue inured unto grief,
Might lose his spleen ere it distemper you,
But love and mine alleagance bid me speak.

Cy. Then speak, and do not rack me with delay.

Epy. Women, why were you made for man's affliction,
The first that ever made us taste of grief,
And last of whom in torments we complain,
You devils shapt like Angels, through whose deeds,
Our forked shames are made most visible,
No soul of sense would wrong bright Majesty,
Nor stain their blood with such impurity.

Cy. Nay good Lord leave this Allegorick speech,
And give me knowledge from a plainer phrase.

Epy. Then plainly thus, your bed is pressed with lust.
I know you do not credit, nay what is more,
I know you hate me for my vertuousnes,
Your Queen behaues her like a curtezan,
I know you hold me for a vild imposter,
O foolish zeal that makes me be so fond
To leave my faith unto black censuring,
O she has sinned and done a double wrong
To you, to her and sacred chastity.

Cy. Duke thou art valiant, and with a valiant mind,
Slander is worse then theft or sacrilidge,
Nay more then murder, or the height of treason,
A step beyond the utmost plagues in hell.
Then thou which in that nature wrongst a Queen,
Deseru'st a scourge beyond their punishments,
Virtue should kill thee now.

Epy. Nay do, my breast is bare unto thy steel,
Kill me because I love thee and speak true,
Is this the merit of a Roman faith,
For this have I observed, pried in unto,
And searched each secret shift of vanity?
Nay pray you kill me, faith I Will patient stand,
Live still a monster, hold shame in your hand.

Cy. Speak a word more, a King shall be thy death.

Epy. Death is a slave to him that is resolud,
And my soul loathes this servile flattery:
Nor will I cover such intemperate sin,
But to the world make them and that transparent,
Unless your self will seek to right your self.

Cy. Thou have awakt me, and thy piercing words
Have split my sense in sunder: yet what ground ha?
Remains whereon to ground suspicion? a cuckold, cuckold

Epy. Your absence is the baud to her desires,
For their maskes, dauncings, gaming, banqueting,
Strange private meetings and all to^fes in love.
As wanton speeches to stir Appetite,
And all enchantments that inflame desire.
When you return, then all is hushed and still,
And she demurely walks like virtues Ghost:
Before your face she is like a Puritan,
Behind your back a blushes curtezan.

Cy. O I have drunck in poison at mine ears,
which makes my blood boil with vnque^ched flames,
But speak who is it that dishonors me?

Epy. He that you prize a line before your life,
I know you will not credit faith you will not.

Cy. Nay if thou cease to speak, thou hatst my life,
Take thou delight to kill me, then forbear,
Sfoote I am mortal man kill me, do do do.

Epy. Your best of friends, your dearest Philocles
Vsurps your bed and makes you a cornute,
A creature uncreate in paradise.
And one that's only of a woman's making.

Cy. Is It possible? can I give faith to this?

Epy. Nay be but patient, smooth your brow a little,
And you shall take them as they clip each other.
Even in their height of sin then dam them both,
And let them stinck before they ask God pardon,
That your revenge may stretch unto their souls.

Cy. To be a cuckold does exceed all grief.

Epy. To have a pleasant scoff at Majesty.

Cy. To taste the fruit forbidden from my tree.

Epy. But he shall loose his paradise for that.

Cy. The slave will make base songs in my disgrace.

Epy. And wound your reputation in strange Lands.

Cy. This injury sads all my ioies on earth.

Epy. Horns are not shund by wisdom, wealth or birth

Cy. Watch their close meetings, and the^ give us notice,
Mean space my love shall in thy bosom rest,
My grief is like my birth great, great and hie:
Give close intelligence, till then farewell,
Lust is the broadest path which leads to hell.

Exit Cypres. Ep. He Is gone with black suspicion in his heart:
And made his soul a slave to jealousy,
My plots shall drive him to his own destruction;
And I gain both revenge and dignity.
He shall no sooner put his Queen to death,
But i will proclaim her spotless innocence.
All men will hate him for so vile an act,
And mad with rage depose him from his crown.
Then I will be his death, his state does give,
Kings once deposd, long after must not live;
For like a Phoenix rare in jealousy,,
He shall consume himself in scortching flames,
Whilst from his ashes I a Phoenix spring:
Many renounce their God to be a king,
And i will be one to kill men with a frown.
None dare dispute the actions of a crown.

Exit. Act. 4.
Scen. 1. Music.
Enter Florio and Meshant. Florio. THe Queen is all for reuelles, her light
heart,
Unladen from the heaviness of state,
Bestows it self upon delightfulness.

Me. She follows her creation and her sex.
In my conceit it is as vile a thing,
To see the worthy model of a woman,
Who had not been at all; but to give life,
And stirring spleen to man's allacrity,
To sit orewhelmd with thought, with dark amuze
And the sad sullenness of a grieved dislike;
As to behold an old man in his furs,
Whose well spent youth, has given his age full strength
To be his countries best physician,
To caper to his grave, and with vain gaudes
Trick up his coffin, and upon his tomb,
To leave no knowledge but his leuitie.

Flo. It Is true indeed, and nature in her self,
Does give us still distaste in contraries.
And in my thoughts it is as base to see a woman man
As see a man a long roab'd feminine.

Me. Well, we forget our selves my Lord, What is the music ready? I pray you
command the guard to take their halberts in their hands, the Vshers should have
seen this room perfumed, in faith they are too negligent: here comes the
Queen.


Enter the Queen, Mariana, and waiting women, Philocles and other Lords, the
King disguised like one of the guard at the one end of the stage, and the Duke
so likewise disguised at the other end of the Stage. Qu. Loud music there,
and let the God of Harmony
Ravish our senses with delightful aires,
Tuned to the music of the higher sphere,
And with that mortal sign rarely show,
The joys in Jove's high court, to feast the Gods,
Making that place abound in happinsse.
Come noble Philocles I ceaze you first,
( Mariana there are choice of other Lords)
In gracing you, it is the king I grace.

Ma. Come honest Lord, it is you must stand to me,
The Queen in mine does challenge interest,
And I must fly for shelter to my friends.

Me. And i will be glad to be your couerture.

Ma. O no my Lord, not till the weather change.

Me. Well when you please, mean time you do me grace.

Qu. Nay my Lord, there is a Lady worth the handling.
Sound music then, fill earth with heavens pleasure,

Cyp. My Queen is out of time, though she keep measure.

Here they dance the first strain. Epi. Be luckie villainie,
Hit now the mark that mine ambition aims at
Me thinks I see that lean Italian devil, jealousy, dance
In his eyes: possess him spirit of rage,
Mufflle his understanding with black thoughts,
Let passion govern reason, falsehood truth,
Oblivion hide his age, hate kill his youth.

Epy. Thou dauncest on my heart lascivious Queen,
Even as upon these rushes, which thou treadest:
See how her motions wind about his eyes,
And does present to him her passions,
Now does her moistning palm glow in his hand
And courts him unto dalliance: she dies, it is just,
She Is slave to murder that is slave to lust.

Epi. Thou curse of greatness, waking ei'd suspicion,
Now help thy poor friends, murder and ambition.

The first strain ends. Qu. This strain contained a preticke change.
Proceed unto the next.

They dance the second. Cyp. Sin follows sin, and change on change does wait,
Thy change does change my love to cruel hate.

Here in this strain Mariana came to Philocles. Phi. Madam methinks this
change is better then the first.

Ma. I if the music would not alter it.

Qu. Methinks it is worse, come we will have another strain

They dance again. Phi. I pleased, let us proceed.

Cyp. Riuals in crowns and beds of kings must bleed,
Can that fair house contain so foul a guest.
As lust, or cloak inordinate and base desires,
Under so fair a couerture; O yes,
Women can blind our sense when we se best,
And set fair landskips on inconstancy,
Making us blind with seeing the dance ends,
Your sins are blackest, breach of love and friends.

Epy. Now to the king, blow rage till it flame hate,
A politician thriues the best in state.

Exit Epyre, and enters to the King again. Qu. Come sweet Prince Philocles,
Devise some new delights to shorten time,
This dullness has no relish in my sense,
It has no pith, and sloth in my conceit
Is but a tipe of pride in best constructions.

Ma. Madame i will stand, that a fair woman must be proud or else a fool.


Phi. I would feign hear that In Faith.

Qu. Thy reason wench, I pray the come disburse.

Ma. A woman fair is like a full blown rose,

Qu. Which holds the fair no longer then it grows.

Ma. A woman fair is like the finest gold.

Phi. Which kept from use is good though nere so old.

Ma. Nay good Lord leave a little,
She that is fair is wise, and ought to know it,
For to that end did nature first bestow it.
Now of this knowledge if we be not proud,
We wrong the author, and we are allowd
To rank with sensles beasts, since careless we
For want of pride detract our dignity.
Now knowing it, we know truth in the same,
Not to be proud of truth asks follies name.
This lesson still is read in beauties school,
She that is fair and humble is a fool:
For neither know she how to hold her good,
Or to keep safe the treasure of her blood.

Qu. a notable declamation.

Ma Nay madame by your leave,
Pride gives a luster to a woman's fair,
Things that are highest prizd, are ever dear.
Why is the Diamond the Saphyrs king,
But for esteem and rareness? both which spring
From the stones pride, which is so chaste and hard,
Nothing can pierce it, it self is it selfs guard,
Now what is pride? self love, our own esteem,
A strength to make us of our selves well deem:
From whence this maxim I collect among other,
Who hates her self can never love another.
And to conclude, man's appetite grows dull
To what it may have, empty hope is full,
To all our sex on earth, maid, widow, wife and bride,
They happy live, when they live with chaste pride.

Cyp. My Queen will speak as much for lust as she for pride, if the toy take
her.


Me. Your Ladyship sowes dangerous seed abroad.

Ma. But I hope my lord all grounds are not fruitful.

Qu. Well wench, shall be the proud woman's champion.

Ma. And i will defend them against all men, as at single tongue.

Me. I had rather fight with a giant, then you at that weapon.

Cyp. My Lord go forth, return in your own shape, say I am coming.

Epy. I go my Lord.

Exit Epyre. Cyp. I Will note their countenance when they hear of me.
Kings often see that which they would not see.

Qu. Dancing has made me weary, what sport is next?

Phi. What your highness will command.

Cyp. she will command you sir to play with her.

Enter Epyre. Epy. Madame his majesty is returned to court.

Qu. Nay then away with revels and with sports,
Lie hushed, and still this vainer idleness,
It now has lost his spleen, come Lords away.
My sun is risen, brings a brighter day.

Exeunt all but Cypres and Epyre. Cyp. Darkness is thy delight lascivious
Queen,
And thou would have thy sun pent up in cloud:
If I be he, O falsnesse did I for this,
In single opposition hand to hand,
Hazard my royal blood for thee to be
My greatest shame, the scandal of my blood,
Whilst rumor crowns me king of infamy?
But I will be revenged: watch gentle Lord,
When next I see them, they shall taste of death,
Such power has baseness over great defame
That monarchs cannot cover their own shame.

Exit Cypres. Epy. My plot yet holds a true proportion,
And I do see, an even way to rule,
A crown like a bold champion bids me on,
And fame shall chronicle mine enterprise:
The Queen being dead, I must oppose my self,
Against her tyrant husband, that's my claim
And with strong courage, stand the shocke of war:
If of my self I can withstand the King,
Then all the Land will flock unto mine aid, if not,
The king is Gods anointed, my head fits the block,
And that's the worst, yet future times will tell:
I sunk not slightly, for a crown I fell.

Exit Epyre. Enter Meshant, and a guard of watchmen. Me. Come on my masters,
you know the tenure of the kings command,
And what in this great business you must do,
Which is to keep him safe, and not vouchsafe
That any creature speak or visit him,
Till he be brought to the presence of the king,
You must not start for bounty nor for threats.
No though he say he is a noble man,
As it may be, he may prove mighty borne,
Yet what for that? you must perform your office
Or else expect to taste sharp punishment.

1 Watch. Tut, fear not my Lord, we that have had Cerberus office so many
years under a gate, are not to learn now to play either diules or tyrants,
let us but see him, and then take no care for his safety.


2 Watch. Nay he shall be put into safe keeping, for my wife shall take
charge of him.


Enter Alphonso in the Orators clothes. Me. It Is well deui'sd, see where he
comes,
He may not see my presence, think upon it,
Your charge is trusty, and of mighty weight.
Farewell.

Exit Meshant. 1 Watch. Fear not: come my ^arts, compass him about, and ceaze
on him all at once, like so many Ravens on a dead horse.


Alp. Now an eternal sleep, an apoplex, a swound
Ceaze on their senses, who in this disguise
Shall view or note my vile deformity.
I was bewitched with spells to my misfortune:
Or else star crossed with some hagges hellishnesse.
Sure I said my prayers, ris'd on my right side,
Washed hands and eyes, put on my girdle last;
Sure I met no splea-footed baker,
No hare did cross me, nor no bearded witch,
Nor other ominous sign, O then why
Should I be thus damn'nd in the devils nets?
Pst possible? this habit which I wear
Should become any man? now of my soul,
I loath to see my self, and willingly
I would even vomit at my counteneance.

1 Watch. Stand sir, we arrest you.

Alp. Arrest me, why I iniure no man but my self.

2 Watch. You are the more unkind, he that wrongs himself, will not stick to
wrong the whole world also.


1 Wa. Nay strive not for we arrest you by virtue of the Kings commission.


Alp. Well my masters be careful, you may mistake me.

2 Wa. Indeed it is no marvel you are so like other men.

Alp. Indeed at this time, I am hardly like one of Gods making.

1 Wa. Faith and I am sure you are no man of a good tailors making, you are but
peest work.


Alp. Well yet I may hap to prove a noble man.

2 Wa. A whoremaster or an unthrift, away with him, and let no man man
catachise him upon pain of my displaesure.


Exeunt Enter the Duke of Epyre alone Epy. Roll on the chariot wheels of my
dear plots,
And bear mine ends to their desired ^^kes:
As yet there is not a rub of wit, a gulf of thought,
No rockie misconstruction, thorny amaze,
Or other let of any doubtfulnesse;
As yet thy way is even smoth and plain,
Like the green Ocean, in a silent calm.
Blessed credulity, thou great God of error,
That art the strong foundation of huge wrongs,
To thee give I my vows and sacrifice,
By thy great deity he does believe
Falsehoods, that falsehoods self could not invent,
And from that misbeleefe does draw a course
To ouerwhelme even virtue, truth and sanctity.
Let him go on blessed stars, it is meet he fall,
Whose blindfold judgment has no guide at all.
But O these shadows have bewitchted long,
To threat and not to do, does malice wrong;
And see here comes the Queen.

Enter the Queen, Mariana and other Ladies. Qu. My Lord the Duke, your
presence and my wish,
Iumpe in an even line together: come we must to cards,
I have some crowns I needs must lose to you.

Epy. I humbly beseech your highness pardon me,
I have important business of the Kings,
Which does command mine instant diligence.

Ma. Brother, indeed you shall attend the Queen,
Another time will serve those state dispatches.

Epy. Sister content you, the affairs of state
Must give their best attendance on the times,
And great occurrents must not lose their minutes.

Ma. Now i will stand to it, that to be a states man or a lawier, is to be of the
most thanklesse occupation that ever was derived from humain invention.


Que. Why I pray thee wench?

Ma. Because they bestow all the laborious toil of the mind until they be
forty, that they may live imprisoned in a study chamber till they be
fourscore, only this worlds Mammon, which is great name and riches, like a
string between a gallie slaves legs, is the only ease of their fetters.


Que. A notable construction of a noble labor: but shall we not have your
company my Lord?


Epy. My service Madam, but my presence the King has imploid, only if you
please, I will send Prince Philocles to your Majesty.


Que. No creature better for his skill in play,
Is equal with our knowledge, good my Lord,
Send him to my privy chamber presently.

Exit Queen and Mariana. Enter Philocles. Epy. I will, and send affliction
after him,
And see where he comes, My Lord your presence has
Saved me much labor, and a little care,
I was in quest for your fair company:
The Queen my Lord entreats you earnestly
You will attend her in her privy chamber.

Phi. Unto what end?

Epy. Only to waste some time at cards with her,
The lasie hours stick heavy on her thoughts,
Which she would lose with some forgetfulness.

Phi. Faith, and play nere relisht worse within my thoghts,
I know not how, but laden heaviness
Draws me to be in love with melancholy.

Epi. The fitter for you with more light sports
To chase that blood consumer from your breast,
Who with a honnie poison does devour,
And kill the very life of liuelihood.

Phi. It Is true, and therefore shall your counsel tutor me,
Where is her Majesty?

Epy. Gone to her privy chamber where she does expect you.

Phi. I will attend her presently.

Exit Phi. Epy. Do, and I will attend thee to thy grave,
Poor shallow Lord, by much too virtuous.
Hoe, whose within there?

Enter Florio. Flo. Your graces pleasure.

Epy. Go tell his Majesty that I must speak with him.

Flo. I go.

Enter aloft to cards the Queen and Philocles. Que. Come my Lord take your
place, here are cards, and here are my crowns.


Phi. And here are mine, at what game will your Majesty play?

Qu. At mount saint.

Phi. A royal game, and worthy of the name,
And meetest even for Saints to exercise:
Sure it was of a woman's first invention.

Qu. It is not Saint, but Cent, taken from hundreds.

Phi. True, for among millions hardly is found one saint

Qu. Indeed you may allow a double game,
But come list for the dealing, it is my chance to deal.

Phi. An action most, most proper to your sex.

Enter Cypres. Cy. How now my waking dragon, thou whose eyes
Do never fall or close through Lethean sleep,
What is there a Hercules that dare to touch,
Or enter the Hesperian Rosaries?

Epy. Speak softly gentle Lord behold, behold
The silly birds are tangled in your snare,
And have no way to escape your punishment:
See how her eyes do court him, and his looks pay to her
love a double interest: fie fie, they are toe blame.

Que. What are you my Lord?

Phi. Your highness servant, but misfortunes slave.

Que. Your game I mean.

Phi. Nothing in show, yet somewhat in account,
Madam I am blanke.

Qu. You are a double game, and I am no less, there is an hundred, and all cards
made but one knave.


Epy. Mark that, of my life she means your Majesty.

Cy. True, I know she holds me as her varlet,
And that I am imperfit in her game,
But my revenge shall give me better place,
Beyond the hate of her foul impudence.

Epy. Nay good my Lord observe, they will confirm you better.

Qu. What Is your game now?

Phi. Four Kings as I imagine.

Qu. Nay I have two, yet one does me little good.

Phi. Indeed mine are 2 Queens, and one I Will throw away.

Epy. Does your Majesty mark that?
You are the King that she is weary of,
And my sister the Queen that he will castaway.

Phi. Can you decard Madam?

Qu. Hardly but I must do hurt.

Phi. But spare not any to confirm your game.

Epy. Would you have more plain proof of their foul treason?
They do not plot your highness death alone.

Cy. But others which they think depend on me.

Epy. My self and those which do you services,
They are bloody minded, yet for my self,
Were it not for your saftie, I could wish
You would remit and blot these errors out,
In hope that time would bring them to more virtue.

Cy. O then thou did not love me, nor thy faith
Took hold upon my scandals, fie I am mad,
Shamed and disgraced, all wit-stung, wisdomlesse.
Within there ho?

Enter Florio. Flo. Did your majesty call?

Cy. Go instantly, (nay do not look sad or pale,
Neither dispute with me nor with thy thoughts:
But as thou love thy life, effect my will)
Call all my guard, ascend the Queens privy chamber,
And in my name arrest her and Prince Philocles of treason:
Make no delay but in thy diligence
Show how thou do respect me, arrested once,
Convey them unto straitest prison: away.
Exit Florio. For you my Lord, go instantly prepare,
And summon all the Princes of our land
Unto an instant Parliament, where we
Will have them both condemned imediately,
Without their answers plaints or pitiousnes.
Since women's tears do blunt reuenges sword,
I will not see nor hear the^ speak one word.

Ex. Cy. Epy. Enter Florio and a guard aloft to the Queen and Philocles Flo.
Madam and Prince Philocles, in the Kings name I arrest you both of high treason.


Phi. He lies that says I ever knew the word.

Que. I pray thee do not affright me gentle Lord,
Thy words do carry death even in their sound.

Flo. Madam I am most sorry it is my fortune,
But what I do is by the Kings commission.

Que. Whence is that warrant grounded, or what is our treason?

Flo. I am his instrument but not his counsailor.

Que. Witness my tears that I am innocent.

Phi. Madam be patient, that we do not know,
We have no cause to grieve at, as for enuies toil,
Let her even break her own gall with desire,
Our innocence is our prevention.
Be cheerful Madam, it is but some villains sound,
Made only to amaze, not to confound.
And what must we do my Lord?

Flo. To prison are the words of my commission.

Phi. Then lead the way; he has of grief no sense,
Whose conscience does not know of his offense.

Act. 5.
Scene. 1. Music.
Enter at one door Epyre, at another Mariana. Epyre. HOw now mad sister, your
dear love is condemned,
A sweet adulterer.

Ma. How, condemd before their trial?

Epy. No they were condemnd by Act of Parliament.

Ma. I do not hold thee brother for a man,
For it is reasonlesse to mock calamity,
If he die innocent, thrice happy soul;
If guilty, weep, that man should so transgress:
Nature of reason thus much does importune,
Man should partake in grief with man's misfortune.

Epy. For him, if ere mine eyes weep, may they drop out
And leave my body blinder then my sense:
Pity my foe the ruin of my house,
My valors scandal, and mine honors poison!
No let him fall, for blood must still quench lust,
Law has condemd him, then his death is just.

Ma. Spit out that monster envy, it corrupts you,
And mildly hear me answer for my love,
What did he against you was not honorable,
Which you against him would not have gladly done?
Will you hate him for acting your own thoughts?
Can it be ill in him yet good in you?
Let reason weigh this difference then you will find
His honor poizes down his infamy.

Epy. Can thou love him that brought thee to thy death?

Ma. No like a God he made me with his breath.

Epy. Did he not win thy love and then reject thee?

Ma. His honor not his love does now neglect me.

Epy. Fond maid thy foolish dotage does mistake him.

Ma. Hell shall have mercy ere I will forsake him.

Epy. Farewell then sister, friend to my greatest foe,
Revenge strikes home, being ended with one blow.

Exit Epy. Ma. Prevention thou best midwife to misfortune,
Unfold this ugly monsters treachery,
And let his birth be ominous struck dead,
Ere it have being in this open world:
Loves commands nature, brother pardon me,
Thine envy di^s by my loves liberty.
Invention (heart of wit) possess my brain,
For treason is to treason her own bane.
And you bright heavens, now aid me in my plots,
That truth may shine through falsehoods leporous spots.
My life I Will hazard to redeem my love,
Firm constancy like rocks can never move.
Be bold then maiden heart in his defense
He saved thy life, thy life's his recompense.
My wit and hopes have furnished me with all
The helps of art, to bring forth treasons fall.
Now to the means: some say that gold has power,
To enter without force a gatelesse tower;
And I Will try that, which if it take fast hold,
I Will never blame them more that doat on gold.
Hoe, whose within there?

Enter Gailer. Ga. Who calls, what would you have? I thought you were a woman
you were so hasty: O Madam is it you? I cry you mercy.


Ma. My grief speaks loud sir, and my swift desire
Ore rules my tongue, makes it keep time with thought,
I long to see a prisoner in this ill built house.

Ga. What prisoner Madam?

Ma. The worthy Prince, the famous Philocles.

Ga. Madame I dare not, without especial warrant.

Ma. I have my brothers strong commission, hold there is gold.

Ga. This golden calfe is an excellent Idol; and sewe of my profession but
serves it this dumb god gives tongue to all men, wit to all me^, honor to any
man, but honesty to no man; and therefore as for honesty I mean not to deal
with so dear a commodity, but leave it to my better: Madam those stairs
direct you to his lodging.


Ma. I thank you sir.

Exit Mariana. Ga. This is a worthy Lady to give thus much for the bare sight
of a man in affliction, if he were at liberty it were nothing: but being as it
is, it is most bountiful, but it may be it is for the past hours of former
recreations, well let it be what it shall be, I am sure it was not that I
should hold this disputation: but see here she comes again.


Enter Philocles in Marianaes attire, and Mariana in his. Phi. Madame my soul
cannot consent to leave
Your life in this great hazard, nor can death
Carry such ugly shape as does the thought
That you are left in this extremity:
Indeed I will not leave you.

Ma. Will you grow mad? what shall your nobler spirit
Which is the school of wisdom grow so fond,
As to revolt from all our happiness?
Our plots you know, and how to manage cares,
Whose true events have true proportions.
Then dear Lord rest resolved, the Gailer over hears:
Live you with safety, most worthy maid farewell.

Phi. Farewell fair Prince; thanks M Iayler and a kind commend.

Gai. As much unto your Ladyship. So now I Will lock my doors.

Exit Mar. Phi. and Gatler. Enter Cypres, Meshant, Florio and attendants. Cy.
Is our commission, as we gave in charge,
Delivered ore to the Corigidors?

Me. It is, and with such strictnes and advice,
For speedy execution of the same,
That by this time I know they are in the way
Unto their execution, for the hour
Of death does run upon his latest minutes.

Cy. It Is well: for till their shameless lives have end,
There can no comfort creep into my thoughts,
Or ought save mifchief keep me company.
Why was I borne to this malignity
And lowness of base fortune: yet my place
Above the level of the vulgars sight,
O it is but to let me know thus much,
That those which ly within the richest graves
Were at the best but fortunes glorious slaves.
But see, here comes my shame.

Enter Corigidors, Queen and Philocles bound, and a guard of halberts with the
executioner. Que. My dearest Lord.

Cy. Pass and respect me not lascivious woman,
Thy tears are of the spears of Crocodils,
See how I stop mine ears against thy plaints,
And glue mine understandings from thy charms,
Nay call on him thou have offended most,
Mercy from me were worse then cruelty.

Qu. My dearest dread, my best best sovereign,
Whom I have nere offended but with zeal
And constant love, loyal and honorable,
Vouchsafe me though a Queen a subjects right,
And let me know for what offense I perish.

Cyp. For thine adulterat and monstrous lust,
Shameful and gross and most insufferable.

Qu. Who does accuse us?

Cyp. Our self, and our own soul that have beheld
Your vile and most lascivious passages.

Ma. O that my tongue would not betray my knowledge
Then would I amaze them all with mine assertions:
Madame, challenge the law.

Qu. My gracious Lord, since no desert in me,
Can merit your belief, nor that your eye,
Can rightly judge my pure complexion:
Yet as your handmaid, let me beg the right,
Due unto wretches from our countries laws.

Cyp. The tenure of the law you do demand.

Qu. That in the case of slander, where the proof
Proceeds as much from envy as from truth,
We are allowed our champions to defend
Our innocence, with a well ordered sword.

Cyp. I looked for this objection and allow it,
Nor am I unprovided for your best
And strongest hope in any victory; Lords attend in my Champion.

Here the noble men go forth, and bring in the Duke of Epire like a combatant.
Qu. Will you my Lord approve the Kings assertion.

Epy. Madame, although against the nature of my spirit,
And my first duty, bound to your allegiance,
Yet now compeld by duty and by truth,
I must of force become your opposite.

Qu. Thou art no true Italian, nor true gentleman,
Thus to confound the glory of thy judgment.
Has not that arm which now is armed against me
That valor, spirit, judgment and that worth,
Which only makes you worthy, stood t'approue
More then my self will challenge to my virtues?
And are you now basely turned retrograde?
Well, I perceive there is naught in you but spleen,
And times observance, still to hold the best:
Still I demand the Law.

Cyp. And you shall have it in the amplest manner. Sound cornets.

Here the cornets sound thrice, and at the third sound, enters Philocles
disguised like a combatant. Flo. There is a co^batant on the defe^da^ts part;
your majesty's pleasure.

Cyp. Give him his oath according to the laws.

Flo. Are the fair ends of this your warlike posture,
To prove the innocence of these two condemnd?
So help you Jove.

Phi. They are.

Cyp. Then give the warlicke signal to the fight.

Here the combat being fought, Philocles ouercomes the Duke. Phi. Thou art my
slave, either confess or die.

Epi. Did thou speak true, I would not sound a word
To save the world from cinders; yet that thou may
With more resolved fury murder me,
This I confess, it was I that only stird,
Out of strong falsehoods hate and jealousy
The kings eternal wrath, and made him think
Untruths, that even untruth would not suggest:
And all my malice sprung from that Prince Philocles.

Phi. No it was from me that still am Philocles.

Cyp. My Philocles, my Queen, O double pardon me,
My jealousy, his envy, and your virtues:
Are sprung from such impatient contraries,
I cannot reconcile them; yet O pardon me:
My faith in life shall make you recompense:
For thee rare Mariana; thou have wrought
A work of noble constant magnitude.
As for this monster, this my tempting devil,
Whose forfait life is witness to his shame:
I give his life and fortunes to the Queen,
She whom his malice would have brought to death,
Shall now be judge and Iurer of his breath.

Ma. In which commission, (madame) let it be inrold
He is my brother and my best of blood.

Qu. And only that is charter for his life:
Live envious Lord, more envious then thou art great,
Live to lament thy worst of wretchedness,
Live to repent, since this I certain know:
Thine own gald conscieuce will be thy worst woe.

Enter a guard of watchmen with Alphonso. 1 Watch. Come bring him away, thrust
him forward, though favor and a great purse were against him.


Cyp. How now, what tamult have we there?

2 Watch. And it please your majesty we have brought you here a slip a piece
of false coin: one that is neither stamped with true coin for his excuse, nor
with good clothes for his redemption.


Cyp. Alphonso, in the name of madness how comes this Metamorphosis? Nay stand
forth, discourse, if thou do lie, thou art mine enemy.


Me. Nay more, if thou stick in any bogge, and by a trick seek to wind out,
I will discover you.


Alph. This coniuration (believe it my Lord) shall make me leap out of all
fetters, and briefly thus I have long time loved the fair wife of the Orator;
and having no opportunity but his absence at the senate, I took that season:
he out of negligence, omitting his papers returned unseasonably, found me
insufficiently, and forced me to take sanctuary strangely, which howeuer I
purchased, yet he found mine apparel, and mistaken in the tenure, reached it
presently, put it on immediately: and now in the senate house is pleading in it
seriously.


Cyp. I cannot blame him, you having got so much within his inward garment.


Me. Of all which my Lord, I being (in a strict conceit) a baudy witness: and
having both from the Orators scorns and delays received many indignities;
though by this discovery to cry quittance with my proud enemy.


Cyp. And you have amply done, yet this jest,
So perfect does deserve more memory.
Florio, go bid the Orator attend us presently.
Exit Flo. And now to you Drap and Velous, I did
Refer you long since to the Orator.
Yet I note your attention: come there is
Some too close fisted hardness in your hearts,
You gripe too hard, your bribes will not disburse,
Come tell me truly, as you look for heaven,
What must you pay for your dispatches?

Dra. Ve. A thousand crowns we offered willingly.

Cyp. And will your suit avail with such disbursment?

Dra. Ve. It will, and we most richly satisfied.

Cyp. Will you bestow the money on our self,
We will see the business perfited.

Dra. Ve. With all our hearts, and be full joyed thereat, here are the crowns.


Cyp. You shall have your dispatches.
Enter Prat and Florio. See here comes the Orator, Prat come hither.
These Gentlemen whom long since I referd
To Your dispatches, are yet unsatisfied.

Prat. Alas my Lord the state,

Cyp. I know implores you, yet there is many minute^
May give your best cares leisure; come there is
Some odd disburse, some bribe, some gratulance,
Which makes you lock up leisure, come tell true,
What bribe must they give, what is your v^^^ost price

Pra. But five hundred crowns of my best conscience.

Cyp. Tut it is nothing, hold here is the coin,
And let them have their pattens presently:
Or look to loose both place and sovereignty.

Prat. Legions of devils haunt their diligence.

Cyp. Fie, I would not have a man of your high place,
Or for respect of wealth or base observance
In smallest things thus to neglect your credit.
Why look you my Lords, this Orator is not like others of his rank,
Who from their ganish and fantastic humors,
Go through the streets, spotted in peacocks plumes.
Wearing all colors, laces, broderies,
Sattans and silks, so antike garnished,
That when their gowns are off, you cannot find
In Italy a master shapt more nice.
But this fellow Prate, here is of another sort,
Clothed like himself, demure and soberly:
Nay you shall see him for a president.
Vngownes the Orator. Passion of mine eie-sight, who have we here?
This is Alphonso, there is the Orator.

Pra. Heart of impatience, I am then a Cuckold,
A scorn, a by word and a laughing stock.
What is my wife turned whoreand must her depth
Be sounded by the plumes of forrainers?
Well, the revenge that I will take for this my shame,
Shall make all whores hereafter dread my name.

Cyp. Not for thy life, not for my love I charge thee:
Thy wife is honest, chaste and virtuous:
Only this wanton Lord, with lust and come
Has much attempted, but preuaild in naught,
For proof see here the crowns he would have given
To Have purchased her beds honor but she would not,
Which I bestow on you for recompense.
Therefore as thou do hope my grace to find,
So to thy wife, be loving, gentle kind.

Prat. Your majesty may mould me to your pleasure

Cyp. I thank you and will quittance it.
Now Meshant, we restore to you your lands,
Your honors and near places, next our self,
To all that feel distaste in any sore,
We give to cure them, all our grace and favor,
Thus storms bring gentle sunshine, and our hands,
May after shipwreck bring us to safe lands.

FINIS.


