MARKHAMS METHOD OR EPJTOME: WHEREIN IS SHOWED his aprooued Remedies for all
diseases whatsoever incident to Horses, Oxen, Kine, Bulls, Calves, Sheep,
Lambs, Goats, Swine, Dogs of all kind, Conies, all sorts of Poultrye, all
Water-soule, as Geese, Ducks, Swans, and the like,) Pigeons, all singing Birds,
Hawks of all kind; and other Creatures serviceable for the use of man:

Divided into twelve general Points or Heads.

By GERVASE MARKHAM. Gentleman.



Printed at London by G. E. for Thomas Langley, and are to be sold at his shop
over against the (...)

TO THE RIGT WORSHIPFVLL AND his most dear respected friend Master JOHN MASSY
of Codington in Cheshire.
GOod Sir, He that much does, may much miscarry, because danger ever is the
Companion with labor: and in these days men's brains are so sickly and
subject to take surfaits, especially where either the feast is (in their own
conceits) too full, or the dishes not dressed answerable to their stomachs, that,
to be a Cook to please all men's varieties, were to ascribe a cunning hardly
bestowed upon Angels; from which consideration I have been many times induced
to have obscured this small and inrespeccted Epitome, as willing to hold from
mistaking minds (which poison with false construction) a benefit so good and
certain, as I know they will be fruitful in diuulging my dispraise, and
finding knots in smooth rushes, adding to my title, vain prate and
ostentation; But by many of my better friends, and some whose approved
wisdoms are worthy, and some whose known loves do and ever shall govern
me, I am enforced to disesteeme the vain battery of the envious, and boldly
publish this Treatise, which I doubt not but will be a general good to all
the whole Kingdom, for whose service I was only created. As for your worthy
self who was the first that ever beheld it, and to whose hands it flew before
it had taken any perfect or true form, as knowing how able you were both to
judge of the defects, and to crown the perfections, not a Gentleman in this
Kingdom of your rank going one step before you, either in love or knowledge
of Horsemanship: To whom I say but you should I send this my last Infant; to
be nourished and defended, since it pleased you to accept it with much love,
when it was unlikely of life any where but in your bosom. Then worthy Sir, let
me beseech you to take it to Protection, and whilst nothing but envy assaults
it, be you its constant guardian; But when either a stronger or better skill
proves ie vain, then leave it again to my self, and we will both dye
inrespected; till when, (which will not be whilst any thing is) at least not
whilst Men ride on Horseback, I will ever rest a faithful and true Cabanet,
full of your Goodness.

GERVASE MARKHAM.

To the old and new Readers.
THis is an Age, (gentle Reader) of much inquisition and examination of men's
printed works: neither is it in my conceit either unreasonable or unnecessary
that men should give account for their labors, especially where they make the
world believe they do the world a particular profit, for otherwise the world
might come to be cosened: Therefore for my self, thus me thinks I hear the
world say: Sir why load you thus both men's minds and the Booke-sellers
stalles with such change and variety of books, all upon one subject, as if
men were tied to your readings? me thinks the little Pamphlet you first
published, might have given satisfaction; To this I answer: that Pamphlet was
the milk of my first experience, drawn, not to nourish the world, but to give
a little satisfaction to a noble Kinsman I had, from whom a very corrupt copy
was stolen, and in printing without my knowledge; so that to shield both mine
own shame and the books, I was compeld to put it forth in that manner as it
went, and then, many judicious Gentlemen in the same art found faint in the
breefnes thereof, saying, that the scanting of my rules took away much
satisfaction from the young scholar, an that there was a lamenesse therein,
because I had not handled the whole members of the art, but here a finger and
there a toe, as I was led by mine own fancy. Hence it came I writ the great
Boohe Cauelorice, and in it omitted nothing in my knowledge appertinent to
Horsemanship: but by reason of a too greedy and hasty Booke-seller, and the
distributing of the work into the hands of many Printers, it was not only
exceeding falsely printed, but also most part of the book of cures left out,
which was such a maime to the book, that I was many years stird up by my
friends to repair that error; which I did by writing that book entitled the
Masterpiece, wherein I have set down every disease and every medicine, so
full and so exactly that there is not a farrier in this kingdom, which knows
a medicine for any disease, which is true and good indeed, but I will find the
substance thereof in that book yet this book did not satisfy my friends, for
they said though it was a work right good and necessary, yet the greatness of
the book and the great price thereof, deprived poor men of the benefit; and
that the multiplicity of the medicines, and the cost of the ingredients, were
such as poor men stood amazed at, and found that their beasts perished before
they could compass that should cure them: from hence only I have with much
labor and experience found out the Contents of this book, where with twelve
medicines, not oftwele pence cost, and to be got commonly every where, I will
cure all the diseases that are in Horses, whatsoever, and they almost 300. This
book I hope the price will not hinder, for it is determined only for the good
of the needful, to whose use if it prove as fortunate as it is faithfully and
justly set down, they will have cause to praise God and love me.

GERVASE MARKHAM.

A brief Preface of the nature of the Horse.
A Horse, of all the unreasonable creatures upon the earth, is of the greatest
understanding, having in them (as the Schole men affirm) a certain natural
instinct, not only of the knowledge of their riders, and keepers, but also of
their own generation and descent, knowing their Sires, and Dams, in such wise
that they will refuse (as Pliny says) to couple, or engender with them: they
are also of all creatures, the aptest to learn any motion, and the readiest to
obey their teachers, having a greater love to exercise then any other beast.
They are of infinite great courage and valor, taking an exceeding delight in
the wars, and (as some Schole-men affirm) have a certain foreknowledge of
battle, and will prepare themselves man-like for the same. They will mourn for
the loss, or deaths of their masters, and are so apt to endure labor, that
it is written of the horses of the Sama^rans, that they would gallop a hundred
and fifty miles end-wayes, without rest or stay: they ate naturally of long
life, and by choice keeping, have been brought to sum up fifty years; but
for thirty years it is much ordinary. The Mares are less lived, as till
twenty, or five and twenty at the most. They are of all beasts the most
beautiful of shape, they are fit for the saddle at four years of age, for
the wars at six, for the race at eight, and for hunting, or for extreme
matches, at ten or eleven: the females bear their Foales full eleven months,
and foale in the twelfth: the best time for their ingendring is in March at the
increase of the Moon, or in the middle part thereof, and the Mare foaleth her
foale standing: they are supposed to be so loving and kind to their
generation, that if a foale loose the damme, yet the other mares which are
milche, will of their own accord lend their teates, and feed or nurse up the
orphan foale. Horses are subject to more diseases then any other beast, for
they have full as many as belongs unto a man; and yet notwithstanding, all
those diseases may be cured by twelve medicines only, as you shall find by
reading of the sequel which follows.

How to cure all the infirmities in Horses, either inward, or outward, with
twelve medicines only, and all not worth twelue-pence.

The first point.
All these infirmities are cured by the first medicine following.

All Fevers in general. The pestilence. A Horse taken. The falling evil. The
palsy, or shaking evil. The night mare. Hyde-bound, All consumptions. The
breast grief. The anticor. All tyrednesse: The loathing of meat. Casting out of
drink. All surfeits. The hungry evil, Sick liver. Sick gall. Sick spleen.
Sick kidneys. The yellowes. The dropsy. Costiuenes in the body. The Botts.
All worms. Pissing blood. The mattering yard. Shedding of the seed. Falling of
the yard. Eating of hens dung. The falling of the crest.
The first Medicine.
If the horse have been brought weak by sickness, and that you find it
proceeds from some inward infection, or corruption of blood, you shall give
him in the morning fasting two spoonefull of the powder of Diapente, well
brewed and tossed to and fro in a pint of sweet wine, as Muskadine, or Malmsey,
and then ride or walk him up and down in the Sun an hour after: then set
him up very warm in the stable, and let him fast an hour, and then give him
such prouender as he will eat, and his hay sprinkled with a little water: But
if his sickness proceed from any cold cause, as from ouer-riding, and too
sudden cooling, or from washing when he was hot* or such like, then you shall
give the same quantity of Diapente in Sack, or other hot wine, in the same
manner, as aforesaid: But if his sickness be less contagious, or that wine is
not ready to be had, then you shall give the same quantity of the aforesaid
powder, either in a quart of strong Ale, or a quart of strong Beer, observing
all the instructions formerly declared. Now for this powder which is called
Diapente, or (of some) Horse Methridate, because it is a general Antidote or
preservative against al poisonous infection, you shall make it in this manner.
Take of Aristolochia rotunda, of Gentiana, of Mirrhe, of Bachilauri, and of
Ebori, of each a like quantity, beat them all together in a mortar to a very
fine powder, and then searse it till not any grossnes be left, and then keep
it either in a close pot, or in a bladder, and use it as before said when you
shall have occasion, and observe to do it diverse mornings together, if the
sickness be violent. Now for as much as this powder may many times be wanting,
or at least hard to come by on the sudden, therefore in case of such
extremity you shall take a good handful of Cellodine, roots and leaves and
all, and having picked and cleansed them, you shall take of Wormwood, and of
Rue, of each half an handful, boil these in a pottle of strong Ale or
Beer, till a full half be consumed, then strain it, and press the herbs
excedingly, and then dissolve into the drink almost half a pound of sweet
butter, and an ounce and a half of the best treakle: and being no more but
luke warm, give it the horse to drink in the morning fasting, and ride or
walk him an hour after it, then set him up warm, and let him fast an other
hour, then give him meat as aforesaid: and do thus diverse mornings according
to the greatness of his sickness. Now in this cure, you must by no means forget
to let the horse blood in the neck-veine, an hour or two before you give him
the first drink, and let him bleed till you see the corrupt blood change and
begin to look pure, to know which, you shall save the first blood, and the
last blood, in two saucers, and as they cool, they will easily show you the
difference. Now if your horse happen to fall suddenly sick under you, as you
travel, when there is no town nor help near you, then you shall presently
light from his back, and with a sharp poynted knife, or bodkin, or for want of
both, with a strong point tagge, you shall prick him in the roof of the
mouth amongst the bars, somewhat near to his uppermost teeth, and make him
bleed well, walking him foreward, and suffering him to champe and eat his own
blood which is very wholesome, and almost a present cure: Now if the blood
stanch of it self (as commonly it will) then you shall presently piss in his
mouth, and so ride him with all gentleness and ease home-ward, and being set
up warm, wash his mouth and nostrills with vinegar, and the next morning let
him blood in the necke-veine, and give him either of the drenches before
prescribed, and no doubt but you may hold on your journey without danger. Now
if in the pricking of the horse in the mouth, you either strike your knife too
deep, or else cut the vein in sunder, whereby you cannot stanch the blood (as
it many times happens) in this case you shall put some big round piece of wood
into the horses mouth (to keep him from biting) and then take a little of the
fine down of a Hares skin, or a Conies skin, or (for want of them) the
fine linte of any woollen cloth, and hold it hard to the wound and it will
stanch it, neither will it be lickt away with the horses tongue.

All these infirmities are cured by the second Medicine following.

All headache. All frenzy. The lethargy. The staggers. The posse. All coldes.
All coughes, or wet or dry. All shortness of breath. Broken wind. Rotten lungs.
The Glangers. Mourning of the chyne. Laxe, or loosenes. The bloody flux.
The second Medicine.
For any of these diseases of the head, or lunges, or other parts by them
offended, you shall in any wise first let the horse blood in the necke-veine,
and let him bleed exceeding well, that is to say, till you see the blood
change, and that corruption come to pureness, then stanch the vein, and take
of Assaefetida as much as a hassell nut, and dissolve it in a saucer full of
strong wine vinegar, and then take fine flax hurds and dip them therein, and
then stop the same hard into the horses ears, and with a needle and a thread
stich the tippes of the horses ears together, to keep the medicine in from
shaking forth* then take of the white cankerous moss, which grows upon an old
oak pale, or other oak wood, a good handful or more, and boil it in a
pottle of new milk till one half be consumed then strain it, and press the
moss excedingly, and being luke warm give it the horse to drink fasting in
the morning, and ride or walk him an hour after it gently, then set him up
warm, and having stood an hour, then offer him such meat as he will most
willingly eat, and in any wise sprinckle his hay with water, and thus do
diverse mornings together, according to the greatness of his sickness: but if you
shall perceive that he casts foul and filthy matter at his nostrils, then
you shall every morning as soon as you have given the drench, take of
Auripigmentum two drammes of Tussilaginis made into powder as much, then with
Turpentine work them to a stiff past, and make little round cakes thereof,
the compass of a groat, but much thicker, and dry them a little; then take a
chafing dish and coals, and laying one or two of these cakes thereon, cover
them with a tunnell, such as you tun wine or beer into bottles with, that
the smoke may ascend through the same: then having made the horses head fast,
put the smoke to his nostrils, and perfume him well with the same, and though
at the first he be somewhat coy to take the smoke, yet having once felt the
smell thereof, he will take such delight therein, that he will of his own
accord thrust his nose to the same: as soon as you have perfumed your horse, you
shall ride him forth till he begin to sweat, and then bring him home and set
him up warm, and having so stood an hour or more, then give him meat as
before said, but by no means let him drink any cold water, either in his
sickness or out of his sickness, but when you may ride him after it, which if
either weakness, leisure, time or place do hinder you to do, then you shall
heat a pottle of water on the fire scalding hot, and put it into a gallo^ or
two of cold water, so that it may only take the coldness away* and then cast
a handful or two of ground malt or wheat branne into the same and so give it
the horse to drink.

All these infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.

Impostumes in the Ears. The Vines. Ulcers in the nose. All wens whatsoever.
The Colt evil. Sweld stones. Incording or bursting.
The third Medicine.
For any of these outward infirmities or swellings, you shall take a penniworth
of pepper beaten to fine powder, a spoonefull of Swines grease, the juice of a
handful of Rue, two spoonful of strong wine vinegar, and mix them well
altogether: then if the swelling be about the horses head, face, or throat, you
shall take flax hurds and steep them therein, and stop it hard into the
horses ears and stich the tippes together with a needle and a thread, as in
the second medicine, renewing it once in two days till the swelling go away.
But if it be in any other part of the body, then with this ointment you shall
anoint the grieved place twice a day, till the infirmity consume away. Now for
the swelling about the Cods or privy members, it shall be good before you
anoint them with this ointment, to bath them well with cold water, as either by
trotting the horse into some deep ponde, or else by taking a paile of cold
water, and dipping a cloth into the same, to bath, clap, and wash the Cods
therewith, then drying them with another clean cloth, lay on the ointment,
which is a present cure.

All these infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.

The pole evil. Swelling after bloodletting. The withers hurt. All galld
backs. All stittfasts. The nauell-gall. The Strangle. The botch in the groyne.
All Fistulas. Biting with venomous beasts or worms.
The fourth medicine.
For any of these filthy imposthumations, galls or swellings, you shall take
the earth lome of a mudde wall which has no lime in it, but only earth,
straw, or litter, and you shall boil it in strong wine vinegar till it become
very thick like a pultus, then being very hot apply it to the sore, renewing
it once in twelve or four and twenty hours, and it will not only ripen it and
break it, but also draw it, search it, and heal it most perfectly: as
experience will manifest it.

All these infirmities are cured by the fifth medicine following.

Mangines in the maine. Mangines in the tail. The Mallander. The Sellander.
The pains. The Scratches. All kyb'd heels. The leprosy. The farcye. The
general scab. All lice or nittes or other vermin.
The fifth Medicine.
First in any wise you shall let the horse blood in the necke-veine, and you
shall suffer him to bleed very well (because corruption of blood is the only
breeder of these infirmities) then having with knife, launcet, curry comb,
hayre-cloth, or such like, opened the knots or pustules, and rubd away al
skurfe or filthiness, laying the sores open and raw and as it were ready to
bleed, then you shall take of yellow A snicke beaten to fine powder, and
clarified hogs grease, of each a little quantity, and beat them well together
till they come to a perfect ointment, then having tied the horses head up fast
to the rack, in such wise that he can neither lick nor bite himself, with
this ointment anoint all the sores and other offended places very well over,
holding some hot bar of iron or fire-shouell heated against the same, that
the ointment may the better and speedilier enter into the same: and being thus
anointed, let him stand the space of two or three hours at the least tied as
beforesaid: which done, take of the strongest urine you can get, and with the
same wash away all the ointment wheresoever it was laid, and then untie the
horse and put him to his meat: and thus do once a day, till the sores dry up
and begin to shill away.

All these infirmities are cured by the sixth medicine following.

All wounds in general. All Synewes cut. All wounds with shot. Burning with
lime. Mad dog biting. Foundering. Frettizing. Surbaiting. All loose hoofes,
Casting of the hoof. Hoofe-bound.
The sixth Medicine.
Take of Turpentine, wax, and hogs grease, of each a like quantity, first
melt the yellow wax and hogs grease upon a soft fire, then take it off and
dissolve the turpentine into it, and stir it very well together, then put it
into a Gally pot and let it cool: and with this salve, tent, or plaster any
wound or sore, and it will heal it: also with the same anoint the cronets of
your horses hoofes, and putting wheat branne unto it, being boiling hot, stop
up your horses feet therewith, in case either of founder, frettize, surbat, or
such like infirmity.

All these infirmities are cured by the seventh medicine following.

All old ulcers. The Shackle gall. The Canker, The Anbury. All bruises broken.
All ouer-reaches. The crown scab, The crownet hurt. Grauelling. Prick in the
soale. A retrait. Cloying. The rotten frush.
All these infirmities are cured by the way onley contained in the seventh
medicine following.

The bloody rifts. The bladders. The lampas. All mouth Cankers. All heat in the
mouth. The tongue hurt. The paps. The tooth-ake, Shedding of hair. The felter
worm.
The seventh Medicine.
Take of new milk three quarts, a good handful of Plantaine, let it boil
till a full pint be consumed, then take three ounces of Allome, and one ounce
and an half of white sugar Candy, both being made into a very fine powder,
and three spoonefull of strong wine vinegar, and put them into the milk, then
let it boil a little till it have a hard curde, then strain it and save the
whay, wherewith you shall first bath the sore, the whay being made warm: then
with a clean cloth dry the sore, and then apply to it this salve: take of
turpentine, yellow-waxe and hog's grease of each an ounce, and of verdigrease
ground to fine powder an ounce and a half, mix all these very well together on
a soft fire, and then put it into a gally pot and let it cool: but in case
where the bruise is not broken, yet likely to break, there you shall only
apply the fourth medicine only, mentioned before.

All these infirmities are cured by the eighth medicine following.

All conuulsions of sinews. All Crampes whatsoever. The necke-cricke. Shoulder
splat. All sweld legs. Ouer-reach in the back sinew. All windgalls. Wrench
in the nether joint. All bruises unbroke. All strains whatsoever.
The eight Medicine.
Take strong wine vinegar and patch grease of each a like quantity and boy it
on the fire then with wheat branne make it into a hot pultus and being so
warm as the horse may well endure it, apply it twice a day to the grieved
place, but in case the sorance be where you cannot bind any pultus unto it,
then you shall only take patch grease and being mol^en very hot with the same,
bath the horse twice or thrice a day and give him very moderate exercise
before and after his dressing, and it will not only take away all pain and
anguish but also remove all swellings, gourdings, or any other eyesore
whatsoever.

All these infirmities are cured by the ninth medicine following.

All light galls. To skin sores. To dry up humors.
The ninth Medicine.
First bath the sore place with hot moulten Butter, then strew upon it the
powder of Rossen, lastly take a spoonefull or two of very thick Cream, and
with the soote of a Chimney bring it to a very thick past, then spread it also
upon the sore and it will heal dry and skin it in a short space.

All these infirmities are cured by the tenth medicine following.

All watery eyes. All blood-shotten eyes All dimnesse of sight. The pin and web
in the eye. All Pearls or spots. All lunaticke eyes. All ulcers in the eyes.
All cankers in the eyes. All Fistulas in the eyes. The hawe in the eye.
The tenth Medicine.
Take true ground-Iuy, which of some is called alehoofe, and beat it well in a
mortar, and if it be very dry drop a little white rose water into it, or a
little of the water of the herb Eyebright, then strain it well into a clean
glass, and with that juice wash, anoint, or tent the sores in the eyes at
least three or four times a day: as for the hawes or hogs in a horses eyes,
every common Smith knows in what sort to cut them away, and that easily.

All these infirmities are cured by the eleventh medicine following.

All splents. All Spauens. All Curbs. All ringbones. All quitterbones. All bony
excrescions.
The eleventh Medicine.
Take white Arsnicke ground to powder and make a little slit upon the head of
the excrescion the length of a barley corn, and down to the bone, then raise
up the skin with a fine cornet, and put in as much of the Arsnicke as will lie
upon a three halfepence, and then bind upon the sore a little dry flax hurds,
which done tie up the horses head to the rack, so as he may not bite the sore
place, and let him so stand the space of two or three hours, for in that time
the anguish will be gone and the medicine will have done working, then put the
horse to his meat either in the house or abroad, and the excrescion will rotte
and fall away of it self, which seen you may heal up the sore, either with
the sixth or the ninth medicine specified before.

All these infirmities are cured by the twelfth Medicine following.

All broken bones, All bones out of joint. Swaying of the back* Weakness in
the back. Horse-hipped. Horse-stifled.
The twelfth Medicine.
The bones being placed in their true and proper places, according to the form
of the member, you shall first bath the grieved place with warm patch greasse,
then clap about it a bynding plaster of pitch, rosen, masticke, and sallet
oil, well mixed together and molten on the fire, then fould the limb about
with sine flax hurds, and then splent it with broad, flat, strong and soft
splents, and remove not the dressing for the space of fifteen days, except
you find the roulers to slacken which is a very good sign and then you may
strayten them again, or if you find the member increase in swelling, and that
the roulers grow as it were straiter and strayter then you may give the members
ease, for it is a sign it was rould too straight before, and thus you shall
dress it but twice in thirty days, or there abouts, in which time the bones
will be knit, but if through the breatch or dislocation, you find any gross
substance to appear about the grieved place, then you shall twice or thrice a
day bath it with hot patch greasse, and that will take away the eye sore in a
short space.

The emperor of all medicines concerning Horses, The second point.
TAke of wheat meal six pounds, or as much as will bring all the other simples
following to a stiff paste: of Annis-seeds two ounces, of Commig-seedes six
drams, of Carthamus one dram and a half, of Fenugreeke seed one ounce and two
drammes, of Brimston one ounce and a half, of Sallet oil, one pint and two
ounces, of Honey one pound and a half, of white wine four pints, and all this
must be made into a very stiff past, the hard simples being pounded and fearst
to a fine powder and so mixed with the wet simples, after this past is thus
made, it must be kept in a very clean cloth, and when you have occasion to use
it, you shall take there of as much as will make a round ball as big a man's
fist, and this ball you shall by continual washing or lauingng dissolve in a
gallon or two of fair running water, and so give it the horse to drink,
either after his heates, or after any violent labor or exercise, or when he is
sick poor, lean, or inwardly diseased, and full of foul surfaits, and then
you shall suffer him to drink thereof as much and as often as he pleases. Now
it may be at the first, that partly through the color thereof, and partly
through the smell, the horse will be coy to taste it, but care not you
therefore, but be sure to keep him from all water else but it only, and that
he may the readier take it, you shall do well at first to offer him this water
in the dark, that the color may not offend him, of which when he has but
once tasted, he will then forsake all water whatsoever to drink of this water
only, as I have often known by experience. Now touching the virtues which
appertain to this medicine, they are these: first if your horse be never so
poor, lean, surfaited and diseased, if you give your horse of this water with
the ball dissolved in it as aforesaid, it will in fourteen days not only
cleanse and scowre him from all infirmity, but also feed him and make him sat
with good and sound flesh, so as he shall be fit either for the Market, or for
present travel: Secondly, if your horse be inwardly foul and fatt, and have
either by orderly or disorderly riding had his grease molten within him, then
this medicine used as aforesaid, is a most excellent and sovereign purge or
scowring, and makes the horse not only avoid all such filthy and ill matter
as lies molten in his body, and would breed most dangerous and mortal
sicknesses, but also it comfort and strengthens the inward parts, and
breeds great courage and spirit in the horse, whence it comes to pass that it
is of especial and great use for hunting horses, and running horses, to be
given after their heates, because it does cleanse the body, preuents all inward
sicknesses, keeps a horse cool and soluble in his body, and adds more courage
and mettle then any other food whatsoever: Lastly the use of this medicine one
fortnight is as good as a quarter of a years grass at any time of the year,
and works as many and more good effects, especially in this, that this
medicine is to be had at al times, and grass is to be had but only in the
Summer season: and whereas at grass (if it be rank and sweet) a horse is in
danger of many sicknesses, as the yellowes, staggers, and many other which
proceed from the corruption of the blood, or the heat of the season, by the use
of this medicine all those infirmities are taken away, and the horse recouereth
flesh, strength, and liuelihood of spirit, without any danger, as proof shall
testify, much better then my writing.

The third point. How to cure all the diseases in Cattle, as Ox, Cow, Bull,
or Calfe, with seven medicines only.
The Caracter, or nature of the Ox, Bull, Cow, or Calfe.
THe Ox, Bull, Cow, or Calfe, for indeed they are but one and the self same
in generation, are beasts naturally of a slow and heavy disposition, yet fit
for the draught, being temperately handled, and especially the Oxen or Bulls,
the Cowes may be and are sometimes employed in the same work, but yet they are
more fit for the paile, or for yielding of milk, which they yield in greater
abundance then any other beasts whatsoever, their flesh is the best and most
wholsomest for the sustenance of man, and therefore when they are past labor,
or other commodity, they may be fed and sold to the shambles: The fat of
these beasts is soft, and apt upon any violent exercise to melt whence it
proceeds that in their labor they may not be driven above an ordinary
foote-pace: their skins are of very great price, being a leather of that
firm, fast and hard composition, that with ordinary liquering or working in
oil, it withstandeth all wet and weather, and out wears all other leather
whatsoever. Of these kind of Cattle with us in this Island of great Britain
are four sorts: the first, and best, are those which are bred in the west
parts, as in Somersetshire, Gloster-shire, Dorset-shire, and the Countries
adjoining, these are for the most part of a blood red color, with great,
large, and long bodies, tall of stature, and slenderly cast downwards, their
horns are little and crooked, and the milk which the Cowes give is the most
best and wholsomest of all other. The second sort are bred in the countries of
Darby-shire, Chesse-shire, Lancha-shire, Yorke-shire, and the countries
adjoining: these are for the most part of a cool black color, with large
bodies and short legs, stately large and white horns, and the Cow most
fruitful of all other for breed. The third sort are bred in Lincolneshire and
the countries adjoining and are of a pied color, very tall, and large of body,
only slender and long legged. The fourth sort are bred in the extremest part
of the North as in Northumberland and beyond the Tweede, they are the least of
all the other with short low bodies and very little horns, yet is their flesh
most excellent and the sweetest beef of allother, whence our ancient heardsmen
conclude, that the west country beast is best for the paile, the yorkshire best
for the hide and tallow, the Lincolnshire for travel, and the Northumberland
for the shambles: they have all as many diseases as the horse, yet all may be
cured by seven medicines only.

All these infirmities are cured in Cattle by the first medicine following.

All Fevers. The pestilence. The gargill. The mourraine. All misliking. All
leannes. All fluxes. The pissing of blood. Hide-bound. The dry skin. The
Lunge-growne. Swallowing of all poison whatsoever. All worms. Vomiting of
blood. Milting. To provoke urine. The ouerflow of the gall. A Cow wethered. All
faintnes. How to breed milk. The Pantas. The loss of the cud. The rot.
The first Medicine.
First as soon as you perceive your beast to droop, you shall in any wise let
him blood in the neck vein, and let him bleed well (that is to say) till you
see alteration in the blood; then take of plantaine, of rewe, of wormwood, of
housleike, of woodrosse, of sheppards purse, of Smallage, and of galworte* of
each of these (or of so many as you can conveniently get) half a handful, beat
them well in a mortar and then mix therewith a pint of urine and a handful of
henns dunge strayned all together exceeding much, then put this Juice so
strayned to a full ale-quarte of strong beer or strong ale, and so set it on
the fire and boil it till a full half be consumed, then take it from the
fire, and dissolve into it half an ounce of the best treacle and a spoonful
of the juice of Garlic, then take of Myrhe, of Iuory, of Bay Berries, of
Cinnamon, and of Annis seeds beaten to fine powder two good spoonefull, and
brew it very well with the ale, then being sufficiently well cooled give it the
beast to drink with a horn, early in the morning fasting, and chase the Beast
up and down, half an hour after, then put him where he may come to no meat
for an hour and an half after, and thus do two or three mornings together
according to the greatness of his sickness: But if you find his dewe-lap begin to
swell, then you shall with a sharp knife slit it, and opening of the skin you
shall thrust into it half a handful of Speare-grasse and salt chopped together,
and then stitch it up again and anoint it with butter and tar mixed together,
and so put the beast to a fresh pasture, but by no means let the grass be too
rank, for that is most dangerous.

All these infirmities are cured by the second medicine following.

The belly ache. All colds in general. Dropping nostrils. All costiuenes. All
coughes or hausts. All shortness of breath. A general purge for Cattle.
The second Medicine.
First, you shall in any wise let the beast blood, as in the former Medicine,
then take a quart of strong Ale and boil it on the fire and scume it well,
then take it of and disolue into it a spounfull of tar and a spounfull of the
Juice of Garlike, which done take of sugarcandy of Fenugreeke, and of
brimstone, all being beaten to a fine powder, the quantity of three sponfull,
brew them well together with the Ale till it be sufficiently well cold, then
put to it a quarter of a pint of Sallet-oyle and so give it the beast to drink
fasting, and chase him and use him as was before prescrybed in the former
Medicine.

All these infirmities are cured by the third Medecin following.

The Sturdy, The neck gald, The neck bruysd, The neck sweld, The closh, All
swellings in general in any part. All impostumes, All Byles, All Botches, The
dew-boulne, Catell goared All wounds what-soeuer.
The third Medecin.
First in case of the sturdy you shall open the skull upon the forehead and
take out the blader, then heal the sore with the salve following, but in case
of deweboulne where the bleane rises on the tongue or in the mouth, there you
shall first break the bleane, and thrust out the filth then rub the sore with
salt and earth, and after apply the salve following, which is this. Take the
green leaves of Aristolochia of fresh grease, of tallow, of the ashes of an
old burnt shoe, of terpentine, of tar, and of lyllie roots of each a like
quantity, beat them all in a mortar till they come to a perfect salve which if
it prove too lenwicke or moist then you shall take as much yellow wax as will
stiffen it, and with this salve anoint the sore places, and it is a present
remedy.

Al these infirmities are cured by the fourth Medicine following.

The Barbs, The Bleane, The Canker in the mouth, Loose teeth, The tongue venomed
The falling of the palate.
The fourth Medicine.
First thtust your hand into the beasts mouth, and if there be any Blisters
risen or the pallat fallen, rub the one away and put up the other, then take of
woodbine leaves, of Sage, of Plantain and of Salt, of each half an handful,
boil them well in a quart of running water, a pint of vinegar, and half a
pint of honey, then with the water wash the sore places very well and it is a
present remedy,

All these infirmities are cured by the fifth Medicine following.

All sore eyes, The haw in the eye, The pin in the eye, The web in the eye,
The fifth Medicine.
First you shall let the horse blood in the temple veins, and cut out the
hawes if they offend him, which every ordinary Smith can do, then take an egg
and open it in the crown, and put out half the white, then fill it up again
with salt, and then roste it in the hot embers so long and so hard that you may
beat it to a fine powder, which done, dissolve some of that powder in a
spoonefull of the water of eiebright, and a spoonefull of the juice of
house-leeke, and with the same wash the beasts eye twice or thrice a day, and
it is a present remedy.

All these infirmities are cured by the sixth medicine following.

The worm in the tail. The general scabbe. The party color scab. The Itch
or scurse. The biting of a mad dog. The biting with venomous beasts All lyce
or tickes. All pricks with thorns, or stubbes. To be shrewe-runne.
The sixth medicine.
You shall first make a strong lie with old urine, and the ashes of ash-wood,
then take a pynte of this lie and add to it of tar, o^ black soap, of
coperas, of boares grease, of brimston, of peper, of staues-aker, and of
plantaine of each a like quantity, as much as will bring the lie to a thick
and stiiffe salve, then with the same annoint all the sore places: but in case
the beast be shrew run only and have no other infirmity, then you shall take
a bramble which grows at both ends, and with the same beat all over the body
of the beast, and if you can conveniently, you shall also draw his whole body
under a bramble which grows at both ends as aforesaid.

All these infirmities are cured by the seventh medicine following.

All stains whatsoever All sorenes in the sinews. All stifnes in the neck.
The gout. All broken bones. Al grieves in the houes The foul.
The seventh medicine.
Take mallows, chikweede, and galling-gall, and boil them in urine, butter,
burgundy, pitch, tallow, and linseed oil till they be so soft that you may
beat them to a salve, which done, apply that salve to the grieved place very
hot, either as an ointment, or as a pultus, and it is a present remedy, as has
been often proved.

The fourth point. How to cure all the diseases in Sheep with six medicines
only.
The Caracter or nature of the Sheep.
Sheep are naturally of a hot disposition, weak and tender, yet so free from
gredines that they will live of less food then any other beast of their
bigness: they are of a most singular profit and esteem, as having in them not
about them any thing which is not of some good use, the worst of which are
their houes, and yet the very treading of them upon the ground are a good
manuring and enriching of the same: as for their fleeces, their flesh and other
intralls, who knows not the excellent goodness thereof? The Rams and Ewes are
fit for generation from two years of age till they be ten, and after that they
are only for the shambles: the Ewes carry their lambs in their bodies a
hundred and fifty days and no longer, according to common computation. Sheep
in our Island of great Britain (which is not inferior to any kingdom in the
world for the excellency of good Sheep) are of sundry natures, according to
the alteration of the climats, for where the ground is most firtile, there the
sheep are large of body, and deep woold, yet is the staple but of an
indifferent finenes, rather inclining to some coursenes, then yielding the best
third others are bred of a more barraine and wild earth, yet if the leare be
cold then is the staple most course, and the wool both short and harie, and
the least that are bred on the most barraine earth, though the sheep be the
least of body, and the least of burden, yet if the leare be warm and well
colored, the wool is of all the finest, and the staple of a fine and
silke-like handling. To conclude, it is better and more natural for a sheep
to be bred abroad in the fields amongst the flock then domesticke at home in
the house, for so shall both his flesh and fleece be better both for the taste,
and for all other service.

All these infirmities in sheep are cured by the first medicine following.

All Fevers. The red water. The lunge-sick. All coughes, All colds. All
diseases of the gall. The Iaundisse. All sickness coming of choler. All tough
fleagme. The Pox. The wood evil. The crampe. All licking of poison To cause
easy deliverance. To increase milk. All worms inward. The loss of the cud.
The Staggers. The general rot. Water in the belly.
The first Medicine.
Take of wormwood flowers, of rue, of Coltsfoote, of lunge-wort, of plantaine,
of lettice, of rosemary, of cinquefoyle, of horsemint, of dyll, of Sage, of
tanscy, and of holy thistle, or of so many of those as you can conveniently
get, of each a like quantity and beat them very well in a mortar, then strain
forth the juice thereof, and to a pint of a very sweet honnied water made with
the best honny and running water, add five or six spoonefull of this juice,
then set it on the fire and boil it with two spoonful of the powder of anny
seeds, licoras, long pepper, and bayberries made of equal quantities, then
being taken from the fire put in as much sweet butter as a walnut, and two
spoonful of that Salt which is called Adcoces, which is salt gathered (and
made by the violence of the suns heat) upon the salt marshes after the tide
is gone away, or for want of it (because it is scarce) you may take as much of
the best Spanish salt, and all being well stirred together, so soon as it is
luke warm give it the sheep to drink with a horn, and morning and evening
rub his mouth very well with the salt aforesaid, and it is a certain cure,
and has been often proved.

All these infirmities are cured by the second medicine following.

The Scabbe or Itch. All maggots whatsoever. The worm in the clawe. All wild
fire. The Sturdy. The turning evil. The more found. Sheep taggd. Sheep
belted.
The second Medicine.
First you shall let the Sheep blood in the eye-veines, then take tar and
fresh grease of each a like quantity, and mixing them well together with a
little Brimstone and the juice of Cheruile, bring it to a salve, and with the
same (after you have bared, cleansed, and made all the sore places raw) anoint
all the grieved place, or in case of the sturdy after you have opened the skull
and taken out the bladder, plaster the sore therewith, and it is a certain
cure.

All these infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.

All pain in the joints. All bones out of joint. All Broken bones.
The fourth Medicine.
First after you have placed the member right (which you may do by the example
of the sound member) then you shall bath the grieved place well with butter and
beer, then make a scarcloth of patchgrease and yellow wax, and warming it
very hot lap it about the member, and if need require then splent it, and in
case the member be broken renew it not til fifteen days be past, otherwise
renew it once in three days.

All these infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.

All greiues in the eyes. All dimnesse of sight.
The fourth Medicine.
You shall first let the sheep blood in the eye-veines, then take of the juice
of Cellodine, that is to say, of the leaves in summer and of the roots in
winter, and with the same wash the sheeps eyes, and it will help them.

All these infirmities are cured by the fifth medicine following.

All greiues in the mouth. All looseness of teeth.
The fifth Medicine.
First you shall let the sheep blood in the gummes, then you shall take of
earth, of Sage and of Salt, of each a like quantity, and beat them well
together, and with the same rub the mouth of the sheep very well, but
especially where it is grieved* and it helps.

All these infirmities are cured by the sixth medicine following.

All sickness in Lambs. Lambs that are yeaned sick.
The sixth Medicine.
First you shall take up the lamb and breath into the mouth thereof, then
suckell or feed it with mares milk and a little water mixed together and made
luke warm, and in any case during the sickness keep it very warm for that is
the greatest nourishment that can be given unto them, and best agrees with
them.

The fifth point. How to cure all the Diseases in Goats with two Medicines
only.
The Carracter or nature of Goats.
Goats are naturally of a wanton, light, and ayry disposition, given to much
wildnes whence it comes that they are in many countries preserved, as we
preserve our Dear wild, and for the chase, and surely they will make excellent
sport in their hunting: They do bring forth their young kids in more abundance
then sheep do lambs, for they do seldom bring forth under two, very often
three, and sometimes four, they carry their kids in their bodies five months
as sheep do, and seldom grow barraine but through extreme fatnes, they
begin very early to go to the bucke as in the first year, whence it comes
that they continue not long in bearing as not above three or four years at
the most: Their greatest and best food is the brouzing upon young trees and
therefore they should so go to the buck, that they might bring forth their young
ones in the month of March or April, when every tree begins to bud: They are
naturally ever good Physicians for themselves* and when they find any
imperfection will seek out cures for the same, as by letting themselves blood
upon briers, thorns, bulrushes and such like, they are much subject to
aborsement or casting of their young ones, especially in extreme cold seasons,
whence it comes that they should have ever a shed provided for the^ in the
winter season: The hair of the goats in some countries is yearly shorn off,
and a course stuff made thereof* wherewith they cloth the meaner sort of
people: They do naturally see as well by day as by night, and their ages are
best known by the knots and round risings about the nether part of their
horns. To conclude, their teeth are very dangerous for the spoiling of young
trees, especially the olive tree, which if they but chance to lick on the tree,
never bears any fruit after it.

All these infirmities in Goats are cured by the first Medicine.

The pestilence, The dropsy, Hardness to kidd, The Staggers.
The first Medicine.
First you shall let the Goat blood under the eyes, and in the tail, then you
shall take of celladine leaves, of rushes, of reeds green and of wormwood of
each a like quantity, beat them in a mortar and strain out the juice: then
take four or five spoonful of that juice and mix it with a pince of veruine
and water, then put in a spoonful of salt, and half a spoonful of cloves
beaten to fine powder, and being luke warm give it the Goat to drink
fasting, and let it fast two hours after it.

All these infirmities are cured by the seond medicine.

All stoppings in the teats, The tuell stopped, The tetter, The dry scabbe, The
itch, All maggots. All flye-blowings.
The Second medicine.
First you shall take and cleanse away all the filth and scurffe which any way
stops or offends the grieved place, then take of honey, of Capons-grease,
of black soap, of tar, of brimston, and of the soote of a chimney, of each a
spoonefull, and of Goats milk five spoonefull, mix them all very well
together till it come to a perfect ointment, then it with annoint the sore
place very well, morning and evening; and if the stoping have been very long,
or that the Goat be much inwardly dried, then you shall take two inches of a
small candles end and thrust it up into the Coats tuell, in the manner of a
suppository, and it will not only cleanse the bag and give the Goat great
ease in his body, but also keep the place from stopping ever after.

The sixth point. How to cure all the diseases in Swine with three medicines
only.
The Caracter or nature of the Swine.
SWine are naturally of a sluttish, sloathfull, and devouring disposition,
given only to gredynesse and spoil, whence comes the saying of the
husbandman, that the swine is never good till he be in the dish: they are of
most creatures the most apoundant in their breed, for they bring forth their
litters three times in the year, and will bring forth ten twelve, fifteen,
and twenty sometimes in a litter, yet they will never bring up more pigges then
she has teates to give suck with: such pigges as are piggd the beginning or the
last of December have teeth immediately, the other have not. Swine, of all other
beasts, do sonest show their sickness, for if you pull but a bristle from
their backs and find it bloody at the nether end, or if he carry his neck on
the one side, you may be well assured of present sickness: Swine are to be used
three several ways in the house, that is, for brawne, for bacon, and for
porke: for brawne, the bore is only in use, and he is to be frank fed, and
not stye fed for the frank hardneth the flesh best: the Hog is best for
porke, most tender and sweetest, and fittest for present service: and the spayd
Guylt, or spayd or guelt Sow is best for bakon: feeds soundest, takes fat
soonest, and hangs by the walls vncorrupt longest* As there be household and
tame swine, so there be also wild and sauadge swine, and they are somewhat
less then the tame swine, yet by much more fierce and cruel, they differ
little or nothing in nature, only they are by their wildnes and much ranging,
a great deal less apt to take infirmity or be sick: To conclude, they are a
good and wholesome meat, having nothing in them or about them vselesse, as is
found by daily experience.

All these infirmities in Swine are cured by the first medicine following.

All fevers. All hid sicknesses. The mourraine. The pestilence. The Catharre.
The gall. The meazle. The pox. The laxe. All vomiting. The sleeping evil. All
pain in the myte.
The first medicine.
First you shall let the Swine blood in the tail, and under the ears, then
bind up the sores with the green barks of oziers, which done, you shall take
of barley meal two or three handful, of red oaker and hens dunge of each a
handful, of the juice of liver wort, gall wort, and wormwood half a pynte,
of treakle an ounce, mix all these well with a pottle of honey and urine
blended together, then put it into a gallon or two of sweet warm wash or
swillings* and so give it the swine to drink, and annoint all the sore places
of his body with brimston and bores grease mixed together, and during the time
of his sickness let his food be only dry beans spelted on a mill.

All these infirmities are cured by the second medicine following.

All impostumes. All leanenes or mislike All scurfe or mangines. Swine that are
luggd All maggots in the ears.
The second medicine.
First you shall let the swine blood in the tail as aforesaid, then if the
imposthume be ripe, lance it, and thrust out the filth, then heal the sore
with tar and butter mixed together, but if the impostume be hard then only
rub it with wheat meal and salt till it dissolve, but if the infection be
universal then annoint the swine all over with boares grease, brimston,
vinegar, black soape and honey mixed together, each of like quantity, and having
formerly rubd all the scurfe and filth away with a wool card.

All these infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.

All unnaturalness in Sowes devouring their births.
The third Medicine.
If your Sow be given to much unnaturalness, and that she will devour her
pigges so soon as she has pigged them, you shall watch her piging and take
them away as they fall, then take the wreckling or worst pigge, and annoint and
bath it all over with the juice of the herb Stonecroppe, and then give it the
Sow to devour, which so sone as she has done, it will immediately make her
so exceeding sick and cause her to vomit so excedingly, that she will never
after do the same again.

The seventh point. How to cure all the diseases in Dogs, with three
medicines only.
The Caracter, or nature of the Dog.
THere be of Dogs diverse kinds, though all concur and come to one nature in
the matter of diseases and infirmity, The Greyhound.
for there is first the Greyhound which exceeds in swiftnes, and is
preserved for the chase, as either to course the wild Dear, the Hare, the
Bore, the Wolf, or other vermin, he is a beast of infinite valor and
spirit, yet tender and apt by his fiersenes to much casualty, and his only
virtue consists in the swiftnes of his foot. Then there is the Hound which
is of a more duller temper, whose only glory is in his smell, The Hound
hunting and finding out by his scent the tractes and footestepes of all sorts
of wild beasts: in which he shows so much cunning, that not any winding,
turning, or art full double can prevent his search, he is both valiant and
industrious, and so vnappaled with labor, that only by the continuance of his
toil he makes himself master of what prey soever he hunteth. Next unto
them is the Spaniell, which also is singular for his smell upon Birds, and
the hound upon Beasts: The Spaniell.
whence it comes that neither Partrige, Phesant, Rail, Quail, Pecock nor any
other Bird can escape their search, they are of all other Dogs the most
louingest, humblest, and most familiar with the man: then there is the water
Spaniell, whose scent is also his only glory, yet that scent is taken aloft
from the air upon the water, whereby it comes to pass that no water foul is
safe from his search, he is also of a most exceeding strong constitution, being
so very able to endure the cold, that no sharpness of winter nor frost
troubles him, but the water is as familiar with him as the air: Then there is
the Mastiue, whose virtue is only in his courage, strength, sharpnes of tooth,
and aptnes to encounter with any fierce wild beast, as Lions, Bears, Bulls,
Wolves, Tigers, and such like, against which they are so apt, wiling, and so
cunning in their fight, that they sildom or never part but victors. Tumblers
and Mongrils
To conclude, for your Tumbler or Lurcher, whose delight is only in killing
the Cony, for the Lice^cea which only enuieth the Fox, and for your general
Mongrils whose uses are either for chasing away vermin or defense of the
husbandmans yard, they were, and are in their special natures and qualities
with the other forenamed dogs, and touching their diseases, they are cured by
one and the self same medicines.

All these infirmities in dogs are cured by the first medicine following.

All worms inwardly. All coldes or stoppings. The stone. Costiuenes or
belly-bound.
The first Medicine.
Make a strong decoction of worme-wood and of Southern-wood, then take a pint
of the decoction and dissolve into it as much Aloes as half a hazell nut, and
a good spoonful of the powder of Iuory and Brimstone mixed together, then being
luke warm give it the Dog to drink, and administer at his tuell two inches
of a candles end in manner of a suppository.

All these infirmities are cured by the second Medicine following.

All lice or fleas. All worms outwardly. All Serpent-bitings. All mad Dog
bitings. All Galls or tetters. All itch or scab or mangie. All hurts by wild
beasts. All gallings of feet. All frettizing in the feet. The Canker.
The second Medicine.
Make a strong decoction of Rewe, Sage, Mints, and a handful or two of salt,
then with the decoction wash over all the Dogs body, then take treakle,
hogges-grease, yellow wax turpentine and coperas of each a like quantity melt
and mingle them together and with that ointment anoint all the sore places,
especially those which he cannot come to lick, or else scratcheth most, and
it will speedily cure him.

All these infirmities are cured by the third Medicine following.

All tirednes. All wounds whatsoever. All bruises. All pain in the ears.
The third medicine.
Frst if the wound be great and gaping or in any fleshy part, you shall stitch
it up with a needle and a little red silk, then take the yelke of an egg, and
as much soot of a chimney, and twice so much of the juice of green tobacco,
and the juice of Mellilot, with as much fresh butter as will bring all these to
a salve, being molten and mingled well together on a soft fire, then with this
salve either tent or plaster the grieved place, and it is a present remedy for
all the former greeuances, as has been often by me and others experienced.

The eighth point. How to cure all the Diseases in Conies or Hares, with one
Medicine only.
The Character of Hares or Conies.
HAres or Conies are small Beasts of a much more melancholy disposition then
other beasts, whence comes the hardness of their living, for as it is written
they will feed fat with the white rind of the frost, or the snow either:
certain it is that in the frost and sharpest time of winter they feed best,
because then the frost biting the foggy grass makes it most sweet, upon
which they delight most to feed: they are abundant in their increase bringing
forth their broods once every month, and of those broodes not under three or
four at the least: neither does she so soon disburden one brood but she
presently runs to the bucke and ingendreth for another: the male of these
kinds are very unnatural, for if they can find where the young ones are
kindled, they presently devour them: whence it comes to pass that the female
at her time complete withdraws her self and hides her young, daubing and
damming up the hole till they be able to run and shife for themselves, and
then she opens the hole by little and little, giving them liberty to take the
air and use their own exercise: as for the profit of them, besides their
flesh, which is an excellent food, their skins are of great price, be a most
excellent furre, and little inferior for warmth, sweetness, and goodness, to any
other: again, the wool or hair of them is very good to make felts of, and
indeed is so soft and fine that it is but a little inferior to the beauer: with
which wool if it be mixed it makes a most perfect and good felt. To conclude,
they are beasts of much hardness, and therefore no long life, and they take
delight in hard and sandy grounds which are dry, for they have no greater
enemy then the wet, whence it proceeds that their greatest infirmity is
rottennes: yet such Hares or Connies as do live and delight in the clay
earthes are ever the greatest, fattest, stoutest, and best either for the dish,
or any sport whatsoever.

All Conies or Hares are subject but to two infirmities only, which are cured
by this one medicine following.

The Rotte, Madness.
The Medicine.
For these infirmities above named, you shall only take the finest, sweetest,
and dryest hay you can get, and mix it very well with the herb hare-thistle,
and therewith feed your Conies and Hares especially in the winter season, and
it will not only prevent the infirmities, but also recover and cure the
sicknesses, when at any time they are infected.

The ninth point. How to cure all the diseases in Poultrye, as Cocks, Hens,
Capons, Chikens, Turkies, Peacockes, Pheasants, Partrige, Quales, Rayles, Doves
of all kind, and such like with four medicines only.
The Carracter or natures of all sorts of Poultrye.
THe Cock, from whence the Hen, Capon and Chicken proceeds, The Cock and
his kind
and so all one, being the centinell and watch of the house, is a lusty,
proud, valiant, and courageous bird, taking both delight in himself and in
other men's praises of him. It is writ of them that they are Astronomers, and
know the course of the stars; certain it is that they keep a true distance
in their times, and crow more after proportion then order, they are great
commanders and rulers of their own kind, and so jealous of their wives, that
they will die ere any strange Cock enjoy the least show of their presence. Of
all beasts whatsoever, none but he rejoices after the act of generation: the
Hens are no less valiant then the Cocks if they be true bred, and will with
their opposites fight to the last drop: they are exceeding loving and natural
to their young, and will not only fight in their defense, but also starve
themselves to give the Chickens sustenance. Your Turkey is not unlike unto
these birds, for the Cock is proud* valiant, The Turkey
and apt to fight, only the Hens are much less natural, though somewhat more
doting, for from her too much love she will draw her Chickens abroad, and by
her wandering will loose them, never respecting her number, but so long as she
has one to follow her, so long she respects not what happens to the rest. Of
this nature also is the Peacocke, The Peacocke
who for beauty, pride, and understanding excedeth all other birds, yet only
are careless of their young. The Peacocke is a bird of long life, ordinarily
living to the years of five and twenty or upwards, he is a dish much used at
banquets, for show, more then for rast, for his flesh is not held exceeding
wholesome: for it is certain that if he be never so well and dry roasted over
night, yet he will be bloud-rawe the next day following. Now contrary to the
Peacocke; the Pheasant, Partridge, The Pheasant the Partrige, Quail and Rail.
Quail and Rail, are excellent birds for the table, and more dainty and
wholesome then any other: they are also excellent flights, and make rare sport
before the hawk, they fly not high but nere to the ground, and though not
very nimble of winge, yet swift after they are on winge: they love not to fly
long by reason of their much earnestness, but must have many rests, but being
so slain with the hawk, they are the best, tenderest, and most pleasing
food: they bring forth their broods in great abundance, and having once
disclosed them, the young ones are able to defend themselves by flight, even
when the shel is on their crowns: so strong and wily they are by nature as
house Doves are, of an innocent nature, and very chaste, and neither male nor
female change their make, but keep together one true to the other, living as
coupled by the bond of marriage, keeping their own hen continually never
visiting the holes of others, unless they be single by the death of their
make: The females are humble to their males: the male and female are both
careful of their young ones, nay, you shall have the Cock often times chastise
the hen if she keep not the nest well, and yet kind they be to them when they
are about to build, lay, and set, as may be seen by their readiness to them in
that case: when the hen comes off the nest, the Cock goes on presently. The
Cock will go abroad and first feed himself well, and gorge himself, and
when he comes home will disgorge himself again, feeding his hen or his
young ones. Stock-doues live ordinarily (as Pliny affirms) thirty years. The
Turtle doves of all the rest are the louingst to their make: for you shall see
them always fly together, unless the one of them be killed, then the other
will not live long after but pine away.

All these infirmities in Poultrye are cured by the first medicine following.

The flux of the belly. Drowsines of the brain.
The first Medicine.
You shall take pease-branne and scald it, either with water or sweet whay, and
give it the poultrye to eat, and it will stop any scowring in these
house-foule whatsoever, as has been often experienced.

All these infirmities are cured by the second Medicine following.

The stopping of the belly. All molten grease. To avoid bruised blood.
The second Medicine.
Take either bread made of wheat, or wheat corn, but bread is the better, and
put it into a small trough, then put to the same a good quantity of man's urine
newly made and warm, and let the poultrye eat the bread or corn out of the
urine, and it will scowre them.

All these infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.

The pip. The roope. All lice. The stinging by worms or venomous things.
The third medicine.
First you shall pull away the scale from the pip, and the black scurfe from
the roope, and lay the sore raw and bare, then take of salt, Rue, Pepper, and
sweet butter, of each a like quantity, and beat them together in a mortar till
it come to a salve, then with the same annoint the sores and it helps.

All these infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.

All sore eyes All dimnes of sight.
The fourth medicine.
Take a leaf or two of ground Iuy, or as some call it alehoofe, and chawe it
well in your mouth, then sucking the juice thereof hard, spit it into the eyes
of your poultrye, and thus do twice or thrice a day, and it is a most certain
cure, and often proved.

The tenth point. How to cure all the diseases in water-foule, as Geese,
Duckes, Swanns, Taylls, Widgeons, Sheldraks, Plouers, Herns, Puets, Bytters,
Gulls, and such like, with one medicine only.
The Character and natures of wild Foul.
Wild Foul though they differ much in name and proportions, yet in their
general natures there is small variety: they all love to live together in
flocks and herds, and in like manner they fly together, yet not in route but
like soldiers either in single or double files, and for the most part they
fly triangle wise, one as it were leading the way, and the rest in two wide
branches following, by which means they gather more wind under them, and are
more able to mount their flights higher, which is that in which they most joy:
some write they fly so close one after another that the hindmost rests his
head on him that flies before him: how ever it is most certain that they fly
in a most decent and comely order: They do for the most part keep ever one
nest, and in nourishing their young are most careful and diligent, hyding them
in holes, and in sedge bushes, and never discovering them till they be able by
strength of winge to save themselves in flying. They are of all creatures most
vigilant and watchful, sildome sleeping but when they are guarded by some of
their own company. They bring forth their broods commonly once a year, yet
sometimes twice: yet those foul are rather domestical then wild, for such
fruitfulnes ever springs from some extraordinary keeping.

All water foul for the most part are subject but to one infirmity only,
which is cured by this one medicine following.

The Gargill.
The Medicine.
Take a cloue of Garlic clean pilld, and bruise it a little, and then roll
it up in sweet butter in the fashion of a Capons cram, and so give it to your
foul, and thus give about three cloves of Garlic at one time, and no more,
and it is a present cure for this disease, or for any other inward sickness
which shall offend your water-foule at any time whatsoever.

The eleventh point. How to cure all the diseases in singing birds* as the
Nightingale, Lynnet, solitary Sparrow, Goldfinch, Bull-finch, Myskin, Spynke,
Canary-byrde, Cordial, Lark, Callander, Black-birde, Robin, Throstell, and
such like with three Medicines only.
The Character, and nature of all manner of singing Birds.
ALl singing Birds generally do once a year change their colors in
feathers, and altet their voice in singing, and that in such sort that of a
sudden a man would say they were other birds, which is a thing which happens
not unto the greater fowls except it be only the Crane, for they will at some
times of the year grow blacker then at other some, especially in their old
age: so likewise the blackbird will grow reddish, The Blackbird.
and in summer he sings clear and tunable, and in winter he stutreth and
stammereth, but in December commonly he is clean mute and dumb altogether:
also after the blackbird is a year old, and especially the males, their
bills turn white like Iuory, The Throstle or Mauis.
so likewise the Throstles or Mauisses all summer are painted about the necks
with sundry colors, but in the winter they are all of one color. The
Nightingale also sings almost fifteen days together in the height of the
spring, The Nightingale.
and will learn easily to whistle: and so generally all other singing birds
sing more at one time of the year then at another, except it be such birds
as are altogether domestical and tame, used only to hear music, the voices
of men, and continual clamors, candle light and torch light, such I say will
not only sing all the year long, but also all day and night without ceasing,
as may be daily discernd in many Noblemen and Gentlemen's houses. These singing
Birds seldom sing the first year, only in the winter time they will a little
record, and then when the Spring approaches they will break forth with their
voices, and sound their notes full and perfect, And of all these singing
birds, the Linnet, Robin, Bulfinch, Stare, The Linnet The Robin redbrest. The
Bullfinch.
is most docible and aptest both to tune, and to learn all several tunes:
they take delight in their cages and servitude, only they are apt to feed
suddenly, and with their too much fatnes often corrupt and dye suddenly,
therefore it is not good at any time to let them be without chalk, sugar or
chickweed, which is a great preservative and present help against the disease
of fatnes, and you must shift them in a fresh Cage every month, and take their
dung from them every morning, and then blow their meat, and when you shift
their cages, put the two doors together and blow on them, and they will shift
themselves, for to handle them is dangerous, and when they moult or cast their
feathers, sprowt a little wine on them, and it will the sooner make them moult
their old coat: and for those birds that you would teach and bring up to
whistle, you must hang their Cages in such a place where they shall not hear
the chirping of Sparrowes for naturally they will rather take the wild note, as
I have known by experience, and have heard birds, some crow like a Cock, and
counterfeit notes of birds of other kinds contrary to their own kind: The
Stare.
The Stare of all other Brides is very apt, ready, and tractable to be taught
to whistle, and speak any thing without cutting or clipping the tongue, as I
have heard many speak as plain as any parrat, but you must keep them covered
all over saving a place where they may see their meat and water, and as you
would teach a parrat, so teach them: And for the dieting of Birds, the Stare
feeds cheefely on raw beef and bread soaked in water, Dieting of birds.
both mixed together and small minced: the Blackbird and thrush feeds on raw
beef being whole, and stickt on a stick in their Cage: the Bullfinch and
Linnet feed on Rapeseedes, but you must take heed of mustardseed, for they are
like to the rape seeds, and will make them pine away: The Canary Bird does
feed on canary seeds and rapeseedes mixed together: The Robin and Nightingale
feed on oatmeale, or raw meat: but if you get them now and then some of the
worms, that do breed among the flower at the bakers, it will much avail them.

All these infirmities in singing Birds are cured by the first Medicine
following.

All melancholy. Leannes or mislike, Strangling of the breast. Moutting. All
lite. The Roupe. The Pthisicke. The Apoplexy. To bring the voice again. The
pippe. All costiuenes. The privy sickness.
The first medicine.
Take Sugar, Saffron and figs, of each a like quantity, and either chaw them
or beat them in a mortar, till they come to a past, and then give it the bird
to eat during the time of her sickness, and into her water put mellon seeds
bruised and chopped very small, provided ever that you forget not in case of the
pippe, or roope, first to pluck off the scale or scab, and then to give the
medicines after.

All these infirmities are cured by the second medicine following.

All fores or wounds. All impostumes, All Gouts.
The second medicine.
Take of Butter and of h^^s grease, of each a like quantity, and melte them and
mix them well together upon a soft and gentle fire, then with a feather dipped
into it when it is reasonably warm anoint all the sore places, and if the
wound be very great or deep, then with a fine needle or a little red silk
stitch it up, and then anoint it, and thus do twice a day at the least and it
will help them.

All these infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.

All blindness. All sore eyes. All dimnesse of sight.
The third Medicine.
Take half a spoonful of clear running water, and a full spoonefull of the
juice of beets and mix them very well together, then with a feather either
anoint the birds eyes, or taking a little of it into your mouth, spirt it into
the birds eyes, and thus do twice or thrice a day at least, and it will help
them presently.

The twelfth and last point. How to cure all the Diseases in Hawks of what
nature or quality soever they be, with six Medicines only.
The Character or nature of all sorts of Hawks.
THere be in Falconry, sixteen kinds of Hawks or birds that live upon prey,
and though every one have in them a special note or Character of much valor,
yet some are much more valiant then other some, as the Eagle, the Vulture, the
Gerfaulcon, Faulcon, and such like, are more valiant then the Gossehauke,
Lanner, Kilt, Ringtaile, and such like. The valiant hawk ever trusseth her
prey in the air, the less valiant takes her prey near unto the ground, and
most commonly upon the ground. The valiant hawks always build upon the hie
rocks, and on the steep cliffes, against which the rage of the Sea and water
continually beats. And the less valiant hawks build in tall timber trees
where they have some shelter and refuge: as for those which build in some
walls, or upon the ruins of old houses, as the Kestrills and such like, they
are most base and cowardly, and neither fit for use nor employment. The long
wingd hawks are fittest for the river, and kill both the Herne and other
smaller foul, as is the Mallard and Tail* and the short wingd hawks will
kill the Hare also. The Merlin and Hobby take most delight in killing the
Lark: the Sparrow-hauke sn killing the Blackbird, and the Musket in killing
the Sparrowe only, many other flights there be, as at the Pie, Iay and such
like, but they are to be measured according to the mettle of the Hawk, for
they are flights of danger and force, and therefore it behoues the hawk to
have much cunning and much exercise before she be brought to such flights,
least that her mettle and rashness become her own ruin, as many Faulkoners
find in daily experience.

All these infirmities in Hawks are cured by the first medicine following.

All inward and privy sicknesses of body. The pantas. Casting of the gorge. All
sorts of worms. Purging of glut. Costiuenes in the body. To cause disgestion.
The first Medicine.
Take as much Agaricke as a pease and wrap it either in a warm Pidgions heart,
or Chickens heart, or any other warm and bloody flesh, and give it the hawk
to eat fasting in the morning, and it is a most ready and certain cure.

All these infirmities are cured by the second medicine following.

All privy grieves in the head. All rhumes. The Rye. All apoplexies.
The second Medicine.
Take as much mustardseed bruisd as will lie upon a three halfe-pence, and lap
it as aforesaid, either in a warm Pidgions heart, Chickens heart, or other
warm flesh, and then dip it in the juice of Rosemary and Sage well mixed
together, and so give it the hawk to eat fasting in the morning, and it will
not only purge and cleanse her, but also comfort and strengthen the brain
excedingly, as by proof you shall find.

All these infirmities are cured by the third Medicine following.

All diseases in the eyes. All dimnes of sight. All bloud-shotten eyes The
pynne and web.
The third Medicine.
Take of the juice of ground Iuy or ale-hoofe half a spoonefull, and put it to
as much fine searst ginger as will lie on a three halfe-pence, and being well
mixed togerher with a small soft feather annoint the hawks eye therewith,
morning, noone, and night, and it is a most certain cure, and often approved.

All these infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.

All diseases in the mouth The Frounce. All Cankers.
The fourth medicine.
Take roch alume and beat it to as fine a powder as you can possible get it,
then take a spoonefull or two of the strongest and best wine vinegar, and mix
your allome with the same till it be as thick as puddle, then take a fine rag
of cambricke or lawne, and dip it therein, and with the same rub the sores well
till they be ready to bleed, both morning, noone, and night, and it will cure
it in a short space.

All these infirmities are cured by the fifth medicine following.

All imposthumes. All wounds whatsoever. All bruises whatsoever All
excrescions. The formicas. To stanch blood.
The fifth medicine.
First where there is any excrescion of horny or bony substance, you shall cut
it away, and lay the sore open and bare, and then apply the salve which
follows, but in case of wounds, if the wound be great or deep, you shall
first stitch it up with a fine needle and a little red silk, then take twenty
raisons of the sun, and having picked out the stones, boil them in half a
pint of wine till it be thick like pap, then beat it well together, and being
very warm apply it to the sore places, renewing it once in four and twenty
hours till all the soars be healed: but if the flux of blood be great, then
you shall take merchants wax and drop it upon the vein which bleedeth, and it
will presently stanch it.

All these infirmities are cured by the sixth medicine following.

The pin in the foot The broken pounce. Bones broken. Bones out of joint.
The sixth medicine.
First you shall place the member right if there be either breath or
dislocation, then take of Galbanum, of white Pich, and of Turpentine of each a
like quantity, and melt them together on a soft fire, then plaister-wise spread
it upon a linen cloth and so fould it about the sore, then splent it if need
require, otherwise only roll it up with a fine linen ragge, and the remedy
will soon be effected, as has been often by me and others seen, and proved
by experience.

The nature of red and fallow Dear.
THough the Dear by a secret instinct of nature and the Providence of God are
their own Physician and not needing the help of man, yet because they are so
serviceable for the use of man. I thought it not much impertinent from my
discourse to show their Character or nature. The Heart of all other beasts
loves to hear music, and meruaileth at all things that he sees, and
takes great pleasure to behold them, as has been often seen by their gazing
at the bow and arrows of the hunter, or at a Carter and the like, they are at
mighty enmity with Serpents and renew their strength by eating of them, they
have also a strange property, that if they go to feed in young springs or
coppes they go full against the wind, and so can tell whether there be any
person there or not: and if any man chance to spit or piss upon any spring or
branch in the coppes, they will find it out presently and utterly abandon the
place: being hunted and ready to be taken by the hounds, they will for their
last refuge fly to houses and places of resort, rather yielding to man then to
the dogs: and as Pliny says they can endure to swim thirty miles
endwayes: and when they are to pass any great river to go to rut in some I Will
or forest, they assemble themselves together in great herds, and knowing the
strongest and best swimmer they make him go foremost, and then he which
comes second stays up his head upon the back of the first, and all the
rest in like manner even unto the last: the foremost being weary the second
takes his place, and he comes backward: they go to rut about the midst of
September, and bear their young ones 8. months: sometimes they bring two
calves at once: their little ones they practice and exercise to use their
legs from the very beginning, leading them up to high rocks, teaching them to
leap, run, and fly away acquainting them with their dens and secret places of
harbor: the males are horned, and they above all other living Creatures cast
them every year once at a certain time of the spring, and to that purpose a
little before their mewing they seek out the most secret corners and most out
of the way to hide themselves: when they are Pollards they keep close hidden
as if they were disarmed: and all this they do as if they envied that men
should have good of any thing they had. Their age may be known by their
heads, (for every year they have one more branch then they had the last year
before) until they come to six, after which time: they come new ever alike, so
that their age cannot be discerned any more by their head, but their mark is
taken by their mouth and teeth: for as they grow in age they have few or no
teeth at all: yet the branches grow out of the root, whereas all the while they
were younger they used to have them break forth and standing out at the very
forehead. At the first when they break out again, they be like to the
glanduells or kernells of dry skin, that new put forth, then grow they with
tender stalks to certain round and long knots covered all over with a
certain plume down like velvet, so long as they be destitute of their horns
and perceive their heads naked, they go forth to relief by night, and as they
grow bigger and bigger they harden them in the hot Sun, eftsoons making
proof of them against trees: and when they perceive they be tough and strong
enough, then they go abroad boldly. The Hearts and Hindes may live an hundred
years and upward.

Thus gentle Reader I have breefely ended my short Epitome, craving nothing but
this at thy hands, that when thou have made trial of these my approved
remedies and find the profit to redound to thy self (as many heretofore
have done) praise God, and think well of me thy friend.

FINIS.
A brief Table showing the Contents of the twelve Points handled in this BOOK.
THe first Point shows the Character or nature of the Horse; and how the
Horse, being subject almost to 300 diseases, yet all may be cured by twelve
medicines, and commonly to be gotten. Fol. 3 etc. The second Point contains
the rarest Medicine that ever was found out for Horses. from Fol. 21 to 24 The
third Point shows the nature of the Ox, Bull, and Calfe, and how to cure all
the diseases incident to them with seven medicines as, from Fol. 24 to 33 The
fourth point shows the nature of Sheep, and how to cure all the diseases in
them with six medicines, from Fol. 33 to 39 The fifth point shows the nature
of Goats, and how to cure all the diseases in them with two medicines* as from
Fol. 39 to 42 The sixth point shows the nature of Swine and how to cure all
diseases in them with three medicines, from Fol. 42 to 46 The seventh Point
shows the nature of all kind of Dogs, and how to cure all the diseases in
them with three medicines only, from Fol. 46 to 51 The eighth Point shows
the nature of Hares and Conies, and how to cure all the diseases in them with
one only medicine, from Fol. 51 to 54 The ninth point shows the nature of
all sorts of Poultrye as, Cocks, Hens, Capons, Chickens, Turkies, Peacocks,
Pheasants, Partriges, Quails, Cranes, House-doues, Stocke-doues, Turtle-doues,
and the like, and how to cure all the diseases in them wtth four medicines,
from Fol. 54 to 59 The tenth Point shows the nature of al Waterfoule, as
Swannes, Geese, Duckes Tails, Widgions, Sheldrakes, Plouers, Herns, Puets,
Bitters, Gulles, and such like, and how to cure the diseases in them with one
medicine only, from Fol. 59 to 61 The eleventh Point shows the nature of all
singing and whistling birds, as Nightingale, Robbin, Bullfinch, Linnet,
solitary, Sparrow, Goldfinch, Miskin, Spinke, Canary bird, Calander, Blackbird,
Throstle, Cordial Lark and such like and how to cure all the diseases in them
with three medicines as from Fol. 61 to 67. The twelfth and last Point shows
the Character and nature of all sorts of Hawks, and how to cure all the
diseases in them with six Medicines, as from Fol. 67. to 73. And concludes
with the nature of red and Fallow Dear.
FJNIS.

