The Famous TRAGEDY OF THE RICH JEW OF MALTA. AS IT WAS PLAYED BEFORE THE KING
AND QVEENE, IN HIS MAJESTY'S Theater at White Hall, by her Majesty's Servants
at the Cockpit.

Written by CHRISTOPHER MARLO.

(...) Printed by I. B. for Nicholas Vavasour, and are to be sold at his Shop
in the Inner Temple, near the Church. 1633.

TO MY WORTHY FRIEND, Mr. THOMAS HAMMON, OF GRAYES INN, etc.
THis Play, composed by so worthy an Author as Mr. Marlo; and the part of the
Jew presented by so inimitable an Actor as Mr. Allin, being in this later Age
commended to the Stage: As I vsher'd it unto the Court, and presented it to the
Cockpit, with these Prologues and Epilogues here inserted, so now being newly
brought to the Iresse, I was loath it should be published without the ornament
of an Epistle; making choice of you unto whom to deuote it; then whom (of all
those Gentlemen and acquaintance, within the compass of my long knowledge)
there is none more able to tax Ignorance, or attribute right to merit. Sir,
you have bin pleased to grace some of mine own works with your courteous
patronage; I hope this will not be the worse accepted, because commended by
me; over whom, none can claim more power or privilege than your self. I had
no better a New-yeares gift to present you with; receive it therefore as a
continuance of that inviolable obliegement, by which, he rests still engaged;
who as he ever has, shall always remain,

Tuissmus: THO. HEYWOOD.

The Prologue spoken at Court.
GRacious and Great, that we so boldly dare,
('Mo^gst other Plays that now in fashion are)
To present this; writ many years agone,
And in that Age, thought second unto none;
We humbly c^ave your pardon: we pursue
The story of a rich and famous Jew
Who lived in Malta: you shall find him still,
In all his p^oiects, a sound Macheuill;
And that is ^is Character: He that has past
So many Ce^sures, is now come at last
To have your princely Ears, grace you him; then
You crown^ the Action, and renown the pen.
Epilogue.
IT is our fear (dread Sovereign) we have bin
Too te^ious; neither cannot be less than sin
To wrong your Princely patience: If we have,
(Thus lo^ dejected) we your pardon crave:
And if ought here offend your ear or sight,
We one^y Act, and Speak, what others write.
The Prologue to the Stage, at the Cocke-pit.
WE (...) pass this Stage,
But by the best of Marlo.
Poets in that ag^
The Malta-Jew had being, and was made;
And He, then by the best of Allin.
Actors played:
In Hero and Leander, one did gain
A lasting memory: in Tamberlaine,
This Jew, with others many: the other man
The Attribute of peerless, being a man
Whom we may rank with (doing no one wrong)
Proteus for shapes, and Roseius for a tongue,
So could he speak, so vary; nor is it hate
To merit: in Perkins.
him who does personate
Our Jew this day, nor is it his ambition
To exceed, or equal, being of condition
More modest; this is all that he intends,
(And that too, at the vrgence of some friends)
To prove his best, and if none here gainsay it,
The part he has studied, and intends to play it.
Epilogue.
IN Graving, with Pigmalion to contend;
Or Painting, with Apelles; doubtless the end
Must be disgrace: our Actor did not so,
He only aimed to go, but not out go.
Nor think that this day any prize was played,
Here were no bett^ at all, no wagers laid;
All the ambition that his mind does swell,
Is but to hear from you, (by me) 'twas well.
THE JEW OF MALTA.
Macheuil. ALbeit the world think Macheuill is dead,
Yet was his soul but flowne beyond the Alps,
And now the Guize is dead, is come from France
To view this Land, and frolic with his friends.
To some perhaps my name is odious,
But such as love me, guard me from their tongues,
And let them know that I am Macheuill,
And weigh not men, and therefore not men's words:
Admired I am of those that hate me most.
Though some speak openly against my books,
Yet will they read me, and thereby attain
To Peter's Chair: And when they cast me off;
Are poisoned by my climing followers.
I count Religion but a childish Toy,
And hold there is no sin but Ignorance.
Birds of the Air will tell of murders past;
I am ashamed to hear such fooleries:
Many will talk of Title to a Crown.
What right had Caesar to the Empire?
Might first made Kings, and Laws were then most sure
When like the Dran^us they were writ in blood.
Hence comes it, that a strong built Citadell
Commands much more then letters can import:
Which maxim had Phaleris observed,
He Had never bellowed in a brazen Bull
Of great ones envy; o'th poor petty wites,
Let me be enuy'd and not pitied!
But whither am I bound, I come not, I,
To read a lecture here in Britain,
But to present the Tragedy of a Jew,
Who smiles to see how full his bags are cramb'd
Which money was not got without my means.
I crave but this, Grace him as he deserves,
And let him not be entertained the worse
Because he favors me.

Enter Barabas in his Counting House, with h^apes of gold before him. Jew, So
that of thus much that return was made:
And of the third part of the Persian ships,
Th^re was the venture summed and satisfied.
As for those Samintes, and the men of Vzz,
That bought my Spanish Oils, and Wines of Greece,
Here have I purst their paltry siluerbings.
Fie; what a trouble it is to count this trash.
Well fare the Arabians, who so richly pay,
The things they traffic for with wedge of gold,
Whereof a man may easily in a day
Tell that which may maintain him all his life.
The needy groom that never fingred groat,
Would make a miracle of thus much coin:
But he whose steele-bard co^^ers are cramb'd full,
And all his life time has bin tired,
Wearying his fingers ends with telling it,
Would in his age be loath to labor so,
And for a pound to sweat himself to death:
Give me the Merchants of the Indian Mines,
That trade in metal of the purest mould;
The wealth Moor^, that in the Eastern rocks
Without control can pick his riches up,
And in his house heap pearl like pibble-stones:
Receive them free, and sell them by the weight,
Bags of fiery Opals, Saphires, Amatists,
Iacints, hard Topas, grasse-greene Emeraulds,
Beauteous Rubyes, sparkling Diamonds,
And seildsene costly stones of so great price,
As one of them indifferently rated,
And of a C^rrect of this quantity,
May serve in peril of calamity
To ransom great Kings from captivity.
This is the ware wherein consists my wealth:
And thus me thinks should men of judgment frame
Their means of traffic from the vulgar trade,
And as their wealth increases, so enclose
In ^mite riches in a little room.
But now how stands the wind?
Into what corner peers my Halcions bill?
H^, to the East? yes: See how stands the Vanes?
East and by- South: why then I hope my ships
I sent for Egypt and the bordering Isles
Are gotten up by Nilus winding banks:
Mine Argosie from Alexandria,
Laden with Spice and Silks, now under sail,
Are smoothly gl^ding down by Candie shore
To Malta, through our Mediterranean sea.
But who comes hear? How now.

Enter a Merchant. Merch. Barabas, thy ships are safe,
Riding in Malta Rhode: And all the Merchants
With other Merchandise are safe arrived,
And have sent me to know whether your self
Will come and custom them.

Jew. The ships are safe thou say, and richly fraught.

Merch. They are.

Jew. Why then go bid them come ashore,
And bring with them their bills of entry:
I hope our credit in the Custom House
Will serve as well as I were present there.
Go send '^m threescore Camels, thirty Mules,
And twenty Wagons to bring up the ware.
But art thou master in a ship of mine,
And is thy credit not enough for that?

Merch. The very Custom barely comes to more
Then many Merchants of the Town are worth,
And therefore far exceeds my credit, Sir.

Jew. Go tell 'em the Jew of Malta sent thee, man.
Tush, who amongst 'em knows not Barrabas?

Merch. I go.

Jew. So then, there is somewhat ^ome.
Sir, which of my ships art thou Master off?

Merch. Of the Speranza, Sir.

Jew. And saw thou not mine Argosie at Alexandria
Thou could not come from Egypt, or by Caire
But at the entry there into the sea,
Where Nilus pays his tribute to the maine,
Thou needs must sail by Alexandria.

Merch. I neither saw them, nor inquired of them.
But this we heard some of our seamen say,
They wondered how you durst with so much wealth
Trust such a crazed Vessel, and so far.

Jew. Tush; they are wise, I know her and her strength:
By go, go thou thy ways, discharge thy Ship,
And bid my Factor bring his loading in.
And yet I wonder at ^his Argosie,

Enter a second Merchant. 2. Merch. Thine Argosie from Alexandria,
Know Barabas does ride in Malta Rhode.
Laden with riches, and exceeding store
Of Persian silks, of gold, and Orient Perle:

Jew. How chance you came not with those other ship^
That sailed by Egypt?

2 Merch. Sir we saw 'em not.

Jew. Belike they coasted round by Candie shore
About their Oils, or other businesses.
But 'twas ill done of you to come so far
Without the aid or conduct of their ships.

2. Merch. Sir, we were wafted by a Spanish Fleet
That never le^t us till within a league,
That had the Galleys of the Turk in chase.

Jew. Oh they were going up to Sicily: well, go
And bid the Merchants and my men dispatch
And come ashore, and see the fraught discharged.

Merch. I go. Exit.

Jew. Thus trowles our fortune in by land and Sea,
And thus are we on enery side enriched:
These are the Blessings promised to the Jews,
And herein was old Abrams happiness:
What more may Heaven do for earthly man
Then thus to power out plenty in their laps,
Ripping the bowels of the earth for them,
Making the Sea their servants, and the winds
To drive their substance with successful blasts?
Who hates me but for my happiness?
Or who is honored now but for his wealth?
Rather had I a Jew be hated thus,
Then pitied in a Christian poverty:
For I can see no fruits in all their faith,
But malice, falsehood, and excessive pride,
Which me thinks fits not their profession.
Happily some hapless man has conscience,
And for his conscience lives in beggary.
They say we are a scattered Nation:
I cannot tell, but we have scambled up
More wealth by far then those that brag of faith.
There Is Kirriab Iairim, the great Jew of Greece,
Obed in Bairseth, No^es in Portugal,
My self in Malta, some in Italy,
Many in France, and wealthy every one:
I, wealthier far then any Christian.
I must confess we come not to be Kings:
That Is not our fault: Alas, our number's few,
And Crowns come either by succession
Or urged by force; and nothing violent,
Often have I heard tell, can be permanent.
Give us a peaceful rule, make Christians Kings,
That thirst so much for Principality.
I have no charge, nor many children,
But one sole Daughter, whom I hold as dear
As Agamemnon did his Iphigen:
And all I have is hers. But who comes here?

Enter three Jews. 1. Tush, tell not me 'twas done of policy.

2. Come therefore let us go to Barrabas;
For he can counsel best in these affairs;
And here he comes.

Jew. Why how now Countrymen?
Why flock you thus to me in multitudes?
What accident's betided to the Jews?

1. A Fleet of warlike Gallyes, Barabas,
Are come from Turkey, and lie in our Rhode:
And they this day sit in the Counsell-house
To entertain them and their Embassy.

Jew. Why let 'em come, so they come not to war;
Or let 'em war, so we be conquerors:
Nay, let 'em combat, conquer, and kill all, Aside.
So they spare me, my daughter, and my wealth.

1. Were it for confirmation of a League,
They would not come in warlike manner thus.

2. I fear their coming will afflict us all.

Jew. Fond men, what dream you of their multitudes?
What need they treat of peace that are in league?
The Turks and those of Malta are in league.
Tut, tut, there is some other matter in it.

1. Why, Barabas, they come for peace or war.

Jew. Happily for neither, but to pass along
Toward Venice by the Adriatic Sea;
With whom they have attempted many times,
But never could effect their Stratagem.

3. And very wisely said, it may be so.

2. But there is a meeting in the Senate House,
And all the Jews in Malta must be there.

Jew. Vmh; All the Jews in Malta must be there?
I, like enough, why then let every man
Provide him, and be there for fashion-sake.
If any thing shall there concern our state
Assure your selves I Will look unto my self. aside,

1. I know you will; well brethren let us go.

2. Let Us take our leaves; Farewell good Barabas.

Jew. Do so; Farewell Zaareth, farewell Temainte.
And Barabas now search this secret out.
Summon thy senses, call thy wits togethre:
These silly men mistake the matter clean.
Long to the Turk did Malta contribute;
Which Tribute all in policy, I fear,
The Turks have let increase to such a sum,
As all the wealth of Malta cannot pay;
And now by that advantage thinks, belike,
To seize upon the Town: I, that he seeks.
How ere the world go, I Will make sure for one,
And seek in time to intercept the worst,
Warily garding that which I ha got.
Ego mihimet sum semper proximas.
Why let 'em enter, let 'em take the Town.

Enter Governors of Malta, Knights me^ by Bassoes of the Turk; Calymath.
Gouer. Now Bassoes, what demand you at our hands?

Bass. Know Knights of Malta, that we came from Rhodes
From Cyprus, Candy, and those other Isles
That lie betwixt the Mediterranean seas.

Gov. What Is Cyprus, Candy, and those other Isles
To us, or Malta? What at our hands demand ye?

Calim. The ten years tribute that remains unpaid.

Gov. Alas, my Lord, the sum is ouergreat,
I hope your Highness will consider us.

Calim. I wish, grave Governors 'twere in my power
To favor you, but it is my fathers cause,
Wherein I may not, nay I dare not dally.

Gov. Then give us leave, great Selim-Calymath.

Caly. Stand all aside, and let the Knights determine,
And send to keep our Galleys vnder-saile,
For happily we shall not tarry here:
Now Governors how are you resolved?

Gov. Thus: Since your hard conditions are such
That you will needs have ten years tribute past,
We may have time to make collection
Amongst the Inhabitants of Malta for it.

Bass. That Is more then is in our Commission.

Caly. What Callapine a little courtesy.
Let Us know their time, perhaps it is not long;
And it is more Kingly to obtain by peace
Then to enforce conditions by constraint.
What respit ask you Governors?

Gov. But a month.

Caly. We grant a month, but see you keep your promise.
Now lanch our Galleys back again to Sea,
VVh^re we will attend the respit you have t^ne,
And for the money send our messenger.
Farewell great Governors, and brave Knights of Malta.

Exeunt. Gov. And all good fortune wait on Calymath.
Go one and call those Jews of Malta hither:
Were they not summoned to appear to day.

Officer. They were, my Lord, and here they come.

Enter Barabas, and three Jews. 1 Knight. Have you determined what to say to
them?

Gov. Yes, give me leave, and Hebrwes now come near.
From the Emperor of Turkey is arrived
Great Selim-Calymath, his Highness son,
To levy of us ten years tribute past,
Now then here know that it concerns us:

Bar. Then good my Lord, to keep your quiet still,
Your Lordship shall do well to let them have it.

Gov. Soft Barabas, there is more longs to it than so.
To what this ten years tribute will amount
That we have cast, but cannot compass it
By reason of the wars, that robbed our store;
And therefore are we to request your aid.

Bar. Alas, my Lord, we are no soldiers:
And what is our aid against so great a Prince?

1 Kni. Tut, Jew, we know thou art no soldier;
Thou art a Merchant, and a monied man,
And it is thy money, Barabas, we seek.

Bar. How, my Lord, my money?

Gov. Thine and the rest.
For to be short, amongst you 'tmust be had,

Jew. Alas, my Lord, the most of us are poor.

Gov. Then let the rich increase your portions:

Bar. Are strangers with your tribute to be taxed?

2 Kni. Have strangers leave with us to get their wealth?
Then let them with us contribute.

Bar. How, equally?

Gov. No, Jew, like infidels.
For through our sufferance of your hateful lives,
Who stand accursed in the sight of heaven,
These taxes and afflictions are befal'ne,
And therefore thus we are determined;
Read there the Articles of our decrees.

Reader. First, the tribute money of the Turks shall all be
Leuyed amongst the Jews, and each of them to pay one
Half of his estate.

Bar. How, half his estate? I hope you mean not mine.

Gov. Read on.

Read. Secondly, he that denies to pay, shall straight become
A Christian.

Bar. How a Christian? Hum, what is here to do?

Read. Lastly, he that denies this, shall absolutely lose al he has.

All 3 Jews. Oh my Lord we will give half.

Bar. Oh earth-mettall'd villains, and no Hebrews born!
And will you basely thus submit your selves
To leave your goods to their arbitrament?

Gov. Why Barabas will thou be christned^

Bar. No, Governor, I will be no conuertite.

Gov, Then pay thy half.

Bar. Why know you what you did by this device?
Half of my substance is a Cities wealth.
Governor, it was not got so easily;
Nor will I part so slightly therewithal.

Gov. Sir, half is the penalty of our decree,
Either pay that, or we will seize on all.

Bar. Corpo di deo; stay, you shall have half,
Let me be used but as my brethren are.

Gov. No, Jew, thou have denied the Articles,
And now it cannot be recalled.

Bar, Will you then steal my goods?
Is theft the ground of your Religion?

Gov. No, Jew, we take particularly thine
To save the ruin of a multitude:
And better one want for a common good,
Then many perish for a private man:
Yet Barrabas we will not banish thee,
But here in Malta, where thou go^st thy wealth,
Live still; and if thou can, get more.

Bar. Christians; what, or how can I multiply?
Of naught is nothing made.

1 Knight. From naught at first thou can to little wealth,
From little unto more, from more to most:
If your first curse fall heavy on thy head,
And make thee poor and scorn^d of all the world,
It Is not our fault, but thy inherent sin.

Bar. What? bring you Scripture to confirm your wrong?
^reach m^ not out of my possessions.
Some Jews are wicked, as all Christians are:
But say the Tribe that I descended of
Were all in general cast away for sin,
Shall I be tried by their transgression?
The man that deals righteously shall live:
And which of you can charge me otherwise?

Gov. Out wretched Barabas, sham'st thou not thus
To justify thy self, as if we knew not
Thy profession? If thou rely upon thy righteousness,
Be patient and thy riches will increase.
Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness:
And covetousness, oh it is a monstrous sin.

Bar. I, but theft is worse: tush, take not from me then,
For that is theft; and if you rob me thus,
I must be forced to steal and compass more.

1 Kni. Grave Governors, list not to his exclames:
Convert his mansion to a Nunnery, Enter Officers.
His house will harbor many holy Nuns.

Gov. It shall be so: now Officers have you done?

Offic. I, my Lord, we have seized upon the goods
And wares of Barabas, which being valued
Amount to more then all the wealth in Malta.
And of the other we have seized half.
Then we will take order for the residue.

Bar. Well then my Lord, say, are you satisfied?
You have my goods, my money, and my wealth,
My ships, my store, and all that I enjoyed;
And having all, you can request no more;
Unless your unrelenting flinty hearts
Suppress all pity in your stony breasts,
And now shall move you to bereave my life.

Gov. No, Barabas, to stain our hands with blood
Is far from us and our profession.

Bar. Why I esteem the injury far less,
To take the lives of miserable men,
Then be the causers of their misery,
You have my wealth the labor of my life,
The comfort of mine age, my childrens hope,
And therefore never distinguish of the wrong.

Gov. Content thee, Barabas, thou have naught but right.

Bar. Your extreme right does me exceeding wrong:
But take it to you in the devils name.

Gov. Come, let us in, and gather of these goods
The money for this tribute of the Turk.

1 Knight, It Is necessary that be looked unto:
For if we break our day, we break the league,
And that will prove but simple policy. Exeunt,

Bar. I, policy? that is their profession,
And not simplicity, as they suggest.
The plagues of Egypt, and the curse of heaven,
Earths barrenness, and all men's hatred
Inflict upon them, thou great Primas Motor.
And here upon my knees, striking the earth,
I banne their souls to everlasting pains
And extreme tortures of the fiery deep,
That thus have dealt with me in my distress.

1 Jew. Oh yet be patient, gentle Barabas.

Bar. Oh silly brethren, borne to see this day!
Why stand you thus unmoved with my laments?
Why weep you not to think upon my wrongs?
Why pine not I, and dye in this distress?

1 Jew. Why, Barabas, as hardly can we brook
The cruel handling of our selves in this:
Thou see they have taken half our goods.

Bar. Why did you yield to their extortion?
You were a multitude, and I but one,
And of me only have they taken all.

1 Jew. Yet brother Barabas remember Job,

Bar. What tell you me of Job? I wot his wealth
Was written thus: he had seven thousand sheep,
Three thousand Camels, and two hundred yoke
Of laboring Oxen, and five hundred
She Asses: but for every one of those,
Had they been valued at indifferent rate,
I had at home, and in mine Argosie
And other ships that came from Egypt last,
As much as would have bought his beasts and him,
And yet have kept enough to live upon;
So that not he, but I may curse the day,
Thy fatal birthday, forlorn Barabas;
And henceforth wish for an eternal night,
That clouds of darkness may enclose my flesh,
And hide these extreme sorrows from mine eyes:
For only I have toiled to inherit here
The months of vanity and loss of time,
And painful nights have bin appointed me.

2 Jew. Good Barabas be patient.

Bar. I, I pray leave me in my patience.
You that were never possessed of wealth, are pleased with want.
But give him liberty at least to mourn,
That in a field amidst his enemies,
Does see his soldiers slain, himself disarmed,
And knows no means of his recovery:
I, let me sorrow for this sudden chance,
It Is in the trouble of my spirit I speak;
Great injuries are not so soon forgot.

1 Jew. Come, let us leave him in his irefull mood,
Our words will but increase his ecstasy.

2 Jew. On then: but trust me it is a misery
To see a man in such affliction:
Farewell Barabas. Exeunt.

Bar. I, fare you well.
See the simplicity of these base s^aues,
Who for the villains have no wit themselves,
Think me to be a senseless lump of clay
That will with every water wash to dirt:
No, Barabas is borne to better chance,
And framed of finer mold then common men,
That measure naught but by the present time.
A reaching thought will search his deepest wits,
And cast with cunning for the time to come:
For evils are apt to happen every day
But whither wends my beauteous Abigall?
Enter Abigall the Jews daughter. Oh what has made my lovely daughter sad?
What? woman, moan not for a little loss:
Thy father has enough in store for thee.

Abig. Not for my self, but aged Barabas:
Father, for thee lamenteth Abigaile:
But I will learn to leave these fruitless tears.
And urged thereto with my afflictions,
With fierce exlaimes run to the Senate House,
And in the Senate reprehend them all,
And rent their hearts with tearing of my hair,
Till they reduce the wrongs done to my father.

Bar. No, Abigail, things past recovery
Are hardly cured with exclamations.
Be silent, Daughter, sufferance breeds ease,
And time may yield us an occasion
Which on the sudden cannot serve the turn.
Besides, my girl, think me not all so fond
As negligently to forgo so much
Without provision for thy self and me.
Ten thousand Portagnes, besides great Perles,
Rich costly Jewels, and Stones infinite,
Fearing the worst of this before it fell,
I closely hid.

Abig. Where father?

Bar. In my house my girl.

Abig. Then shall they never be seen of Barrabas:
For they have seized upon thy house and wares.

Bar. But they will give me leave once more, I trow,
To go into my house.

Abig. That may they not:
For there I left the Governor placing Nuns,
Displacing me; and of thy house they mean
To make a Nunnery, where none but their own sect
Must enter in; men generally barred.

Bar. My gold, my gold, and all my wealth is gone.
You partial heavens, have I deserved this plague?
What will you thus oppose me, lucklesse Stars,
To make me desperate in my poverty?
And knowing me impatient in distress
Think me so mad as I will hang my self,
That I may vanish ore the earth in air,
And leave no memory that e're I was.
No, I will live; nor loath I this my life:
And since you leave me in the Ocean thus
To sink or swim, and put me to my shifts,
I Will rouse my senses, and awake my self.
Daughter, I have it: thou perceiu'st the plight
Wherein these Christians have oppressed me:
Be ruled by me, for in extremity
We ought to make bar of no policy.

Abig. Father, what e're it be to iniure them
That have so manifestly wronged us,
What will not Abigall attempt?

Bar. Why so; then thus, thou toldst me they have turned my house
Into a Nunnery, and some Nuns are there.

Abig. I did.

Bar. Then Abigall, there must my girl
Entreat the Abbasse to be entertained.

Abig. How, as a Nun?

Bar. I, Daughter, for Religion
Hides many mischiefs from suspicion.

Abig. I, but father they will suspect me there.

Bar. Let 'em suspect, but be thou so precise
As they may think it done of Holiness.
Entreat 'em fair, and give them friendly speech,
And seem to them as if thy sins were great,
Till thou have gotten to be entertained.

Abig. Thus father shall I much dissemble.

Bar. Tush, as good dissemble that thou never mean
As first mean truth, and then dissemble it,
A counterfeit profession is better
Then unseen hypocrisy.

Abig. Well father, say I be entertained,
What then shall follow?

Bar. This shall follow then;
There have I hid close underneath the plancke
That runs along the upper chamber floor,
The gold and Jewels which I kept for thee.
But here they come; be cunning Abigall.

Abig. Then father go with me.

Bar. No, Abigall, in this
It is not necessary I be seen.
For I will seem offended with thee for it.
Be close, my girl, for this must fetch my gold.

Enter three Friars and two Nuns. 1 Fry. Sisters, we now are almost at the new
made Nunnery.

1 Nun. The better; for we love not to be seen:
It Is 30 winters long since some of us
Did stray so far amongst the multitude.

1 Fry. But, Madam, this house
And waters of this new made Nunnery
Will much delight you.

Nun. It may be so: but who comes here?

Abig. Grave Abbasse, and you happy Virgins guide,
Pity the state of a distressed Maid.

Abb. What art thou daughter?

Abig. The hopeless daughter of a hapless Jew,
The Jew of Malta, wretched Barabas;
Sometimes the owner of a goodly house,
Which they have now turned to a Nunnery.

Abb. Well, daughter, say, what is thy suit with us?

Abig. Fearing the afflictions which my father feels,
Proceed from sin, or want of faith in us,
I Would pass away my life in penitence,
And be a Nouice in your Nunnery,
To make atonement for my laboring soul.

1. Fry. No doubt, brother, but this proceeds of the spirit.

2 Fry. I, and of a moving spirit too, brother; but come,
Let us entreat she may be entertained.

Abb. Well, daughter, we admit you for a Nun.

Abig. First let me as a Novice learn to frame
My solitary life to your straight laws,
And let me lodge where I was wont to lie,
I do not doubt by your divine precepts
And mine own industry, but to profit much.

Bar. As much I hope as all I hid is worth. aside.

Abb. Come daughter, follow us.

Bar. Why how now Abigall, what make thou
Amongst these hateful Christians?

1 Fry. Hinder her not, thou man of little faith,
For she has mortified her self.

Bar. How, mortified I

1 Fry. And is admitted to the Sister-hood.

Bar. Child of pordition, and thy fathers shame,
What will thou do among these hateful fiends?
I charge thee on my blessing that thou leave
These devils, and their damned heresy.

Abig. Father give me --

Bar. Nay back, Abigall,
And think upon the Jewels and the gold^ Whispers to he^.
The board is marked thus that couers it.
Away accursed from thy fathers sight.

1 Fry. Barabas, although thou art in mis-belee^e,
And wilt not see thine own afflictions,
Yet let thy daughter be no longer blind.

Bar. Blind, Friar, I wrecke ^o^ thy persuasions.
The board is marked thus that couers i^^
For I had rather dye, then see her thus.
Will thou forsake me too in my distress,
Seduced Daughter, Go forget not. aside to her.
Becomes it Jews to be so credulo^s,
To morrow early I Will be at the doors. aside to her.
No come not at me, if thou will be damned,
Forget me, see me not, and so (...)
Farewell, Remember to morrow morning. aside.
Out, out thou wretch.

Enter Mathias. Math. Whose this? Fair Abigall the rich Jews daughter
Become a Nun, her fathers sudden fall
Has humbled her and brought her down to this:
Tut, she were fitter for a tale of love
Then to be tired out with Orizons:
And better would she far become a bed
Embraced in a friendly lovers arms,
Then rise at midnight to a solemn mass.

Enter Lodowicke. Lod. Why how now Don Mathias, in a dump?

Math. Believe me, Noble Lodowicke, I have seen
The strangest sight, in my opinion,
That ever I beheld.

Lod. What wast I prithee?

Math. A fair young maid scarce 14 years of age,
The sweetest flower in Citherea's field,
Cropped from the pleasures of the fruitful earth,
And strangely metamorphis'd Nun.

Lod. But say, What was she?

Math. Why the rich Jews daughter.

Lod. What Barabas, whose goods were lately seized?
Is she so fair?

Math. And matchless beautiful;
As had you seen her 'twould have moved your heart,
Tho countermin'd with walls of brass, to love,
Or at the least to pity.

Lod. And if she be so fair as you report,
'Twere time well spent to go and visit her:
How say you, shall we?

Math^ I must and will, Sir, there is no remedy.

Lod. And so will I too, or it shall go hard.
Farewell Mathias.

Mat. Farewell Lodowicke. Ex^unt.

Actus Secundus.
Enter Barabas with a light. Bar. THus like the sad presaging Raven that tolls
The sick man's passeport in her hollow beak,
And in the shadow of the silent night
Does shake contagion from her sable wings;
Vexed and tormented runs poor Barabas
With fatal curses toward these Christians.
The incertaine pleasures of swift-footed time
Have taken their flight, and left me in despair;
And of my former riches rests no more
But bare remembrance; like a soldiers skarre,
That has no further comfort for his maime.
Oh thou that with a fiery pillar led'st
The sons of Israel through the dismal shades,
Light Abraham's offspring; and direct the hand
Of Abigall this night; or let the day
Turn to eternal darkness after this:
No sleep can fasten on my watchful eyes,
Nor quiet enter my distempered thoughts,
Till I have answer of my Abigall.

Enter Abigall above. Abig. Now have I happily espied a time
To search the plancke my father did appoint;
And here behold (unseen) where I have found
The gold, the perles, and Jewels which he hid.

Bar. Now I remember those old women's words,
Who in my wealth wud tell me winters tales,
And speak of spirits and ghosts that glide by night
About the place where Treasure has bin hid:
And now me thinks that I am one of those:
For whilst I live, here lives my souls sole hope,
And when I dye, here shall my spirit walk.

Abig. Now that my fathers fortune were so good
As but to be about this happy place;
It Is not so happy: yet when we parted last,
He said he wud attend me in the morn.
Then, gentle sleep, where e're his body rests,
Give charge to Morpheus that he may dream
A golden dream, and of the sudden walk,
Come and receive the Treasure I have found.

Bar. Birn para todos, my ga nada no er:
As good go on, as fit so sadly thus.
But stay, what star shines yonder in the East?
The Loadstarre of my life, if Abigall.
Who Is there?

Abig. Who Is that?

Bar. Peace, Abigal, it is I.

Abig. Then father here receive thy happiness.

Bar. Have thou't? Throws down bags,

Abig. Here,
Have thou't?
There Is more, and more, and more.

Bar. Oh my girl,
My gold, my fortune, my felicity;
Strength to my soul, death to mine enemy;
Welcome the first beginner of my bliss:
Oh Aigal, Abigal, that I had thee here too,
Then my desires were fully satisfied,
But I will practice thy enlargement thence:
Oh girl, oh gold, oh beauty, oh my bl^sse! hugs his bags

Abig. Father, it draws toward midnight now,
And 'bout this time the Nuns begin to wake;
To ^^aun suspicion, therefore, let us part.

Bar. Farewell my ^oy, and by my fingers take
A kiss from hi^ that sends it from his soul.
Now Phoebus open the eyelids of the day,
And for the Raven wake the morning Lark,
That I may houer with her in the Air;
Singing ore these, as she does ore her young.
H^rmoso Pi^^^r, de les D^nirch. Exeunt^

Enter Governor, Martin del Bosco, the knights. Gov. Now Captain tell us
whither thou art bound?
Whence is thy ship that anchors in our Rhoad?
And why thou came ashore without our leave?

Bosc. Governor of Malta, hither am I bound;
My Ship, the flying Dragon, is of Spain,
And so am I, Delbosco is my name;
Vizadmirall unto the Catholic King.

1 Kni. It Is true, my Lord, therefore entreat him well.

Bosc. Our fraught is Grecians, Turks, and Africa Moors.
For late upon the coast of Corsica,
Because we veiled not to the Spanish Fleet,
Their creeping Gallyes had us in the chase:
But suddenly the wind began to rise,
And then we left, and took, and fought at ease:
Some have we fired, and many have we sunk;
But one amongst the rest became our prize:
The Captain's slain, the rest remain our slaves,
Of whom we would make sale in Malta here.

Gov. Martin del Bosco, I have heard of thee;
Welcome to Malta, and to all of us;
But to admit a sale of these thy Turks
We may not, nay we dare not give consent
By reason of a Tributary league.

1 Kni. Delbosco, as thou love and honour'st us,
Persuade our Governor against the Turk;
This truce we have is but in hope of gold,
And with that sum he craves might we wage war.

Bosc. Will Knights of Malta be in league with Turks,
And buy it basely too for sums of gold?
My Lord, Remember that to Europ's shame,
The Christian I Will of Rhodes, from whence you came,
Was lately lost, and you were stated here
To be at deadly enmity with Turks

Gov. Captain we know it, but our force is small:

Bosc. What is the sum that Calymath requires?

Gov. A hundred thousand Crowns.

Bosc. My Lord and King has title to this Isle,
And he means quickly to expel you hence;
Therefore be ruled by me, and keep the gold:
I Will write unto his Majesty for aid,
And not depart until I see you free.

Gov. On this condition shall thy Turks be sold.
Go Offi^ers and set them straight in show.
Bosco, thou shall be Malta's General;
We and our warlike Knights will follow thee
Against these barbarous mis-beleeuing Turks.

Bosc. So shall you imitate those you succeed:
For when their hideous force inuiron'd Rhodes,
Small though the number was that kept the Town,
They fought it out, and not a man ^uruiu'd
To bring the hapless news to Christendom.

Gov. So will we fight it out; come, let us away:
Proud-daring Calymath, instead of gold,
We Will send the bullets wrapped in smoke and fire:
Claim tribute where thou will, we are resolved,
Honor is bought with blood and not with gold. Extunt

Enter Officers with slaves. 1 Off. This is the Marketplace, here let 'em
stand:
Fear not their sale, for they will be quickly bought.

2 Off. Every ones price is written on his back,
And so much must they yield or not be sold. Ent. Bar.

1 Off. Here comes the Jew, had not his goods bin seized,
He'de give us present money for them all.

Enter Barabas. Bar, In spite of these swine-eating Christians,
(Vnchosen Nation, never circumciz'd;
Such as poor villains were never thought upon
Till Titus and Vespasian conquered us.)
Am I become as wealthy as I was:
They hoped my daughter would ha bin a Nun;
But she is at home, and I have bought a house
As great and fair as is the Governors;
And there in spite of Malta will I dwell:
Having Fernezes hand, whose heart I Will have;
I, and his sons too, or it shall go hard.
I am not of the Tribe of Levy, I,
That can so soon forget an injury.
We Jews can fawn like Spaniels when we please;
And when we grin we bite, yet are our looks
As innocent and harmless as a Lambs.
I learned in Florence how to kiss my hand,
Heave up my shoulders when they call me dog,
And ducke as low as any barefoot Friar,
Hoping to see them starve upon a stall,
Or else be gathered for in our Synagogue;
That when the offering-Bason comes to me,
Even for charity I may spit intoo't.
Here comes Don Lodowick^ the Gouernor's son,
One that I love for his good fathers sake.

Enter Lodowicke. Lod. I hear the wealthy Jew walked this way;
I Will seek him out, and so insinuate,
That I may have a sight of Abigall;
For Don Mathias tells me she is fair.

Bar. Now will I show my self to have more of the Serpent
Then the Dove; that is, more knave than fool.

Lod. Yond walks the Jew, now for fair Abigall.

Bar. I, I, no doubt but she is at your command.

Lod. Barabas, thou know I am the Governors son.

Bar. I wud you were his father too, Sir, that is all the harm
I wish you: the slave looks like a hogs cheek new findg'd.

Lod. Whither walk'st thou Barabas?

Bar. No further: it is a custom held with us,
That when we speak with Gentiles like to you,
We turn into the Air to purge our selves:
For unto us the Promise does belong.

Lod. Well, Barabas, can help me to a Diamond?

Bar. Oh, Sir, your father had my Diamonds.
Yet I have one left that will serve your turn:
I mean my daughter: -- but e're he shall have her
I Will sacrifice her on a pile of wood. aside.
I ha the poison of the City for him, and the
White leprosy.

Lod. What sparkle does it give without a foil?

Bar. The Diamond that I talk of, never was foild:
But when he touches it, it will be foild:
Lord Lodowicke, it sparkles bright and fair.

Lod. Is it square or pointed, pray let me know.

Bar. Pointed it is, good Sir, -- but not for you. aside

Lod. I like it much the better.

Brr. So do I too.

Lod. How shows it by night?

B^r. Out shines Cinthia's rays:
Yeu'le like it better far a nights than days. aside.

Lod. And what is the price?

Bar. Your life and if you have it. -- Oh my Lord
We will not larre about the price; come to my house
And I will giu't your honor -- with a vengeance. aside

Lod. No, Barabas, I will deserve it first.

Bar. Good Sir, your father has deserved it at my hands,
Who of mere charity and Christian ruth,
To bring me to religious purity,
And as it were in Catechizing sort,
To make me mindful of my mortal sins,
Against my will, and whether I would or no,
Seized all I had, and thrust me out a doors,
And made my house a place for Nuns most chaste.

Lod. No doubt your soul shall reap the fruit of it.

Bar. I, but my Lord, the harvest is far off:
And yet I know the prayers of those Nuns
And holy Friars, having money for their pains,
Are wondrous; and indeed do no man good: aside.
And seeing they are not idle, but still doing,
It Is likely they in time may reap some fruit,
I mean in fullness of perfection.

Lod. Good Barabas glance not at our holy Nuns.

Bar. No, but I do it through a burning zeal,
Hoping ere long to set the house a fire;
For though they do a while increase and multiply, aside.
I Will have a saying to that Nunnery.
As for the Diamond, Sir, I told you of,
Come home and there is no price shall make us part,
Even for your Honorable fathers sake.
It shall go hard but I will see your death, aside.
But now I must be gone to buy a slave.

Lod. And, Barabas, I Will bear thee company.

Bar. Come then, here is the marketplace; what is the price
Of this flaue, 200 Crowns? Do the Turk weigh so much?

Off. Sir, that is his price.

Bar. What, can he steal that you demand so much?
Belike he has some new trick for a purse;
And if he has, he is worth 300 plats.
So that, being bought, the Towne-seale might be got
To keep him for his life time from the gallows.
The Sessions day is critical to thieves,
And few or none escape but by being purged.

Lod. Ratest thou this Moore but at 200 plats?

1 Off. No more, my Lord.

Bar. Why should this Turk be dearer then that Moore?

Off. Because he is young and has more qualities.

Bar. What, have the Philosophers stone? and thou have,
Break my head with it, I Will forgive thee.

Itha. No Sir, I can cut and shave.

Bar. Let me see, sir, are you not an old shauer?

Ith. Alas, Sir, I am a very youth.

Bar. A youth? I Will buy you, and marry you to Lady vanity
If you do well.

Ith. I will serve you, Sir.

Bar. Some wicked trick or other. It may be under color
Of shauing, thou wilt cut my throat for my goods.
Tell me, have thou thy health well?

Ith. I^ passing well.

Bar. So much the worse; I must have one that is ^ickly,
And be but for sparing vittles: it is not a stone of beef a day
Will maintain you in these chops; let me see one
That Is some what leaner.

1 Off. Here Is a leaner, how like you him?

Bar. Where was thou borne?

Itha. In Trace; brought up in Arabia.

Bar. So much the better, thou art for my turn,
An hundred Crowns; I Will have him; there is the coin.

1 Off. Then mark him, Sir, and take him hence.

Bar. I, mark him, you were best, for this is he
That by my help shall do much villainy.
My Lord farewell: Come Sir you are mine.
As for the Diamond it shall be yours;
I pray, Sir, be no stranger at my house,
All that I have shall be at your command.

Enter Mathias, Matter. Math. What makes the Jew and Lodewicke so private?
I fear me it is about fair Abigall.

Bar. Yonder comes Don Mathias, let us stay;
He loves my daughter, and she holds him dear:
But I have sworn to frustrate both their hopes,
And be revenged upon the -- Governor.

Matter. This Moore is comeliest, is he not? speak son.

Math. No, this is the better, mother, view this well.

Bar. Seem not to know me here before your mother
Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand:
When you have brought her home, come to my house;
Think of me as thy father; Son farewell.

Math. But wherefore talked Don Lodowick with you?

Bar. Tush man, we talked of Diamonds, not of Abigal.

Matter. Tell me, Mathias, is not that the Jew?

Bar. As for the Comment on the Machabees
I have it, Sir, and it is at your command.

Math. Yes, Madam, and my talk with him was
About the borrowing of a book or two.

Matter. Converse not with him, he is cast off from heaven.
Thou have thy Crowns, fellow, come let us away. exeunt

Math. Sir, Jew, remember the book.

Bar. Marry will I, Sir.

Off. Come, I have made a reasonable market, let us away.

Bar. Now let me know thy name, and there withal
Thy birth, condition, and profession.

Ithi. Faith, Sir, my birth is but mean, my name's Ithimer,
My profession what you please.

Bar. Have thou no Trade? then listen to my words,
And I will teach that shall stick by thee:
First be thou void of these affections,
Compassion, love, vain hope, and hartlesse fear,
Be moved at nothing, see thou pity none,
But to ^hy self smile when the Christians moan.

Ithi. Oh brave, master, I worship your nose for this.

Bar. As for my self, I walk abroad a nights
And kill sick people groaning under walls:
Sometimes I go about and poison wells;
And now and then, to cherish Christian thieves,
I am content to lose some of my Crowns;
That I may, walking in my Gallery,
See 'em go pinioned along by my door.
Being young I studied Physic, and began
To practice first upon the Italian;
There I enric'd the Priests with burials,
And always kept the Sexton's arms in ure
With digging graves and ringing dead men's knels:
And after that was I an Engineere,
And in the wars 'twixt France and Germany,
Under pretense of helping Charles the fifth,
Slew friend and enemy with my stratagems.
Then after that was I an Usurer,
And with extorting, cozening, forfeiting,
And tricks belonging unto Brokery,
I filled the Iailes with Bankrouts in a year,
And with young Orphans planted Hospitals,
And every Moon made some or other mad,
And now and then one hang himself for grief,
Pinning upon his breast along great Scrowle
How I with interest tormented him.
But mark how I am blessed for plaguing them,
I have as much coin as will buy the Town.
But tell me now, How have thou spent thy time?

Ithi. Faith, Master, in setting Christian villages on fire,
Chaining of Eunuchs, binding gally-slaues.
One time I was an Hostler in an Inn,
And in the night time secretly-would I steal
To travelers Chambers, and there cut their throats:
Once at Jerusalem, where the pilgrims kneeled,
I strowed powder on the Marble stones,
And therewithal their knees would ranckle, so
That I have laughed agood to see the cripples
Go limping home to Christendom on stilts.

Bar. Why this is something: make account of me
As of thy fellow; we are villains both:
Both circumcized, we hate Christians both:
Be true and secret, thou shall want no gold.
But stand a^ide, here comes Don Lodowicke.

Enter Lodowicke. Lod. Oh Barabas well met; where is the Diamond
You told me of?

Bar. I have it for you, Sir; please you walk in with me:
What, ho, Abigall; open the door I say.

Enter Abigall. Abig. In good time, father, here are letters come
From Ormus, and the Post stays here within.

Bar. Give me the letters, daughter, do you hear?
Entertain Lodowicke the Governors son
With all the courtesy you can afford;
Provided, that you keep your Maidenhead.
Use him as if he were a Philist^^^. aside.
Dissemble, swear, protest, vow to love him,
He is not of the seed of Abraham.
I am a little busy, Sir, pray pardon me.
Abigall, bid him welcome for my sake.

Abig. For your sake and his own he is welcome hither.

Bar. Daughter, a word more; kiss him, speak him fair,
And like a cunning Jew so cast about,
That ye be both made sure e're you come out.

Abig. Oh father, Don Mathias is my love.

Bar. I know it: yet I say make love to him;
Do, it is requisite it should be so.
Nay on my life it is my Factors hand,
But go you in, I Will think upon the account:
The account is made, for Lodowicke dies.
My Factor sends me word a Merchant's fled
That owes me for a hundred Tun of Wine:
I weigh it thus much; I have wealth enough.
For now by this has he kissed Abigall;
And she vows love to him, and he to her.
As sure as heaven rained Manna for the Jews,
So sure shall he and Don Mathias dye:
His father was my chiefest enemy.
Whither goes Don Mathias? stay a while.

Enter Mathias. Math. Wither but to my fair love Abigall?

Bar. Thou know, and heaven can witness it is true,
That I intend my daughter shall be thine.

Math. I, Barabas, or else thou wrong'st me much:

Bar. Oh heaven forbid I should have such a thought.
Pardon me though I weep; the Governors son
Will, whether I will or no, have Abigall:
He sends her letters, bracelets, jewels, rings.

Math. Does she receive them?

Bar. She? No, Mathias, no, but sends them back,
And when he comes, she locks her self up fast;
Yet through the key^ hole will he talk to her,
While she runs to the wi^dow looking out
When you should come and hale him from the doore^

Math. Oh treacherous Lodowicke!

Bar. Even now as I came home, he slipped me in,
And I am sure he is with Abigall.

Math. I Will rouse him thence.

Bar. Not for all Malta, therefore sheath your sword;
If you love me, no quarrels in my house;
But st^ale you in, and seem to see him not;
I Will give him such a warning e're he goes
As he shall have small hopes of Abigall.
Away, for here they come,

Enter Lodowicke^ Abigall. Math. What hand in hand, I cannot suffer this.

Bar. Mathias, as thou love me, not a word.

Math. Well, let it pass, another time shall serve.

Exit. Lod. Barabas, is not that the widows son?

Bar. I, and take heed, for he has sworn your death.

Lod. My death? what is the base borne peasant mad?

B^r. No, no, but happily he stands in fear
Of that which you, I think, never dream upon,
My daughter here, a paltry silly girl.

Lod. Why loves she Don Mathias?

Bar. Does she not with her smiling answer you?

Abig. He has my heart, I smile against my will.

Lod. Barabas, thou know I have loved thy daughter long.

Bar. And so has she done you, even from a child.

Lod. And now I can no longer hold my mind.

Bar. Nor I the affection that I bear to you

Lod. This is thy Diamond, tell me, shall I have it?

Bar. Win it, and wear it, it is yet vn^oyl'd,
Oh but I know your Lordship wud disdain
To marry with the daughter of a Jew:
And yet I Will give her many a golden cross
With Christian posies round about the ring.

Lod. It Is not thy wealth, but her that I esteem,
Yet crave I thy consent.

Bar. And mine you have, yet let me talk to her;
This offspring of Cain, this Iebusite
That never tasted of the Passover,
Nor e're shall see the land of Canaan,
Nor our Messiah that is yet to come, aside.
This gentle Magot Lodowicke I mean,
Must be deluded: let him have thy hand,
But keep thy heart till Don Mathias comes.

Abig. What shall I be betrothed to Lodowicke?

Bar. It Is no sin to deceive a Christian;
For they them s^lues hold it a principle,
Faith is not to be held with Heretics;
But all are Heretics that are not Jews;
This follows well, and therefore daughter fear not.
I have entreated her, and she will grant.

Lod. Then gentle Abigal plight thy faith to me.

Abig. I cannot choose, seeing my father bids:
Nothing but death shall part my love and me.

Lod. Now have I that for which my soul has longed.

Bar. So have not I, but yet I hope I shall. aside.

Abig. Oh wretched Abigal, what have thee done?

Lod. Why on the sudden is your color changed?

Abig. I know not, but farewell, I must be gone.

Bar. Stay her, but let her not speak one word more.

Lod. Mute a the sudden; here is a sudden change.

Bar. Oh muse not at it, it is the Hebrews guize,
That maidens new betrothed should weep a while^
Trouble her not, sweet Lodowicke depart:
She is thy wife, and thou shall be mine heir.

Lod. Oh, is it the custom, then I am resolved:
But rathe let the brightsome heavens be dim,
And Natures beauty choke with stifeling clouds,
Then my fair Abigal should frown on me.
There comes the villain, now I Will be revenged.

Enter Mathias. Bar. Be quiet Lodowicke, it is enough
That I have made thee sure to Abigal.

Lod. Well, let him go. Exit.

Bar. Well, but for me, as you went in at doors
You had bin stabbed, but not a word on it now;
Here must no speeches pass, nor swords be drawn.

Math. Suffer me, Barabas, but to follow him.

Bar. No; so shall I, if any hurt be done,
Be made an accessory of your deeds;
Revenge it on him when you meet him next.

Math. For this I Will have his heart.

Bar. Do so; lo here I give thee Abigall.

Math. What greater gift can poor Mathias have?
Shall Lodowicke rob me of so fair a love?
My life is not so dear as Abigall.

Bar. My heart misgiues me, that to cross your love,
He Is with your mother, therefore after him.

Math. What, is he gone unto my mother?

Bar. Nay, if you will, stay till she comes her self.

Math. I cannot stay; for if my mother come,
She Will dye with grief. Exit.

Abig. I cannot take my leave of him for tears:
Father, why have you thus incenst them both?

Bar. What Is that to thee?

Abig. I Will make 'em friends again.

Bar. You Will make 'em friends? are there not Jews
Enough in Malta.
But thou must dote upon a Christian?

Abig. I will have Don Mathias, he is my love.

Bar. Yes, you shall have him: Go put her in.

Ith. I, I Will put her in.

Bar. Now tell me, Ithimore, how like thou this?

Ith. Faith Master, I think by this
You purchase both their lives; is it not so?

Bar. True; and it shall be cunningly performed.

Ith. Oh, master, that I might have a hand in this.

Bar. I, so thou shall, it is thou must do the deed:
Take this and bear it to Mathias straight,
And tell him that it comes from Lodowicke.

Ith. It Is poisoned, is it not?

Bar. No, no, and yet it might be done that way:
It is a challenge feigned from Lodowicke.

Ith. Fear not, I Will so set his heart a fire, that he
Shall verily think it comes from him.

Bar. I cannot choose but like thy readiness:
Yet be not rash, but do it cunningly.

Ith. As I behave my self in this, employ me hereafter.

Bar. Away then. Exit.
So, now will I go in to Lodowicke,
And like a cunning spirit feign some lie,
Till I have set 'em both at enmity. Exit.

Actus Tertius.
Enter a Curtezan^. SInce this Town was besieged, my gain grows cold
The time has bin, that but for one bare night
A hundred Ducats have bin freely given:
But now against my will I must be chaste.
And yet I know my beauty does not fail.
From Venice Merchants, and from Padua,
Were wont to come rare witted Gentlemen,
Scholars I mean, learned and liberal;
And now, save Pilia-borza, comes there none,
And he is very seldom from my house;
And here he comes.

Enter Pilia-borza. Pilia. Hold thee, wench, there is something for thee to
spend.

Curt. It Is silver, I disdain it.

Pilia. I, but the Jew has gold,
And I will have it or it shall go hard.

Curt. Tell me, how came thou by this?

Pilia. Faith, walking the back lanes through the Gardens
I chanced to cast mine eye up to the Jews counting house
Where I saw some bags of money, and in the night I
Clamber'd up with my hooks, and as I was taking
My choice, I heard a rumbling in the house; so I took
Only this, and run my way: but here is the Jews man.

Enter Ithimore. Curt. Hide the bag.

Pilia. Look not toward him, let us away:
Zoon's what a looking thou keep'st,
Thou Wilt betraye's anon.

Ith. O the sweetest face that ever I beheld! I know she is
A Curtezane by her attire: now would I give a hundred
Of the Jews Crowns that I had ^uch a Concubine.
Well, I have delivered the challenge in such sort,
As meet they will, and fighting dye; brave sport.

Exit. Enter Mathias. Math. This is the place, now Abigall shall see
Whether Mathias holds her dear or no.

Enter Lodow. reading. Math. What, dares the villain write in such base terms?

Lod. I did it, and revenge it if thou dare.

Fight: Enter Barabas above. Bar. Oh bravely fought, and yet they thrust not
home.
Now Lodowicke, now Mathias, so;
So now they have showed themselves to be tall fellows.
Within, Part 'em, part 'em.

Bar. I, part 'em now they are dead: Farewell, farewell.

Exit. Enter Go^ernor. Matter. Gov. What sight is this? my Lodowicke slain!
These arms of mine shall be thy Sepulcher.

Matter, Who is this? my son Mathias slain!

Gov. Oh Lodowicke! had thou perished by the Turk,
Wretched Ferneze might have veng'd thy death.

Matter. Thy son slew mine, and I Will revenge his death.

Gov. Look, Katherin, look, thy son gave mine these wounds

Mat. O leave to griue me, I am grieved enough.

Gov. Oh that my sighs could turn to lively breath;
And these my tears to blood, that he might live.

Matter. Who made them enemies?

Gov. I know not, and that grieves me most of all.

Mat. My son loved thine.

Gov. And so did Lodowicke him.

Mat. Lend me that weapon that did kill my son,
And it shall murder me.

Gov, Nay Madem stay, that weapon was my son's,
And on that rather should Ferneze dye.

Mat. Hold, let us inquire the causers of their deaths,
That we may venge their blood upon their heads.

Gov. Then take them up, and let them be interred
Within one sacred monument of stone;
Upon which Altar I will offer up
My daily sacrifice of sighs and tears,
And with my prayers pierce impartial heavens,
Till they the causers of our smarts,
Which forced their hands divide united hearts:
Come, Katherina, our losses equal are,
Then of true grief let us take equal share.

Exeunt. Enter Ithimore. Ith. Why was there ever seen such villainy, so neatly
Plotted, and so well performed? both held in hand, and
Flatly both beguiled.

Enter Abigall. Abig. Why how now Ithimore, why laugh'st thou so?

Ith. Oh, Mistress, ha ha ha.

Abig. Why what ayl'st thou?

Ith. Oh my master.

Abig. Ha.

Ith. Oh Mistress! I have the brauest, grauest, secret, subtle
Bottle-nos'd knave to my Master, that ever Gentleman had

Abig. Say, knave, why rail'st upon my father thus?

Ith. Oh, my master has the brauest policy.

Abig. Wherein?

Ith. Why, know you not?

Abig. Why no.

Ith. Know you not of Mathia and Don Lodowick disaster?

Abig. No, what was it?

Ith. Why the devil invented a challenge, my Mr. writ it,
And I carried it, first to Lodowicke, and impr^mis to Mathia.
And then they met, as the story says,
In doleful wise they ended both their days.

Abig. And was my father furtherer of their deaths?

Ith. Am I Ithimore?

Abig. Yes.

Ith. So sure did your father write, and I carry the challenge.

Abig. Well, Ithimore, let me request thee this,
Go to the new made Nunnery, and inquire
For any of the Friars of St. Iaynes,
And say, I pray them come and speak with me.

Ith. I pray, mistress, will you answer me to one question?

Abig. Well, sir, what is it?

Ith. A very feeling one; have not the Nuns fine sport
With the Friars now and then?

Abig. Go to, sir sauce, is this your question? get ye gone

Ith. I will forsooth, Mistress. Exit

Abig. Hard-hearted Father, unkind Barabas,
Was this the pursuit of thy policy?
To make me show them favor severally,
That by my favor they should both be slain?
Admit thou lou'dst not Lodowicke for his sin,
Yet Don Mathias never offended thee:
But thou were set upon extreme revenge,
Because the Pryor dispossessed thee once,
And could not venge it, but upon his son,
Nor on his son, but by Mathias means;
Nor on Mathias, but by murdering me.
But I perceive there is no love on earth,
Pity in Jews, nor piety in Turks.
But here Comes cursed Ithimore with the Friar.

Enter Ithimore. Friar. Fry. Virgo, salve.

Ith. When ducke you?

Abig. Welcome grave Fryar^ Ithamore begone, Exit
Know, holy Sir, I am bold to solicit thee.

Fry. Wherein?

Abig. To get me be admitted for a Nun.

Fry. Why Abigal it is not yet long since
That I did labor thy admition,
And then thou did not like that holy life.

Abig. Then were my thoughts so frail and vnconfirm'd,
And I was chained to follies of the world:
But now experience, purchased with grief,
Has made me see the difference of things.
My sinful soul, alas, has paced too long
The fatal Labyrinth of misbeleefe,
Far from the Son that gives eternal life.

Fry. Who taught thee this?

Abig. The Abbasse of the house,
Whose zealous admonition I embrace:
Oh therefore, Iacomi, let me be one,
Although unworthy of that Sister-hood.

Fry. Abigal I will, but see, thou change no more,
For that will be most heavy to thy soul.

Abig. That was my father's fault.

Fry. Thy father's, how?

Abig. Nay, you shall pardon me: oh Barabas,
Though thou deseruest hardly at my hands,
Yet never shall these lips bewray thy life.

Fry. Come, shall we go?

Abig. My duty waits on you. Exeunt.

Enter Barabas reading a letter. Bar. What, Abigall become a Nun again?
False, and unkind; what have thou lost thy father?
And all unknown, and vnconstrain'd of me,
Art thou again got to the Nunnery?
Now here she writes, and wills me to repent.
Repentance? Spurca: what pretends this?
I fear she knows ('it is so) of my device
In Don Mathias and Lodovicoes deaths:
If so, it is time that it be seen into:
For she that varies from me in belief
Gives great presumption that she loves me not;
Or loving, does dislike of something done:
But who comes here? Oh Ithimore come near;
Come near my love, come near thy masters life,
My trusty servant, nay, my second life;
For I have now no hope but even in thee;
And on that hope my happiness is built:
When saw thou Abigall?

Ith. To day.

Bar. With whom?

Ith. A Friar.

Bar. A Friar? false villain, he has done the deed.

Ith. How, Sir?

Bar. Why made mine Abigall a Nun.

Ith. That Is no lie, for she sent me for him.

Brr. Oh unhappy day,
False, credulous, inconstant Abigall!
But let 'em go: And Ithimore, from hence
Never shall she grieve me more with her disgrace;
Never shall she live to inherit ought of mine,
Be blessed of me, nor come within my gates,
But perish underneath my bitter curse
Like Cain by Adam, for his brother's death.

Ith. Oh master.

Bar. Ithimore, entreat not for her, I am moved,
And she is hateful to my soul and me:
And least thou yield to this that I entreat,
I cannot think but that thou hat'st my life.

Ith. Who I, master? Why I Will run to some rock and
Throw my self headlong into the sea; why I Will do any
Thing for your sweet sake.

Bar. Oh trusty Ithimore; no servant, but my friend;
I here adopt thee for mine only heir,
All that I have is thine when I am dead,
And whilst I live use (...); spend as my self;
Here take my keys, I Will give 'em thee anon^
Go buy thee garments: but thou shall not want:
Only know this, that thus thou art to do:
But first go fetch me in the pot of Rice
That for our supper stands upon the fire.

Ith. I hold my head my master's hungry: I go Sir.

Exit: Bar. Thus every villain ambles after wealth
Although he never be richer then in hope:
But hu^h't.

Enter Ithimore with the pot. Ith. Here it is, Master.

Bar. Well said, Ithimore; what have thou brought
The Ladle with thee too?

Ith. Yes, Sir, the proverb says, he that eats with the devil
Had need of a long spoone, I have brought you a Ladle.

Bar. Very well, Ithimore, then now be secret^
And for thy sake, whom I so dearly love,
Now shall thou see the death of Abigall,
That thou may freely live to be my heir.

Ith. Why, master, will you poison her with a mess of rice
Porredge that will preserve life, make her round and plump,
And batten more then you are aware.

Bar. I but Ithimore see thou this?
It is a precious powder that I bought
Of an Italian in An^^na once,
Whose operation is to binde^ infect,
And poison deeply: yet not appear
In forty hours after it is ta^e.

Ith. How master?

Bar. Thus Ithimore:
This Even they use in Malta here ('it is called
Saint Iagues Even) and then I say they use
To send their Alms unto the Nunneries:
Among the rest bear this, and set it there;
There Is a dark entry where ^^ey take it in,
Where they must neither see the messenger,
Nor make enquiry who has sent it them.

Ith. How so?

Bar. Belike there is some Ceremony in it.
There Ithimore must thou go place this plot:
Stay, let me spice it first.

Ith. Pray do, and let me help you Mr. Pray let me taste first.

Bar. Prithee do: what say thou now?

Ith. Troth Mr. I Am loath such a pot of pottage should be spoyld.

Bar. Peace, Ithimore, it is better so then spared.
Assure thy self thou shall have broth by the eye.
My purse, my Coffer, and my self is thine.

Ith. Well, master, I go.

Bar. Stay, first let me stir it Ithimore.
As fatal be it to her as the draught
Of which great Alexander drunk, and dyed:
And with her let it work like Borgias wine,
Whereof his sire, the Pope, was poisoned.
In few, the blood of Hydra, Lerna's bane;
The iouyce of Hebon, and Cocitus breath,
And all the poisons of the Stygian poole
Break from the fiery kingdom; and in this
Vomit your venom, and inuenome her
That like a fiend has left her father thus.

Ith. What a blessing has he giu'nt? was ever pot of
Rice porredge so sa^c't? what shall I do with it?

Bar. Oh my sweet Ithimore go set it down
And come again so soon as thou have done,
For I have other business for thee.

Ith. Here Is a drench to poison a whole stable of
Flanders mares: I Will carry't to the Nuns with a powder.

B^r. And the horse pestilence to boot; away.

Ith, I am gone.
Pay me my wages for my work is done. Exit.

Bar. I Will pay thee with a vengeance Ithamore. Exit.

Enter Govern. (...). Knights. Bashaw. Gov. Welcome great Bashaws, how fares
C^llymath,
What wind drives you thus into Malta rhode?

Bash. The wind that blows all the world besides,
Desire of gold.

Gov. Desire of gold, great Sir?
That Is to be gotten in the Western Inde:
In Malta are no golden Minerals.

Bash. To you of Malta thus says Calymath:
The time you took for respite, is at hand,
For the performance of your promise past;
And for the Tribute-mony I am sent.

Gov. Bashaw, in brief, shall have no tribute here,
Nor shall the Heathens live upon our spoil:
First will we race the City walls our selves,
Lay waste the Island, hew the Temples down,
And shipping of our goods to Sicily,
Open an entrance for the wastfull sea,
Whose billows beating the resistlesse banks,
Shall ouerflow it with their refluence.

Bash. Well, Governor, since thou have broke the league
By ^^at denial of the promised Tribute,
Talk not of racing down your City walls,
You shall not need trouble your selves so far,
For Selim-Calymath shall come himself,
And with brasse-bullets batter down your Towers,
And turn proud Malta to a wilderness
For these intolerable wrongs of yours; And so farewell.

Gov. Farewell:
And now you men of Malta look about,
And let us provide to welcome Calymath:
Close your Port-cullise, charge your Basiliskes,
And as you profitably take up Arms,
So now courageously encounter them;
For by this Answer, broken is the league,
And naught is to be looked for now but wars,
And naught to us more welcome is then wars. Exeunt

Enter two Friars and Abigall. 1 Fry. Oh brother, brother, all the Nuns are
sick,
And Physic will not help them, they must dye.

2 Fry. The Abbasse sent for me to be con^est:
Oh what a sad confession will there be?

1 Fry. And so did fair Maria send for me:
I Will to her lodging; hereabouts she lies. Exit.

Enter Abigall. 2 Fry. What, all dead save only Abigall?

Abig. And I shall dye too, for I feel death coming.
Where is the Friar that conuerst with me?

2 Fry. Oh he is gone to see the other Nuns.

Abig. I sent for him, but seeing you are come
Be you my ghostly father; and first know,
That in this house I lived religiously,
Chaste, and devout, much sorrowing for my sins,
But e're I came --

2 Fry. What then?

Abig. I did offend high heaven so grievously,
As I am almost desperate for my sins:
And one offense torments me more then all.
You knew Mathias and Don Lodowicke?

2 Fry. Yes, what of them?

Abig. My father did contract me to 'em both:
First to Don Lodowicke, him I never loved;
Mathias was the man that I held dear,
And for his sake did I become a Nun.

2 Fry. So, say how was their end?

Abig. Both jealous of my love, envied each other:
And by my father's practice, which is there
Set down at large, the Gallants were both slain.

2 Fry. Oh monstrous villainy:

Abig. To work my peace, this I confess to thee:
Reveal it not, for then my father dies.

2 Fry. Know that Confession must not be revealed,
The Canon Law forbids it, and the Priest
That makes it known, being degraded first,
Shall ^e condemned, and then sent to the fire,

Abig. So I have heard; pray therefore keep it close,
Death seizes on my heart, ah gentle Friar
Convert my father that he may be saved,
And witness that I dye a Christian.

2 Fry. I, and a Virgin too, that grieves me most:
But I must to the Jew and exclaim on him,
And make him stand in fear of me.

Enter 1 Friar. 1 Fry. Oh brother, all the Nuns are dead, let us bury them.

2 Fry. First help to bury this, then go with me
And help me to exclaim against the Jew.

1 Fry. Why? what has he done?

2 Fry. A thing that makes me tremble to unfold.

1 Fry. What h^a he crucified a child?

2 Fry. No, but a worse thing: 'twas told me in shr^ft,
Thou know it is death and if it be revealed.
Come let us away. Exeunt.

Actus Quartus.
Enter Barabas. Itha. B^lls within. Bar. THere is no music to a Christians
knell:
How sweet the Bells ring now the Nuns are dead
That sound at other times like Tinkers pans?
I was afraid the poison had not wrought;
Or though it wrought, it would have done no good,
For every year they swell, and yet they li^e;
Now all are dead^ not one remains alive.

Ith. That Is brave Mr. but think you it will not be known

Bar. How can it if we two be secret.

Ith. For my part fear you not.

Bar. I Would cut thy throat if I did.

Ith. And reason too; but here is a royal Monastry hard
By, good master let me poison all the Monks.

Bar. Thou shall not need, for now the Nuns are dead,
They Will dye with grief.

Ith. Do you ^ot sorrow for your daughters death?

Bar. No, but I gr^eue because she lived so long an Hebrew Catho diabola.
Borne, and would become a Christian.

Enter the two Friars. Ith. Look, look, Mr. here come two religious
Caterpillars.

Bar. I smelt 'em e're they came.

Ith. God-a-mercy nose; come let us begone.

2 Fry. Stay wicked Jew, repent, I say, and stay.

1 Fry. Thou have offended, therefore must be damned.

Bar. I fear they know we sent the poisoned broth.

Ith, And so do I, master, therefore speak 'em fair.

2. Barabas, thou have --

1. I, that thou have --

Bar. True, I have money, what though I have?

2. Thou art a --

1. I, that thou art a --

Bar. What needs all this? I know I am a Jew.

2. Thy daughter --

1. I, thy daughter, --

Bar. Oh speak not of her, then I dye with grief.

2. Remember that --

1. I, remember that --

Bar. I must needs say that I have been a great usurer.

2. Thou have committed --

Bar. Fornication? but that was in another Country:
And besides, the Wench is dead.

2. I, but Barabas remember Mathias and Don Lodowick.

Bar. Why, what of them?

2. I will not say that by a forged challenge they met.

Bar. She has confessed, and we are both undone;
My bosom inmates, but I must dissemble. aside.
Oh holy Friars, the burden of my sins
Lie heavy on my soul; then pray you tell me,
Is It not too late now to turn Christian?
I have been zealous in the Jewish faith,
Hard hearted to the poor^, a covetous wretch,
That would for Lucars sake have sold my soul.
A hundred for a hundred I have ^ane;
And now for store of wealth may I compare
With all the Jews in Ma^ta; but what is wealth?
I am a Jew, and therefore am I lost.
Would penance serve for this my sin,
I could afford to whip my self to death.

Ith. And so could I; but penance will not serve.

Bar. To fast, to pray, and wear a shirt of hair,
And on my knees creep to Jerusalem,
Cellers of Wine, and Sollers full of Wheat,
Warehouses stuffed with spices and with drugs,
Whole Chests of Gold, in Bulloine, and in Coin,
Besides I know not how much weight in Pearl
Orient and round, have I within my house;
At Alexandria, Merchandise unsold:
But yesterday two ships went from this Town,
Their voyage will be worth ten thousand Crowns.
In Flo^ence, Venice, Antwerpe, London, Civil,
Frankeford, Lubecke, Mosco, and where not,
Have I debts owing; and in most of these,
Great sums of money lying in the bancho;
All this I Will give to some religious house
So I may be baptized and live therein.

1. Oh good Barabas come to our house.

2. Oh no, good Barabas come to our house.
And Barabas, you know --

Bar. I know that I have highly sinned,
You shall convert me, you shall have all my wealth.

1. Oh Barabas, their Laws are strict.

Bar. I know they are, and I will be with you.

1. They wear no shirts, and they go barefoot too.

Bar. Then it is not for me; and I am resolved
You shall confess me, and have all my goods.

1. Good Barabas come to me.

Bar. You see I answer him, and yet he stays;
Rid him away, and go you home with me.

2. I Will be with you to night.

Bar. Come to my house at one a clock this night.

1. You hear your answer, and you may be gone.

2, Why go get you away.

1. I will not go for thee.

2. Not, then I Will make thee go.

1. How, do call me rogue? Fight.

Ith. Part 'em, master, part 'em.

Bar. This is mere frailty, brethren, be content.
Friar Barnardine go you with Ithimore.

Ith. You know my mind, let me alone with him;
Why does he go to thy house, let him begone.

Bar. I Will give him something and so stop his mouth.
Exit. I never heard of any man but he
Malign'd the order of the Iacobines:
But do you think that I believe his words?
Why Brother you converted Abigall;
And I am bound in charity to requite it,
And so I will, oh Iocome, fail not but come.

Fry, But Barabas who shall be your godfathers,
For presently you shall be shriu'd.

Bar. Marry the Turk shall be one of my godfathers,
But not a word to any of your Covent.

Fry. I warrant thee, Barabas. Exit

Bar. So now the fear is past, and I am safe:
For he that shriu'd her is within my house,
What if I murdered him e're Iocoma comes?
Now I have such a plot for both their lives,
As never Jew nor Christian knew the like:
One turned my daughter, therefore he shall dye;
The other knows enough to have my life,
Therefore it is not requisite he should live.
But are not both these wise men to suppose
That I will leave my house, my goods, and all,
To fast and be well whipped; I Will none of that.
Now Friar Bernardine I come to you,
I Will feast you, lodge you, give you fair words,
And after that, I and my trusty Turk --
No more but so: it must and shall be done.
Ithimore, tell me, is the Friar asleep?

Enter Ithimore. Ith. Yes; and I know not what the reason is^
Do what I can he will not strip himself,
Nor go to bed, but sleeps in his own cloth^
I fear me he mistrusts what we intend.

Bar. No, it is an order which the Friars use:
Yet if he knew our meanings, could he escape?

Ith. No, none can hear him, cry he never so loud.

Bar. Why true, therefore did I place him there:
The other Chambers open toward the street.

Ith. You loyter, master, wherefore stay we thus?
Oh how I long to see him shake his heels.

Bar. Come on, sir, off with your girdle, make a hansom noose;
Friar awake.

Fry. What do you mean to strangle me?

Ith. Yes, 'cause you use to confess.

Bar. Blame not us but the proverb, Confess and be hanged
Pull hard.

Fry. What, will you save my life?

Bar. Pull hard, I say, you would have had my goods.

Ith. I, and our lives too^ therefore pull amain.
It Is neatly done, Sir, here is no print at all.

Bar. Then is it as it should be, take him up.

Ith. Nay, Mr. be ^ul'd by me a little; so, let him lean
Upon his staff; excellent, he stands as if he were begging of Bacon.

Bar. Who would not think but that this Friar lived?
What time a night is it now, sweet Ithimore?

Ith. Toward one.

Enter Iocoma. Bar. Then will not Iocoma (...) long from hence.

Ioco. This is the hour wherein I shall proceed;
Oh happy hour, wherein I shall convert
An Infidel, and bring his gold into our treasury.
But soft, is not this Bernardine? it is;
And understanding I should come this way,
Stands here a purpose, meaning me some wrong,
And intercept my going to the Jew; Bernardine;
Will thou not speak? thou think I see thee no^;
Away^ I Would wish thee, and let me go by:
No, will thou not? nay then I Will force my way;
And see^ staff stands ready for the purpose:
As thou like that, stop me another time.

Strike him, he falls. Enter Barabas. Bar. Why how now Iocoma, what have thou
done?

Io^o. Why stricken him that would have stroke at me.

Bar. Who is it Bernardine? now out alas, he is slain.

Ith. I, Mr. he is slain; look how his brains drop out on's nose.

Ioco. Good sirs I have don't, but nobody knows it but
You two, I may escape.

Bar. So might my man and I hang with you for company.

Ith. No, let us bear him to the Magistrates.

Ioco. Good Barabas let me go.

Bar. No, pardon me, the Law must have his course.
I must be forced to give in evidence,
That being importuned by this Ber^ardin^
To be a Christian, I shut him out,
And there he sat: now I to keep my word,
And give my goods and substance to your house,
Was up thus early; with intent to go
Unto your Friery, because you staid.

Ith. Fie upon 'em, Mr. will you turn Christian, when
Holy Friars turn devils and murder one another.

Bar. No, for this example I Will remain a Jew:
Heaven bless me; what, a Friar a murderer?
When shall you see a Jew commit the like?

Ith. Why a Turk could ^a done no more.

Bar. To morrow is the Sessions; you shall to it.
Come Ithimore, let us help to take him hence.

Ioco. Villains, I am a sacred person, touch me not.

Bar. The Law shall touch you, we'll but lead you, we^
Alas I could weep at your calamity.
Take in the staff too, for that must be shown:
Law wills that each particular be known. Exeunt.

Enter Curtezant, and Pilia-borz^. Curt. Pilia-borza, did thou meet with
Ithimore?

Pil. I did.

Curt. And did thou deliver my letter?

Pil. I did.

Curt. And what think thou, will he come?

Pil. I think so, and yet I cannot tell, for at the reading of
The letter, he looked like a man of another world.

Curt. Why so?

Pil. That such a base slave as he should be saluted by such
A tall man as I am, from such a beautiful dame as you.

Curt. And what said he?

Pil. Not a wise word, only gave me a nod, as who should say, Is it even so; and
so I left him, being driven to a Nonplus at the critical aspect of my terrible
countenance.

Curt. And where did meet him?


Pil. Upon mine own freehold within 40 foot of the Gallows, conning his
neck-verse I take it, looking of a Friars Execution, whom I saluted with an old
hempen proverb, Hidie tibi, cras mihi, and so I left him to the mercy Of the
Hangman: but the Exercise being done, see where He comes.


Enter Ithimore. Ith. I never knew a man take his death so patiently as This
Friar; he was ready to leap off e're the halter was About his neck; and when
the Hangman had put on his Hempen Tippet, he made such haste to his prayers, as
if He had had another Cure to serve; well, go whither He will, I Will be none
of his followers in haste:

And now I think on it, going to the execution, a fellow
Met me with a muschatoes like a Ravens wing, and
A Dagger with a hilt like a warming-pan, and he
Gave me a letter from one Madam Bellamira,
Saluting me in such sort as if he had meant to make
Clean my Boots with his lips; the effect was, that
I should come to her house, I wonder what the reason is;
It may be she sees more in me than I can find in
My self: for she writes further, that she loves me
Ever since she saw me, and who would not requi^e such
Loue^ he^e's her house, and here she comes, and now
Would I were gone, I am not worthy to look upon her.

Pilia. This is the Gentleman you writ to.

Ith. Gentleman, he flouts me, what gentry can be in a
Poor Turk of ten pence? I Will be gone.

Curt. Is It not a sweet faced youth, Pilia?

Ith. Again, sweet youth; did not you, Sir, bring the sweet
Youth a letter?

Pilia. I did Sir, and from this Gentlewoman, who as my
Self, and the rest of the family, stand or fall at your service.

Curt. Though woman's modesty should hale me back,
I can withold no longer; welcome sweet love.

Ith. Now am I clean, or rather foully out of the way.

Curt. Whither so soon?

Ith. I Will go steal some money from my Master to
Make me hansome:
Pray pardon me, I must go see a ship discharged.

Curt. Can thou be so unkind to leave me thus?

Pilia. And ye did but know how she loves you, Sir.

Ith. Nay, I care not how much she loves me;
Sweet Allamira, would I had my Masters wealth for thy sake:

Pilia. And you can have it, Sir, and if you please.

Ith. If 'twere above ground I could, and would have it;
But he hides and buries it up as Partridges do
Their eggs, under the earth.

Pil. And is it not possible to find it out?

Ith. By no means possible.

Curt. What shall we do with this base villain then?

Pil. Let me alone, do but you speak him fair:
But you know some secrets of the Jew, which if they were
Revealed, would do him harm.

Ith. I, and such as -- Go to, no more,
I Will make him send me half he has, and glad he scapes so too.
Pen and Ink:
I Will write unto him, we will have money strait.

Pil, Send for a hundred Crowns at least.

He writes. Ith. Ten hundred thousand crowns, -- Mr. Barabas.

Pil. Write not so submissiuely, but threatening him.

Ith. Sir Barabas, send me a hundred crowns.

Pil. Put in two hundred at least.

Ith. I charge thee send me 300 by this bearer, and this
Shall be your warrant; if you do not, no more but so.

Pil. Tell him you will confess.

Ith. Otherwise I Will confess all, vanish and return in a Twinckle.

Pil. Let me alone, I Will use him in his kind.

Ith. Hang him Jew.

Curt. Now, gentle Ithimore, lie in my lap.
Where are my Maids? provide a running Banquet;
Send to the Merchant, bid him bring me silks,
Shall Ithimore my love go in such rags?

Ith. And bid the Ieweller come hither too.

Curt. I have no husband, sweet, I Will marry thee.

Ith. Content, but we will leave this paltry land,
And sail from hence to Greece, to lovely Greece,
I Will be thy Jason, thou my golden Fleece;
Where painted Carpets over the meads are hurled,
And Bacchus vineyards ore-spread the world:
Where Woods and Forests go in goodly green,
I Will be Adonis, thou shall be Loves Queen.
The Meads, the Orchards, and the Primrose lanes,
Instead of Sedge and Reed, bear Sugar Canes:
Thou in those Groves, by Dis above,
Shall live with me and be my love.

Curt. Whi^her will I not go with gentle Ithimore?

Enter Pilea-borza. Ith. How now? have thou the gold?

Pil. Yes.

It^. But came it freely, did the Cow give down her milk freely?

Pil. At reading of the letter, he star'd and stamped, and turned
Aside, I took him by the sterd, and looked upon him thus;
Told him he were best to send it, then he hugged and embraced me^

Ith. Rather for fear then love.

Pil. Then like a Jew he laughed and jeered, and told me he
loved me for your sake, and said what a faithful servant you had bin.

Ith. The more villain he to keep me thus:
Here Is goodly 'parrell, is there not?

Pil. To conclude, he gave me ten crowns.

Ith. But ten? I Will not leave him worth a gray groat, give
Me a Reame of paper, we'll have a kingdom of gold for it.

Pil. Write for 500 Crowns.

Ith. Sir Jew, as you love your life send me 500 crowns,
And give the Bearer 100. Tell him I must hau't.

Pil. I warrant your worship shall hau't.

Ith, And if he ask why I demand so much, tell him,
I scorn to write a line under a hundred crowns.

Pil. Yo^'d make a rich Poet, Sir. I am gone. Exit.

Ith. Take thou the money, spend it for my sake.

Curt. It Is not thy money, but thy self I weigh:
Thus Bellamira esteems of gold;
But thus of thee. -- Kiss him. --

Ith. That kiss again; she runs division of my lips.
What an eye she casts on me?
It twinckles like a Star.

Curt. Come my dear love, let us in and sleep together.

Ith. Oh that ten thousand nights were put in one,
That we might sleep seven years together before
We wake.

Curt. Come Amorous wag, first banquet and then sleep.

Enter Barabas reading a letter. Bar. Barabas send me 300 Crowns.
Plain Barabas: oh that wicked Curtezane!
He was not wont to call me Barabas.
Or else I will confess: I, there it goes:
But if I get him Coupe de Gorge, for that
He sent a shaggy tottered staring slave,
That when he speaks, draws out his grisly beard,
And winds it twice or thrice about his ear;
Whose face has bin a grind-stone for men's swords,
His hands are hackt, some fingers cut quite off;
Who when he speaks, grunts like a hog, and looks
Like one that is employed in Catzerie,
And crosbiting such a Rogue
As is the husband to a hundred whores:
And I by him must send three hundred crowns.
Well, my hope is, he will not stay there still;
And when he comes: Oh that he were but here!

Enter Pilia-borza. Pil. Jew, I must ha more gold.

Bar. Why wantst thou any of thy tale?

Pil. No; but 300 will not serve his turn.

Bar. Not serve his turn, Sir?

Pil. No Sir; and therefore I must have 500 more.

Bar. I Will rather --

Pil. Oh good words, Sir, and send it you were best, see,
There Is his letter.

Bar. Might he not as well come as send; pray bid him
Come and fetch it, what he writes for you, ye shall have straight.

Pil. I, and the rest too, or else --

Bar. I must make this villain away: please you dine
With me, Sir, and you shall be most heartily poisoned. aside

Pil. No god-a-mercy, shall I have these crowns?

Bar. I cannot do it, I have lost my keys.

Pil. Oh, if that be all, I can pick open your locks.

Bar. Or climb up to my Counting House window:
You know my meaning.

Pil. I know enough, and therefore talk not to me of your
Counting House, the gold, or know Jew it is in my power to hang thee^

Bar. I am betrayed.
It Is not 500 Crowns that I esteem,
I am not moved at that: this angers me,
That he who knows I love him as my self
Should write in this imperious vain? why Sir,
You know I have no child, and unto whom
Should I leave all but unto Ithimore?

Pil. Here Is many words but no crowns; the crowns.

Bar. Commend me to him, Sir, most humbly,
And unto your good mistress as unknown.

Pil. Speak, shall I have 'vm, Sir?

Bar. Sir here they are.
Oh that I should part with so much gold!
Here take 'em, fellow, with as good a will --
-- As I and see thee hanged; oh, love stops my breath:
Never loved man servant as I do Ithimore.

Pil. I know it, Sir.

Bar. Pray when, Sir, shall I see you at my house?

Pil. Soon enough to your cost, Sir:
Fare you well. Exit.

Bar. Nay to thine own cost, villain, if thou come.
Was ever Jew tormented as I am?
To have a shag-rag knave to come
300 Crowns, and then 500 Crowns?
Well, I must seek a means to rid 'em all,
And presently: for in his villainy
He will tell all he knows and I shall dye for it. I have it.
I will in some disguize go see the slave,
And how the villain revels with my gold. Exit.

Enter Curtezane. Ithimore. Pilia-borza. Curt. I Will pledge thee, love, and
therefore drink it off.

Ith. Say thou me so? have at it; and do you hear?

Curt. Go to, it shall be so.

Ith. Of that condition I will drink it up; here is to thee.

Pil. Nay, I Will have all or none.

Ith. There, if thou love me do not leave a drop.

Curt. Love thee, fill me three glasses.

Ith. Three and fifty dozen, I Will pledge thee,

Pil. Knauely spoke, and like a Knight at Arms.

Ith. Hey Riuo Castiliano, a man's a man.

Curt. Now to the Jew.

Ith. Ha to the Jew, and send me money you were best.

Pil. What wudst thou do if he should send thee none?

Ith. Do nothing; but I know what I know,
He Is a murderer.

Curt. I had not thought he had been so brave a man.

Ith. You knew Mathias and the Governors son, he and
I killed 'em both, and yet never touched 'em.

Pil. Oh bravely done.

Ith. I carried the broth that poisoned the Nuns, and he
And I snicle hand too fast, strangled a Friar.

Curt. You two alone.

Ith. We two, and 'twas never known, nor never shall
Be for me.

Pil. This shall with me unto the Governor.

Curt. And fit it should: but first let us ha more gold^
Come gentle Ithimore, lie in my lap.

Ith. Love me little, love me long, let music rumble,
Whilst I in thy incoomy lap do tumble.

Enter Barabas with a Lute, disguised. Curt. A French Musician, come let us
hear your skill?

Bar. Must tuna my Lute for sound, twang twang first.

Ith. Wilt drink Frenchman, here is to thee with a --
Pox on this drunken hick-vp.

Bar. Gramercy Mounsier.

Curt. Prithee, Pilia-borza, bid the Fiddler give me
The posey in his hat there.

Pil. Sir, you must give my mistress your posey.

Bar. A voustre commandemente Madam.

Curt. How sweet, my Ithimore, the flowers smell.

Ith. Like thy breath, sweet-hart, no violet like 'em.

Pil. Foh, me thinks they stink like a Holly-Hoke.

Bar. So, now I am revenged upon 'em all.
The scent thereof was death, I poisoned it.

Ith. Play, Fiddler, or I Will cut your cats guts into chitterlins
Pardona moy, be no in tune yet; so now, now all be in.

Ith. Give him a crown, and fill me out more wine.

Pil. There Is two crowns for thee, play.

Bar. How liberally the villain gives me mine own gold.

aside. Pil. Me thinks he fingers very well.

Bar. So did you when you stole my gold. aside

Pil. How swift he runs.

Bar. You run swifter when yon threw my gold out of
My Window. aside.

Curt. Musician, have been in Malta long?

Bar. Two, three, four month Madam.

Ith. Do not know a Jew, one Barabas?

Bar. Very mush, Mounsier, you no be his man.

Pil. His man?

Ith. I scorn the Peasant, tell him so.

Bar. He knows it already.

Ith. It Is a strange thing of that Jew, he lives upon
Pickled Grasshoppers, and sau^'d Mushrumbs.

Bar. What a slaue's this?
The Governor feeds not as I do. aside.

Ith. He never put on clean shirt since he was circumcised

Bar. Oh rascal! I change my self twice a day. aside

Ith. The Hat he wears, Judas left under the Elder
When he hanged himself.

Bar. 'Twas sent me for a present from the great Cham.

aside Pil. A masty slave he is;
Whether now, Fiddler?

Bar. Pardona moy, Mounsier, we be no well. Exit.

Pil. Farewell Fiddler: One letter more to the Jew.

Curt. Prithee sweet love, one more, and write it sharp.

Ith. No, I Will send by word of mouth now;
Bid him deliver thee a thousand Crowns, by the same
Token, that the Nuns loved Rice, that Friar Bernardine
Slept in his own clothes,
Any of 'em will do it.

Pil. Let me alone to urge it now I know the meaning.

Ith. The meaning has a meaning; come let us in:
To undo a Jew is charity, and not sinne^ Exeunt.

Actus Quintus.
Enter Gouernor^ Knights. Martin Del-Bosco. Gov. NOw, Gentlemen, betake you to
your Arms,
And see that Malta be well fortified;
And it behoues you to be resolute;
For Calymath having houer'd here so long,
Will win the Town, or dye before the walls.

Kni. And dye he shall, for we will never yield.

Enter Curtezan^, Pilia-borza. Curt. Oh bring us to the Governor.

Gov. Away with her, she is a Curtezane.

Curt. What e're I am, yet Governor hear me speak;
I bring thee news by whom thy son was slain:
Mathias did it not, it was the Jew.

Pil. Who, besides the slaughter of these Gentlemen,
Poisoned his own daughter and the Nuns,
Strangled a Friar, and I know not what
Mischief beside.

Gov. Had we but proof of this.

Curt. Strong proof, my Lord, his man's now at my
Lodging that was his Agent, he will confess it all.

Gov. Go fetch him straight, I always feared that Jew.

Enter Ie^, Ithimore. Bar. I Will go alone, dogs do not hale me thus.

Ith. Nor me neither, I cannot outrun you Constable, oh my belly.

Bar. One dram of powder more had made all sure,
What a damned slave was I?

Gov. Make fires, heat irons, let the rack be fetched.

Kni. Nay stay, my Lord, 'tmay be he will confess.

Bar. Confess; what mean you, Lords, who should confess?

Gov. Thou and thy Turk; 'twas you that slew my son.

Ith. Gilty, my Lord, I confess; your son and Mathias
Were both contracted unto Abigall,
Forged a counterfeit challenge.

Jew. Who carried that challenge?

Ith. I carried it, I confess, but who writ it?
Marry even he that strangled Bernardine, poisoned the
Nuns, and his own daughter.

Gov. Away with him, his sight is death to me.

Bar. For what, you men of Malta, hear me speak;
She is a Curtezane and he a thief,
And he my bondsman, let me have law,
For none of this can prejudice my life:

Gov. Once more away with him; you shall have law.

Bar. Devils do your worst, I live in spite of you.
As these have spoke so be it to their souls:
I hope the poisoned flowers will work anon. Exit.

Enter Matter. Matter. Was my Mathias murdered by the Jew?
Ferueze, 'twas thy son that murdered him.

Gov. Be patient, gentle Madam, it was he,
He forged the daring challenge made them fight.

Mat. Where is the Jew, where is that murderer?

Gov. In prison till the Law has past on him.

Enter Officer. Offi. My Lord, the Curtezane and her man are dead;
So is the Turk, and Barabas the Jew.

Gov. Dead?

Offi. Dead, my Lord, and here they bring his body.

Bosco. This sudden death of his is very strange.

Gov. Wonder not at it, Sir, the heavens are iust^
Their deaths were like their lives, then think not of 'em
Since they are dead, let them be buried.
For the Jews body, throw that over the walls,
To be a prey for Vultures and wild beasts.
So, now away and fortify the Town. Exeunt.

Bar. What, all alone? well fare sleepy drink.
I Will be revenged on this accursed Town;
For by my means Calymath shall enter in.
I Will help to slay their children and their wives,
To fire the Churches, pull their houses down,
Take my goods too, and seize upon my lands:
I hope to see the Governor a slave,
And, rowing in a Gally, whipped to death.

Enter Calymath, Bashawes, Turks. Caly. Whom have we there, a spy?

Bar. Yes, my good Lord, one that can spy a place
Where you may enter, and surprise the Town:
My name is Barabas; I am a Jew.

Caly. Art thou that Jew whose goods we heard were sold
For Tribute-mony?

Bar. The very same, my Lord:
And since that time they have hired a slave my man
To accuse me of a thousand villainies:
I was imprisoned, but escaped their hands.

Caly. Did break prison?

Bar. No, no:
I drank of Poppy and cold mandrake juice;
And being asleep, belike they thought me dead,
And threw me over the wals^ so, or how else,
The Jew is here, and rests at your command.

Caly. 'Twas bravely done: but tell me, Barabas,
Can thou, as thou reportest, make Malta ours?

Bar. Fear not, my Lord, for here against the Truce,
The rock is hollow, and of purpose dug,
To make a passage for the running streams
And common channels of the City.
Now whilst you give assault unto the walls,
I Will lead 500 soldiers through the Vault,
And rise with them in the middle of the Town,
Open the gates for you to enter in,
And by this means the City is your own.

Caly. If this be true, I Will make thee Governor.

Jew. And if it be not true, then let me dye.

Caly. Thou'st doomed thy self, assault it presently.

Exeunt. Alarmes. Enter Turks, Barabas, Governor, and Knights prisoners.
Caly. Now veil your pride you captive Christians,
And kneel for mercy to your conquering foe:
Now where is the hope you had of haughty Spain?
Ferneze, speak, had it not been much better
To kept thy promise then be thus surpised?

Gov. What should I say, we are captives and must yield.

Caly. I, villains, you must yield, and under Turkish yokes
Shall groaning bear the burden of our ire;
And Barabas, as erst we promised thee,
For thy desert we make the Governor,
Use them at thy discretion.

Bar. Thanks, my Lord.

Gov. Oh fatal day to fall into the hands
Of such a Traitor and unhallowed Jew!
What greater misery could heaven inflict?

Caly. It Is our command: and Barabas, we give
To guard thy person, these our Ianizaries:
Entreat them well, as we have used thee.
And now, brave Bashawes, come, we will walk about
The ruined Town, and see the wrack we made:
Farewell brave Jew, farewell great Barabas. Exeunt.

Bar. May all good fortune follow Calymath.
And now, as entrance to our safety,
To prison with the Governor and these
Captains, his consorts and confederates.

Gov. Oh villain, Heaven will be revenged on thee.

Exeunt. Bar. A way, no more, let him not trouble me.
Thus have thou gotten, by thy policy,
No simple place, no small authority,
I now am Governor of Malta; true,
But Malta hates me, and in hating me
My life's in danger, and what boots it thee
Poor Barabas, to be the Governor,
When as thy life shall be at their command?
No, Barabas, this must be looked into;
And since by wrong thou got'st Authority,
Maintain it bravely by firm policy,
At least unprofitably lose it not:
For he that lives in Authority,
And neither gets him friends, nor fills his bags,
Lives like the Ass that Aesope speaks of,
That labors with a load of bread and wine,
And leaves it off to snap on Thistle tops:
But Barabas will be more circumspect.
Begin betimes, Occasion's bald behind,
Slip not thine opportunity, for fear too late
Thou seek'st for much, but can not compass it
Within here.

Enter Governor with a guard. Gov. My Lord?

Bar. I, Lord, thus ^^aues will learne^
Now Governor stand by there, wait within,
This is the reason that I sent for thee;
Thou see thy life, and Malta's happiness,
Are at my Arbitrament; and Barabas
At his discretion may dispose of both:
Now tell me, Governor, and plainly too,
What think thou shall become of it and thee?

Gov. This; Barabas, since things are in thy power,
I see no reason but of Malta's wrack,
Nor hope of thee but extreme cruelty,
Nor fear I death, nor will I flatter thee.

Bar. Governor, good words, be not so furious;
It Is not thy life which can aua^le me ought,
Yet you do live, and live for me you shall:
And as for Malta's ruin, think you no^
'Twere slender policy for Barabas
To dispossess himself of such a place?
For since, as once you said, within this I Will
In Malta here, that I have got my goods,
And in this City still have had success,
And now at length am grown your Governor,
Your selves shall see it shall not be forgot:
For as a friend not known, but in distress,
I Will rear up Malta now remediless.

Gov. Will Barabas recover Malta's loss?
Will Barabas be good to Christians?

Bar. What will thou give me, Governor, to procure
A dissolution of the slavish Bands
Wherein the Turk has yoked your land and you?
What will you give me if I render you
The life of Calymath, surprise his men,
And in an out house of the City shut
His soldiers, till I have consumed 'em all with fire?
What will you give him that procures this?

Gov. Do but bring this to pass which thou pretendest,
Deal truly with us as thou intimatest,
And I will send amongst the Citizens
And by my letters privately procure
Great sums of money for thy recompense:
Nay more, do this, and live thou Governor still.

Bar. Nay, do thou this, Ferneze, and be free;
Governor, I enlarge thee, live with me,
Go walk about the City, see thy friends:
Tush, send not letters to 'em, go thy self,
And let me see what money thou can make;
Here is my hand that I Will set Malta free:
And thus we ca^t it: To a solemn feast
I will inuit young Selim-Calymath,
Where be thou present only to perform
One stratagem that I Will impart to thee,
Wherein no danger shall betide thy life,
And I will warrant Malta free for ever.

Gov. Here is my hand, believe me, Barabas,
I will be there, and do as thou desire;
When is the time?

Bar. Governor, presently.
For Callymath, when he has viewed the Town,
Will take his leave and sail toward, Ottoman,

Gov. Then will I, Barabas, about this coin,
And bring it with me to thee in the evening.

Bar. Do so, but fail not; now farewell Ferneze
And thus far roundly goes the business:
Thus loving neither, will I live with both,
Making a profit of my policy;
And he from whom my most advantage comes,
Shall be my friend.
This is the life we Jews are used to lead;
And reason too, for Christians do the like:
Well, now about effecting this device:
First to surprise great Selims soldiers,
And then to make provision for the feast,
That at one instant all things may be done,
My policy detests prevention:
To what event my secret purpose drives,
I know; and they shall witness with their lives. Exit.

Enter Calymath, Bashawes. Caly. Thus have we viewed the City, seen the sack,
And cau^'d the ruins to be new repaired,
Which with our Bombards shot and Basiliske,
We rent in sunder at our entry:
And now I see the Situation,
And how secure this conquered Island stands
Inuiron'd with the mediterranean Sea,
Strong contermin'd with other petty Isles;
And toward Calabria backed by Sicily,
Two lofty Turrets that command the Town.
When Siracusian Dionisius reigned;
I wonder how it could be conquered thus?

Enter a messenger. Mess. From Barabas, Malta's Governor, I bring
A message unto mighty Calymath;
Hearing his Sovereign was bound for Sea,
To sail to Turkey, to great Ottamon,
He humbly would entreat your Majesty
To come and see his homely Citadell,
And banquet with him e're thou leau'st the I Will.

Caly. To banquet with him in his Citadell,
I ^eare me, Messenger, to feast my train
Within a Town of war so lately pillaged,
Will be too costly and too troublesome:
Yet would I gladly visit Barabas.
For well has Barabas desern'd of us.

Mess. Selim, for that, thus says the Governor,
That he has in store a Pearl so big,
So precious, and withal so orient,
As be it valued but indifferently,
The price thereof will serve to entertain
Selim and all his soldiers for a month^
Therefore he humbly would entreat your Highness
Not to depart till he has feasted you.

Caly. I cannot feast my men in Malta walls,
Except he place his Tables in the streets.

Mess. Know, Selim, that there is a monastery
Which stands as an out-house to the Town;
There will he banquet them, but thee at home,
With all thy Bashawes and brave followers.

Caly. Well, tell the Governor we grant his suit,
We Will in this Summer Evening feast with him.

Mess. I shall, my Lord, Exit.

Caly. And now, bold Bashawes, let us to our Tents,
And meditate how we may grace us best
To solemnize our Governors great feast. Exeunt.

Enter Governor, Knights, Del-bosco. Gov. In this, my Countrymen, be ruled by
me,
Have special care that no man sally forth
Till you shall hear a Culuerin discharged
By him that bears the Linstocke, kindled thus;
Then issue out and come to rescue me,
For happily I shall be in distress,
Or you released of this servitude.

1 Kni. Rather then thus to live as Turkish thrals,
What will we not adventure?

Gov. On then, begone.

Kni: Farewell grave Governor.

Enter with a Hammar above, very busy. Bar. How stand the cords? How hang
these hinges, fast?
Are all the Cranes and Pulleyes sure?

Serve. All fast.

Bar. Leave nothing loose, all leueld to my mind.
Why now I see that you have Art indeed.
There, Carpenters, divide that gold amongst you:
Go swill in bowls of Sack and Muscadine:
Down to the Cell^r, taste of all my wines.

Carp. We shall, my Lord, and thank you: Exeunt.

Bar. And if you like them, drink your fill and dye:
For so I live, perish may all the world.
Now Selim-Calymath return me word
That thou will come, and I am satisfied.
Now sir, what, will he come?

Enter Messenger. Mess. He will; and has commanded all his men
To come ashore, and march through Malta streets,
That thou may feast them in thy Citadell.

Bar. Then now are all things as my wish wud have 'em,
There wants nothing but the Governors pelf,
And see he brings it: Now, Governor, the sum.

Enter Governor. Gou. With free consent a hundred thousand pounds.

Bar. Pounds say thou, Gouer^or, well since it is no more
I Will satisfy my self with that; nay, keep it still,
For if I keep not promise, trust not me.
And Governor, now partake my policy:
First for his Army, they are sent before,
Entered the Monastery, and underneath
In several places are fieldpieces pitched,
Bombards, whole Barrels full of Gunpowder,
That on the sudden shall disseuer it,
And batter all the stones about their ears,
Whence none can possibly escape alive:
Now as for Calymath and his consorts,
Here have I made a dainty Gallery,
The floor whereof, this Cable being cut,
Does fall asunder; so that it does sink
Into a deep pit past recovery.
Here, hold that knife, and when thou see he comes,
And with his Bashawes shall be blithely set,
A warning-peece shall be shot off from the Tower,
To give thee knowledge when to cut the cord,
And fire the house; say, will not this be brave?

Gov. Oh excellent! here, hold thee, Barabas,
I trust thy word, take what I promised thee.

Bar. No, Governor, I Will satisfy thee first,
Thou shall not live in doubt of any thing.
Stand close, for here they come: why, is not this
A kingly kind of trade to purchase Towns
By treachery, and sell 'em by deceit?
Now tell me, worldlings, underneath the sum,
If greater falsehood ever h^s bin done.

Enter Calymath and Bashawes. Caly. Come, my Companion-Bashawes, see I pray
How busy Barrabas is there above
To entertain us in his Gallery;
Let us salute him, Save thee, Barabas.

Bar. Welcome great Calymath.

Gov. How the slave jeeres at him?

Bar. Will It please thee, mighty Selim-Calymath,
To ascend our homely stayres?

Caly. I, Barabas, come Bashawes, attend.

Gov. Stay, Calymath;
For I will show thee greater courtesy
Then Barabas would have affoorded thee.

Kni. Sound a charge there. A charge, the cable cut, A Caldron discovered.

Call. How now, what means this

Bar. Help, help me, Christians, help.

Gov. See Calymath, this was devised for thee.

Caly. Treason, treason Bashawes, fly.

Gov. No, Selim, do not fly;
See his end first, and fly then if thou can.

Bar. Oh help me, Selim, help me, Christians.
Governor, why stand you all so pitiless?

Gov. Should I in pity of thy plaints or thee,
Accursed Barabas; base Jew relent:
No, thus I Will see thy treachery repaid,
But wish thou had behau'd thee otherwise.

Bar. You will not help me then?

Gov. No, villain, no.

Bar. And villains, know you cannot help me now.
Then Barabas breath forth thy latest fate,
And in the fury of thy torments, strive
To end thy life with resolution:
Know, Governor, 'twas I that slew thy son;
I framed the challenge that did make them meet^
Know, Calymath, I aimed thy overthrow,
And had I but escaped this stratagem,
I would have brought confusion on you all,
Damned Christians, dogs, and Turkish Infidels;
But now begins the extremity of heat
To pinch me with intolerable pangs:
Dye life, fly soul, tongue curse thy ^ill and dye:

Caly. Tell me, you Christians, what does this portend?

Gov. This train he laid to have intrap'd thy life;
Now Selim note the unhallowed deeds of Jews:
Thus he determined to have handled thee,
But I have rather chose to save thy life.

Caly. Was this the banquet he prepared for us?
Let Us hence, lest further mischief be pretended.

Gov. Nay, Selim, stay, for since we have th^e here,
We will not let thee part so suddenly:
Besides, if we should let thee go, all is one,
Nor with thy Gallyes could thou not get hence,
Without fresh men to rigge and furnish them.

Caly. Tush, Governor, take thou no care for that,
My men are all aboard,
And do attend my coming there by this.

Gov. Why hardst thou not the trumpet sound a charge?

Caly. Yes, what of that?

Gov. Why then the house was fired,
Blown up, and all thy soldiers massacred.

Caly. Oh monstrous treason!

Gov. A Iewe^ courtesy:
For he that did by treason work our fall,
By treason has delivered thee to us:
Know therefore, till thy father has made good
The ruins done to Malta and to us,
Thou can not part: for Malta shall be freed,
Or Selim never return to Ottamen.

Caly. Nay rather, Christians, let me go to Turkey
In person there to meditate your peace;
To keep me here will naught advantage you.

Gov. Content thee, Calymath, here thou must stay,
And live in Malia prisoner; for come cal^ ^he world
To rescue thee, so will we guard us now
(...) sooner shall they drink the Ocean dry,
Then conquer Malta, or endanger us.
So march away, and let due praise be given
Neither to Fate nor Fottune, but to Heaven.

FINIS.

