THE SECOND PART OF THE SOLDIERS GRAMMAR: OR A SCHOOL FOR Young Soldiers.

Especially for all such as are called to any place, or office, (how high or
low soever) either in the City, or Country, for the Training, and exercising
of the Trained Band, whether they be Foot or Horse.

Together with perfect Figures and Demonstrations for attaining the knowledge
of all manner of Imbattailings, and other Exercises.

By. G. M.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Perry, and are to be sold in Britains Bursse, at
the sign of the Harrow. 1627.

A Table of all the principal things handled in this Book.
CHAP. I
OF the Ranges of Officers from the lowest to the highest. Page 1 Of the
Launspesado, Ibidem Of the Corporal, Page 2 Of the Serieant of the Band, Ibid.
Of the Drum, 3 Of the Clarke of the Band, Ibid. Of the Chyrurgion, 4 Of the
Ensign Ibid. Of the Lieutenant 5 Of the Quartermaster, Ibid. Of the
Prouost-Marshall, 6 Of the Captain Ibid. Of the Sergeant Majors of Regiments,
Ibid. Of Lieutenant Colonel of Regiments, 7 Of Colonells of Regiments. Ibid.
Of the Sergeant Mayor general. Ibid. Of the Colonel general. 8 Of Lieutenant
general of the Horse. Ibid. Of the Treasurer of the Army. Ibid. Of the Master
of the Ordnance. Ibid. Of the Lord Marshall. 9 Of Lieutenant General of the
Army, Ibid. Of the General, Ibid. A Second Raunge, 10 Of the Master Gunner.
Ibid. Of the Trench-Master, Ibid. Of the Wagon Master, 11 Of the
Forrage-Master, Ibid. Of the Victuall-Master, Ibid. Of the Iudge-Marshall, 12
Of the Scout-Master, Ibid. Of the Lieutenant of the Ordnance Ibid. Of the
Muster-Master General. Ibid.
Chap. 2.
OF the several Imbattellings of a private Company of two hundred, or
otherwise. 17 Differences in opinions touching a private Company, Ib. The Roman
rule for Companies, 14 The true composition of a Company, Ibid. The first
Imbattelling of 200 men, 15 The second form of Imbattelling, being against
Horse. 17 The manner of Sally or giving of vollies against the Horse. 19 The
manner of Volleyes, when the Foot battle is charged every way. 22 The
Imbattailing of many squares in one square. 23 The politic or deceiving
Battle. 25 The Battle to withstand the Wedge of Horse. 27 The square
Battle whereof to frame a Diamond. 29 The Diamond Battle it self. 30 The
Diamond Battle brought into a Triangle, or two Triangles. 31 The form of
Imbattelling for Speech, or Parley. 41 Another form of Imbattailing for Speech
or Parley. 42 Of the Ring, the half Moon, the Spur, and the like
Imbattellings. 43
Chap: 3.
The several Imbattailings of a Regiment of 1000 men or more. 44 Disputation
grown about Imbattailing. Ibid. The Authors discussion of the difference,
between whom the diffierence is. Ibid. The opinion of the new Soldier. Ibid.
The new form of imbattailing a Regiment. 45 The Numbers commanded, 46 The
opinion of the old Soldiers Ibid. The old and ancient form of Imbattailing a
Regimnt. Ibid. The young Soldiers reasons for their opinions. Ibid. The old
Soldiers reason for their oppinions. 47 Other reasons. 49 The danger of the
first form of Imbattailing. 51 The Authors censure of both the opiniones. 52
The former difference reconciled. Ibid:
Chap. 4.
OF the Ioining of sundry Regiments together. 53 What is the great substance of
the Art Military Ibid. Of what Armies consist. bid. How to observe dignity of
place. 54 Regiments Joined together in plain battle. 55 Who are to form
battles. 56 Observation of grounds. Ibid. Regiments divided yet brought into
uniformity. 57
Chap: 5.
THe forming of maine batailes of any extent or Number how great soever. 56
Observations in the Shaping of battles. Ibid. The composition of battles
and the members 60 How to find a square root and the use thereof Ibid. The
dividing of a battle Ibid. Alteration of Squares, or squares in squares. 61
Of Forlornes. Ibid. Of the Vantguard. 62 Of the battle. Ibid. Of the Rear.
Ibid. Of the Horse battle and the great Ordnance with the guard thereof. 63
The portrature of a plain ordinary battle. 64 The Wind-Mille battle of
50000 men, Foot and Horse. 65
The end of the Table.
THE SECOND PART OF the Soldiers Grammar.
CHAP. 1. Of the Raunge of Officers, from the lowest to the Highest.
ALl the low inferior Raunges I have a little touched before, both in the
Accidence, and in the first part of this Grammar, but not so Methodically and
orderly as now I entend to proceed, and of the great and superior Officers, I
have not made any mention at all; and therefore in this place I may not omit
them. Launcepesado.


The lowest Raunge and meanest officer in an Army is called the Launcepesado,
or Launspresado, who is the leader or governor of half a File, and therefore
is commonly called a Middle man, or Captain over four. He is the Corporals
deputy, and in his absence, discharges his duties: the nature of whose place,
his Office and dignity, I have at large set down in the Soldiers Accidence:
This is the most inferior Officer or effectual Commander, and therefore has
the lowest and last Range in Battles, yet he holds his dignity by the
antiquity of his Place, and the greatness of him under whom he is commanded:
As the Launspesado under the General, is before the Launspesado under the
Lieutenant-Generall; that of the Sergeant Mayor General, before the Colonel
General; that of the Colonel of a Regiment, before his Lieutenant Colonel;
the Lieuetenant Colonel, before the Sergeant Mayor of a Regiment; the Seriant
Mayor, before the Captain; and the Captains successively according to their
antiquities.

Corporal
Next above the Launspesado is raunged the Corporal, of whose particular Office
I have written sufficiently in the Soldiers Accidence. He is the Leader or
Captain of a Fyle, and the Commander of a Squadron, which commonly is twenty
five Men; these take their ranges or places of dignity as the former, that is,
according to their antiquity, and the greatness of the Person under whom they
are commanded.

Sergeant of the Band.
The next in range above the Corporal is the Sergeant of the Band, whose
particular Office I have also at large set down in the Soldiers Accidence;
and howsoever his Name and Place be neglected and forgotten in the Roman
Discypline, yet is he an Officer with us of great use and eminence; he has no
certain place or range within the Battalia, but is extrauegant and wandering
up and down every where, to see the Ranks and Files be kept, and that the
Body run not into any disorder; they also take their places of dignity and are
ranged as the former, that is, according to their antiquity, and the greatness
of the Person under whom they command.

Next to the Sergeant of the Band is ranged the Drum, The Drum
whose place is Gentile and of great respect, for he ought to be a Soldier of
much experience and judgment, and (if possible) a good Linguist, that being
sent to the Enemy upon any occasion, he may be able to deliver his Message
without any Interpreter or assistant, and also, to take notice of such things
of importance as shall encounter with his eyes or ears, whereby his own party
may be bettered or secured; this Officer is ranged according to his antiquity
and greatness of place; that is to say, the Drum Mayor of the Army has the
first and principal range, then the Drumm Majors of Regiments successively,
according to the antiquities of their Colonells; and so all other Drums,
according to the places of their Officers in chief and other Captains. The
Clarke of the Band


Next the Drum I range the Clearke of the Band who although he be no Soldier,
nor have any Martial command in the Field, or before the face of the Enemy,
yet ought he to be a Gentleman of good respect and well quallified, that is to
say, he ought to be learned in all Martial Laws, whereby he may instruct the
Soldiers, and prevent Trespasses; he ought to be skillful in accounts, because
he is the Auditor which keeps all sorts of accounts between the Captain and
the Soldier; as for his range, it is incertaine, for he has no particular
Place of pre-eminence, but so far forth as his honest virtue and fair
demeanor carries him, so he is to be respected and preferred, and this range
will fall fit both with his quallity and place, as is seen in the general
experience both of our own and other Armies; and this Officer houldeth the
dignity of his place, not according to antiquity, but according to the
greatness and great office of the Person under whom he serves.

Next to this Officer I range the Surgeon, The Surgeon.
who likewise is no Soldier, but holds the dignity of his place from
courtesy and good manners; he ought to be learned and skillful in his
profession, and thereby having won the heart of the Soldier, he need not
doubt of reverence; as for his range in general, it is according to his desert
and fair demeanor; but in particular (and amongst his fellow Chirurgions) the
Surgeon Mayor has the first range, and then the rest according to
antiquity, and the greatness of the Person under whom he serves.

Now to return again to the Soldier: The next Officer which is ranged in the
wars is the Ensign of the Band, The Ensign.
or bearer of the Captains Colors; this Officer ought to be a Gentleman of
great respect and trust, for his Captains honor is delivered into his care
and keeping: Whence it came to pass that the ancient Romans when they
delivered their Colors to any man's trust, they did it with great ceremony and
solemnity, the party trusted, receiving them by oath, in the face of the
Soldiers; and the Soldiers likewise taking an oath for faythfulnesse to their
Coullors, and this oath was called Militia Sacrata: This Officer was called
amongst the Romans, Signifer, or Bandopharus, whom they ever ranged next unto
the Captain, as at this day the Spaniard does, who will not allow any
Lieutenant, because there shall not be any interposition between the Ensign
bearer and the Captain; but our discipline alters in this nature, and
therefore the Ensign takes his range after his Lieutenant, and according to
his antiquity, or the greatness of the person under whom he commands,
having superior Office or place of command in the Army.

Next to the Ensign, is ranged the Lieuetenant of a Band, The Lieutenant.
whom (howsoever the Romans and Spaniards do skippe and leap over, as a place
neglected or forgotten) yet is he a Gentleman of singular trust and reputation,
for he is his Captains principal Councelor, and one that takes all burdens
from the Captains shoulders: In the Captains absence he performs all the
Captains duties, commands as Captain, and in his presence is assistant to
all the Captains commandments, and an indifferent moderator in all questions
between the Captain and the Soldier: These Lieutenants take their ranges or
places of dignity according to the antiquity of their Captains, and the
greatness of place in which they command; as the Lieutenant to the General,
or the Liuetenant General are Captains absolute: The Lieutenants of other
great and superior Officers, and the Lieutenants of Colonells are Captains in
courtesy, and may in a Court of War fit as the puny Captain of that
Regiment in which he commands: The Lieutenants of Lieutenant Colonells are
ranged next unto them, then the Lieutenants of Serieant Majors, and lastly the
Lieutenants of Captains, according to command and antiquity.

Quarter Master
Next to the Liuetenants are ranged the Quarter Masters of Regiments, who
besides the division of Quarters, ought to discharge the office of Harbingers,
for to make them two distinkt places is a surcharge to the Army, and these take
their ranges according to the dignity of the Regiment in which they command.

Prouest Marshall
Next to the Quarter Masters are ranged the Provost Marshalls of the best
degree, and these take their places according to their ellection and antiquity.

Above all these are ranged the Captains, of which amongst the Romans were two
several kinds, the one called Centurion, or a commander of one hundred, the
other Cohortis Praefectus, and commanded an whole Battalia, in which were
diverse Centurions, and yet but one Ensign; and these at this day are those
which we call Colonells: But for the private Captain (of whom we speak) he is
(or ought to be) a Gentleman of great wisdom, courage and judgment, wise in
the election of his Officers and the manage of his affairs, valyent in the
executing of all manner of commands and the contempt of dangers, and excellent
in judging of all occurrances and occasions, by which great perrils may be
prevented, and the lesser so qualified, that they may wear no vizzard of
amazement: These Captains take their ranges according to their antiquities, or
the places of great Office whereunto they are advanced.

(...) Mayor of Regiments
Next to the Captains are ranged the Sergeant Majors of Regiments, being
principal Captains in the Regiment wherein they serve, and having power upon
all commandments, to imbattaile and form the Regiment according to the form
and demonstration appointed by the Sergeant Mayor general: These Officers take
their range according to antiquity, and the dignity of the place whereunto
they are called, (that is to say) before every private Capiaine.

Next to these are ranged the Liuetenant Colonells of Regiments, Lieutenant
Colonells of regiments
who are a degree above the Sergeant Mayor, and are Gentlemen of noble and
brave quallity, every one in the absence of the Colonel governing as the
absolute Colonel; their range holds according to antiquity and no otherwise.

Next above these are ranged the Colonells, who in in dignity of place are as
far above the Captains, Colonells of regiments
as the Captains above the private Soldier; they command in their Regiments
sometimes five hundred, sometimes a thousand, sometimes fiueteene hundred, and
sometimes two thousand, according to the trust reposed, and the virtues of him
trusted: These Colonells are ranged according to their antiquity, or the
greatness of the place they hold, the eldest Colonel (being ever Magister de
Campo, or, Camp Master) holding the first or primer place, and all the rest
successively according to antiquity: This Officer was of great account amongst
the Romans, and had diverse attributes given to their virtues, being sometimes
called Drungarius sometimes Tribunus or Militum, Chiliarchus, and the like; and
when their commands came to be advanced as to be made Camp Master or Colonel
General, then they were caled Turmarca, Merarca or Turmaru^ Praefectus, so
great was the estimation of this high command.

Next these is ranged the Sergeant Mayor General, Sergeant mayor general
whom the Romans called Tessararius, he ought to be a man of noble quallity and
high valor, in as much as all his actions (for the most part) are executed in
the face of the Enemy, and he is evermore of the Council of War.

Colonel General.
Next him is ranged the Colonel General, a man of equal virtue and gifts
with the former, especially he ought to be exceeding temperate and just, for
upon him rests the according of all differences of great nature which shall
happen in the Army; and he is also evermore one of the Council of War.

Liuetenant General of the Horse.
Next him is ranged the Liuetenant General of the Horse, who has the same
command, and discharges the same duty amongst the Horsemen that the Colonel
General does amongst the Foot, and he is evermore also one of the Council of
War: This Officer was called among the Romans, Magister Equitum, or
Praefectus Equitum; he has a general command over all Horsemen whatsoever,
whether they be Men at Arms which were called Cataphractos; or Light Horsemen,
which were called Expeditos Incursores; he is also ever of the Council of
War.

Treasurer of the Army
Next this Officer, is ranged the High Treasurer of the Army, who amongst the
ancient Romans was called Quaestor; this man is under no command but the
General only, yet is to draw his eye and respect through the whole Army,
especially he is to have regard to the Auditor, Muster Master, and Comissarie
of the Army, and is of the Council.

Master of the Ordnance.
Next to this Officer, is ranged the Master of the Ordnance, who is a principal
Officer of the Field, having command of all manner of Artillery, Munition, and
Engines whatsoever, and is also one of the Council of War.

The next great Officer is the Lord Marshall of the Field, Lord Marshall
whose command stretches every way, both to the Horse and Foot; how
excellent he ought to be, is not to be disputed, because he ought to be one of
the best of Soldiers, having a prerogative to disanull foreign laws, and to
make good whatsoever shall be thought fit in his own Army.

Next this great Officer, Lieuteant general of the Army
is ranged the Liuetenant General of the Army, who indeed is but the younger
brother to the General, and in his absence has his sovereign authority, and
the absolute Rule of the Army, being (as it were) a Superintendant over all
the rest of the great ones.

Lastly, (as having no parallel, The General
but carrying a supreme and sovereign authority over all the whole Army) is
ranged the General, whom the ancient Soldiers would allow to be no less then
a King, valuing this high Place at so great a rate, that they thought the best
Subject too mean to undergo it; But we find it otherwise, and reason leads
us to better argument; for although Kings are the best Generals, yet (God
forbid) but they should have that power and privilege to elect out of their
Noblest and best deserning Subjects, such able and sufficient Generals as may
take upon them the government of an army, and not be tied at all times and
upon all occasions to imbarque themselves into the danger of the Wars. Thus
you see that Subjects may be Generals, yet indeed none worthily but the best
of Subjects, who for their excellent virtues draw the nearest in quality unto
Kings.

A second Range
Thus have I run through the whole Range of great and small Offices, which
support and govern an Army, and must of necessity be (for their Marshiall
employment) in the range and martch thereof; yet notwithstanding I must
confess, I have skipt or leapt over a range of Officers, which out of certain
priueledges which they have, are more remote and abandoned from the Army, or
else have such places of particularitie and certainetie, that they do not
entirely mix and join with the gross Body; besides, they have another
dependence, and indeed are called the particular Officers belonging unto the
Caualarie or Horse Army, and howsoever they have Foot commands, yet they
depend and wait upon the Horse, and from the Lord Marshall take all their
directions.

The Master Gunner,
The first and the lowest of these is the Master Gunner, who is indeed but an
inferior Officer under the Master of the Ordnance; he has athoritie over all
the rest of the Gunners, and ought to see that every man perform his duty:
This Officer, though he had no place amongst the Romans, because the invention
of Powder was not then found out, yet they had amongst them a kind of
Artillery, which they called Arietes, Scorpions, Balistas, Arcubalistas,
Testudines, Turres, and a world of other Engines, the Governor whereof was the
same in nature that our Master Gunner is.

The Trench Master,
Next above this Officer, is ranged the Trench Master, who has command over all
the P^^^ers in all their works, and by his directions sees all manner of
Trenches cast up, whether it be for guard and enclosing of the Camp, or for
other particular annoyance to the Enemy, or for the building of Sconces or
other defense or offense, as directions shall be given.

Next this Officer is ranged the Wagon Master or Carriadge Master General,
The Wagon Master,
who amongst the Romans was called Impedimentoru^ Magistru^, the Master of
Impediments or hindra^ces in the Wars; for it is true, that from niceness
and curiosity, first grew the foundation of this Office; he has supreme
authority over al Wagons, Carriages, Sledds, and the like, and foreseeth that
they martch orderly, without cloying up the hie ways, or doing foul
annoyances one to the other in their martches, with a world of other
observations, which are too long to recite in this place.

Next this Officer, The Forage Master
is ranged the Forage Master General, who is a principal dependant upon the
Lord Marshall: To this Officers charge is delivered the disposing of all manner
of Horse provisions, as Hay, Corn, Straw, Grass, Forage, and the like, and
he foreseeth that all inferior Officers which have charge herein do their
duties truly, and that equal distribution be made, and no Soldier hindered of
his true alowance, and where fault is, to see due punishment executed on the
offenders.

Next this Officer, The Victual Master
is ranged the Victual Master General, to whose charge is delivered all kind
of Food and sustenance belonging to the Soldier, as Bread, Biscuit, Butter,
Cheese, Beef, Poore-Iohn, Haberdine, Peafe, Wheat, Ryce, and the like, and by
his inferior Officers (which are called Prouant-Masters) he is to see that due
distribution be made thereof amongst the Soldiers, according to allowance from
the superior Officers.

The Judge Marshall
Next this, is ranged the Iudge-Marshall, or Comissarie general, who ought to
be a learned Gentleman and skillfull in the civil and Marshall Laws, For he
expounds them to the Soldier and giueeth sentence upon all Offenders and
Offenses; as they are decreed by a Marshall Court.

The Scout-Master
Next this Officer is Randged the Scout-Master General, who amongst the Romans
was an Officer unknown, because they never lodged their Horse without the
verge of the Camp, or the walls of the Town as in our modern wars now we
do, yet had the Romans their discouerers, which they called Scultators, or
Speculators, or indeed Campiductores, who differed little or nothing in their
charge and Office from these which we call Scoutes, or Scoute-Master; this
Officer has command over all Scouts, makes ellection of places of danger
where to place them, and gives them all directions which they are to observe;
his dependence is upon the Lord Marshall, and he is a principal Councellor in
disposing of the Camp, and informs the manner of the Horse Parado when the
watch is to be set.

The Lieutenant of the Ordnance
Next this officer is Ranged the Liuetenant of the Ordnance, who has his
general dependence on the Master of the Ordnance, having under his charge the
command of all the small Ordnance and Munition; and in the absence of the
Master commands as the Master, both over the great and lesser Artillery and
over all sorts of Officers depending upon the Masters commandment,

The Muster Master general
The last and greatest of this second range is the Muster master General, or
Controuler of the Musters being an high and most necessary Officer in all
royal Armies; his Office extends to the numbering of men, to the well Arming,
ordering and disposing of bodies; to the preventing of all manner of frauds and
deceits in the Captains, and their inferior Officers: he has the list of
every man's band, preuents alterations, has the Control of all inferior
Comisaries under him, he appeaseth differences between Captains and his
Ministers, gives out all the warrants for full pay, Checketh all gross
defaults and is evermore one of the Counsel of war.

Thus I have showed you a true range of all Officers in the wars, from the
lowest to the highest, as also those which have a Colatterall dependence, by
which it is easily for any man to understand how they be joined and linckt
together; I will now descend to matters of other Importance.

CHAP. II. Of the several Imbattalings of a private Company of 200. or
otherwise.
THere has been, Differences in oppinions, touching a private company,
and is at this day, much disputation and Arguments amongst old and new
Soldiers touching the composition or Number of a private Captains company, some
allowing more as 200, or 250, and 300, nay at this day 500, in a private
Captains Command; others allow less, as but 50. or 100 or 150 at the most,
But in both these there are extreamities; and as 250, 300 and 500 are more then
any private man can well govern, for neither can his eye or voice extend
either to instruction or correction, the front will be so dilated and spread,
for 500: men must ever carry 50: in breast; so likewise the number of 50: in the
whole body is too few and neither sorteth with dicipline, nor is an equal
aduancment for a well deserving Captain; for if the Captain of 100: men have
but 4s per diem entertinement, then the Ceptaine of 50: can expect but 2s per
diem which is to little either to support his place, or maintain the Rank
where unto he is called.

It is true that the ancient Romans allowed their Captains but 100: The Romans
rule for companies.
and there upon called them Centurions, and it is true also that this is an
wholesome preportion both in respect of the entertainment, and easiness of
government, and the form of the Body, which being a true square they are ever
most ready and proper for the forming and fashioning of any gross body or
Battle what soever; but notwithstanding the aptness and readiness of this
body; yet the necessity of affairs; the diligence and desert of well deserving
Spirits compells our Generals to allow other numbers, and as 100 men is
thought sufficient for a Captain at his first beginning, so an 150, or 200 men
to him that has excellently deserved is but a competent advancement and by the
aid of sufficient Officers may be governed and instructed in all perfecton, but
to exceed this number of 200: there will be ever error found and advancement
will prove an hurt and Burden.

The true composition of a Company
Sure then it must fall out in the Conclusion that 200 men is the only perfect
number whereon to compound a private company: I will therefore take that number
in hand and show you the several Imbattalings or forms of Battle whereunto
they can be reducted: wherein you are first to conceive that (according to our
present discipline, this number of 200: men is divided into two bodies equal,
or two distinct and several weapons, that is to say, 100: Pyks, and 100 Shot
or Muskets: the Pyks I do express under this carracter (p) and the Shot or
Musquetts under this carracter: (s)

The First imbattalling then of a Company of 200: The First Imbattaling of 200.
men is to draw them into a form or kind of Square Body, according to the
form of this figure following.

The First Form of Imbattalling of two hundred men.


This Battayll you see almost drawn to a Square by reason of the distance,
for it is to be supposed, that now this body stands at order in Files, which
is three foot; and at open order in Ranks, which is Six foot: and so by
extending the length the file is made as large as the front; and of all
Battles this is the strongest and the best, being ablest to bring most hands
to fight without disorder and the soonest repaired and amended whenever it
shall come to any ruin, for now it stands ready for all motions what soever.

There is an other manner of Imbattailing of this number, when they shall
encounter with a Troop of Horse, the order and proportion whereof is Contained
in this figure following:

The second form of Imbattailing being against Horse.


Here in this Bataile you see how the ranks of Shot are drawn within the
Ranks of Pikes and so covered and safeguarded that the Horsemen cannot charge
or break upon, or through them, but with most eminent and certain danger, for
the vollyes lie rrady prepared, and the Pykes stand so that they cannot be
enforced to any rout or disorder; And here you shall take a principal
observation; that if the horse which shall charge this Battle of foot be
Gentlemen at Arms, Armed Cap a pe: from head to foot; with strong Lances in
their hands and Pistolls at the Saddle bow; and the Horse Armed also both with
defensive and offensive Armor, then shall all the Pikes charge at the right
foot and draw their swords over arm, every man with his former foot linking
in his leaders hinder foot; But if the Horse be but Curashieirs Armed from the
head to knee, with long Pystols and unarmed Horses, then shall all the Pykes
charge above hand, and not at the right foot, and shall also advance forward
in their charge and offer to encounter with the Horse, for their strength is
such that it cannot be broken by unarmed Horses, nor can they be ruined but by
the utter loss of the Horse Troop,

Now for the manner of the Salley of this enclosed Shot, and how they shall
give their volley, to the most anoiance of the enemy, you shall perceive it in
the form of this next figure following.

The manuer of gining Volleis against the Horse.


Here you see that in this Salley or giving of the volly against the horse,
one half of the Muskets (upon the first appearance or approach of the Troop
and before they come within distance to deliver their pistols) Issues fourth
by the flank, which by wheel or otherwise, by turning of faces you shall ever
make the front, and being advanced some small distance they presently spread
forth themselves into one single file, and so deliver their volly
alltogeather, whilst the other haulfe of the Shot ascend into their places,
and make ready, then that part of the Shot which did Issue forth, and have
given their volly, shall with all convenient speed retire themselves again
between the ranks, and Pass behind the Shot which fills their rooms and
there lade thire Muskets again; whilst the Pikes charge either to the right
foot, or alloft according to the nature of the Horse Troop which charge
them; then the Horse wheeling about to recover the second Pistol the other
half of the Shot shall Issue out and deliver their volly as the former.

Now if the Horse Troop shall happen to divide it self and so charge the
foot Battle on both sides, or if they shall range themselves and charge every
way, both before, behind, and on both sides, then shall the Shot Issue out
both ways and girdle the Battaille round about, according to the form and
fashion of this figure following.

Volleis when the foot Battle is charged every way.


Thus you see the Shot issues fourth equally on on both sides, and girdleth
the foot Battalia round about, so that the volly is given entirely and without
impeachment or trouble one of another, whereas to shoot over one another
Shoulder or by making the First man kneel, the Second stoop, the Third bend
his body, the Fourth lean forward, and the Fifte to stand upright, and so to
deliver their volly were both rude and disorderly, bringing great danger to the
Soldier, and placing them in such a lame and uncomely Posture, that all
Agillity and aptness to do service would be taken away and the enemy taking
advantage thereof would be much more ready and apt to break in upon them and
drive them to rout and confusion.

There is an other form of Imbattaling this company of 200 men, and it is
excellent either against foot or Horse, and has so many several ways to
fight, and that with such strength and safety, that on which hand soever the
Battle shall be assailed, yet it will stand impregnable, the Shot so
seconding the Pikes, and the Pikes so garding the Shot that every way it will
give a certain and Infallibe repulse unto the enemy. This Battle is a square
Battle as the rest before showed; yet it is compounded of diverse squares or
Maniples, which amongst the best experienced Soldiers is held the best and
safest way of fighting, the form of which Battle is contained in this figure
following.

The Imbattelling of many Squares in one Square.


Here you see eight several squares brought into one square, and the ninth
reserved void for the entertainment of the Ensign, and such short weapons as
shall attend it, which howsoever they be out of use, in the Low Countries,
where groose Bodies, seldom or never Join, yet with us, where hand Battle
must continually be expected, they are not unnecessary, nor to be neglected.
This form of Battle carries the front every way, and upon the allteration
of the face, is ready to receive the charge four several ways at once, with
equal strength and oppositions; for every square is a several Manuple, and
one so answering to another that nothing but multitudes can subdue it.

There is again another form of Imbattailling these 200: men, which howsoever
it carry an imaginary face of weakness, yet it is strong and substantial, and
was indeed invented through the false show, to draw and bring the enemy on,
who being once ingadged, in the open and weak places, the Maniples or small
squares, at an instant retire, and Join them selves together so strongly,
that it is impossible for the enemy to come off without great loss or utter
subversion.

This Battle (as the former) is compounded of nine squares fullfilled and
supplied, and of six empty and vnsupplied, which may draw on, and entice the
enemy to charge; but afterward by closing and Ioining together, frustrateth
that hope, and leaves the event to the hazard of fortune.

The form of this politic and deceiving Battle is expressd in this figure
following.

The Politic, or deceiving Battle.


Here you see that though these empty places in the Battle are reserved,
whereby to entice the enemy; yet they are so slanked on either hand and before,
both with Pikes and Shot, that no approach can be made without danger: no if
the Horse should attempt to charge and break in, thinking to cut the Shot from
the Pikes as in outward show it seems likely; yet have the Shot such safe
and several places to retire into, and the Pikes standing so apt and ready to
cover and entertain them, that the assault is to no purpose, and the Battle
stands still stronger and stronger.

The difference betwixt this Battle and the former is only the breach and
separation of Manuples, which being advanced one from another (yet within the
distance of guard) have more liberty to fight, and may alter their proportions,
or distances, as they please.

There is another form of imbattailing these 200 men, and it is principally
used against the Horse, especially, when they charge in the form of a wedge,
or Triangular, of which wedge I have spoken more largely in the former part of
this Grammar, and this Battle also is drawn from a maine square, only the
weapons are altered, and the opposition of the Pikes are made strongest in the
bottom of the Battle; This Battle was of great use amongst the Grecians
before fire or powder was known, and many famous votaries, and Triumphs gotten
by the use thereof, and therefore having now fire and Shot to assist the
natural strength thereof, it must needs be more acceptable and worthier of
imitation.

This Battle is drawn by division between the Middle men to the front, and
the Middlemen to the rear, and between the Middle men to the right flank,
and the Middle men to the left, leaving the Shot within the Pikes, in such
manner, that upon all assaults they may have free use of their Arms; and yet
notwithstanding abide in safety in dispight of the enemy.

The form of this Battle is expressed in the next figure following.

The Battle to withstand the wedge of Horse.


Thus you see how this Bataile is interlined with the Shot, and guarded with
the Pikes, so that although there be a field of entrance, yet it is a straight
place of much danger; and howsoever the enemy may come on bouldly, yet he
cannot but return heavily.

Many other sorts of imbatialing there are, though none more necessary, as the
battle called Diamond, the Battle Triangular, and such like; which Novelty
(I know) is desirous to search into; and the proportions I know at the first,
carry a great show of much skill, and counning, especially to the ignorant,
but being once waded into with Judgment, there is nothing more facile or
easy: therefore to draw a Diamond Battle, first draw your battle into a
square, according to the first figure in this book; or for your better
remembrance, according to this figure following which being but compounded of
144 men; may serve to express the manner and fashioning of 4000.

The Square Battle, whereof to frame a Diamond.


Here you behold the square or form of a Battalia, now to reduce this to a
Diamond, or imperfect square, the Captain shall come to the leader of the
right hand file, (which is the first and principal man of the company) and
advancing before him, shall wheel the whole company into a direct line, with
the right point foreward, and the left point descending, as in this figure
following.

The Diamond Battle:


Here you see that by drawing forth of the Battle, howsoever square at the
first, yet by alteration of distance, it is brought into a perfect Diamond
form; and although the Pikes and Shot keep their places, as in the square,
yet at your pleasure you may change them, and draw the weapons to what part of
the Battle, and into what files your self pleases.

Now to bring this Diamond or any other Diamond into a perfect Triangular: you
shall cut off the Diamond Battle in the Midst, through the two middle
extreme parts, and then will remain unto you two Triangulars, a greater and a
less, which you may double or increase, as you shall find occasion; so that
albeit by this division you find how to make this proportion, yet perceiueing
how you may double and increase both the files and ranks, (whose number is
ever constant and certain, according to the proportion of the Triangle) you
may at pleasure without any division or separation of body, form this
Triangle, out of the files and ranks only. But because you shall not stand
amazed at this business, I will in a few Charracters, contain but a few men
(which is the easiest for capasity) show you how to bring a Diamond to a
Triangle, as in this figure following appears.

A Diamond Battle brought into a Triangle.


Thus you see the Diamond is cut into two Triangles which being led several
ways may serve as two Bodies, and that to exceeding good, and honorable
purpose, for this Diamond, or sharp piercing body, is of great force to enter
and break any square body, and being but entered in with the point, the rest
of the body follows with such order and strength, and so increases and
makes the Breach greater, and greater, that the square body can hardly join
together again, but falls into rout, or into a retrait that is full as
dishonorable, and to this purpose was this Diamond foot battle first of all
invented.

There is again another manner of imbattailing this private company of 200,
which howsoever it be seldom or never used in fight, yet it is of excellent
use in the field, both before the framing of the battle, and after the
battle is framed, this manner of imbatailing, is when either any of the
Captains officers would deliver a private message to the company, which none
but themselves should hear, or when the Captain himself, would either give
secret directions, or imparte matter of instruction, or matter of reprehension,
or when any other supreme officer of the field, would deliver to the company
either encouragement or caution.

The manner of this imbattailing is in this wise, the Captain shall first
cause both the wings of Shot to stand still, having drawn them up into their
close order, then he shall advance the first division of Pikes upward, till the
middle men of the Pikes to the rear be equal with the two first ranks of
Shot, and every man in his close order, then shall the Subdiuision turn
their faces about and descend downward, till the middle men of the front be
equal with the two last ranks of Shot, then having closed all strongly
together, and turned every face upon the Center: The Captain, Lieutenant,
Ensign, and such other Officers, as he will have partakers of his speech,
shall come into the square void place of the Battle, and there deliver what
seems good to himself; which finished, he shall reduce his Battle back
into its first form, as for the shape of Imbattelling for Parley, it will
carry the proportion of this Figure following.

The form of Imbattailing for Speech or Parley.


There be others which Imbattaile for speech or Parley much after this manner
aforesaid, only they straighten or make less the empty or void place in the
midst, by making the Shot first to double their ranks, then the first
division of Pikes to advance upward, and the subdiuision of Pikes to desscend
downward, and afterward to do in all things as before, and then the form of
battle will be like this figure following.

Another form of Imbattailing for Speech or Parley.


In this form of imbattailing though the center be straightned, yet the
outward verge of the battle is enlarged, so that though some do hear and
understand better, yet many shall not hear nor understand at all, but must
receive the speech by relation; so that I conclude the first form of
Imbattailing for speech or parley is the best, easiest and safest, yet I stand
not upon mine own judgment, but submit to the censure of the old and
experienced Soldiers.

Diverse other forms of imbattailing there be for a private company of 200 men,
as the Ring, the Halfe-moone; the Spur, and the like, but because I have
heard them mightelie condemned by the noblest Soldiers of our age, and men of
high respect and reverence, affirming them rather to lead into rout and
disorder then any way to strentghen and better the Battalia, therefore I dare
not give rules or prescriptions for them, but refer such as are desirous to
learn and behold them, to any Ignorant and unskillful teacher, and he shall
spend hours and days only in these Motions, not knowing otherwise how to
wast time, or make the vulgar people to wonder. And thus much touching the
imbattailings of a private company of 200 men, or any other inferior number.

Chap. 3. The several Imbattailings of a Regiment of one thousand men or more.
Disputation grown about Imbatailings
TOuching the imbattailing of a Regiment of 1000 men or more, there is now at
this instant time great argument and disputation among Soldiers; Some being of
great experience and knowledge, Some of greater reputation then knowledge, Some
seeming to know more then they do know, and Some out of affection to other
men's singularity, or to hold an opposite contention, whereby to get a note or
name of much judgment.

Now how I shall reconcile or atone this difference (who am the meanest
Soldier of many thousands,) rests to me in clouds and undiscovered, because my
words carry not Authentical Authority, neither will the resolute opinion of an
Ignorant person, be bent or governed by any reason, but that which flattereth
his own thoughts. But since I am in the field, and have taken upon me this
discourse, I must go forward, and though I meet with an hard arbitterment,
yet must I not recoile, but having reason, truth and plains on my side, I will
set down the grounds on both sides, and the strength of those arguments by
which they defend their several The New and latter form of Imbattailing a
Regiment.
opinions; The Authors discussion of the difference.
to this (as an indifferent moderator) I will annexe mine own opinion touching
the weight and vallidity of their reasons, and then refer every discreet
Soldier to make his ellection, as wisdom shall govern him.

You must first understand that this difference grows between the old
Soldier and the new Soldier, Between whom the difference is,
that is between those of old and sollide experience, and those of late and
more quainte practice; The first having nothing but what the war it self
informs, the other the help of Garden, Yard, City, Home, and Country
trialls.

To come then to the difference it self, The opinion of the new Soldiers
the new and latter Soldiers would have a regiment when it is drawn into the
field to be compounded of the several companies distinctly one by another,
without any alteration, every Captain and officer governing his own company
and not to make any mixture of them at all, only to join and fix them
together into one body according to the form of this figure following.

Here the Figure.

Here you see how the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Sergeant-Maior and the
rest of the Inferior Captains Join their companies together without mixture
according to the dignity of their places making one entire and sollide body, of
Shot and Pikes, Shot and pikes quite through the regiment, which regiment
contain: 1000 men is divided thus.

The numbers commanded.
The Colonel according to greatness of his command, commands ^00 men, the
Lieutenant Colonel 150, and the Sergeant Mayor. 150, and the five other
inferior Captains command either of them 100 men, and thus the 1000 men, are
Marshalled and governed.

The opinion of the old Soldiers
Now the older experienced Soldiers differ from this manner of discipline, and
though they vary not in the number or command, yet they stand far aloof from
the whole matter of composition, for they will not allow to draw up regiments
by entire and whole companies without alteration, but first draw up all the
Pikes into one body, then the Shot into another, and after dividing the Shot
into two equal parts, wing or flank, the pikes on either hand, and so make
one whole and entire battle of Shot and Pikes, and not a mixte body of
Shot and Pikes in small manuples, but rather keep the regiment in one great
and uniform body according to the preportion of this figure following.

Here the Figure.

Here you see the battle of Pikes is drawn all into one body, and the
Shot on either hand, yet every officer has pre-eminence of place according
to his dignity, and many inferior officers advanced and Employed, which are
extrauegant in the former battle:

The young Soldiers reasons for their opinions
But this discipline the younger Soldiers utterly disallow, and these are the
reasons; first they affirm The old ancient form of Imbattailing a Regiment.
that the best and safest way of fight is by small Manuples, for they are with
least difficulty governed, and made the longest to endure fight without
disorder.

They are the soonest reduced to their first form when they are put into
route, and the Shot and Piks being thus intermixed one with another, the one
offending, the other defending, the battle is of great force, and more
terrible to the enemy. Lastely, in a battle thus compounded, every man has
the order or government of his own Soldiers, who are trained to his
discipline, and understand his commands, by which they are made more willing to
go on, and do obey with greater Courage and allacrity, then when they are
lead by a stranger, as in the other battle perforce they must be; these and
many other like reasons, the younger Soldiers yield to make good this new
opinion, and I must confess they carry a greet show of substantial truth,
did not some impediment cross in the way, which take from them a great part
of belief and credit, for to these Reasons, thus the old Soldiers reply.

That true it is, The old Soldiers reasons for their opinions.
this form of imbattailing is good and may pass for courant, as long as
companies are in their full strength, and hold their perfect and true number,
but to that the war is a known enemy, and who knows not that sickness,
mortality, slaughter, ill diet and lodging, hunger, cold and surfeites do so
attend upon Armies, that by them commpanies are exceedingly weakened and made
less, so that he which mustereth one hundred men if he bring three score and
ten able men into the field to fight, is often held for a strong company, and so
in like case of other numbers, so that to imbattaile these by themselves, being
of so small contents, neither can the volly be great, nor the harm dangerous
which shall ensue to the enemy, whereas the several weapons of these small
bodies, being drawn out and knitte into several great bodies, the numbees
will swell and increase, and as of units are made infinits, so forty of my
Shot joined to forty of an other man's, and to us sixe-score of two or three
other Captains, will make 200 Shot, this will bring forth a great volly,
and this will prove of great danger to the enemy.

Again for the easiness of government, or speedy reducing them to their
first form, being routed, they have no advantage of this other great body, for
howsoever the Shot is in two bodies, as the other former mixed battle is in
sixteen, and the Piks in one body as the other is in eight, yet are these
great bodies divided into so small divisions, and led by such sufficient
officers, that no disorder can happen, but it is as soon brought again into
form, as if they had their own Commanders, and one of the great vollies will
do more hurt and spoil, then four of the smaller.

Lastly for the Imagination of more ready obedience, better understanding of
command, and a greater willingness to discharge duty, the old Soldiers suppose
they are no necessary obstacles to be thrust in into this place, because the
discipline of war being (as it ought to be) all of one form and manner,
without intrusion of new words of command, or addition of curious novelties, so
that every officer speaking a known and a certain language, it matters not
who gives the word, for being understood it must be performed, and that they
will fight more willingly with their own Captains then with other men, the
natural aleageance they bear to their king and Country, whose quarrel they
fight, puts all such doubts out of question, because every honest and valiant
man's conscience is ruled by the justness of his cause, and his Kings
commandment, and all other heats are supernatural, and but the proofs of
false vallonre.

Thus the old Soldier answers to what the young Soldier does object, Other
Reasons.
and for a conclusion adds this more, to withstand this new manner of
imbattailing. They say that this mixing of Shot and Pikes together in
several distinct Companies, weakneth and disableth the gross body; for here
if you cast off your shot, then you leave such empty and wide streets, that
the enemies Horse are apt to break in and disorder them, or if you do not
cast off the Shot, but keep them close, and make them discharge in
Countermarch (which is the best and safest way) yet then they are apt to be
thronged up together by the Pikes, and the distance of place being taken from
them, the use of their Weapons must fall, and so consequently all things fall
to ruin.

But suppose order be kept and these defects not found in the Battle, yet say
the old Soldiers, that there is great impediment in this kind of
Imbattelling; for in what manner soever the Short serve, yet they will ever
leave a weakness in the and such open gaps and streets that the Horse may
break in at pleasure, or any other new foot division may sally forth and
over throw the whole regiment, as by the example of the figure following may
easily be perceived in a few companies, as in this ensuing figure more plainly
is shown.

The danger of this form of Imbatelling.


Thus you see if the Battle of Pikes stand, and the Shot give Fire, into what
damage they bring the whole Regiment, whether they serve in countermarch, or
otherwise; leaving so many open enterances, that if one, yet all can hardly be
prevented.

The Authors censure of both opinions.
Thus I have showed you the several ways of Imbattailing of a Regiment, with
the different opinions of Soldiers, together with their arguments and strength
of reason thereupon. It rests now that I deliver my particular opinion
touching the best election; wherein, although I know, many oposites will rise
up against me, yet freely and ingeniously thus I am persuaded.

That the first manner of Imbattelling by several Companies, The former
difference reconciled
and every Captain leading of his own men, is excellent for show at general
Musters, or at any peaceful Triumph, where the exercise of Arms is required,
because it is comely and beautiful to behold, gives great contentment to the
spectators, and continues the Volley long, though not in the best order. But
if it be to express true Marshall Discipline, to bring hands to fight in good
sadness, or to give affright to a certain enemy at all times both in strength
and weakness, then with out all doubt the latter form of imbattailing where
the Pikes are drawn into one body, and winged on each hand with the Shot, is
without all contradiction, the only best way for the Imbattailing of a
regiment of one thousand men or more.

And thus much for the argument of Imbattailing a regiment, wherein if any man
rest unsatisfied, let him repair to other Authors which are allowed for
authority, and comparing their Reasons together, no doubt but he shall soon
find satisfaction.

Chap. 4, Of the Ioining of sundry Regiments together.
OF ranks and files are compounded small Squadrons, of small Squadrons are
compounded private Companies, of private Companies are compounded Regiments,
and of Regiments are compounded maine Battles of any extent whatsoever.

Now for the composition of a regiment, together with the defects, and
perfections of the same, I have showed sufficiently in the last Chapter. It now
therefore rests that I speak some thing of the ioining or knitting together
of many and sundry Regiments, in one gross body, which is the great substance
of the Arte-Military; What is the great substance of the art Military.
for of these great bodies do Armies consist, and according to the form and
proportion thereof, being agreeable with the ground and strength of Situation
whereon it is placed, is the Army made ever stronger or weaker.

Now Armies do never consist of one only entire and maine body alone, Of what
Armies consist.
without separation or distinction, but of diverse great bodies, as of
Forlornes, Vantguard, Battle and Rear of diverse great bodies of Horse, as
of Gentlemen at Arms, Curashiers, Dragoones, or else Carbines, and every one
of these great bodies are compounded of sundry Regiments in the drawing of
which together is principally to be regarded the dignity and pre-eminence of
the place, How to observe dignity of place.
according to the vallue of the commanders, or the lot when it is either cast
or appointed, wherein the principal observation is the hand; so that
whenever Regiments are to be joined together, whether it be by the Lord
Marshall, or the Seriant-Maior of the field, yet they must not neglect to give
to the best man the best place, by drawing up his Regiment first, and placing
it in the principal place, and then the rest successively one after another,
bringing them up on the left hand, and not on the right, till the body be
formed according to commandment and answerable to this figure following.

Regiments Joined together in plain Battle.


Here you see 5000 men divided into five regiments, how they are drawn up
into one body, and may make either Vantguard Battle, or Rear as it shall
please the supreme Officer to dispose of them. And as thus they are drawn
into plain Battle, so may they also be drawn into any other form of
battle which the Lord Marshall or Sergeant-Maior shall devise, for their
wisdoms and Judgments (which they ever accomodate to the advantage of the
ground, Who are to form Battles.
and to the preventing of the enemies designs) is ever referred the form and
shape of all forts of battles; whence it comes that a man shall hardly in an
age, see two Battles in two several places, of one and the self same form
and fashion; Observation of grounds.
because as grounds vary in their Situations, so proportions change in their
composures, and that battle which is strong and comely for the Plain, will
prove but weak and illfauored for the Hill, and that which is guarded with
water, will not agree with the guard of wood; nor that which is fenced with a
stone wall, suite with the fence of a dry ditch; for every thing must be
accomodated to the property of its own proper Nature; and therefore I will
show you another form of Imbattailing or ioining of Regiments together,
wherein although some Regiments are broken and divided into parts, yet they
agree in one uniformity of body, and may be reduced to their first natural
proportion at pleasure: as by this figure following you may easily perceive.

Regiments divided, yet brought unto Uniform.


Here you may behold two Regiments divided into six triangles, the Pikes in
the midst, and the Shot on each flank, but being drawn up together in one
body, then the Pikes of themseues make a perfect Diamond, and the four
Triangles of Shot guarding every corner, Front, Wing and Rear, bring the
whole mixed body into a quadrangle or perfeit square, this is a strong manner
of imbattailing, and hardly to be broke or entered; and whosoever is ready in
drawing up, and ioining of these bodies together in such form as has been
already specified, may without dificulty or staggering draw up any other body
of what shape or form soever it shall be commanded.

And thus much for the ioining of sundry Regiments together into one body.

Chap: 5. The forming of maine Battles of any extent or Number how great
soever.
AFter the ioining of Regiments together, must necessarily follow the
composition of maine Battles, beyond which Sphere Soldiers do never look,
because it is the end and determination of war,

These battles (as I have formerly showed) are ever shaped according to the
ground whereon they are planted, Observation in shaping of battles.
and according to the natural deffences, or natural offenses which arise from
the same places: yet because particulars often grow from generalities, and
that from plain and homely grounds curious and rare things are derived. I
think it not amiss here in this place to deliver you some general and
plain moddels of battles, which taken into a Souldier-like consideration,
may give you an aid, though not an instruction, how to accomodate battles
and to form and proporrion them in such manner as may be most commodious for
your self, and friends, and most hurtful and noisome for the enemy.

The composition of Battles and the members
First then you must understand that the body of every maine Battle is
compounded of six principiall Members, that is to say, of the Forlorn or
loose bodies, of the Vantguard, Battle, Rear, Horse, and the great
Artillery; and of these, if any be imperfect, or out of frame, either in order,
number, shape or Government, the whole Army is sick, and howsoever like Xerxes
host they may make the sky dark with their Arrows, yet will an handful of
Cirus men, well disciplined, put them to route, and write Captivity on their
backs as a perpetual emblem.

How to find a square Root.
When therefore you will draw up any maine battle, you must look into the
square Root of great Numbers, as the square Root of one hundred is ten,
because the body carries ten in square every way, for ten times ten is one
hundred, so likewise the square Root of 400 is 200, because it carries the
square of 200 every way, for twenty times twenty is four hundred, and thus of
any number which will carry a square proportion be it great or little
whatsoever; Dividing of a Battle.
then knowing the entire Number of the whole Army, and dividing it into
several parts, alowing so many for the Forlorns, so many for the Vantguard, so
many for the Battle, so many for the Rear, and so many for the guard of the
Ordnance, or great Artillery; you by the drawing up of these lesser squares,
and inlargening them as occasion shall serve, form and shape every several
division after what proportion your self pleases, for of squares, you may
make Rounds; of Rounds, Triangles; of Triangles, Diamonds; and of Diamonds many
other curious or intricate figures that shall come into your imagination, for
proof behold this figure following.

Alteration of squares, or squares in squares.


Thus you see by dividing and mixing of squares, Of Forlornes.
you may frame other proportions, it rests then that after you have cast out,
and allotted your Forlorns which is intended ever to be the least of all the
four Battles, that you distribute them in this manner: the first point of
the Forlorn ought to consist of certain loose files of Shot extrauagantly
dispersed without order, then to second them with certain small squares of
Shot as an 100 or 200 in a square well ordered and governed which as the
Battles shall approach nearer and nearer, may upon any occasion of danger
retire into the Vantguard.

Of the vantguard.
Then shall the Vantguard be compounded of one maine and entire body, or of two
at the most; containing almost, but not fully three parts of the Battle, and
being equally mixed of Shot and Pikes.

Of the battle
After the Vantguard, the maine Battle takes place, being compounded of one
body or two at most, and containing a full third part, or sometimes more then
half as much again as the Vantguard. In this battle ought to be the
choicest men and best experienced of the Army, it is the seat and place of the
General, and as an Ocean sends forth his streams of Soldiers to releive
and refresh every weak and distressed part that is about it.

Of the Rear
Next after the Battle is the place of the Rear which likewise is contained
in one body or two at the most. This body ought to be of equal number and
extent with the Vantguard, and in all Forms, Marches, and Executions it is one
and the same in Nature with the Vantguard, for at any time when faces are
turned about then is the Rear the Vantgurad, and the Vantguard the Rear; at
the two points of the Vantgurad, that is to say, the utmost right point and the
utmost left point, as two long extended wings, troopeth the Horse Army, The
Horse battle and the great Ordnance with the guard thereof.
and at the end of them is the great Ordnance on both sides; behind which
marches two Regiments of foot for a guard and defense of the Artillery and
Munition; for the cutting off of the great Ordnance is the renownedst work
the enemy can aim at, or accomplish.

Thus I have in words delivered you the true form of a plain and ordinary
battle, with every several member belonging there unto, but for as much as
the protraicture makes a deeper impression in the mind, and is a greater
help and friend to the memory then the mere relation of words only; I will
therefore in this next figure following, show you the true portraiture of the
battle already discribed.

The Windmill Battle.


Thus here you see the strongest of Battles, and as curious as any what
soever, so that to make a conclusion of this work, who will diligently look
into these models already demonstrated, and apply himself to the imitation
thereof, shall not need to lodge any scruples in his breast, but by the help
of these examples may be able to range any battle with Judgment and
sufficiency. And thus much for the forming of maine Battles of any extent or
Number how great soever.

FINIS.

