A new Postil Conteinyng most Godly and learned sermons upon all the Sunday
Gospelles, that be read in the Church thorowout the year: Lately set forth
unto the great profit not only of al Curates, and spiritual Ministers, but
also of all other godly and Faithful Readers.

Perused and allowed according to the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church, by Thomas
Marshe. M. D. LXVI.

Certain Sentences of holy Scripture.
Esai. lii. Romans x. O How beautiful are the feet of them, which bring the
glad tidings of peace, and show the good and ioyefull news of our
salvation.

Esai. lv. LIke as the rain and snow comes down from heaven, and returns
not thither again, but waters the earth, makes it fruitful and grene, that
it may give corn to the sower, and bread to the eater: so the word also that
comes out of my mouth, shall not turn again void unto me, but shall
accomplish my will, and prosper in them, unto whom I send it.

Hieremie. xxiii. WHat has chafe and wheat to do together, says the Lord?
Is not my word, like a fire, says the Lord? And like an hammer, that breaks
the hard stone?

Psalm. Cvii. HE sent his word, and healed them: and they were saved from
their destruction.

Sapien. xvi. IT is neither herb nor plaster, that restored them to health,
but thy word (O Lord) which heals all things.

John. xv. NOw are ye clean through the word, that I have spoken unto you.

Romans i. I Am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, because it is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believes.

Heb. 4. THe word of God is quick and myghtie in operation and sharper then
any two edged sword: and enters thorough even unto the deuidyng asunder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marye.

TO HIS FAITHFVLL FELLOW Laborers in the Lords harvest* the Ministers and
Preachers of Gods most holy word, THOMAS BECON wishes the spirit of
knowledge, of strength, and of constancy unto the end, from God the Father,
through JESUS CHRIST our Lord.
ALBEIT (Most dear Brethren) GOD has above all other mortal creatures
greatly garnished mankynds with diverse and manifold benefits: Psalm. 8. Heb. 2.
yet I know not (his son CHRIST only excepted) if he has bestowed upon us
Christians, Psalm. 148.
a more noble and more excellent gift, then the gift of his most blessed and
holy word. For as concerning the gifts of Nature, and the treasures of this
world, The word of god excellethe all other gifts of god.
the Turk, the Sarazen, the Jew, the Infidel have them common with the
Christians, yea for the most part the godless and wicked have them more
abundauntly, then the godly and faithful, Of wordlye things the wicked have
more abounda^ce then the godly.
as not only examples in all ages both of divine and profane writers do
evidently show, but very experience also in these our days proves it most
certain and true. Wisdom, eloquence, strength, beauty, favor, richesse,
honor, fame, promotions, dignities, wealth, lyuynges, and what soever besides
the mad, dotyng, foolyshe, and wicked worldlynges have in most high
admiration, 1. John. 2. Esa. 40. 1. Cor. 7. Baruc. 4.3. Esd. 4. Eccle. 40. 1.
Pet. 1. Psalm. 119. Heb. 12.
are transitory and not long endure, more vain then smoke, more brittle then
glass, more inconstant then wind, more flittyng then shadow. But the word of
God abides for ever and ever, even from generation to generation, and never
leaves the embracers thereof, until it has safely brought them unto the
heavenly haven of most fortunate felicity, and joyfully placed them in that
most joyful and celestial Jerusalem, the city of the living God, where
JESUS the mediator of the new Testament, where also an innumerable sight of
angels, a great congregation of the first borne sons, and the spirits of
just and perfect men, rule, How profitable the word of god is.
reign, and triumph in all joy, pleasure, and glory. And in the mean season,
while we live in this world, who is able to express, how noble and notable
commodities the word of god brings unto us? Heaven and earth yield not such
multitudes of necessary fruictes for the sustenta^tion and safeguard of this our
vile, wretched, mortal, and corruptible body, as the word of God brings
forth for the health and salvation, for the righteous making and
glorification of our soul. Is not the word of God the same to the soul, Deuteronomy.
8. Math. 4. Luc. 4.
that meat is to the body? Is not the knowledge of Gods word to the mind, that
the sight of the eye is to the outward man? Can the body endure, the life being
taken away? No more can the soul continue in saulfe estate, if the word of
God be drawn from it. Where there is no knowledge of Gods word (says the
wise man) there is no goodness for the soul. Proverb. 19.
Again: Uayn and things of naught are all those men, Sap. 13.
in whom there is no knowledge of GOD. This is everlasting life (says Christ
unto his heavenly Father, even to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou haste sent. John. 17.
To know thee (O our God) is perfect righteousness (says the wise man) yea
to know thy ryghteousnes and power, Sap. 15.
is the root of immortality. Are not these the words of God by the Prophet
Ieremye? Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in
his strength, Iere. 9.
nor the rich man in his riches: but who soever will rejoice, let him rejoice
in this, that he understands and knows me: for I am the Lord, which do
mercy, equity, and righteousness upon the earth. The blessed apostle S. Paul
before his conversion unto the Christen faith was a great clerk and excellently
learned not only in the law of Moses, S. Paul.
and in the books of the Prophets, Act. 2^. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 15. Tit. 1.
but also in all kind of liberal sciences, so that in knowledge he far
excelled the residue of the apostels: yet writing to the Corinthians he bosteth
not him self of this his universal knowledge, but he only glories in this,
that he knows Christ. This was his delyghte, his confort, ^. Cor. 2.
his pleasure, his joy. I brethren (says he) when I came unto you, came not in
gloriousnes of words, or of wysedom, showing unto you the testimony of God.
Neither showed I my self, that I knew any thing among you, Phil. 3.
save Jesus Christ even the same that was crucified. And in his epistle to the
Philippians, he cou^teth al things in comparison of the knowledge of Christ,
vile, base, and nothing worth. Coloss. 1.
How oftentimes in his epistles wysheth he, that such as he writes unto, may
be fulfilled with the knowledge of God in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, and that they may increase in the same daily more and more?
Coloss. 3.
Let the word of Christ (says he) dwell in you plenteously with all wisdom.
This knowledge of God, and of his son Christ Jesus abunda^tly suffiseth unto
the sanctification and salvation of all faithful christians, as God says by
the Prophet: By the knowledge of him, which is my rightous servant, he shall
justify the multitude. Esa. 53.
And without this knowledge al other knowledges and sciences are nothing worth,
and not only not profitable, but also wicked and damnable, as it is written:
1. Cor. 3. Iac. 3.
The wisdom of this world is foolishnes before God. Again: The wisdom, that
descends not from above, is earthy, natural, and deuillish. For this cause
the holy apostle termed the great learned wise Gentiles, which stood much in
their own conceit, and thought them selves to know all things, fools and
unwise. Their foolish heart (says he) was blinded, Romans 1.
in so much that when they counted themselves wise, they became fools. In
consideration whereof, if was well said of that great learned philosopher
Socrates, Socrates.
which notwithstanding by the oracle of Apollo was judged of all men the wisest
and best learned. This one thing I know (says he) that I know nothing.
Uerily although a man know all natural and moral things with the documentes
thereof, and whatsoever other doctrine, science, All knowledge without the
knowledge of God is vain and unprofitable.
or knowledge can be reckned up besides, so that in his one breast, there is
contained, whatsoever knowledge has been found in the breasts of all natural
men from the beginnynge of the world unto this day, or shall be unto the end of
the same: yet if he know not Christ, he knows nothing. Notable is this
Distichon and worthy for ever to be remembered.

Hoc est nescire, sine Christo plurima scire.
Si Christum benescis, satis est* si caetera nescis.
Which is thus englished.

This is doubtless, to know nothing at all,
Without Christ, many things to know and see:
If thou know Christ well, as it thee befall,
Thou nedest no more, it is enough for thee.
The knowledge of god is only gotten by the word. John. 5.
But this knowledge of God and of his son Christ can we by no means obteyn,
but by the word of God only, as our Savior Christ says: Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think that ye have eternal life: and they are they, which
testify of me. And as Abraham said to the rich man being in the torments of
hell fire. Luc. 16.
They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them. Again, as the Evangelist
S. John writes. No man has seen God at any time. The only begotten son,
which is in the bosom of the Father, John. 1.
he has declared him.

This word therefore is diligently both day and night to be read, Psalm. 1.
heard, considered, weighed and pondered. Yea our whole delight and pleasure is
to be reposed in it, that we may truly unfeignedly, and from the very bottom
of the heart say with the disciples unto our Savior Christ: Lord, to whom shall
we go? John. 6.
Thou have the words of everlasting life. And we believe and are sure, yt thou
art Christ the son of the living God. And also with the Psalmograph on this
manner: Psalm. 119.
I have had O Lord, as great delyght in the way of thy testimonies, as in all
manner of richesse. For thy testimonies are my delight and my councellers. The
law of thy mouth is derer unto me, then thousands of gold and silver. For I
love thy commandementes above gold and precious stone. And I am as glad of thy
word, as one that fyndeth great spoils. O how sweet are thy words unto my
throat? They are sweeter then honye unto my mouth. Psalm. 19.
They are more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine gold: sweter also
then the honey comb. The words of the Lord are pure words, Psalm. 12.
even as the silver, which from earth is tried and purifyed seven times in
the fire. etc.

Moreover this word of God is that hid treasure in the field, Math. 13.
which whenne a man has found, even for very joy thereof, he goes and
sells all that he has, and bieth the field. Yea it is that precious pearl,
which when a merchant man by long sekyng has ones found, The excellency of
gods word.
he sells all that ever he has, and byeth it. It is that swearde, for byenge
whereof, Christ commands us to sell our very cote: signifieng hereby, that
above all things the word of God, Ephe. 6. Heb. 4. Luc. 22.
and the knowledge thereof is to be gotten, as he says in an other place, Seek
first of all the kingdom of God, and the ryghteousnes thereof. And as he said
to Martha, which was busyly occupied about household businesses, and preparynge
for meat for the body, her sister Mary sittyng at Christ's feet, Math. 6.
Luc. 10.
hearing his word and doctrine: Martha, Martha, said he, Thou art careful
and troubled about many things. Uerily one is nedeful. Mary has chosen the
good part, which shall not be taken away from her. It is that meat, which
perishes not, John. 6. Exodus 16. Psalm 78. Sap. 16.
but abides unto everlasting life. Yea it is that heavenly Manna, which that
princelike Prophet and most counnyng musician David the Psalmograph calls
the bread of Angels, and the wise man terms it not only the food of Angels,
but also such a meat as was very pleasant and of good taste. Exodus 17. John.
4.
It is that rock and fountayn of living water, whereof who soever drinks,
shall never be more a thirst: but the water that he shall drink shall be in him
a well of water, springyng up into everlasting life. It is that pillar of
fire, Exodus 14. Psalm. 78. Luc. 1.
which gives light to them that walk in darkness, and sit in the shadow of
death, to guide their fete into the way of peace, as David says: Thy word, O
Lord, is a lantern to my feet, and a light to my pathwaies. And Solomon
says: Psalm. 119.
The commandment is a lantern, and the law a light, yea it is the way of
life. Likewise says S. Peter. We have a right sure word of prophecy, Prouer.
6. 2. Pet. 1.
whereunto if ye take heed, as unto a light that shyneth in a dark place, ye
do well* until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts. To
end: Romans 1.
it is the power of God unto salvation for so many as believe.

Furthermore, who is able to express, what a joyful jewel, The fruits of the
word of god.
precious pearl, incomparable ouche, and most noble tresure the word of God
shall be found, if we in few words consider the commodities, fruictes, and
profits that come thereof? It turns souls (says David.) It makes of an
unfaithful Romans 10.
and hearing comes by the word of God. It makes Psalm. 18.
The people, whom I knew not, has served me: in the hering of the ear they
have been obedient unto me. Genesis 9.19. Exodus 2.
Moses, David, Manasses, Zachee, Peter, the thief, Mary Magdalene. etc. It
conuerteth sinners, and makes them 2. Reg. 12. 2. Par. 33. Luc. 9. Math. 26.
Luc. 23. Luc. 7. Iere. 26. Luc. 1.
Look that thou keep not the word back, if peradventure they will harken, and
turn every man from his wicked way. Likewise said the Angel of John Baptist
to his father Zachary the priest, concerning his preaching: He shall turn
many of the sons of Israel unto the Lord their God. And he shall go before
him in the spirit and power of Helias, to turn the herts of the fathers to the
children, and the unbelievers to the wisdom of the just me^, to make ready a
perfect people for the Lord. That John turned many by the preaching of Gods
word unto the Lord, Math. 3. Luc. 3. Act. 2.3.4.
it is manifest in the Eua^gelical history. What great multitudes of people S.
Peter (as I may speak nothing of the other apostels) turned unto Christ by
preaching the word, blessed Luke in his Chronicle of the Apostles acts does
partly declare. Was not the holle world in a manner turned unto the faith of
Christ through the preaching of the word? As saint Paul says: Faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10. Psalm. 19.
and hearing comes by the word of God. But I ask: Have they not heard? No
doubt their sound went out into all lands, and their words into the ends
of the world. In matters of co^trouersye we must have recourse unto the word
of god.
In matters of controversy concerning religion, it declares and shows, who
maintains truth, and who approves falshode. It is the true touchestone,
whereby we easily discern the true doctrine of Christ, from the false and
corrupt teaching of Antichrist. And therefore it is called of the Psalmograph,
Psalm. 19.
and of that to learn the certainty of al matters concerning Faith and
Doctrine. If any man (says he) want light, Esa. ^.
let him look upon the law and the testimony, whether they speak not after
this meaning. If he do not this, he stumbleth and suffers hunger. And if he
suffer hunger, he is out of patience and blasphemeth his king and his God. So
read we of the noble men of Thessalonica, Act. 17.
which when they herd Paul and Sylas preach, that Christ must needs suffer
and rise again from death for the salvation of the world, received the word
with all diligence of mind, and yet notwithstanding searched the scriptures
daily, whether those things were even so, as Paul and Sylas preached. And
therefore S. Paul afterward writing unto the^, as one greatly alowing this their
act, says in his epistle: Quench not the spirit: despise not prophecyings:
Examyn al things: keep that which is good. And. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
S. John in his canonical Epistle says: Derely beloved, believe not every
spirit: but prove the spirits, whether they are of God or not. etc. 1. John.
4. Psalm. 19.
It gives wisdom to the simple, to the poor in spirit, to ye humble to the
meke, to the little ones, to the babes. This wisdom is the Esa. 66.
Unto whom shall I have respect, but unto him that is poor, and of a lowly
troubled spirit, and stands in awe of my words? The fine Phariseys, the
saucy Saduceis, the subtle Scribes, the lustye Lawyers, the bite^hepe
Bishops, the patteryng Priests, (as I may speak nothing of the eloquente
Orators, noble hystoriographers, learned Poets, quickewitted Logitians, far
syghted Astronomers. etc.) were before the world great wise learned men, and
yet understood they nothing of God aryght. The simple idiots and unlearned men
had more true knowledge of God, then all they, as our savior Christ said unto
his heavenly Father, I thank thee, Math. 11.
O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and have showed them unto babes. Uerily Father, eue^ so
was it thy good pleasure. Likewise says S. Paul: Not many wise men after the
flesh, 1. Cor. ^^
not many mighty, not many of high degree, are called. But God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. And God has chosen the
weak things of the world to confound things, which are mighty: and vile
things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen: yea and
things of no reputation, for to bring to naught things of reputation, that no
flesh should rejoice in his presence. S. James also says: Has not God chosen
the poor of this world, such as are rich in Faith, Iac. 2.
and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to them that love him?

Psalm. 19. Iere. 15.
When I had found thy words, I did eat them up gredily. They have made my
heart joyful and glad. For thy name was called upon me, O Lord God of Hosts.
The Prophet Ezechiel says also: Ezech. 3.
I did eat the book, and it was in my mouth sweter then honey. Were not these
the words of the two disciples, that went unto Emaus, after that Christ had
interpreted unto them the scriptures, Luc. 24.
which were written of him? Did not our hearts (say they) burn within us, while
he talked with us by the way, and opened to us the scriptures? Who is able to
express, what joy, what mirth, what solace, what confort, Adam and Heua
received after their transgression, when they heard out of the mouth of God,
Genesis 3.
that the sede of the woman should tread down the serpents head? Who can
sufficiently declare, how greatly king David being rebuked of the prophet
Nathan for his whoredom and manslaughter, was conforted and replenished with
all true and perfect gladness, ^. Reg. 12.
when he heard out of the prophets mouth these most sweet and confortable
words: The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shalt not dye. What joy and
confort the sinful woman conceived in her heart, which before was almost
swalowed up of sorrow for her wicked and sinful life past, Luc. 7.
as her tears and outward behavior do manifestly declare, when she heard
these words out of the mouth of Christ: Thy sins are forgeuen thee: Go in
peace: no man is able to express. The thief likewise hanging on the cross,
Luc. 22.
and hearing these words spoken unto him of Christ: Uerily, verily I say unto
thee, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise: conceived in his heart an
vnoutspeakable joy. Many such examples find we in the Scriptures both of
the old and new Testament. The word of God (I mean the Gospel of our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus) apprehended and laid hand on with a sure and strong
faith, brings to the heart and conscience of man, peace, rest, joy, solace
confort. etc. For this cause it is called the word of reconciliation or
atonement, of joy, of peace, of confort, of health, 2. Cor. ^. Luc. 2. Ephe. 1.
John. 6.
of spirit, of life. etc. It lyghtneth the eyes. It shows unto men the right
way, how they ought to walk to please God, and to do those things which
are acceptable unto him. It delivers Psalm. 19.
and from the darkness of men's traditions, and opens unto them the glorious
God, that they may not stumble, and walk safely in that way that the Lord has
appointed, declinyng neither on the right hand nor on the left hand, as the
Psalmographe says: Esa. 30. Psalm. 119. Proverb. 6. 2 Pet. 1. Ephe. 5. John. 3.
Thy word, O Lord, is a lantern unto my fete, and a light to my pathewaies.
For this cause it is termed of the holy writers, Light, in diverse places of
the sacred Bible. Our Savior Christ says: This is condemnation, that the
light is come into the world, and men have loved darkness more then the light.

It is a mighty shield and strong defense against Satan, Proverb. 30.
) The word of God is a bucklar to such as believe it. Therefore S. Paul in a
certain Epistle, where he appoints, what armor we should put on, that we may
be able to stand against the assaults of the devil, Ephe. 6.
and to resist the governors of darkness in the evil day and to stand perfect
in all things, exhorts us among other weapons, to put on the sword of the
spirit, which (says he) is the word of God. With this spiritual sword did
our savior Christ in the wyldernes fight against Satan, and mightily overcame
him: by this his conflict declaring unto us, Math. 4. Luc. 4.
what a noble weapon the word of God is to vanquishe and to overcome Satan, so
that who soever puts on this swearde, and with a mighty faith falls in
hand with this old cankred ennemy of mankind, he may be sure to have the
victory. For this word is that percyng stone, ^. Reg. 17.
wherewith David ouerthrue and killed that mighty great giant Goliath that
proud Philstine and blasphemous rayler upon God and his host.

2 Thessalonians. 2.
That wicked, that sinful man, that son of perdition, which is an
adversary (to Gods truth) and is exalted above all that is called GOD, or
that is worshipped, so that he does sit in the Temple of God, bostyng
himself to be God, shall be disclosed, uttered, and brought to light, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth. etc. Again, As James and
Iambres withstode Moses, 2. Timoth. 3. Exodus 7.
even so do these also resyst the truth: men they are of corrupt minds, and
leude as concerning the Faith: but they shall prevail no longer. For their
madness shall be uttered unto all men, even as theirs was. Of this thing (God be
thanked) we have experience at this day, wherein Antichrist is reveled, and
all his wicked doctrine disclosed, so that the very blind begin to see his
iugglyng. And though there be, which after the manner of Atlas, susteyn,
underprop and hold up with their shoulders, that is to say, with their
writings and preachings, the kingdom of Antichrist, so much as they can, with
his Antichristian acts, deuillish decrees, crooked co^stitutions, trifling
traditions drousie dreams, idle inventions, unwritten verities. etc. yet is
the time of the judgment of that great whore of Babylon at hand, wherein she
with her marked merchauntes, with that blasphemous beast, and false prophet
shall be cast into that lake, that burns with fire and brymstone. He whom
John saw syttyng upon a white horse, Apoc* ^9.
clothed with a vesture dipte in blood, whose eyes were as a flame of fire,
and whose name is the word of God, and out of whose mouth went a sharp two
edged sword, Math. 5.
shall smite, kill, and destroy them. Every plant (says Christ) that my
heavenly Father has not planted, shall be plucked up by the roots. Again, The
Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, Math. 24.
for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come.

It defends the lover and embracer thereof from all sin, Psalm. 119..
that I should not sin against thee. Again, wherwithall shall a young man
cleanse his way? even by rulyng himself by thy word. Ones again: Order my
steps in thy word: and so shall no wickedness have dominion over me.

It comfort the troubled in his tribulation, so that it suffers Psalm. 119.
I should have perished in my trouble. Again, O think upon thy servant, as
concerning the word, wherein thou haste caused me to put my trust. The same
is my conforte in my trouble: For thy word has quickened me. In an other
place he also says: Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me. Psalm. 22.
Thy rod and thy staff confort me.

It cures and heals all spiritual sicknesses and diseases, as the wise man
says: It is neither herb nor emplasture, that Sap. 16. Psalm. 107.
but thy word (O Lord) which heals al things. Likewise says the
Psalmograph: He sent his word, and healed them, and they were saved from their
destruction.

It purifieth and cleanses the heart of man, yea the whole man, as our Savior
Christ says: Now are ye clean through John. 15.
Hereto pertains the saying of thapostle: Christ loved the congregation, and
gave himself for it, to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the fountain of water
thorough the word. S. Peter also says: Ephe. 5. 1. Pet. 1.
Ye are borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of
God, which lives and abides for ever.

It brings peace, rest, quietness, joy, and conforte to men's consciences, as
the Psalmograph says: Great is the peace yt they Psalm. 119.
Peace peace unto the^ that are far of, and to them that are nigh, says the
Lord, and I make him whole. But the wicked are like the ragyng sea that can not
rest: whose water fometh with the mire and gravel. Even so the wicked have no
peace, says God. It brings the holy Ghost to them y^ believe, as we read in
the Esa. 57.
while Peter yet spoke these words (says the blessed historiograph S. Luke)
the holy ghost fell on al them, which heard the preaching. Likewise saeith S.
Paul: Act. 10.
In Christ also we believe, forasmuch as we have herd the word of truth, Ephe.
1.
even the Gospel of your salvation: wherein when ye had believed, ye were sealed
with the holy Spirit. etc. And in his Epistle to the Galathians, Galat. 3.
he says: that they received the spirit by the preaching of the Faith.

It is able to make a man learned unto salvation through the

2. Timoth. 3.
It teaches al degrees, how they ought to behave the^ selves

Romans 1.
Likewise says saint James in his Epistle. Lay apart all filthynes and
superfluity of maliciousnes, Iac. ^
and receive with mekenes the word that is graffed in you, which is able to
save your souls.

2. timoth. ^.
to improve, to amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect and prepared unto all good works.

Thus have we heard (most dear brethren) both what a precious pearl, joyful
jewel, and noble treasure the word of God is, and also what inestimable
fruictes, incomparable commodities, and vnoutspeakable profits it brings
unto us. Uerily it is more woorthe then precious stones: and all the things
(as Solomon says) that thou can desire, Pro. 5.
are not to be compared unto it. For the gettyng of it is better then any
merchandise of silver, and the profit of it is better then gold. Upon her
right hand is long life, and upon her left hand is richesse and honor. Her
ways are pleasant ways, and all her paths are peaceable. She is a tree of
life to them that lay hold upon her, and blessed is he that keeps her fast.
For her doctrine is better then silver, Pro. 8.
and the knowledge thereof is more worth then fine gold and precious stones. O
blessed is the man, that hears the word of God, watching daily at her gates,
and geuyng attendance at the posts of her doors. For who so fyndeth her,
fyndeth life, and shall obtain favor of the LORD. But who so offends
against her, hurts his own soul. But all they that hate her, are the
lovers of death.

Now what fruictes, commodities, and profits we receive by the word of God, we
have tofore partly heard. Pro. 3.
Solomon adds and says: That the word of God gives long life, makes me^
to walk safely, to sleep swetely, delivers from sudden fear, Pro. 4.
preserves such as embrace her, promoteth them, brings the^ unto honor, is
life unto them, and health unto al their bodies, Pro. 7.
delivers from the strange woman, and from the harlote, which gives sweet
words, enricheth her lovers with wisdom, knowledge, understanding,
doctrine, learning, council, Pro. 8.
magnanimity, strength, righteousness, judgment, richesse, wealth,
prosperity, honor, renoume, glory. etc.

This incomparable treasure, I mean the word of God, with the fruits
thereof, has God of his great mercy committed unto you, by calling you unto the
ministry of his most glorious Gospel, and unto the dispensation of his
divine mysteries, not that ye should become dumb dogs not able to bark, not
that ye should conceal, hyde, and keep secret these joyful jewels and
precious pearls, but that ye should publish set forth, declare, and make
them to be known to other, as our Savior Christ says: A city that is
set on an hill, can not be hyd: neither do men light a candel, Esa. 56.
and put it under a bushel, but on a candell stick, and it gives light unto
all that are in the house. Again: What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in
light. And what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the house tops. God
will have his mysteries, his laws, his decrees, his statutes, his testimonies
blased abroad, Math. 5.
and made known to all creatures, and not be kept in houcker moucker, as
things not able to abide the light, that all men may glorify and praise his
holy and blessed name, by having knowledge of them. Math. 10.
And that it may so come to pass according to his godly will, he has called
you to an office, not to say mass not to mumble a great number of prayers in a
strange tongue, The office of a spiritual Pastore.
not to exorcise or conjure water: salt, bread, candles, fire, palms, ashes.
etc. not to offer sacrifices for the quick and the dead not to hear auricular
confession, not to absolve men from their sins with a few latin words. etc.
but to preach the gospel to declare the law of the Lord to the people,
Math. 28. Marc. 16. Malach. 2. Esa. 58. John. 16.
to publyshe his holy testament, to reprove sin, to declare to the world
their vices, sins, and wickedness, to exhort al men to repentance, faith,
hope, love, patience, long suffryng, mercy, gentleness, and such other fruictes
of the spirit: and to lead a life agreeable to their profession in all
godliness and honesty. As my Father has sent me (says Christ) so send I
you. John. 20.


Now who knows not, that Christ was sent to preach? as he himself says by
the Prophet: He has sent me to preach the Gospel to the poor. And in the
Evangelical history he says: Esa. 61. Luc. 4.
Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: For therefore am
I come. And he preached, says the Evangelist in their synagoges, and in all
Galilee. Again he says: Marc. 1.
I must preach also to other cities the Gospel of the kingdom of God: for to
that end was I sent. If ye therefore be sent of Christ, Luc. 4.
and called unto the ministry, and have not rather thruste in your selves for
hope of worldly gain and bodyly ease, even to the intent that ye may live
wealthylye and ydelly of the labor of other men's hands, and of the sweat
of other men's brows (as it is to be feared that a great number do at this
present day, rather seeking their own, then the profit of the flock) so are
ye sent to preach, not men's traditions, but the Gospel of the kingdom of
God. And this was the commission that Christ gave to his Apostles, Marc. 16.
and to all their successors: Go (says he) thoroughe out the world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature. If ye therefore be the successors of
Christ's Apostles, so have ye received an Iniunction from the high
shepehearde and everlasting Bishop Jesus Christ, to preach the Gospelle.
Neither can ye be his Disciples, except ye earnestly study to obey and
fulfill his Iniunction. Christ would have the love of his Apostles toward
him none otherwise known, John. 12.
but by feeding his lambs and sheep. If thou love me, (says he) feed my
lambs: feed my sheep, feed my sheep. If ye therefore will show your selves
to love Christ: so must ye feed the flock of Christ, as Saint Peter
says: The Elders, which are among you, I exhort, which am also an elder,
1. Pet. 5.
and a witness of the afflictions of Christ, and also a partaker of the
glory that shall be opened: Feed ye Christ's flock, as much as lies in
you, taking the ouersyght of them, not as compelled thereto, but wyllynglye,
not for the desire of fylthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as though ye were
lords over the paryshes, but that ye be an ensample to the flock. And whenne
the chief shephearde shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible crown
of glory. Now if ye feed not the flock of Christ, but rather your selves:
Ezech. 34.
if ye eat up the fat, if ye clothe your selves with the wolle: if ye
devour the milk, and yet labor not about the safe keeping of the flock,
but rather churlyshly and cruelly reign and rule over them, catchyng and
snatchynge from them what ye can get, so that they are scattered here and
there, as sheep without a shephearde, and are devoured of all the beasts of
the field: how can ye justly say that ye love Christ? If thou love me
(says he) feed my lambs, and feed my sheep.

Again: Ye are my friends, if ye do those things, John. 15.
that I command you. Christ has commanded you to feed his flock, and to
preach the Gospel. If ye do this, so are ye Christ's friends and lovers: if
ye do it not, so are ye his foes and ennemies. Christ says: A good
shepherd gives his life for his sheep: signifyinge hereby, that he which is
a faithful feder and true pastor of the Lords flock, 1 (...). 10.
does not only faithfully and truly feed the sheep, but he also (if need
require) is ready to bestow his life and all that ever he has for the safegarde
of the flock. If these things be found in you, so are ye good shepheardes.
But if ye do not teach, but rather reach after as much as ye can get,
bearyng no good affection toward the flock concerning their salvation, seking
not ye commodity of the sheep, but your own private lucre and gain, so are ye
no shepheardes, but hyrelynges: no pastors, but wolves, no heardmen and
teachers, but thieves and robbers: no kepers, but murderers. A thief comes
not (says our Savior Christ) but for to steal, John. 10.
to kylle, and to destroy. Again: An hirelyng sees the wolf coming, and
leaves the sheep, and flees: and the wolf catches and scatters the sheep.
Math. 24. Luc 12.
Christ requires, that such as be in the ministerye should be faithful and
wise servants, even such as in due time will give meat to the Lords household.
And Christ calls that servant blessed, whom his Lord when he comes, shall
find so doing. A spiritual pastore ought to be faithful and wise.
He adds more over, and says, that the Lord will make him ruler over al his
goods. Here, hear you, that it is required of you, if ye be true seruautes,
first, that ye be faithful, as S. Paul says: It is required of the
ministers of Christ, and stewards of the secrets of God, 1. Cor. 4.
that a man be found faith full. Faythefull.
Ye shall show your selves faithful, if ye truly, faithfully, purely,
syncerely, and diligently behave your selves according to your commission, in
executyng your lords and masters commandment. You may not display and
set abroad your own will and fancy, nor yet the decrees and traditions of
other, but ye must publish and set forth the good will and pleasure of your Lord
with all sincerity and pureness, and without all corruption or co^mixtion of
man's doctrine, yea and that after such sort, as is contained in your
commission, alwais remembering, that ye are the Legates and Ambassadors of the
most mighty king, yea, that ye are the mouth of the most high God. He that
hears you, Luc. 10. Math. 10.
hears me (says Christ.) Again: It is not ye that speak, but the spirit
of your father, which speaks in you. For as he is a faythefull and true
ambassador, that symply and plainly without addition or diminution, expresses
his Lords mind, will, and pleasure to such as he is sent unto: even so shall
ye show your selves faithful servants, if ye utter unto the people those
things only, which are contained in your commission, that is to say, in the
sacred Bible, as our Savior Christ says: teaching them to observe all
things, Math. 23.
what soever I have commanded you. Notable are these words of that most noble
and eloquent Doctor S. John Chrysostom: Nothing ought to be put unto the words
of god. In Romans
nor to be plucked away from them. For the very proper and peculiar work and
office of an Ambassador is, only to carye those things that are committed
unto him. Therefore the priest is called an Ambassador, Malach. 2.
because he declares not his own matters, but the matters of him that sent
him. Again, he says: The Apostles were sent unto this end, that they should
utter, declare, and set forth those things that they had received, and not
that they should put any thing thereunto of their own.

Secondly, it is required of you, Wise or prudent.
that ye be not only faithful, but also wise and prudent servants, whereby is
signified that ye ought to have, not only a zeal to do good (as many
unlearned ministers pretend now a days) but also a wisdom, a knowledge, an
understanding, how to do good, how to do your duty, how to accomplish
that, which is enjoined you in your commission, lest it be said of you, as it
is written of the Jews: Romans 1^.
They have a fervent zeal and good mind to Godwarde, but not according to
knowledge. The ministers and servants of the Lord may not be like horses and
moyles that have no understanding, Psalm. 32.
but such must be their knowledge, that they may be able (as thapostle says)
to exhort by wholesome learning, Tit. 1.
and to improve them that speak against it. In the priests lips (says the
prophet) should be sure knowledge, that men may seek the law at his mouth:
Malach. 2.
for he is a messenger of the Lord of hosts. The blessed Apostle S. Paul in
the description of a bishop or spiritual ouerseer requires, 1. Timoth. ^.
Tit. 1.
that such one should be chosen to be a pastor or feder of the Lords flock, as
is apt and able to teach, to distribute the word of truth justly, to
inform them that resist the truth, 2. Timoth. 2.
to do the work thoroughly of an Evangelist, to fulfill the office of a
spiritual minister unto the uttermost, to preach the word, to be fervent in
season, and out of season, to improve, to rebuke, 2. Timoth. 4.
to exhort with all long suffering and doctrine, to watch in all things, to
suffer afflictions, Tit. 1.
to rebuke sharply them that are enemies to the truth, that they may be found in
the faith, to speak those things which become wholesome doctrine. etc. Christ,
Tit. 2.
the Apostles and the Fathers of the primative church committed the ministry
of the word, To whom the ministry of the word was committed in times paste.
not to dumb dogs that were not able to bark, not to horses and moyles that
had no understanding not to Mammonistes and Epicures, which only seek gayn
and pleasure, lucre, and ease, but to such as were mighty in word and
doctrine, full of power, and of the holy Ghost, and thoroughly furnyshed with
wisdom, knowledge, and understanding of the holy scriptures, ready at all
times to give even their very lives (if need so require) for the glory of God,
for the confirmation of their doctrine, and for the health of the flock, which
Christ purchased with his most precious blood, as the Apostle says: Act. 20.
The holy ghost witnesses in every city, saying: that bands and trouble
abide me. But none of these things move me, neither is my life dear unto me,
so that I may fulfill my course with joy, and the ministration of the word,
which I have receued of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of
God. Act. 21.
Again: I am ready not only to be bound but also to die for the name of the Lord
Jesus.

Ignorancie or lack of knowledge.
Ignorancy is discommendable in common persons, but in them that ought to be
teachers of other, it is not only discommendable, but also intolerable, yea
and abominable. For as Christ says: If the blind lead the blind, both
fall into the dyche. Math. 15.
Again: The light of the body is the eye. Wherefore if the eye be single, all
the body shall be full of light. But and if thine eye be wicked, Math. 6.
all thy body shall be full of darkness. Wherefore if the light that is in thee, be
darkness, how great is that darkness? It becomes not them, that profess them
selves to be guides of the blind, lyghtes of them which are in darkness, Romans
2.
informers of them which lack discretion, teachers of the unlearned. etc. to
be ignorant and unlearned, void of the knowledge of Gods mysteries, and
utterly estraunged from the true and perfect understanding of the holy
Scriptures. Math. 15. ^sa. 56. Psalm. 3^. Phil. 3. Act. 20. Math. 7.
All such the word of God calls blind guydes, dumb dogs not able to
bark, horses and moyles that have no understanding, evil woorkemenne, white
daubed walls, grievous and rauenynge wolves, hyrelynges, thieves, robbers,
murderers, foolyshe shepeheardes, Idols. etc. Saint Hierome says: It is
the office of Priests, John. 10. ^acha. 11.
whenne they be demanded of the law, to answer. If he be a priest, let him
know the law of the Lord. If he know not the law of the Lord, he declares
evidently that he is no priest. In Agge. Prophet.
For it pertains unto the Lords priest, to know the law, and when he is
asked, to make answer of the law. Again he says: If after the mind of the
Apostle Paul, Christ be the power of God and the wisdom of God, it follows
well, that he that knows not the Scriptures, knows not the power of God, In
Esaiam.
and the wysedom of him. For the ignorance of the Scriptures, is the ignorance
of Christ. Leo the bishop says: Did. 38. Can. Si in Lai^cis.
If ignorance seems intolerable even in lay men: how much more is it
worthy, neither of excuse, nor of forgeuenes in them that bear rule? In
Concilio Toletano, we read on this manner: Ignorance the mother of all
errors, Did. 33. Can Ignora^tia.
is most of all to be eschewed in the Priests of GOD, which have taken upon
them the office of teaching among the people of god. Priests are warned to
read the holy Scriptures, as Paul the Apostle says unto Timothe: Give
attendance unto redynge and exhortation, and to learning, 1. Timoth. 4.
and continue always in these. Let priests therefore know the holy
scriptures and Canons, and let all their work, The woke of a true pastore
consysteth in preching and learning only.
business and travail consyste in preaching and doctrine: And let them
edifye all men so well with the knowledge of Faith, as with the good
information of works.

Thus see you (dear brethren) that it is required of you, not only that ye
should be faithful, but also wise servants, Godly wisdom is only learned
of gods word.
which wisdom ye can by no means obtain, except ye get unto you the
knowledge of the holy Scriptures, which alone make the man of God, wise, as the
Psalmograph says: The undefiled law of the Lord turns souls: the faithful
wytnes of the Lord gives wysedom unto Babes. Psalm. 19
Little can fidelity profit, where this wisdom wants.

Thyrdly, it is required of you, that ye give meat to the Lords household in
due time, or in season. Who are the Lords household.
This household of the Lord is the congregation of God, whom the Lord Christ
has purchased and reedemed by his precious bloudde. Act. 20.
This householde, What the meat is wherwyth the Lord^s household must be fed.
this Congregation, this fellowshyppe, this company of the Lords servants,
must ye feed. To them must ye give meat. This meat is the word of God,
that is to say, the law and the Gospel. With this ^ode is the Christen man's
soul fed, as Christ says: Man shall not live with bread alone, Math. 4.
Luc. 4.
but with every word that comes out of the mouth of God. This meat is
ministered unto them by preaching the law and the Gospel: the law to this
end, Law.
that they may learn to know them selves, and the heavy wrath of God against
sin: the Gospel, that they may by the preaching thereof, Gospel.
receive consolation and confort, joy and peace against the accusation, curse,
and condemnation of the law, against the terroures of Gods judgment, Romans 5.
against the assaults of Satan. etc. and so through faith in Christ, be at
peace with God. And this is it, that the Lord Christ speaks in the Gospel:
Math. ^3.
Every Scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man,
that is an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure things new
and old. After his resurrection he also said to his disciples: Luc. 24.
Thus is it written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again
from death the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should
be preached in his name among all nations. And this trade of teaching used
CHRIST and his Apostles, Math. 4. Marc. 1. Act. 2.20. Apoc. 2. Math. ^6. 1.
Cor. 5.
and all other godly preachers, as we may evidently see both in the divine
and ecclesiastical writers: and so from time to time they fed the Lords
householde, not with the leaven of the Pharyseys, but with the sweet bread of
pureness and truth. And here see ye, that ye are appointed officers in the
Lords house unto this end, Why spiritual pastores are appointed Officers in
the Lords household.
not that ye should be loyterynge lubbers, marchantlyke Mammonistes, gredye
gathergoodes, Ethnyke Epicures, voluptuous worldlynges, dumb dogs,
vnpreachyng prelates, ydell Idols. etc. but that ye should give them meat in
due time, that is, preach the law and the Gospel, and so feed them not with
the flesh pottes of Egypt, but with Manna that celestial food, that came
down from heaven. The office of preaching therefore is committed unto you.
Look well unto it, and take heed, that ye defraude not the Lords family of
their food and sustenance, ever setting before your eyes this saying of the
wise man: when the word of God is not preached, the people peryshe. Proverb 29.
It is not the quarter sermon preaching, that ought to suffice the Lords
householde. The word of God ought continually to be ministered and set
before the Lords family, as God him self says by the Prophet: Cry, cease
not: lift up thy voice as a trompe and show unto the people their wickednesses,
Esa. 58.
and to the house of Jacob their sins. Again: I have set watchemen upon
thy walls (O Jerusalem) which shall neither cease day nor night to
preach. Esa. 62.
The godly inspired Apostle saint Paul says, writing unto Bishop Timothe:
2. timoth. 4.
Preach thou the word: be fervent in season and out of season. Improve rebuke,
exhort, with all long sufferyng and doctrine. For the time will come, when they
shall not suffer wholesome doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they
(whose ears itche) get them an heap of teachers, and shall withdraw their
ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. But watch thou in all
things, suffer afflictions, do the work thoroughly of an Euangeliste, fulfill
thine office to the vttermoste. Blessed Luke in his Chronicle of the Apostles
acts, witnesses, that Saint Paul sendyng for the Elders of Gods
congregation at Ephesus, to come to Mileton unto him, Act. 20.
among other, spoke these words unto them: I take you to record this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have spared no labor, but
have showed you all the counsel of God. Take heed therefore unto your selves,
and to all the flock, among whom the holy Ghost has made you Overseers to
rule the congregation of God, which he has purchased with his blood. For I
am sure of this, that after my departing, shall grievous wolves enter in among
you, not sparyng the flock. Moreover, of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them. Therefore awake, and
remember, that by the space of three years: I ceased not to warn every one of
you, night and day with tears. S. Peter speaking of him self, 2. Pet. ^^
writes on this manner: I will not be negligente to put you always in
remembrance of such things, though ye know them your selves, and be
stablyshed in the present truth. Not withstandyng I think it mete (as long
as I am in this tabernacle to stere you up, by puttyng you in remembrance. etc.
Thus ye see, what diligence is required of you in feeding the Lords household
with the holy word of God. This office above all other, may by no means be
neglected. For herein (as I may so speak) consists either the salvation or
damnation both of you, and of the Lords householde, as God says by the
Prophet: Ezech. 33.
O thou son of man, I have made thee a watcheman unto the house of Israel,
that where as thou hear any thing out of my mouth, thou may warn them on
my behalf. If I say unto the wicked: Thou wicked, thou shall surely dye, and
thou geuest him not warning, that he may beware of his ungodly way: the wicked
shall die in his own sin, but his blood I will require of thy hand.
Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, where as he
yet will not be turned from it: then shall he die, because of his sin, but
thou have delivered thy soul. But if the wicked turn from his sins, and do
the thing, yt is laufull and right: then shall he surely live, and not dye. Yea
the sins that he has done, shall never be thought upon. For in somuche as he
does now the thing that is laufull and right, he shall live.

If ye be tongue tied or play Placebo* so that ye reprove not the wicked by
the word of God, of their wickedness, but suffer them to go forth in their
wickedness, as though they were good, righteous, and fautlesse: so bring ye
damnation both upon your selves, and upon them. But if ye sharply rebuke the
wicked of their wickedness, so that by this means they turn from their
lewdnes, and work that, which is good and pleasant, before the eyes of Gods
majesty: so do ye that, which shall bring salvation to you both, 1. Timoth. 4,
as the Apostle says: Take heed to thy self, and unto learning, and continue
therein. For if thou shall so do, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear
thee. Hereto agrees the saying of S. James: Brethren, if any of you do err
from the truth, Jacob. 5^
and an other convert him: let the same know that he, Did. 43. Cap.
dispensatio. 1. Cor. 9.
which conuerteth the sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save a
soul from death, and shall hyde the multitude of sins. As the Lord has
committed to you the meat, wherewith his household should be fed: so is it
your duty not to withdraw it from them, Names appropriates to spiritual
pastors.
but liberally to give it unto them, as good, faithful, and wise servants and
stewardes. The distribution of the heavenly sede, Malach. 2. 1. timoth. 5.
Ephe. 4. Act. 20. 1. Cor. 12. Math. 5. Math. 10. 1. Timoth. 2. Luc. 10. Math.
24. Tit. 1. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 4. Malach. 2. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 9.
1. Cor. 12. 1. Cor. 14. 2. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 5. ^. Cor. 6. Galat. 6. Ephe. 4. 1.
Pet. 5. 2. Timoth. 2. Heb. 13. Math. 23. Act. 2^. Apoc. 21.
says a certain man, is enjoined us. Woe therefore be unto us, if we do not
sprinkle it abroad. Woe be unto us, if we hold our peace, as the Apostle
says: Woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospelle. The very titles and
names, which are appropriated unto you by the holy Ghost in the sacred
scriptures, ought to move you to do your duty in this behalf, and by no
means to be negligent herein. Ye are called priests, elders, shepheardes,
feders, overseers, apostles, prophets, salt, light, workmen, preachers,
laborers, servants, bishops, planters, waterers, fathers, angels,
ambassadors, Gods laborers, buylders, ministers of Christ, stewardes of the
secrets of God, schoolemasters, sowers of spiritual things, Gospel
preachers, ministers of the new testament, servants of the faithful,
preachers of the atonement, Christ's messangers, Christ's servants,
Catechistes, doctors or teachers, Evangelists, Christ's witnesses, soldiers
of Jesus Christ, husbandmen, labors, distributers of the word of truth,
informers of them that resyst the truth, watchers for the health of men's
souls. etc. If your trauayles, doyngs, life, and conversation agree with these
titles and names, so are ye faithful and wise servants, and great is your
reward in heaven. But contrarywyse, if ye vainly and without cause usurp
these names, so that ye are not the same in deed, that ye are called in name
and word: what other thing are ye, then painted sepulchers, and white daubed
walls, whose portion is in that lake that burns with fire and brymstone.

Moreover the salarie, stipende and wages, that ye receive of your parishoners,
appointed for the true pastors of the Lords flock, and for the faithful
ministers of Gods word, The Stipend appointed for the spiritual Pastors.
ought to be no dulle spur unto you to prick you forward to feed the
Lords household. The lyuynges, which many of you enjoy, are neither small
nor slender, but rich and wealthy, great and many. They are not given you unto
this end, that ye should live of them like voluptuous Epicures and ydell
bellygods, but for this purpose, that ye being void of worldly care, and
having al necessary things provided for you, should the more frankely and
freely give your minds to the study of the holy Scriptures, and to the
preaching of the same to the ministration of the sacraments, to prayer, to
thanks geuyng, and to such other spiritual exercyses. Our savior Christ
says: The workman is worthy of his meat. He says not: Math. 10.
The loyteryng lurden is worthy of his meat. If any man be in the mynisterie,
and will live of that, he must labor first, and afterward eat. If he labor
not, so ought he not to eat, according to this rule of S. Paul: He that
labors not, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
ought not to eat. And his labor is not, to hunte and hawk, to keep great
horses, to feed many dogs, and a sort of ydell lasye lubbers, to lie lurkyng
in the court, in Bishops, and noble men's houses, in the universities etc. but
as I said, to give meat to the Lords household, to preach the Gospel, to
mynister the sacraments, to pray unto God for the people, to thank God for his
benefits, to watch day and night about the health of the Lords flock. Heb.
13. 1. Cor. 9.
etc. The Apostle says, that he which sows spiritual things, ought to
reap temporal things. If ye therefore will reap temporal things, ye must
first of all sow spiritual things. If ye do not sow, so ought ye not to
mow. If ye do mow, Note well ye spiritual sheppardes. John. 106.
where ye did not sow, so are ye not pastors, but raptors, no shepheardes, but
hyrelynges, no flockelouers, but flockelubbers, yea very plain thieves (as
CHRIST says: A thief comes not, but to steal, to kylle, and to destroy.
Again he says: Let him that is taught in the word, mynister unto him
that teaches him in all good things. Galat. 6.
If ye will have all good things mynistred unto you, so must ye teach the
word of God to them of whom ye require such things. If ye teach not, with
what fo^heade ask ye that, which ye have not deserved? Is any man so impudent
as to ask wages of him, to whom he has done no service? Is the reward of
a labourer due to a loyterer? 1. timoth. 5. Deuteronomy. 2. 1* Cor. 9. Math. 10.
In an other place he also says: The elders that rule well, ar worthy of
double honor, most specially they, which labor in the word and teaching.
For the Scripture says: Thou shall not mosell the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn. And: The labourer is worthy of his reward. What double
honor is that is due to the sprituall pastor.
Here is appointed double honor, that is to say, outward reverence and
provision of all things necessary to live withal. But to whom? To such as
rule evil, and are careless for the Lords flock? Or to such as be ydell,
not caryng for the sheep, so that they may have the milk and the wall, that
is, so that they may eat of the fattest, and be clothed with the fynest? Nay
verily: For God by the Prophet cries out upon such, Ezech. 24.
and threatens them everlasting damnation. To such as rule well: to such as
labor in the word and teaching: to the ox that treads out the corn: to
the labourer is this double honor due, and to none other. Ones again he
says: 2. Timoth. 2.
The husband man that labors, must first receive of the fruictes. If ye
will reap the fruictes, ye must first of all play the husbandmen, and
labor. Will ye not labor? So ought ye to require no fruictes: For they belong
not unto you. To the labourer, not to the loyterer is reward appointed in the
word of God. Hear what the high shepherd says: Ye are the salt of the
earth. But if the salt have lost the saltness, what shall be seasoned therwyth?
Math. 5.
It is thenseforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden
down of men. Hear also what S. Gregorye says: In hom. Dignus est mer^en
etc.
Consider and weygh with your selves, brethren, how great damnation it is,
without labor to receive the reward of labor: again, how great an offense
it is, to take the prices of sins, and to speak nothing against sins by
preaching. Again he says: We, which live of the oblations of the
faithefull, which they have offered for their sins, if we eat and hold our
peace, without doubt we eat their sins.

Not only the names and titles therefore, which are attributed unto you of the
holy ghost in the holy Scripture, but also the salarie, stipende, wages and
reward, that is appointed for such as travail in the ministry, ought
worthily and justly to provoke you, diligently to watch and to see, that the
Lords household have their meat in due time. Math. 24.
Which thing if ye faithfully do according to your vocation, the Lord of the
household will not leave you unrewarded, neither in this world, The reward
nor in the world to come. Yea (says our Savior Christ:) Blessed is that
servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. Uerily I say
unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods. When the chief
shepherd shall appear (says blessed Peter to all faithful pastors) ye shall
receive an incorruptible crown of glory. 1. Pet. 5.
Are not these the words of the Prophet Daniel concerning the reward of all
true preachers? Dan. 12.
The wise (such as have taught other) shall glyster, as the shynyng of heaven:
and those that have instruct the multitude unto godlynes, shall be as the
stars, world without end: yea as it is written in the Gospel, they shall
shine as the sun in the kingdom of the heavenly Father, Math. 13. Math. 22.
and shall be as the Angels of God in heaven.

But contrarywyse, if ye be negligent, slothful, evil, and wicked servants,
so that ye feed not the Lords household, but rather begin to stryke and
churlyshely to handle your fellow servants, Math. 24. Luc. 12.
yea to eat and drink with the dronkardes Your lord shall come in a day,
when ye look not for him, and in an hour that ye be not ware of, and shall
hew you in pieces, and give you your portion with hypocrites, where weeping and
gnashyng of teethe shall be, Esa. 66.
where the worm that shall gnawe your conscience shall never dye, and the
fire, wherewith ye shall be most grievously tormented, shall never be quenched,
yea the lake, whereinto ye shall be cast, shall burn with fire and brymstone,
Apo. 21.
worlds without end.

These things I doubt not (most dear brethren) but that ye daily and
diligently consider, and also labor to the vttermoste of your power to
satisfye the good pleasure of God in framynge your selves to do that, which
your vocation and calling requires, seekynge in the same not your own
glory, but the glory of God: not your own commodity and profit
temporally, but the commodity and profit of Christ's flock eternally: not
your own bodyly ease and quietness, but the everlasting ease and quietness
of Gods people: not the enrychemente of you and youres in this world, 1.
Cor. 2. Esa. 64.
but the dignity and advancement of the Lords household, both in this
world, and in the world to come. So doing, ye may be sure to be partakers in
Gods kingdom of such joys, as eye never saw the like, ear never heard,
the like, no tongue is able to express the like, no, nor no heart is able to
conceive and to think the like. And to help forward these your godly studies
and christen trauayles in fedynge Christ's flock, I have done my endeavor to
set forth this Postill, containing most godly, learned, and fruitful
sermons upon all the Sunday Gospells that are read in the Church through
out the year. This work needs no commendation, being sufficiently
commended, in that it is both learned, profitable, and necessary, as it shall
right well appear to the indifferent reader or hearer.

God grant, that the voice of this doctrine may sound in our churches unto
the end. Fare ye well most dear brethren, and let us pray one for an
other unto our heavenly Father, that he may fynyshe that good work which he
has begun in us, unto the glory of his name, and unto the profit of his
holy Congregation. Amen. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Amen.

From my house at Cantorbury, the.xvi. of July. In the year of our Lord. M.D.
lxvi.
A Prayer to be said before the Sermon.
FOR AS MVCHE AS we most loving Lord and sweet Savior CHRIST IESV) are
here assembled, Math. 12. John. 6.
and gathered together in thy holy, blessed, and glorious name, to hear the
healthfulle words of Everlasting Life, contained in thy pure and lively
Gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes,
which also is able through the workyng of the holy Spirit to save our souls:
Romans 1. Iac. 1.
we with one heart and with one mind approach at this present unto the
gracious throne of thy divine majesty, most humbly besechyng thee, Psalm. 51.
John. 3. 1. Cor. 2. Ephe. 2.5 Tit. 3. Luc. 24. John. 16. Math. 9.
that forasmuch as we of our selves and of our own nature are altogether
corrupt, ignorant, blind, and utterly estranged from the felyng and
perceiving of thy divine mysteries (such is our ignorance and blyndnesse
through old Adam) it may please thee of thy merciful goodness by thy holy and
blessed spirit, to open our senses, to lead us into all truth, to purify
our hearts, and to make our minds mete vessels to receive the sweet wine of
thy most sweet and glorious Gospel.

O open thou our eyes, that we may see the wondrous things of thy law. Psalm.
119.
Hyde not thy commandments from us, but teach us thy statutes, and make us
to understand the way of thy commandments, that we may talk of thy
marvelous works. Teach us O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and make us to go
in the pathe of thy commandementes. Incline our hearts unto thy testimonies:
quicken us in thy ways, and take not the word of truth out of our mouth. O
give us understanding acordyng to thy word, that we may learn thy
commandementes, and be occupied in thy laws. Let our hearts be sound in thy
statutes, that we be never ashamed. O show the light of thy countenance upon
us thy servants: teach us thy testimonies: and so order our steps in thy
word, that no wickedness may have dominion over us. Sanctify us through thy
truth: John. 1^.
for thy word is the truth.

Give to me thy Minister and steward of the mysteries of God, a well learned
tongue, that I may confort them which are troubled, 1. Cor. 4. Esa. 50. Esa.
61.
yea and that in due season, that I may show good tidings unto the poor, that
I may bind up the wounded hearts, that I may preach deliverance to the
captives, and open the prison to them that are bound, that I may make joyful
all them that are in heaviness, and through thy word give to them that
mourn, beaultie instead of ashes, ioyefull ointment for syghyng, Ezech. 34.
and pleasant rayement for an heavy mind: that I may hold up the weak, that
I may heal the sick, that I may bynd together the broken, Esa. 61.
that I may bring again the outcastes, and seek up them that are lost, so
that this people may be called trees of righteousness, and a plantynge of the
Lord for him to rejoice in. O give me that mouth, that spirit, that
wisdom, Luc. 21. Act. 6. Psalm. 68.
against the which all the adversaries of thy truth shall not be able to
speak, nor resyst. Give to me that preach, thy word with great power, that I
may be able to exhort by wholesome doctrine, and to improve them, that speak
against it. Tit. 1.


Give me grace also, O Lord, that I may not only be the salt of the earth, but
also the light of the world, Math. 5.
namely that I may not only truly and faithfully, sincerely and purely, Math.
^3.
reverently and godly bring forth out of the treasure house of thy holy
word things new and old, that is to say, the doctrine both of the old and
new testamente, even the law and the Gospel, but also that in my life and
manners I may be an ensample to the faithful in word, in conversation, in
love, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 2. Timoth. 2.
and in all points show my self laudable unto God, a workman that needs not
to be ashamed, distributynge the word of truth justly, so that I may be to
the flock an ensample of good works in honesty and gravity, that he which
withstandeth, may be ashamed, Tit. ^.
having no evil thing to speak of me, lest by any means it come to pass,
that when I have preached to other, 1. Cor. 9.
I my self should be a cast away, and so become a slander to the good
doctrine that I profess and teach.

Give also to the people, that are here gathered together to hear the word of
their salvation, a good spirit, that (al clouds of ignorancie brought in by
old Adam utterly dispelled and driven away) they may learn to know thee to
be their alone Savior: which knowledge is perfect righteousness, Sap. 15.
John. 17.
and the root of immortality, yea it is everlasting life: and without the
which knowledge, we all are but as moyles and horses, void of all goodness and
grace, walkyng in the vanities of our own imaginations, utterly estranged from
God and all godliness. O most loving Lord, open their hearts, that they
may understand thorough the preaching of the word, thy holy and blessed will,
and always do that, not which carnal reason, fleshly imagination, blind
zeal, good intent, and humayne wisdom judges to be good and holy, but that
only, which thou in thy blessed law commaundest to be done, all strange
woorshippynges utterly excluded and banyshed. O sweet savior, Math. 13.
make them that good earth, which receuing the healthful sede of thy most
wholesome word, may bring forth fruit plentuously: some an hundred fold, some
sixty fold, some thirty fold. Phil. 1. Tit. 1. Iac. 1.
Give them grace so to live; and so to behave them selves in all points, as
it becomes them, that embrace thy Gospel. Let them not be of the number
of those, which with their mouth profess God, and with their deeds deny
him, but make them not only diligente hearers of thy word, but also fervent
and earnest doers of the same. Math. 25.
Let them not be like the five foolish virgins, which had lamps and no
oil, but rather so work in them by thy holy spirit, that they may
worthyly be resembled to the five wise virgins, which had not only lamps,
but also oil in their lamps, that is to say, they did not only bear the
name of Chrystians, but their conversation also was garnyshed with works
meet and seemly for Christians. Make them such as no man can justly
complain on, even the unfeigned sons of God without rebuke, Phil. 2.
shynynge as great lyghtes in the world, even in the mids of a crooked and
perverse nation; holdyng fast the word of life, that they, which backebyte
them as evil doers, seeing their good works; 1. Pet. 2.
may cease to speak evil, and glorify thee our Lord God in the day of
visitation.

Finally, grant both to me the Preacher, and to these the hearers, and to so
many as unfeignedly profess thy blessed name, grace and strength from above,
that we may so handle and hear thy word, Iac. 1.
that we being no forgetful hearers, but diligent doers of the same, may
through Faith in thee, obtain that blessyng, which thou haste promised to
all them that hear the word of God, Luc. 11.
and keep it. Grant this O most loving lord and sweet Savior for thy great
mercy and goodness sake. Amen.

A shorter prayer before the Sermon.
O Almighty God and most merciful Father, the Author and geuer of all
wisdom, which at the intercession of thy well-beloved son, Eccle. ^. Iac. 1.
John. 14. Luc. 24. Act. 1.2.
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior did send down according to thy
promise, thy holy spirit to lyghten the hearts and senses of the apostles,
before they could syncerely understand the high mysteries of thy divine will:
we most humbly beseech thee, that all clouds of ignorancie and darkness
dispelled and put away, we being here gathered together in thy name, may through
the same thy spirit, enjoy the light of thy eternal verity, and so
reuerentely preach and mekely hear thy most blessed word at this present,
that we understanding the same, and being enflamed with the love thereof, may
in all points fashion our life, according to thy holy will, and seriously
provide, that the light of our acts and manners may so shine before men, that
they seeing our good works, Math. 5.
may glorifye thee our Father, which art in heaven: to whom with thy derely
beloved son Jesus Christ and the holy ghost three distinct persons in
deity, and yet one very true and perfect God in essence, be all honor,
praise and glory for evermore. Amen.

A thanks geuynge after the Sermon.
Praise, honor, and glory be unto thee (O heavenly Father) which at this
time haste fed us with meat, not that perysheth, John. 6.
but that abides unto everlasting life. Grant we most humbly beseech thee,
that we having the knowledge of thy word, may also practice the same in our
conversation that we both entierly loving and unfeignedly living, both
heartily favoring and earnestly following, both courageously professynge and
diligentely practisyng thy holy and heavenly word may after this mortal
life, live with thee in that life, which is immortal: through JESUS CHRIST
our Lord. Amen.

Give the glory to God alone.

The first Sunday of Aduent. The Gospel of Matthew. xxi.
AND when they drew nygh to Jerusalem and were come to Bethphage, unto mount
Oliuet, then sent Jesus two of his disciples, saying unto them: Go into the
town that lies over against you, and anon you shall find an Ass bound, and
her colte with her, louse them and bring them unto me. And if any man say
ought unto you, say ye, the Lord has need of them, and straight way he will
let them go. All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Prophet, saying: Tell ye the daughter of Sion: Behold, thy king comes
unto thee meke, sitting upon an ass, and a colte, the foale of an ass used to
the yoke. The Disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the
Ass and the colte, and put on them their clothes, and set him thereon. And many
of the people spread their garments in the way. Other cut down branches from
the trees, and strawed them in the way. Moreover, the people that went before,
and they that came after, cried, saying: Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. And when he
was come to Jerusalem, all the City was moved, saying: Who is this? And the
people said: This is Jesus, the prophet of Nazareth, a City of Galile. And
Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought
in the Temple, and ouerthrue the tables of the money changers, and the seats
of them that sold Doves, and said unto them, It is written: My house shall be
called the house of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.

THE EXPOSITION.
THE PEOPLE of Israel had many notable and excellent promyses, as concerning
Messiah or Christ how he should come into this life, and set up an everlasting
kingdom, and deliver his people from all evil, and give help for ever. As it
appears by the writings of the Prophets, when they preach so magnificently
of the kingdom of Christ to come. And these promises were amongst the people.
But they were greatly hindered by false prophets and teachers, Of the king
Christ and of his kingdom.
which did so expound these Promises, as though this king after the worldly
manner should come into his kingdom, with great magnificence and pomp, and
should advance the people to high dignity and power, that all of them might
be made lords and rulers of Provinces. And to this time they can not be
persuaded to have any other opinion of Messiah kingdom, tha^ that as soon as
he comes, they shall be as chief heads over all other, and that the Gentiles
shall be their bondmen. They understand not, that they have need of Christ's
coming, to this end that they might be delivered from sin and eternal
death.

Wherefore that this lewd persuasion might not remain with the people to
their peril, GOD long before raised up Zachary the prophet, Why Zacharye
prophcied the low degree of Christ long before his co^commyng.
to show unto them, that Christ should not come after the facion of other
kings, with kyngly apparel, with loftynes and great pride of imperie and rule:
but (as he says) like a beggar, as the history of this gospel, that we now
entreat of, declares: Lest this people should have any excuse, to pretend that
they would have received this king, if they had not ben ignorant of this matter
and mystery. For that was opened unto them many years before by the prophet.
Zachary. 9.
And this act of Christ was not done in a privy and solitary place, but he
came in the light day time unto his people, as a beggar, rydyng on an other
man's ass, which was nothing prepared or ready to this purpose: in so much that
his disciples were fayn to help their poor king by casting on their clothes,
that this pomp might be somewhat likely. Wherefore the Jews can excuse
themselves no ways. For the prophecy is evident, that when Christ shall come
into his kingdom at Jerusalem, he shall not come after the manner of other
kings, with a great show of horses and army, but as the Gospel says, meke:
and after the Prophet, poor. As though the prophet spoke it to admonysh them
on this wise: Mark diligently the ass, and know that he is very Christ that
sits thereon. Wherefore be wise, and look for no scepter, diadem, or kings
robes. For Christ shall come poor, meke, and humble, showing forth him self
on an ass. This shall be all his magnificence and glory which he shall show
before the world, in the pomp of his coming to Jerusalem.

And this is the cause, why Christ used this pomp before he suffered: and the
matter is done also with great circumspection, as Christ declares hereby
sufficiently, where as he commits all things to be done with such
diligence: and where as he comes not in the night, or privily, but openly in
the day, and enters into Jerusalem, not alone, but with a great multitude of
people, which goes both before him and after him, and aduanceth him with
praises, as the very son of David. And they wish that this his kingdom
might be prosperous: And the matter is done so openly, that it must needs be
known in all the city of his coming. Let them behold the ass, the poor
king, of the which Zachary prophesied, and gave warning to the Jews, that
they should not be offended with the poor show, humble and lowly coming of
Christ, but should rather condemn their own imaginations: where as they
thought, that Christ should come gloriously in the sight of the world. He
shall be a king (says the Prophet) but yet with poverty and misery, and
without al princely reputation, if the matter be considered after the custom of
the world, and of princes.

This Prophet also speaks of an other power of this king: What is the power
of this king and his righteousness, and how it is joined with poverty.
For he calls him righteous, and a savior, and not rich, fortunate, or a
glorious king before the world, but righteous and a savior: which brings
with him justice and salvation, and destroys sin and death, the enemy of
sin and death, which shall deliver all from sin and death that believe in
him, and take him for their king, and are not offended with the borrowed ass.
They that do this, have given unto them, remission of sin, and remedy
against death, to the attainement of everlasting life. And although their
body dye, and be buried, yet is it not to be called death, but rather a sleep.
And this it is that Zachary will teach us of Christ, when he gives him these
two names, that is, of a righteous and Savior, which may be the death of
death, and destroy the power of the devil, and by this means deliver us that
believe in him, from sin and death, and transpose us into the kingdom of
angels, where is life and salvation.

He left for the kings of the world their glory, richesse, towers, palaces.
Let them live in glory never so much, buyld they never so gorgeously, The
kyngedome of the world is no such power as Christ's is
be their apparel never so costely: yet have they not this power, which this
poor king had. For there is no emperor, king, or pope so mighty, with all his
power, that can deliver us from the least sin that is, and that can heal a
small disease with all the richesse that he has. And what shall I say than,
that they have much less any power against everlasting death and hell. But
this poor king only helps therein: and that not only against one sin, but
against al sin: and not only against my sins, but against the sins of the
whole world. He came not only to take away diseases, but also death: and not
only death, but also the death of all the world. Tell this (says the
prophet) to the daughter of Syon, that she be not offended for his low
behavior, but that she shut up her eyes, and open her ears, and let her not
consider how poor this king is in sight, but what the word does teach of
this king: The poverty is open, forasmuch as he comes on an ass, without
ridyng apparel. But in that he forgeueth sin, delivers from death, gives
salvation and everlasting life to them that are sanctified, that is not seen:
wherefore the word thereof is only to be herd, and to be believed. So says
Zachary: Tell the daughter of Sion, that she may know, and not be moved nor
offended, that he comes so pore unto his people, and dies so shameful a
death. For all these things be done for thy sake, that thou by this Savior
might be saved against the devil and death: his purpose is to sanctify
thee, and to deliver the from sin. All endeavors are in vain, when we
regard not the sense of the ears, but look to have it allowed by the eyes.
For this king differs very much from other kings. What so ever they do, they
do it in great magnificence and pomp. But in Christ it is not so, which first
in Baptism gave us this strength, where by we are delivered from sin, and from
death. Here the eyes se nothing but common water* which is included in the word
and pronunciation thereof. The ryghtuousnes and salvation of Christ in baptism,
in the supper of the Lord, and in the Gospel.
Here the eyes see nothing then the breath of a man: but this we must be ware
that we follow not the judgment of the eyes. The eyes ar to be shut up, and
the ears to be opened, and the word to be heard, Which teaches that our
Lord Jesus Christ shed his blood for the remission of sins and everlasting
life. These gifts are found for a surety in the holy Baptism, in the
Supper of the Lord, in the preaching of the Gospel. This is true. But
because of the simplicity thereof, they are not thought to have so great
efficacy by the lauer of water, and supper of the Lord. But beware thy eyes
bring the not to this strait. It seems an absurd thing in the eyes of the
people, that he that came on a vile ass, and after was crucified, should be
thought to have power against sin, death and hell. No man's sight was so clear
as to see that. But the prophet says it. Therefore in this matter there is no
need of eyes, but of Faith and ears. Wherefore says the Evangelist: Tell the
daughter of Syon. And the Prophet says: Rejoice Syon, be glad, dance, and
leap for joy, O Jerusalem, behold, thy king comes. What manner of king? A
righteous king and a savior, which shall sanctify thee, and save thee. For he
will communicate his righteousness and salvation with thee, that thou myghtest be
free from sin: and he will dye for thee, that thou by his death may be
delivered from eternal death. Wherefore let not the great poverty that is in
him offend thee, thy life and salvation lies hid in him. Give thanks for
the benefyte, and use it to thy comfort. For all these things are done for
thy salvation. Wherefore this is our king Jesus Christ, The life and salvation
of the congregation lies hid in the poverty of Christ.
and this is his kingdom and office. He handles no taxes and tributes, he
cares for no towers, nor for worldly magnificence. But when we are now come to
the mark of death, so that we can live here no longer: Then is it the office
of this king, that we by his passion and death may walk into Paradise, and say
on this manner: I am sanctified through my king Jesus Christ, which for that
cause came after a vile form, and would be crucified, that he might sanctify
me, and that in me he might slay sin and death. He that believes this on this
wise, as he hears, and is preached in the Gospel, shall be sure of salvation.
For therefore was Baptism ordained of Christ, that by it he might put his
justice on the, and that his holiness and innocence may become thine by right.
For all we are miserable sinners. But in Baptism Christ does comfort us, and
says: Give me thy sins, and take thou my rightousnes and holiness: Let thy
death be taken from thee, and my life put on thee.

Wherefore this doctrine ought gladly to be received and the godlynes thereof,
The world is unkind for this light.
then also it ought to be declared in our life, that God might not seem to have
given this light in vain unto the earth. But it chances contrariwise, and
the world is made oftentimes the worse for this doctrine. And here is the very
devil reigning with all his kingdom in the unkind worldly man, for all this
great grace of God. The matter is plain, that there is now more avarice,
covetousness, cruelty, impudent lechery, aduoutrie and wickedness, then was
before under the popedom. What is the cause? Uerily no other thing, then that
me^ do not gladly receive this doctrine, as it behooves them to do, but all set
naught by it: They care more for gold and riches, then this incomparable
treasure, which Christ the son of GOD brought down to us from heaven.
Wherefore this punishment is deserved, wherewith God plagueth these unkind
persons. If thou (says he) think thy self unworthy to give me thanks, for
that I deliver thee from great euyls, from syn and from death: be it so truly.
And I will make that thou shall grievously travail under sin and death, seeing
thou love it so well. Luc. 11.
And where as before thou were in the danger but of one devil: now shall thou
be vexed of seven worse. An abhortatio^ to be ware of danger.
Wherefore I adhorie you, to here this doctrine with a godly fear, and to be
tha^kfull for it, and to pray God with all your hearts, that he may confirm you
in this faith, that ye may keep such doctrine. Whereby it shall come to pass,
that we be made daily more sobre, more obedient, more gentle, more chaste, and
better. For this is the nature of this doctrine, to make men more full of
modesty and softnes, of obedience and chastity. But they that cast it from
them, become seven times worse then they were when they were without this
doctrine, as examples do testify every where. Wherefore take ye head: truly
the time will come, it will come without doubt, when God shall revenge this
unkindness: and then shall it be seen what the world has deserved by this
unkindness. To us is this spoken of the kingdom of Christ.
Wherefore mark well the history of this gospel For seeing that the Jews would
not here the voice of the prophet, this is said unto us, that our king comes
meke and poor, that we should not be offended, neither have respect to the
po^pe and riches of the world. But let us consider, that this our king is
righteous and a Savior, which delivers us from sin and from death. And
when this is taught, receive it gladly and louingely, and give God thanks:
least after that ye be feign to receive the devil, with howling, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. To the which thing we are adhorted also by the example of
the Apostles, and of other, The example of ye apostles.
which were in the trayn of this king. For seeing that Christ is a king, he must
needs have a kyngedome and people, and this people must show their due
service to their king. The first service of this king hallowed be thy name.
What service this is the history declares. For here be found some, that
knowledge that the Lord Jesus the king is come, and be not ashamed to be amongst
the waiting men of this ass and poor king. Amongst these are the Apostles
first, What the Ass and the colt signifies
which knowledge the Lord Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah, that shall
justify and become a savior against sin and death. Wherefore they bring unto
Christ an ass, that is, they council the Jews to go to Christ, which
hitherto have lived under the law, and have borne the burden thereof like
asses. Then with the ass they bring a colt also unto Christ, that is the
Gentiles, yt be not yet tamed, neither were under any law. For Christ is the
Savior of all men. Wherefore al true Evangelists and teachers, ought to bring
men unto Christ: And this is one service that is due to this king, that he be
known, received, and glorified of all men for the rightuous Savior.

The second service is, The second worship, Thy kingdom come.
that we sing Osanna to Christ on the Ass, that is, that after we have
received this Savior and knowledge him for our king, that men wyshe well to
him and to his kingdom, and that they do all things that belong to the
aduancyng of this kingdom, although it offend the Phariseis and chief priests
never so much. For Osanna, signifies, Save O lord, bless Lord the son of
David. As we say in the Lords prayer: Thy kingdom come. For the devil and
his members will not cease to go about to abolyshe, or at the least corrupt
this kingdom. Here have we need of prayer, that it may please God to infringe
and repress this enterprise of the devil.

The third is, that we do not only pray, but also put of our clothes, The
third. Thy will be fulfilled.
and sprede them to our Lord Christ in the way, that the pomp of his coming
may be more syghtfull, and not so beggarly. And this is then done when
according to our ability, we help the ministry of the word, that there may
be plenty of teachers and good men, which both by teaching and living, may be
gouerners of the congregation. And also that they that now are ministers, may
so be handled, that they may see to their duty, and give them self to
study, and not to fall away from their ministration for lack of living, or to
be busied with other things, that they can not have leisure to do their
duty. To be short, what soever things or riches is bestowed to this use, that
the ministrations in the congregation, may be well ordered, and may have true
pastors: It is to be understood by the clothes, which are spread for Christ,
that his coming may be somewhat more kynglike.

Who began the service of this king.
Thus must this service be done to this king, neither care thou for the
Priests and Phariseys, which are moved for this sclender pomp, and do all that they can to let it. But Christ does not suffer this. For where as he is
king, he can not be without a people, and he has need also to be served
like a king. And happy are they that serve this king. For he is such a king,
that he will serve us again, not with riches and store (for that were to base
a thing for this king) but with righteousness against sin, with salvation
against death and dampnation. Wherefore it is expedient, that we should be ready
and glad to do this king service. Neither let us be offended with the example
of the Pope and bishops, and such other, which bring not the ass to Christ,
as the Apostles did, to put him thereon: but that they may ride upon the ass
themselves, and may keep men under the danger of their doctrine as they list:
but they make Christ go on foot, neither can they suffer him to come through
his Gospel, and to turn men's eyes unto him. These false doctors have their
disciples also, which flatter with them, and straw boughs of Palms and
Olives in their way, but they cast stones at Christ. For they persecute him,
and his gospel, and all that profess it. These in that day shall know with
the Jews, that they have despised the righteous king and Savior, and therefore
shall suffer the wrath of God for ever. Whereas contrary, they that have
received him, and confessed him, and has become parteners with him in all that
they have, shall obtain by him justice and everlasting life. The which thing
as our trust and wish is, might chance unto us, through our Lord Jesus
Christ and Savior. Amen.

The second Sunday of Aduent. The Gospel of S. Luke. xxi.
THere shall be signs in the Son and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and in
the earth the people shall be at their wits end through despair. The sea and
the water shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for
lokyng after those things which shall come on the earth. For the powers of
heaven shall move and than shall they see the Son of man come in a cloud,
with power and great glory. When these things begin to come to pass, then look
up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. And he showed
them a similitude: Behold the fygge tree and al other trees, when they shoot
forth their buddes, ye see and know of your own selves that Summer is nigh
at hand. So likewise ye also (when ye see these things come to pass) be sure
that the kingdom of God is nigh. Uerily I say unto you, this generation shall
not pass, till all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words
shall not pass.

THE EXPOSITION.
The signs of God goes be fore strange and new mutations.
THIS manner has the Lord our GOD used always from the beginning, when he is
about to do any unwonted thing, he has alwais sent before, great and
marvelous signs. As when he would punish the Egyptians, and deliver his
children, and make him a peculiar people: there were set forth before, many
great and wonderful tokens of all kind of plages. For the frogs, locustes,
botches, and such like, did greatly hurt the Egyptians, until at length all
their first borne were slain in one night, and the remnant of the people
drowned up in the red sea. But among the Jews, these things were good
signs, where as he led them dry foot through the red sea, and drowned their
enemies, and gives Manna, and such like things. This was a token that God
would work some new practice with this people, that it should be a kingdom and
common wealth. This was it also when he would punish the Jews, and ordeyne
a congregation. For when Christ honge upon the Cross, the graves were opened,
and the dead came out, and went into Jerusalem, a strange Eclipse of the Moon
chanced, the veil of the temple was rent. All this did signify some
strange thing to come, and an abolishing of the old, as experience proved
after that, where as the service of the Jews vanyshed away, and Christ set
up a new kingdom. This had the Jews learned often to their own peril.
Wherefore the Apostles here come to Christ with a question: What signs should
come before the destruction of Jerusalem, and the end of the world, before
the only and eternal kingdom of Christ comes? The apostles asks of the
destruction of Jerusalem, and also of the destruction of the world.
Christ answers as concerning the destruction of Jerusalem: When ye shall
see (says he) Jerusalem be sieged with an host, then know ye, that her
desolation is not far of. And therefore he counsaileth them to flee unto the
mountains, for gods wrath can not then be pacified. After like manner he
teaches also as concerning the last day: When ye shall se signs in the son
and moon in the stars, and in the sea, in the fluddes, in men, and in heaven:
when these things (says he) begin to come to pass (for we must not
defer it, until men think that all is paste, or make light of it, as though
such things has chanced before) then take good head, and thynk that there
is no time to jest and laugh at these signs. For these signs are certain,
that the last day draws nygh. Question.
And here is a question, what signs these shall be? and whether they shall fall
all together? But this ought not to be demanded. For Christ says him self:
When this begins to come to pass, than must ye look up. And therefore I
believe that certain things, and perchance the most part, shall then come to
pass, when that day begins to be opened. Wherefore this is sufficient that
Christ teaches, where these signs must be marked and looked for, Where the
signs must be marked.
in heaven, in the son, moon, and stars, in men, and in the sea. When some
of them shall be seen, ye must not look, that all shall come to pass. But we
must make us ready in season, that we may be prepared to the receauyng of this
day. Signs in the Son and Moon.
Two manner of signs are set forth and showed in the Son and Moon. First
when they have Eclipse. And although this be of a natural motion (for by art
may it well be known before the sign chance.) yet it is a sign, as it is
plainly expressed in Matthew. But likewise also may there be signs in the
son that could not be known before, but chances suddenly before they were
perceived of the prognosticators, or any thing thought upon. As the Eclipse at
yt time when Christ was on the cross. For the reason of the art is this, that
the Eclipse of the Son is at the conjunction, or at the beginning of the Moon.
But when it is in the opposition, as it was then, or in an other day of the
month now it is not natural. wherefore that eclipse was a great sign. And
although we have seen no such, yet it may chance suddenly before we look for it.
We also these.xx. years have seen many strange things, which all ar counted
strange and seldom As that a bough did compass about the son of a great
bigness, that the son seemed so to come down, that there were more sons
then one, yet it is very like, that some such thing is signified hereby, which
we never proved, nor saw before. Wherefore we have signs sufficient in the
son, that we need not to be careless, but to look for the true and
healthful coming of our Lord.

The other signs that Christ speaks of, The signs in the sea and waters.
are great rorynges and noises of the sea: whereas these things never chance
commonly but with great destruction. For even as a man, when natural death
approaches, is first vexed with sycknes, and begins to be diseased with ye
fever, pesti^ence, or with some other disease. All these things are tokens
that he must leave this life: so the world also, shall (as a man would say) wax
sick, so that heaven, the son, the Moon, the stars, men, waters, and all
things may signify and give warning by a notable infirmity and sickness, and
by miserable affliction, before it utterly perish. As touching the signs in
men, The signs in men.
I think that they are fully declared in our time, that the most detestable
pope, with his doctrine has promoted and set forward these signs, because
the fearful consciences have been much vexed, for as much as they taught
this, that it was a grievous sin, not to go to Confession, not to pray, fast,
and here Mass. etc. But in such vexation, no man could learn how to
rydde him self out thereof. For the true comfort (that is) the remyssion of
sins through Christ, was abolyshed. And there at last was set up a very
place of tourment, now by this Satisfaction, now by that. So that I may well
believe, that was the chiefest myserye in the earth. As in deed I saw many,
the which could not bide this tremblyng and dread, and did for very fear
and pensiuenes despair, because they mystrusted that they were not able to
susteyn gods judgment. For the popes doctrine brought us to this opinion, yt we
feared Christ as an horrible judge. And many have be^ in that case, that they
thought there was no hope of salvation to be looked for of Christ for them. And
for that cause they prayed to the virgin Mary, that she would be their
patroness, and make intercession for them to such a judge. For no man knew
any other thing, but that Christ was clean lost. Wherefore there was no other
thing looked for, but that we did tremble and quake, when we thought of this
Judge.

Wherefore thynk this, that the greatest part of this sign is past. And I judge
likewise of the celestial signs, that the lest part of them remains. And if
they be not all yet come to pass: yet it may chance daily that they be done.
But never the less we must be nothing slack in caryng therefore, that we may
be ready to mete at that day, As Christ hereafter does exhort us so to do. In
the end Christ speaks also of the other prodigious sign, and says: Men
shall pyne away for fear, and for the dreadful expectation of these things
that shall chance to the world. Here speaks he of an other confusion, which
is excedyng great. And thereof it chances, that men fear the signs of the
last day. A special con^usion in men.
But such are not the wicked, and the ungodly, but the godly and timorous.
Wherefore they join with the signs the meaning thereof, which the wicked do
foolyshely despise, and think themself wise in so doing, because many such
signs has chanced before, and yet the day came not. Wherefore they see these
signs daily, and are not an hear the better, neither do they think that
the things that chance on the last day, are showed to make them to be ware and
circumspect. Such despisers does Christ cast from him. For seeing they are
so dull hearted, The wicked despise the signs
that they are nothing moved with the signs, much less will they care for
the word and doctrine. But the good, which mark these signs, and are moved
with them, does Christ take to his cure, and comfort them swetely after
this sort: Forasmuch as they confess Christ, and set by his word, and will
not depart from it wyllyngly, or deny it, that they ought not to be afraid or
abashed at the sight of any signs, be they never so horrible and dreadefull.
The coming of Christ after the signs
Then shall they see (says Christ) the son of man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory. This magnificence passes all the triumphs of kings
and emperors. For then shall the air be full of angels and Saints, which
shall shine more bryghter then the son, and Christ shall be in the myddest
of them, and with his elect shall give sentence against the damned, which shall
stand beneth in the earth with the dyuell tremblyng and quakyng. Wherefore
(says Christ) when these things begin to come to pass, look up, and lift up
your heads, be of good chere, and see that ye be merry. For all these things
must be done. If the world must needs fall, it must first give a crack. For
such a great buildyng can not fall, except all things thereof be first shaken,
and plucked in pieces. These signs are not given to terrify the congregation
As a man that is now at the point of death, he wrastleth and rolleth his
eyes, mouth, and all his members, his face waxes pale, and all about him is
seen great deformity. Such shall be the facion of the world, when it shall
now perish. But I say unto you, be not discoraged in your minds. Lift up
your heads: for to you it may be a pleasure to behold these things. These
signs are not given to terrify the congregation
And this occasion of joy is not to be despised, your redemption (says he) is
at hand: yours I mean that believe, But the other that do not believe, shall be
condemned. Wherefore they ought to fear, The cause of joy by these signs.
but they do not so. For Christ shall bring with him both these things, that
is, heaven for the beleuers and godly, and hell and damnation for the other.
This speaks Christ to the godly, which also shall be afraid, when the Son
and Moon shall change their countenances, and the world shall be full of signs.
The saints also fear these signs, but not death.
For the Saints be not so strong, yea Peter and Paul would think these
signs fearful, if they were living. But be strong (says Christ: there shall
be an horrible sight, but it shall not hurt you, it shall hurt the dyuell and
the ungodly: but there shall come thereof salvation and most joyful redemption
to you, which ye have desired so greatly, and have prayed, that my kingdom
should come, your sins forgeuen, and you your selves delivered from all
evil. That thing therefore that ye have prayed for so long and so heartily,
shall now be given unto you. For this is called the day of your redemption.
Wherefore this latter day may well be called the day of damnation and redemption,
The last day the day of damnation and redemption.
the day of sorrow and joy, the day of hell, and of the kyngedome of heaven.
As Christ in the.xxiiij. of Matthew says: Then shall all the tribes of the
earth lament. Myth. 24.
We shall not by Gods grace be amongst them: but here will we leave the Pope,
the fantastical spirits, the wrongful extorcioners, the wicked citizens, the
seditious people, and such other, which leaves no kind of wrong undone,
which persecute the Gospel, and are the begynners of all these euyls: then
shall they smoke for this. But we that are now oppressed with their might,
and dare not look them on the face, which weep and are vexed, shall at that
time laugh, and see before our faces how they are driven with the dyuell into
hell. Wherefore although it shall seem dreadful unto you, be not afraid, seek
no corners to hyde you in, Christ's coming is terrible, that the oppressed
congregation might be delivered.
whenne these things begin to come to pass. But lift up your heads
meryly, and strive against your temptation. Remember that ye would have me
such a one. For if ye would have me your redemer, first must I oppress them
that hold you captive: Is it not so? If the robbers had taken thee, and put
thee in a castle, and thou heardest that the castle were strongely besieged,
thou would not care so much for the cruelnes of thy enemies, but would
rather rejoice, if thou knew that this were done for thy sake, that thou
myghtest be delivered from thy enemies. So think ye here also, that it ought
not to seem terrible, when the world shall plunge miserably, and grievously be
tormented. For this punyshement is not for you, but provided for them, on whom
ye made complaynte. Wherefore take this coming, as the coming of your
salvation. For I come not to condemn you to hell, but to deliver you out of
this wicked, froward, and corrupt world, and to separate you from the dyuell
and his guard: and to put you amongst the angels, where ye shall suffer no
evil, but have the fruition of everlasting life.

And to this comfort belongs the goodly similitude of the trees. Christ's
coming is like the spring.
In the spryng (says he) when winter is at an end, and all the earth is
renewed, when cold departs, and heat approaches, and the bare trees begin
to be green with new bowghes: no other thing follows hereof: but that the
trees bring forth buddes, and after that spread abroad their leaves. Then
it is the common saying: Winter is gone, and goodlye Summer draws nyghe: We
gladly let winter depart, and embrace pleasant Summer at his coming.

Therefore in his similitude of the trees, may we have evident resons, declaring
after what manner we ought to look for this last day. For as after leaves
comes summer: so when the earth shall be moved, and the heavens shall tremble,
and when the son and Moon shall appear mourneful: let these things seem no
more dreadful unto us, then when the tender leaves crepe forth of the trees,
when summer begins to come in. For these signs are to us even as the leaves
and juice of the trees, that we may joyfully look for that everlasting summer.
For this present miserable life, is very well compared to bareyn and evil
favored winter. In the which all thing dye and wyther away. But these things
shall then come to their end, and everlasting summer shall come in their
stead, that is, the kyngedome of GOD, whereby the kingdom of the devil shall
peryshe. Why are there so many myseries given as a punisshement in the earth?
because ye live amongst the covetous and wicked, that blaspheme and curse the
Gospel, and stir up all mischief in the world. This must we see and here,
and look daiely for worse. From all these things will I deliver you by my
coming, that ye may not be constrained to behold any longer their wickedness.
Wherefore this terrible state of the world does not com for you, but for your
enemies. They have a good cause to be afraid and sorrowful. But rejoice ye, as
godly Loath did, which says Peter dwelt in Sodoma, The figure of the
destruction of Sodom compared to the destruction of the world:
and was constreigned with his innocent eyes and ears, to hear and se the
detestable sins, until they grew to such fullness and ripeness, that God
could no longer refrain. There came two Angels, which led godly Loath out
of the city. Surely this thing was not without a terrible sight, when the
element was horrible with clouds, when thunder was hard, and the cloud went
aparte with a great wydenesse, and brymstone and fire fell down by rain, and
the gaspyng of the ground ensued, and swalowed in all things. It is not
otherwise to be thought, but that Loath was greatly dismayed at these things. But
this comfort was at hand, that this horrible and dredful tempest did not
strike him, but the Sodomites, which believed not the word of God, but gave
themselves to all kind of most abominable lewdness, yea and that without al
mesure. These must needs be meruailously troubled at this fyry rain. But godly
Loath beheld this tempest as a pleasant tree in the spryng time, that puts
forth his buddes, and begins to be grene. For he feels and receives help
and merciful deliverance against the wicked. So shall it chance to us also in
the latter day, if it befall in our life time. It shall seem a terrible
thing, when heaven and earth shall burn: and we shall be changed in a moment
and dye. But a christian man must not here take his eyes for judges, but mark
how Christ does expound it. That these flowers and boughs are most
pleasant. So that albeit, The su^me of the doctrine concerning the last day.
that the grievous sight of the world shall terrify and abashe reason, yet let
the heart trust to the word of God, that it may not fear that outeward
sight, but say: Mystrust not, there is no hurt or damage. This does not
signify as Christ says, any evil: but that my redemption and redemer is at
hand. Hayle my redemer Christ therefore, and come on as thou art wyshed for,
as I have desired oftentimes, and prayed for, while I lived, that thy kingdom
might com unto me. He that can receive Christ at his coming after this manner,
shall in a momente be changed into that glory, that he may shine with the
son for ever. After this sort does Christ teach us to knowledge truly the
last day, that we may learn how great succor we have therein, and why also we
ought to look for, and fervently to desire his coming.

The Popes doctrine of Christ's coming.
The Pope preaches of Christ, that he is a severe Judge, and that we must have
healpe before him by our good works, and that the Intercession of saints are
to be had, if any manne will be sure from damnation. For so has he put it
forth in picture, how Christ comes to judgment, and how he holds a
swoorde and a rod in his mouth, which both are signs of wroth. And where
as Mary and John stands on both sides, it shewethe, that the prayers and
intercessions of them, and of other such good Saints, must be sought for
and trusted in. As the good father Bernard persuaded himself, that when the
mother shows her pappes to the Son, that he can not deny her any thing.
Which was an evident proof, that Christ should come like a severe Judge. But
in this Gospel he teaches us otherwise, that is, that he shall not come to
judge and condemn us, but to deliver and redeem us, and that he will grant in
deed that that we prayed for, and bring us to his kingdom. And as for other
that believe not in him and vex the Christians with railyng and reuilyng, he
will by his sharp sentence punish greuouslye. This (says he) believe ye
only, and look for my coming joyfully: for it shall be to your welthe, that
ye may be saved by me for ever, from sin, devil, death, hell, and the
world. This is a great comfort. But in this place one thing remains, The
day of Judgment shall come suddenly.
whereby the fearful consciences are troubled. For Christ says, that that
day shall come unlooked for. So that it shall chance likewise to men as it
chances to birds, which flee in the morning hungry out of the woddes, to
find meat somwhere, suspectyng no evil, because they were not deceived of
their hope in that place before, and sodeinly they are wrapped in the nets,
taken, and killed. But they that fear God will take heed thereof. And because
they prove by daily exaumples how soon they that stand, fall: they are weak
hearted, and soon overthrown. For they think it uncertain, what shall
become of them to morrow. Perchance the hour will come, when thou shall be most
unready, and dydst not see it before: orels thou shall be entangled with this
or that sin. Then art thou undone, and this joyful day shall be changed into
mourninge.

In this doubt Christ leaves us not comfortless, What is to be done* that the
day of judgment be not sodayn unto us?
but teaches christen men, how they shall be rydde from this pensifenes, and
says: See that your heart be not ouerladen with surfeit and dronkennes, and
with the cares of this life, least this day oppress you unawares. But watch
at all times, and pray, that ye may be found woorthye to escape these
things, which shall chance, and stand before the son of man. This is an
excellent and a necessary doctrine, which ought never to fall out of our
minds. Christ gives here no iniunction, to forbear meat and drink wholly,
neither as the Pope does, commands to cast away all things, to live out of
the worlds trouble. God does not disalowe the use of meat and drink:
neither is it ungodly to provide things necessary for our household. For God
for this cause made us to work. But take heed of this, that your hearts be not
oppressed with these things so much, that ye forget my coming. but watch,
Watch.
that is: look that at all times ye wayt, and be armed with the fear of God,
and with a good conscience. Prayer.
Do this first: Then ioyn herewith prayer, that your temptations and hard
combrances may be escaped, and that ye may stand before the son of man. As
it is comprised in the two last petitio^s of the Lords prayer: Lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from all ill. If ye do so, there will be no
peril, whether this day come when we be suppyng or sleaping: whether we be in
the church, or in the market place, it is all one: for it shall find us in the
fear and protection of God.

But in this place it is to be noted, that God can not well be prayde unto,
neither can the prayer be true, when a man cares not to leave certain vices,
and to amend his life. Wherefore to true prayer is required true repentance,
and that no man sin wittingly, and so hinder his conscience. Repentance.
After that let us call upon God for mercy, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that he will keep us in true fear of him: and by the holy ghost help
us against sin, and preserve us in true faith unto the end, that we may
joyfully look after this helthfull day, and that we receive Jesus Christ as
our Savior with all confidence. Such prayer thorough Christ is heard without
doubt. Wherefore let us follow this counsel and precepte, and on this wise
prepare our selves to the expectation of this day. The which thing our lord
and redemer Jesus Christ grant us. Amen.

The third Sunday in Aduent. The Gospel of Math. xi.
WHen John being in prison, herds the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples, and said unto him. Art thou he that shall come, or do we look for
an other? Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and show John again, what ye
have heard and seen. The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepres
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
receive the glad tidings of the gospel, and happy is he that is not offended
by me. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the people concerning
John: What went ye out in to the wilderness to see? A read that is shaken with
the wynd? or what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?
Behold, they that wear foft clothyng are in kings houses. But what went ye
out for to see? A Prophet? Merely I say unto you, and more than a prophet.
For this is he, of whom it is written: Behold, I send my messanger before
thy face which shall prepare thy way before the.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN THIS Gospel are set forth two doctrines: The work of God is hyghly to
be magnified.
First that we should highly esteem Christ's word, and set great price
thereby. For it is a thing of great weighte. Then shall be described the shameful
and wicked unkindness of them that here this word, and see the signs, and yet
regard it not, neither believe it: Which is a very horrible thing. First
therefore, that the word of Christ ought diligently to be heard, it is taught
hereby, in that John, when he was now in bands, as soon as he heard of the
works of Christ, sends his disciples unto him, commaundynge them to ask
him, whether it were he that should come? as concerning whom so many things
were written in the old Testament and prophets: The question of John by his
disciples.
and afterward so many things should be spoken in ye new Testament: yt is,
whether he was that promised Christ, of whom it was written, that the kingdom
of the people, and the law of Moses should endure unto his coming: Deuter. 18.
and afterward that he should be heard. For that was plainly spoken of before
in the Prophets, That Christ should have no corporal kingdom, but that he
should be a prophet like unto Moses, and yet should come with an other kind of
doctrine, then Moses did. This deed the Jews well know. Wherefore when this
chanced by and by after the bands of John, and Christ preached of eternal
life, and of the kingdom of God: it seemed good to John to send his disciples
unto him.

What John mente by sendyng his disciples unto Christ.
And he sent them not only, to here the testimonies of the Prophets, but to
see with their eyes, that this prophet was come at last, whom all looked for,
according to the prophecy of Moses. Wherefore such a message is no other thing,
than as if John should say this: As for me, I know that this is very Christ,
but men do not believe it. Wherefore now go ye unto him, and learn of him, that
ye may depart from me, and from the tradition of the Jews, and become his
Disciples, in whom are all things, that are necessary for your salvation, and
for the Salvation of all the world. This is the chief cause of this message
unto Christ, that John's disciples might see him before their eyes, and here,
and begin to be acquainted with him, and so believe in him, and be saved.

But what does Christ answer the messangers? he neither denies neither
affirms: but answers symply by his works, and says: ye se, hear, and
feel that I am he. Esaias. 35.
For as Esaie and other prophets showed before, that by Christ the lame
should go, the blind should see. etc. that now see ye with your eyes. ye
have need of no further declaration or answer if ye will behave your selves
uprightly in this matter.

This answer of Christ is wounderfull, and it compriseth very proprely what
ought to be taught of Christ. It settethe forth his kingdom, and what a
magnificent thing it is, Of Christ and. his kingdom.
that is called Christ's kingdom: That is, such a kyngedome, to the which
belongs the lame, blind, leaprous, the spechelesse, the dead, and especially
the poor and miserable sinners, and there are they sure to have succoure. This
ought to be taught. This doctrine should be commonly proclaimed, that he is a
king, which would healpe the wretched, the vexed in soul and body, the which
could not be healped by all the good in the world. Christ's doctrine.
For there was never such a Prophet that could deliver the blind and the
leapres from their dyseases. As there was never also, such a teacher, that
could teach the Gospel to the poor, that is, promise sure healpe in
himself to the contryte, vexed and miserable consciences, and make their herts
that were full of tremblyng, and overcome by dread and fear, to be merry and
joyful. Moses doctrine.
Moses is an high prophet, but this can he not do. For all his sermons do
sound on this wise: Thou must observe the law, orels perish. This was a very
torment to the Jews The Phariseys did fast, paid tithes, and endeavored with
all their study to represent the law: and thought that they had no need of any
gospel, of any Christ, but that all other things were without peril: and that
god could not but receive them into heaven, for their fastes, prayers, alms.
etc. These be rich and perfect sprited men, which have no need of god and his
grace, and this is very true, that this doctrine of Moses is necessary, and
that men ought to be endued with this discipline and instruction: even as in an
Empire or kingdom there must needs be had somners, and hangmen, to execute
corporal punyshement on them, that will not obey the law, that steal, that
commytte aduoutrie and slaughter. But when the agony of death is at hand,
Moses doctrine can do nothing against death.
this doctrine of Moses by all men's judgment is to no purpose, although thou
have observed it never so much. Thou must needs say and confess: Although I
have not ben an aduoutrer, a thief, a robber, yet do I only flee to thy
mercy. If this be not, all works be they never so great, prevail not against
desperation. As there is an history in the lives of the fathers, An history.
of a certain man, that stood still three whole days in one place, and
continually lyfted up his eyes into heaven with mournyng and waylyng. And when
his Disciples asked of him, why he was so greatly troubled? he answered: I
fear death. Then every man endeavored to comfort him, and thought it the best
for that purpose to put him in remembrance of his straight kind of living, and
of his keeping of Gods precepts. But he testified plainly before them, that
this made nothing against the fear of death. For although (says he) I have
kept gods precepts very straightly, yet I can not be without the fear of
death: Works can not quiet the conscience of a sinner.
for I know that gods judgment is not like unto man's. This Father proceeded so
far, that he understood, that when these tourmentynges begin, and drive us
to God and to his judgment: that Gods Judgment is so grievous, severe, and
hard, that our holiness and good works can not withstand and susteyn it.
Wherefore although the law is to be taught, and the discipline of good works
is to be put in execution, and the commandments to be done: yet when death
comes, let us despair as concerning all our works, and the righteousness
thereof. This is one of the poor that is mentioned in this place. But he can
not tell what he might surely stycke unto. For this was lackyng to him, whereof
Christ speaks in this place: The Gospel is preached to the poor. The Gospel
is a doctrine of comfort.
But the Gospel is such a doctrine as touching Christ, that it comfort a
sinner, and does adhort him not to fear. For Christ commanded it to be
preached to the contrite, that he gives his own righteousness for thee, which
is everlasting. This Grace does he procure to be taught to thee by his
word: Wherefore doubt not. It shall chance unto thee as thou hear, if thou
believe. For the Gospel signifies a fair and quiet doctrine, What the gospel
is.
and joyful tidings. If a rich man would promise to a beggar a thousand
nobles, that would be a gospel to the beggar, and joyful tidings, and
pleasant to the ear. But what ar all riches in comparison of this gospel, and
good tidings that Christ has respect unto the poor, and is such a king,
Difference between the kingdom of Christ and ye worlds.
which makes the dead, sinners, and captives of the law, parttakers of
everlasting life and righteousness? Such is my kingdom says he, much unlike
the kingdom of ye world, where only this regard is had, to advance ye mighty.
For he yt is most of might there, does most oppress the poor. There ye
potestate uses extremity, which spares no man, and can not suffer vice
unpunished. Where it has his sergea^ts, his rods, ye sword, water, fire, that
ye evil doers may be punished. But in the kingdom of Christ, it will be
otherwise. Wherefore as it is a miracle to raise the dead: so is this the chief
miracle, yt God has sent us such a king, that is king of sinners, and
shows his gospel to them. Moses and his law knows of no such king. For
there it is enacted, that he yt is a sinner, is condemned to the devil, and to
death. This now appears hereby, that God is king of the holy and rightuous,
which has far perfecter holiness then that, that the civil laws requier.
And it is true, that that doctrine of the law is Gods word, and that Moses
ministration by the law is Gods ministration. As likewise the civil empires
are well called the empires of God, for as much as he commands such to be
had, and us also to obei thereto. But these are only ye empires of Gods left
hand. But ye kingdom of his right hand is, where he reigns him self, neither
does he substitute any lieutenantes, The kingdom o^ Christ's right hand.
pare^tes, magistrates and other officers, but he rules him self, and so
ordreth ye matter, yt ye gospel be preached to the poor. In ye which thou
learnest, yt when thy righteousness ca^ not abide the judgment of God, to say
thus: I have done lord yt I cold, I have obeyed my parents and masters with al
diligence, I have done no man any dishonestie, I have not ben a murmurer, I
have seen dilige^tli to my household and them that were committed to my cure, I
have done no wrong to my neighbor, I have not stolen, I have not committed
aduoutery. etc. But what is this to ye purpose, when the matter is tried before
thy Judgment? This is nothing to thy kingdom. Wherefore when I know yt thing in
thy gospel, yt thy son and our Lord Jesus Christ, showed diverse signs,
amongst the which this is also, yt thy son preached to ye poor, yt is, that
he was sent from the to this purpose, to comfort the afflicted consciences: to
this intent have I now received the gospel. For I can not be without it, whereas
I am vexed and poor, and there is no where else any confort either in my goods,
either in all the world.

Thus says also ye prophet Esaias of Christ, as Christ says here also, the
lord has given me a learned tongue, that is, God has put this word in my
tongue, that I may at due season speak with the weary, yt is, confort ye
dreadful co^scie^ces. As ye evangelist does expound it in this place, and
says that ye gospel is preached to the poor: for the king Christ was sent to
preach good tidings, and to confirm the trembling and fearful consciences.
And his kingdom is a kingdom of comfort, wherein the dreadful, must be
strengthened and made joyful. And yt is not done by ye doctrine of the law,
but only by ye gospel. This is a chereful and happy tidinges that Christ has
satisfied for our sins. This belongs to the poor, says Christ: this is
mine intent. For with the righteouse I have no place, which will not be rebuked
as sinners, which persecute the gospel, and condemn it as heresi, saying, that
good works are forbid thereby, and yt these words are blasphemous against
Moses, and the law. Wherefore Christ says after: blessed is he yt is not
offended by me: ye truly blessed. For all ye world is offended with this king,
The doctrine of the gospel is wath offense.
and wishes yt he might sone be confounded. For they say yt he turns al up
side down, that he condemns the righteous, and suffers them not to be in
his kingdom, that he is ready to give heaven to ye sinners. What kind of doctrine
is this (say they?) wherein is no respect of good works, and wherein the wicked
have such an easy way to heaven. Christ could not be scotfree from this
sclander amongst his own neither can we be, where as we are so bacbited of
our adversaries, that we teach against good works, and make the way of
salvation to easy. But in this place is a sentence: Blessed is he that is not
offended in me. For if thou consider Christ's doctrine well, thou shall
perceive, that this doctrine is not against good works, as the Papisticall
does falsely report this by us. This we teach, that these things are
necessary, and earnestly to be cared for, that nothing may be done against the
word and conscience. Wherefore the gospel does not disanull the Civil power,
it does not abrogate the offices of the Maiestrates. Why then does it offend
thee? and why do thou imagine that it forbyddeth good works? The Gospel
does not disalowe neither forbydde good works: The doctrine of the Gospel
forbyddeth not good works, but the trust in them.
But it forbyddeth this, that when we must now dye and depart into an other
life, and when we are brought to our straightes, that then we put no trust in
our own righteousness and works, and that we have no more succor remaining,
but only in Christ, and must stycke to his merit and satisfaction only,
that by him we obtain grace and everlasting life.

For God gives such a body unto us to this end, that we should not be idle
as long as we live, that we walk on our fete, put our hands to work, that we
speak with the mouth, and see with our eyes. etc. And for this has he put
forth his word, the ten commandments, that we might compare all our works
with them, and not do contrary to his glory, and the profit of our neighbor.
This gospel does not only permyt, but also command us to do it diligently.
But now when a man is alone, and void of all these things, and gothe out of
the world to the judgment seat of God: then does the gospel teach the, to
go an other ways about: wherefore if thou haste done that is godly in thy life,
thou could not maintain otherways the name of godliness in this life,
thou must thank God for that gift. But in death, beware that thou put no
trust in this godliness, as though thou had deserved heaven thereby: but
yield thy self wholly to this king Jesus Christ: whose office it is (as says ye
Evangelist) to help ye blind, lame, lepres, the deaf, and dead, to preach to
the poor, yt is to comfort ye troubled consciences. For he is sent from God
the father, not to punish us for our sins, but to profit us, to susteyn and
comfort us. They that will not use him after this sort, but are offended rather
with him, and despise him as the Jews and the hipocrites do yet to this day:
Those shall he repress at his time. And this is one of the offenses that are to
be avoided. Then also is Christ an offense, when men dare not confess him for
fear of the cross, and fall from him in temptation. Furthermore it is called
an offense, when we have more respect to our heart and conscience, and what is
their intent than to the gospel: That is, when the sorrow of our work and syn
is greater, then comfort for Christ's mercies sake. This is the common offense,
whereby al christen men at vexed. Christ an offenceful preacher.
So is Christ every where in ye world an offenceful teacher, as he will show more
plainly after this gospel, that men by this doctrine are offended, and begin
to despise and persecute it. And that the world shall be judged for this, the
sermon of the three cities, Capernaum, Corazim, and Bethsaida does declare.
Likewise the grievous co^plainte of Christ against the Jews, is this, where he
declares John that rigorouse teacher of repentance, did eat only honey and
locustes, drunk water, and lived a hard life. But what prevailed he thereby? ye
said, that he had a devil. But I, says he, eat, drink, and show my self
most full of humanity to all men, and they call me a drinker of wine. The
adders are so froward that no man can satisfy them. If a man live at liberty,
he is blamed: if he lives straightly, he can not please them. What shall we do
then, to please the froward world? It would be pleased very well, if all that
it does were allowed, where as never the less it does nothing that good is.
Such offenses must be patiently suffered.

For if it were in such a hard case, when Christ taught him self, wicked
worldlings can not abide ye gospel, nor the preachers thereof.
and al things were full of his miracles, that the blind did see, the lame go,
the dead rise, and it yet could nothing prevail herby, but that the word was
despised: Yea rather Christ the auctor of this doctrine, was most shamefully
crucified, the Apostles driven out of Jury, and no where safe in all the world
for this words sake: what marvel is it then, if the world hates the gospel
without mercy, and resist it, and handle it most vilainously? Such was the
fortune of Christ and his apostles at that time, so that it may seem more
marvelous in them, because they did not only preach, but also wrought many
notable and famous miracles. Wherefore we must endeavor our self to bear this
misery of the world, and to take this rudenes well a worth. For the fortune of
the gospel shall never be otherwise. It is a doctrine, wherewith men are
always offended: and they be not of the common sort, but men very holy,
righteous, wise, and mighty in the world as experience teaches. Blessed are
they, that knowledge, that this is the word of God, they are in good case, and
have both confort and help against these offenses. But they yt know it not,
are inflamed for their good works sake, they fall from this word to their own
righteousness, and think that this doctrine is full of offense and sedition.
And this yt is to stumble and be offended, and yet it chances to them, which
before the world are counted most holy.

Wherefore we have a just cause to complain with Christ of the obstinate
blindness of the world: We have song unto you, and ye would not dance, and
at our lamentable songs ye would not lament. For neither ca^ the doctrine of
the law, Math. 11.
neither of the gospel, further and move men, either to lament, either to
rejoice, that is, neither, will they suffer their sins to be rebuked, neither
give place to confort against their sins, They will neither be blind nor yet
see: As the examples of our adversaries the Papists, are at hand to prove
this. And now must we learn the other thing also out of his gospel, that the
gospel is such a doctrine as is so unkindly, and horribly despised in the
world: that all men be offended at it, seeing kings, Princes, Pope,
Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monks, citizens and rustikes, that is, all the
mighty and excellentest in the world do not only not receive it, but also
scorn and persecute it. Such was the fortune of Christ for all his miracles.
For what cause had he else to say Blessed is he that is not offended with me? if
it cha^ced so to thee O Christ, whereas thou might have stopped all men's
mouths with divine miracles, we may well refrayn from complainyng, when we are
despised for the Gospels sake, and laughed to scorn, and persecuted. This
doctrine of offenses is very necessary, and specially in this our time, wherein
this offense is most grievous. The first doctrine is also necessary. For there in
consysteth our salvation and everlasting life, that we know how Crist is the
King of comfort, which is glad to show his bounteousnesse toward our
troubled consciences, and to comfort them in sin, and healpe us to
everlasting life. For although that the strayghte kyngedome of the world is
his also, yet it is not his principal kingdom, seeing it shall not ever endure.
This is the chief and everlasting kingdom of Christ, when we fall acquaynted
with his word, which must be preached to the poor, that wha^ we dye, we may
say: I believe in Jesus Christ my lord which can restore and give sight to the
blind, whole lymmes to the lame, clensyng to the leapre, to the do^be the use
of speech, to the dead life. He will be my helper, he will not see me forsaken
at my most need. For this is the cause, that he became man, and descended into
the earth unto me. He that believes this truly, departs from this miserable
life, to the celestial and everlasting ioys. The which thing that it may chance
to us, our Lord Jesus Christ might grant. Amen.

The fourth Sunday of Aduent. The Gospel of S. John. i.
THis is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, to ask him What art thou? And he confessed and denied not, and
said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked him, what then, art thou Helias?
And he says: I am not. Art thou the Prophet? And he answered, No. Then said
they unto him. What art thou? that we may give an answer unto them that sent
us? What say thou of thy self? He said: I am the voice of a crier in the
wilderness: make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaie.
And they which were sent, were of the Phariseis, and they asked him, and said
unto him: Why baptisest thou then, if thou be not Christ, nor Helias, neither
that prophet? John answered them, saying: I baptize with water, but there
stands one among you, whom ye know not: he it is, which though he came
after me, was before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose. These
things were done at Bethabara, beyond Jordan where John did baptize.

THE EXPOSITION.
THIS Gospel also is one of the especiallest gospels, that proves a high
article of our religion, which belongs not to the ten commandments or
works, but to a higher matter, teaching what is Christ, and what he has
done. Wherefore it is almost one with the gospel of the last Sunday, and
conteyneth the same doctrine, except that the matter is set forth with
other words and other persons. For the last Sunday ye heard, how all the
matter consists in this point, that we have chief respect unto this person
CHRIST, and that nothing beside be had in so great estimation, Christ alone
saves.
that all our mind and thought rest in this man. For he that swarueth not from
him, fyndeth remission of sins, and deliverance from death and hell. For so is
it wholly decreed with God, John. 14.
that in this man all things should be. He is the way, truth, and life, and by
him only the patriarchs, prophets, and Apostles be saved from the beginning
of the world. This knows John, and sends his disciples for this cause unto
him, that they should not lack so great a tresure and goodness. This does God
well perceive, The patriarchs and Prophets were saved by faith i^ Christ.
that this is our fault, to be desirous to search out many ways. And one for ye
love of monkerie becomes a monk, an other fasteth, an other slepeth on the
ground, and so every man follows his own devise, and goes forth in his own
ways, that may bring him to heaven. Wherefore God talks with us by the gospel,
and protests that he allows not that as seem good to us: But that he
puts forth his word to show us the true way (that is) his son Jesus
Christ. Without Christ there is no salvation
Wherefore he that strayeth from him, shall depart void of salvation, although
he fast and pray never somuche. Contrarywyse he that cleaves unto him by
faith, has remission of sins and life everlasting, neither can the devil or
sin, deceive him of his trust.

This way did the Patriarchs and prophets walk, and obtained salvation through
Christ* For if any should be saved by works, and by their own righteousness,
surely they must needs be the prophets and apostles, which out of mesure,
wrought and suffered many things. But here they do all despair of their own
righteousness, and took hold by that sede with a firm faith that should break
the serpents head. But the Jews will not walk in this way, they could not
believe, Genesis 3.
that there was such help in a carpenter, thinkyng this with them selves: we
must so work by fast, alms, and prayer that we may be with God, it is a folly
to think that this craftesman can save. And for this cause, God took this
order, The office of John.
that John should come as a trompetter before Christ, and this is the meaning
of the trompet, that all at the sound thereof, should have their eyes attent,
and mark that man well, that comes after John as the true expectation of
Israel. Wherefore when the Jews send Legates, and demand whether he be
Christ? Elias, or any Prophet? He answers, I am not. When they are instant,
saying: Who art thou then, and what record geuest thou of thy self? He
aunswerethe: I am the voice of a crier in wyldernes, make ready the way for
the Lord. That is, I am a trompetter before the king. Wherefore be attente to
my word: for he shall come after me incontinently, which was before me, and
shall baptize you with the holy ghost, where as I do baptize but with water, as
a minister. He stands in the myddest of you, and ye know him not. Wherefore
this is my duty, to be the voice of a crier in wyldernes: that when ye hear
the sound of my trumpet, ye may understand that he is come. For I am that
soundynge voice and crier, to whom ye ought to be atte^t. He therefore that
follows next after me, is he him self, Esaye. 40.
as Esaie prophecieth in the.xl. Chapter: The voice of a crier is in the
desert, make ready the way for the Lord, make straight the paths of our Lord in
wilderness. He am I (says John) and this is my word. Wherefore be attent, he is
now amongst you, but ye know him not. And this is my office, to bring you
into acquaintance with him, that ye may receive him. For the next prophet that
comes after me, is even he him self. As for me I am but one sent before: and
this office do I now execute and fulfill my duty prophesyed of before. He as
yet is private and unknown, but by and by after me shall he come abroad with
his prophetical office of teaching. Wherefore take ye good heed, least ye be
deceived in markyng of him, and have him in high estimation among you. Neither
was there truly any other end of this matter, then as John prophesied before.
For inco^tinently after Baptism, Christ began to work miracles in Galilee. He
sent twelve apostles, and seue^tie disciples, to preach that the kyngedome of
God was at hand: that is, that Christ was come. Here he is (says John) Join
your self to him, receive him, and ye shall not be deceived. He came after me,
but he was before me. For John was elder than Christ six whole months, and yet
he says, he was before me. This amongst the Jews had been a blasphemous
word, if they had at that time understand it: as it is plain in John's
Gospel, where as he says: Before Abraham was, I am. And this is as much to
say, as this man before he was borne in the earth, he was in heaven. But yet
the Jews did not understand it: never the less this saying of John is true,
John. 8.
and does notify to us a person of the Godhed. As he declares plainly
hereby, when he says: I am not worthy to lose the lachet of his shoes. Here
should the Jews have diligently considered, what manner of man this was, in
comparison of whom John denies and abaseth him self so much, and says him
self unworthy to serve him in ye least thing that is. The testimony of John
comes freely from his heart, that he is not worthy: Although (says he) I be
never so much set by of you, yet in comparison of this man, I am nothing. He
is well content to lay aside all his glory, and says plainly that he will take
yt for a great renoume, if he might be thought necessary to this man in the
most bassest office of wiping his shoes.

Wherefore least the Jews should surmyse that he humbled him self to much,
whereas John the author of baptism executed ye ministry of a prophet: he does
expound the true meaning of his baptism, saying: I have a sign also, as
has the other prophets. Jeremy did wear a chain of wood: Esai walked
naked and barefooted, Esa. 20.
when he prophesied to the Aegiptia^s and Ethiopes, that they should be a pray
to there enemies, and be spoiled of all they had. I am the auctor of a new word,
and of a new sign. John declares his baptism.
I preach that ye prepare the way for the lord. Ye had no need of this word,
if the way were prepared now alredie. After that I wash you for a sign, that
ye are vnpure and filthy: and I am the beginner of this lauer. But he that
follows me, will provide a better baptism, and baptize you with the holy
spirit. All this was spoken, that they might not count Christ unworthy of
their sight, but should have for a remembrance the words of John: that because
he had borne record of him, which should come forth so magnifice^tly, with
teaching and signs, they might not doubt in an evident matter. But what do
they? they hear John, but they think not his authority sufficient. For as
they beheaded John: so they crucified Christ, as touching whom, John's
witness was so faithful. Such regard of godliness had they, that they only
despised not the word of God, but for that also killed the Prophets, and
nailed on the cross, The Jews regard not John's doctrine.
the Lord of all Prophets. And so goes the matter now also. For Christ is
condemned to the cross: not only at his being here in earth, but now also in
his members. We labor all that we can with John, to bring men into this way:
for as much as without Christ, there is no remission of sins, or life
everlasting. But the more we go about to withdraw men's trust from their oune
works as unprofitable to righteousness in the sight of God, Papists can not
abide the word of God.
and to lead them to Christ: so much the more grievously are we condemned as
heretykes of our adversaries. For that is not agreeable with their doctrine, as
all do know. They set forth the Mounkes rules and masses with ostentation,
they offer up masses for the dead, they ordeyne service, they go a pilgrimage,
they bye pardons. But what other thing is this, then to cast away Christ, and
search out new ways to heaven. And we can allow this by no means: and therefore
can they not abstain from railing and slaundering of us. The Bishops and high
Priests would deal likewise with us, as they did with the Jews, if they
could. Only this is lacking unto them, that they can not abuse us at their
pleasure. But what is the cause they are so grievously offended with us? surely
no other, but that we teach with John to give the glory to God, and to humble
them selves before Christ, and judge them selves unworthy with all their
service and good works, to wipe such a great man's shoes. For they can not
chose but grant this, that John was more holy then all they can be: and yet he
says, I will cast away all this holiness, if I might but be received only into
the fellowship of his grace, to have the oversight of his shoes, I would think
my self an honorable man. This do we therefore testify and proteste before the
world, the Pope, the Bishops, Priests, and Mounkes, that be their
righteousness and holiness never so much: yet in this point they are nothing to
be compared with John. Wherefore if ye do all that ye can by fasting, and saying
your prayers, only do this also: see that these things be cast at Christ's
feet, and let them not look to be justified and saved thereby. But say this
humbly: I do not refuse to be to lowly and humble. This do we teach, that they
suffer Christ to be holy only, but they can not be persuaded so to do. They
cry out upon us like mad men, saying:

Not only faith is sufficient, but we must do good works. And so they make
not the holiness of Christ their ground and pillar, as John did, which is
glad to forgo his own holiness, and count it not so much worthy, as the
cloutes wherewith durty shoes are made clean. He testifies plainly, that his
holiness is not so much worth as a vile cloute, and how much less worthy does
he judge it to wipe CHRIST'S nose, Papists seek salvation by their own works.
and to do any higher office. This does the Pope and his Church refuse to do.
They extolle them self highly with their works, and that they have everlasting
life for them. And can not abide that their works and holiness should be
counted as vile cloutes. Yea rather they doubt, whether they may judge Christ
worthy to have this holiness given in stead of alms and sacrifice. This heard
the Jews, but they despised and persecuted it: and unto this time is not this
contempt and persecution left. But as this madness chanced to the Jews
destruction, so shall it by Gods grace chance to the Papists. Wherefore we
must diligently mark this example, where as John that most holieste man,
which (as Christ says) has none like him amongst all that are borne of
women, Matthew. 116
which passed all mounkes and priests far: yet does he so demitte and humble
him self, and says that he with all his holiness and works is not worthy to be
as a clout to wipe shoes. Truly this example is worthy to be followed. Good
works must be done, and that with great diligence. Good works.
For so has God commanded in the ten precepts. But when we come to that
point, that we must entreat of this man, as John does: all is to be cast
down at his feet, and we must confess heartily with John, that it is not
worthy to do him the least service that is. Before man's judgment hereof is
had chief respect, that thou art no aduouterer, no thief, no robber, that thou
geuest alms, that thou seruest well in thy vocation. These things are boasted
of amongst men, and had in high estimation.

But when the matter is tried in the sight and judgment of God, be not loathe
to say this: O Lord I know that before thee, the excellentest things in me
are nothing worth. Wherefore judge me not according to my works, I am willinge
to bide ye loss of them. And can wish no better thing, if so be I might have
my desire therein, I may think my self well blessed. So does Paul also to the
Philippi. I am (says he) an Israelite, Phil. 3.
after the profession of the law a Pharisei, and as touching righteousness
unblameable, so that no man can reprove me. It is not much seen, that one
should stand so in these things, against the judgment of men. Yet he says: I
think all this but chyppes, and all my trust and confort rests herein, that
I may be found not having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but the
righteousness which is by faith in CHRIST, which righteousness belongs to
faith, as God says. Wherefore that I might take fruit of this man, I cast
away all my own righteousness as chips. The saying of Paul is more
co^tumelious against good works the^ John's. For he is content to suffer them
to be esteemed cloutes, but Paul names them very chips, paryngs, or scrapyngs.
Paul the Apostle nothing fears the reproach of vnciuilitie, whereas he uses
such vnpure words. Such examples are very necessary to maintayn the study of
honesty and sobernes before the world, that men might not have any cause to
reprove us. This righteousness is belonging to this life, and has his end with
this life, as it is known. Good men are put into the grave as well as the
evil, the matrones as well as the harlots. But when thou will make thee a way
to everlasting life, say this: Christ is my refuge, and his righteousness, which
he promises and gives in Baptism by his word, and in the supper by his body
and blood. The difference between the righteousness of faith and good works.
At last I shall stand by him as a poor worm. That so by this means there
may be put a difference between our righteousness, which consists in the
functions of this common life, and between the righteousness which is before
God. The Ethnykes also has showed honesty and sobernes in their lyuinge, and
done and suffered many things for their native countreye, for the which they
have their due renoume. But when death comes, nothing thereof will step
forth to take their part. For by such righteousness and good works, we can
not attain to the remission of sins. But whyther must we then go for
righteousness and such holiness, that is accepted before GOD, and allowed in the
everlasting life? There then is this holy anchor to be cast, this must be our
refuge, that we come humbly after the precept of John, and think vile of our
self, or as Paul says, shamefully. In the eyes of the world, this may
perchance seem excellent, but before God, it is but a cloute to wipe the shoes
of the son of GOD. Whose righteousness I would gladly have to be given to me,
by the help whereof, I might be certain of salvation, whereas for my own
righteousness I ought not to refuse damnation in hell. And this is the cause
that we say surely, that Mounkes, Priests, cooles, and all things of this sort,
is destinate to damnation. For they apply not their works, to the obedience of
God, to honest living, to the avoiding of offense: but that they might hereby
obtain salvation. Wherefore they sell these things also to other, and this it
is to deny CHRIST, Papists sell their words.
and to mock and despise him, as the Jews mocked and despised him. Let us
beware of such abomination, and here let us learn, how to answer such
Iuglers. Would thou wretched man be so mighty with thy works and
righteousness, that thou might purchase me salvation thereby? The virtue of
John, Peter, nor of any other, was ever of such power. If it had been
otherwise, Monasteries.
they would never have thought so lightly of it, as their words show. If the
use of the Abbeis, were turned to the instruction of youth, and to the trayning
up of them in scriptures, no man could reprove it, because it was done with
great reason. But they can not be brought from their wicked order: They refer
all to the obtaining of salvation.

Wherefore yt were better, that such Abbeis were clean put down, than that
men should fall into offense thereby, and straye from CHRIST, and lose both
body and soul. Learn therefore of this Gospel to live godly, righteously, and
chastely, Good works ought diligently to be done.
and to be diligent in good works. For such obedience does God require by his
law, and would have us to do it. And when we do it not, let us know that
punishment is ready for us: and if he sees us not to amend by bodyly pains,
he will punish us everlasting. These things are to be done before me^, but yet
before God say on this wise: Lord, for as much as belongs to my works and
righteousness, I have no hope, only this I desire, that I may have some low
service about CHRIST'S feet. For as much as belongs to my living, I have
deserved to be cast in to hell, but I call upon his holiness, that he will
sanctify me with a better and eternal life, then shall I be sure to have
everlasting life. But the Popes and Bishops hear not this. For if they would,
Priests, Colleges, Mounkeries, Masses, and such other ceremonies and service,
would sone be overthrown. Which things all they defend so stubbornely,
because they trust to have salvation thereby. So does not John, nor Paul,
which renounce their own righteousness. And a Christian man ought to say this
with Paul: My righteousness and justice, is but rubble and rubbyshe. And also
with John: My holiness is an unprofitable cloute, when I compare it with the
works and holiness of Christ. But the Papists ca^ not abide that such
judgment should be given of their masses, vows, fastings, prayers: they murder
us, because we follow this doctrine, and teach not as they do, but show men a
better way of salvation. An evil mind, an evil heart, neither can there ever
be any hope of amendment in them. They seek evil, they shall find evil. Let
us have an eye to John's finger, wherewith he poynteth us whether to look,
least our Lord and savior Jesus CHRIST, that most necessary capitayn pass
by us unseen and unknown, and so we wander and stray from him to our
destruction. And because it should not be so, John is sent to lead us and
show us the way, that we might be saved. The which thing GOD the father grant
us through his son Jesus Christ. AMEN.

Christmas day. The Gospel of S. Luke ij.
ANd it chanced in those days, that there went out a commandment from
August the Emperor, that all the world should be taxed. And this first taxing
was made when Syrenius was lieftenaunt in Syria. And every man went unto his
own City to be taxed. And Joseph also ascended from Galile, out of a City
called Nazareth, into Jury: unto the City of David, which is called Bethleem,
because he was of the house and lynage of Dauyd, to be taxed with Mary his
spoused wife which was with child. And it fortuned, that while they were
there, her time was come that she should be delivered: and she brought forth
her first begotten son, and wrapped him in swadlyng clothes, and laid him
in a manger, because there was no rowme for them within the Inn. Math. 1.


And there were in the same Regyon shepheardes, abydyng in the field, and
watchyng their flock by night. And lo, the Angel of the Lord stood hard by
them, and the brightness of the Lord shone round about them, and they were
sore afraid. But the Angel said unto them: Be not afraid. For behold, I
bring you tidings of great joy, that shall come to all the people; For unto
you is borne this day in the City of David, a savior, which is Christ the
Lord. And take this for a sign: ye shall find the child swadled and laid
in a manger. And straight way there was with the Angel, a multitude of
heavenly soldiers, lauding God, and saying: Glory to God on hye, and peace
on the earth, and unto men good will.

THE EXPOSITION.
THE feast of Christ's birth was ordained in ye congregation especially, that
the hystory thereof might be taught and known perfectly of all men, that the
youth and the other sort of people might have it in remembrance, and prynt it
well in their minds. For although this matter be handled yearly, yet can it
never be sufficiently known. The cause of the feast.
Wherefore we will make two parts of this Gospel. First we will rehearse the
history. Then will we see, what the Angels did show, and what service they
kept this day also. First the history is this, 1. The time of this birth.
that Christ was borne at that time, when the first tax was made amongst the
Jews under Augustus Caesar. At this time did Christ begin his kingdom in the
world, howbeit somewhat privily. Neither could the most valiant Emperor
Augustus be free from the service of this king, so yt in this his commandment
he makes a way for the prophecy, yt Mary with Joseph might come to Bethleem,
2. The place.
and yt there might be borne ye savior of the world. If this had not been,
Joseph and Mary would have tarried at home at their business. Miche. 5.
But Bethleem was appointed to be yt place of Christ's nativity. And therefore
was Cesars commandment necessary yt Christ's parents might come to Bethleem.
Albeit neither the Emperor, neither the world did know any thing of this
matter. For if the world had known (such is the malice thereof) that it would
rather hinder it always then set it forth. But this is the marvelous providence
of God, that he has it unknowing obedient unto him, and can obtain nothing of
it wittyngly.

After they were come from Galile in to Bethleem by yt commandment, 3. The
Emperor of Rome helps knowing not what he does.
Mary's time of bringing forth was come (says ye Evangelist.) There was no
provision at al made for her child bed. They be both in a strange la^d, far
from their country where their dwelli^g was, 4 The manner of the birth.
and had no part of their own stuff. And although it was like, yt they had
kinsfolk there, yet were they not regarded, because of their poverty*
Furthermore yt town it self was so full of men as it appears by the
Evangelist, yt there was no room for the^ in ye June. They are content because
they were of a low degree, to take part of an ox stalle with beasts. Here
was nothing builded, prepared, no bedclothes. They lie amongst straw and hay,
no better tha^ yt beasts does. In this place, in the midst of ye cold, in the
night is borne ye most excellent babe Jesus Christ. And this is the hystory,
Why this hystory is written.
which ye Evangelist puts forth so plainly unto us, which are so hard
hearted: if perchance he might move us, to ye consideration of this thing, yt
our savior was borne into ye world in such great scarcity of al things, yt
we thereby should greatly abhor from the madness of ye world, which despises
so disdainfully these holy things and the kingdom of God. Who would not curse
Bethleem for the little humanity thereof, which in such comberance of strangers,
fyndeth them not mean things. The first swathyng clothes are the mothers
lap, after that the, ox stalle. With these delicates is this babe cherished.
The mother in her travel, if she feared cold, had no other vesture but her
clothes that she wore. Here was no man here to lend any thing to their
necessity. For what purpose did the Evangelist describe so diligently the
great poverty of this birth?

Least thou should forgett it at any time, and that these things might
make the sober, and amend thy natural fearcenes, and that when thou haste
heard yt done for thy self, thou might take confort thereof, and give thanks
to GOD. And it was a long journey from Nazareth of Galile unto this town
Bethleem. They went further then it is from Saxon to Franconie. And hereof a man
may easily gather, that they carried not much stuff with them, and that their
swathelyng clothes and such other things were not very costely, so that he put
on her smock on the child and laid it in the maunger. For she could not
always hold yt in her lap, she must warm the clothes, and dress their
couche, and do such other things, that were requisite for an infa^t. And in the
mean time must the babe rest in the ox stalle. Neither could Joseph be
lackyng to this necessary busynes. And it is like that he went about to some of
the maidens of the house to get water, and to do such other business. But this
is not written, that any man came to proffer service unto them in this
trauaill. They regarded it not, when it was told them, that the maid was
delivered of a child in the stable. Wherefore this town is worthy to be hated
with his great barbarousnes. For although Mary because of her poverty, was not
thought so much worth, and if she had been unhonest, yet at this time had it
ben the part of a man to show humanity. But no man is grieved therewith. The
child must suffer patiently this great extreme pouertye, and look for no
better. In this beggerie and sorrowful life this Lord is borne. Whereas other
devour, riot away consume prodigally al things by costly apparel, and
gorgeous buildi^g. etc. This is the history. Which is set forth to us, to
the intent, that we should grave this picture of Christ's birth fast in our
heart: with how great misery the Lord Jesus was borne in this wordle, that we
might learn to give God thanks for this so great benefit. For we misers and
wretched men and also damned, We are made on flesh and bl^d with the sone of
God. Hebr. 4.
came this day to high renoume. For on this day were we made one flesh and
blood with the son of God, and he that made heaven and earth of nothing, is
borne a man like unto us: only this thing excepted, that with this child all
things are without sin. Wherefore we may boste magnificently, that God is
become our brother, our flesh, and blood. This renoum is not given to the
angels, or devils, but to us men. Wherefore although the angels are more
excellent creatures then we, yet God gives more renoume to us, then to all the
angels. For he was not made an angel but a man. Wherefore if we men could
think and believe this. as the greatness thereof requirethe: our mind would be
most ready to set most by God, to thank him, and to obey his will gladly.
When the Popes religion reigned, there was such an history read unto us: That
upon a time the devil came into the Church to mass: And when these words,
(and he was made man) were song, and men made no obbeisance by bowinge of
their knees, he gave one of them a great blow, and rebukinge him said: Thou
monsterous beast, art not ashamed to be so little moved? why fallest thou not
down on thy face for joy? if the son of God had been made our brother, as he
was youres, surely we would have no measure in rejoicing. And although this
matter be not true, yet it seems to be feigned of a good man, The incarnation
of Christ
which well did perceive, the great renoume given unto us, when the son of
God became man, and that not after the manner of Adam and Eve, which was made of
the ground, but he was made more conjoined unto us. For he was borne of the
flesh and blood of the virgin Mary, as other men were, except this, that Mary
the virgin was sole and alone, and he was conceived without sin, by the holy
Ghost. Except this, that he is worthily named the natural son of a woman.
Adam and Eve were not borne but made. For God made man out of the earth, and a
woman of his ribbe: Genesis 1.2.
But how much nigher is Christ to us then Eve to Adam, because he is our blood
and flesh. We ought to esteem this renoume highly, and to have great meditation
thereupon, in that the son of God is made our flesh, and that there is no
difference between his flesh and ours, except only sin. For he was conceived
of the holy Ghost, Heb. 4.
and God replenished both the body and soul of the virgin with the holy
Ghost, because she was without sin, when she conceived Christ, and
afterward wared great with child by him. And this is the only difference: in
all other things he is like other men, in that he used meat and drink, felt
hunger, thyrst and cold as other did. Phil. 2.
He was subject to all such natural infirmities, as Paul says: in shape he
was found like a man, he eat, he drounke, he was sorrowful and glad. The
humblenes of Christ.
This is truly a profound humility and subjection. For he might have used an
other sort, when he became man, after what sort he is now in heaven, where as
he has flesh and blood as we have. But yet he is not subject to natural
actions. He might have done this at the beginning, but he would not, that he
might declare his singular love toward us, that we might have thereby sure
confort and joy, when we know that we have a brother now in heaven, whose
sure help we may stycke unto, and are bound so to do. For cursed is every man
that does not receive him, and conceive steadfast hope for his sake. And
therefore is this history rehearsed every year, that ye tender minds might have
meditation thereon, and give God thanks, and say: My matter is in good taking,
I have a brother, and he is made like me. But why he was made so, I do not yet
tell (for this was the cause, 1. That this natiuite might be confortable to us.
that he might help me against syn and eternal death.) But now I speak of
the renoume of all mankind, whereof we boaste and rejoice, that the son of
God is become man. Of this renoume may every man boaste. But Christian men
somewhat more then all other: for because this renoume shallbe to their endless
profit. And this is first to be learned of the history. 2. And also that he
might make us humble and meke.
Secondarily mark also this great example. Where as Christ the son of God
does so humble him self, and communicate all his glory with flesh, and whereas
his high majesty, before whom the Angels tremble, does so demitte him
self, and goes after ye lykenes of a man. In heaven the Angels worship him, in
the earth he serves us, and is subject to our beggary. Seeing then ye son of
God does this, this matter is not lightly to be set by. Let us cast our
selves away for his glory and honors sake. And if adversity be to be suffered
we must not refuse it. For Christ him self has suffered likewise, frost,
hunger, miseries and troubles, and not only these: For when he was borne into
the wordle, he was poor in all things, he had neither place, neither bed
clothes, neither stuff for household, A maunger and ox stable was his refuge.
What should I desire any better state, seeing my kinsman, ye rather my brother,
king of heaven, is found so poor in all things before our eyes? Why should
I refuse hardness, seeing the king of glory refuses not to take on him all
things for my sake. Who am I? a sinner not worthy to lie among sharp cutting
flagges, and yet I lie softer than my prince, which suffered to lie in hay, and
abhorred not the maunger. And yet after this, the case is so unworthy, that we
stocks and blocks, are so nice and delicate, that we can suffer no pain, and
yet we se before our eyes the example of Christ, what pains he took for our
sake. But it is not unknown, what reward we shall have for our foolishnes:
And yet if we had any wit, we would beware.

Now therefore let us briefly rehearse both these doctrines and lessons: 1. The
honor of the congregation.
The first is, yt we regard our own honor, in that that Christ is made
man. This honor and renoume is so great, that if a man were an angel in
state, he might worthily and well wish him self a man, that he might be counted
amongst them, which glory and boste: my flesh and blud is placed above the
angels: so blessed is ye creature of man. The second is, 2. An example of love
and patience.
that this might be an example to us of charity and patience, which we might
follow, and walk in the steps of our brother and kinsman Christ, helping
and serving other men gladly, although it be to our labor and pain. The which
thing God the Father with the holy Ghost, thorough our Lord Jesus CHRIST
grant us. Amen.

The second sermon upon the saying of the Angel as concerning that Christ was
borne.
WE have rehearsed unto you the history of the feast, in the which is made
mention also of the saying of the Angel, to the which there were also assembled
many thousand of Angels, which did show and sing altogether to these two or
three shepheardes. This is the sermon of one Angel.

Fear ye not, for behold I declare unto you great joy, that shall be to all ye
people, because ye have a savior borne for you this day, which is CHRIST the
Lord in the City of David. ALthough this sermon of the Angel is repeted every
year, yet may it now be conveniently renewed again in mind. For we shall
never come to ye perfect knowledge of this thing, as long as we live here. And
this sermon of the Angel was very necessary. For if CHRIST had never so
much been borne, Christ not known profits little.
yet should it have profited us nothing, if it had been unknown. For to what
purpose is that treasure that lies hyd, if thou know not where it is? Thou
shall take no pleasure nor profit thereby, as the Proverb says: There is no
pleasure in the unknown treasure. Proverb.
A hyd treasure is no treasure. For all men passes over it as they do dirt,
caring not for it. So is it also with this most joyful birth, if the Angels
had not brought tidings thereof, and had not opened this treasure to men, no man
could have taken the fruition thereof. The cause why, is common. A man sets
not his affection on that he knows not. Neither does this thing delight or
displease: but it is, as though it were not, and never shall be. Wherefore it is
one of the especiallest things in this Gospel, that the Angel by his sermon
does speak openly of this birth, and shows us this treasure, that we pass
not over it, and that we be not ignorant of the presence thereof, but come and
take part of the confort thereof. Wherefore he says: I declare unto you great
joy.

THESE words are weighty. For ye shepherds were greatly astonyed at this
marvelous light, and celestial shyninge, as at an unwonted thing, because
there was sodeinly both in heaven and earth such great light, as though all
the earth had been on fire. To this has the Angel respect, and applies his
words thereto, saying: Fear ye not, as if he should say: there is no cause to
fear. But your fear shows that ye know not what is in doing. For if ye
did, ye would put away fear, and rejoice at your own felicity. And I am come,
to bring you tidings of great joy, of a great work and miracle: Gods messengers
conforte the fearful.
which thing if ye would well consider, ye would much rejoice. This is therefore
the intent of this Angels tidings, to make men to regard it earnestly, and not
to let it pass without effect. Wherefore he speaks of no common joy, but of
a great joy, and of a thing most necessary. For the devil by sin has
brought us to naught, and disturbed all that belongs unto us, so that we do
not only sustain original sin, and thereby eternal death, but also that al
yt we have are in his danger, that almost we may at every moment, look for
his darts in body, life, and goods. For all these things are in a thousand
perils and casualtyes. Yea the Gospel testifies, that the dyuell possesses
men, and dryueth them to madness, so that it may be worthily said, that such a
man is the fylthy puddle and syncke of the dyuell. Satan through sin reigns
in men.
Such corruption is engendered in us by sin, that we have no sure help in
any thing in the world. I will not speak of the greatest misery of all, that
they must abide the wroth of GOD and eternal damnation. What is, if this be
not the most horrible and violent kingdom of the devil. And when we consider
well, and compare both together, this myserie in the kingdom of the dyuell can
not be compared with this glory and reward, with this great joy, whereof the
Angel preaches he^re, that there is a savior borne for us. Wherefore the
Angel entendeth chiefly to remove this myserie out of our sight? and to give
us this child to behold and see* And let him know that he has done the office
of a good preacher, if he bring us to the true beholding of this savior, and
to the knowledge of our own flesh and blood. And doughtles if this were
prynted in us, all the plague wherewith the dyuell vexes us, should seem light,
be it never so paynfull and pernicious.

But now let us come to the most requisite and necessary knowledge of this
divine work of God. Christ only overcomes Satan.
For the dyuell with all his poison can be overcome by no other means then by
this godly power, of the which the Angel speaks to us in this place, when he
says: A savior is borne for you. When ma^s mind attaineth to this knowledge,
the^ is ye sinner out of peril. For than is the matter more depely considered
after this sort: I have been defiled of the dyuel and wholly oppressed, and
overthrown headlong into Gods wrath and eternal damnation: but my myschance
is not so great, but that I have greater help given me from GOD against it.
That is, that God possesses not mankind after that sort as the devil does,
but he him self is made man, that of God and man's nature might be made one
person. The devil can not join him self so nighe to man. But God is made man,
and yet he remains a man. And by this means he set him self more depely in
man's flesh, than the dyuell can, which may enter into man's body and vex
it, but he can not be made man, that the devil and man might become one person.

Between these two natures is there always remaining a difference of persons,
not only in substance, but also in person. But in CHRIST that is borne, these
things be one. For the son of God is made one flesh and one blood, borne of
the virgyn Mary; after the course of nature as all be, Math. 1. Luc. 1.
except that he was not conceived of man, but of the holy Ghost, and has
escaped the fylthy mark of the dyuell, and was borne with very pure flesh and
blood, whereas ours is full of sin. In all other things he is like us, which
was subject to all natural actions, Psalm. 51. Ephe. 2. Phil. 2.
in all points as other men. As says Paul: He was found in behavior as a
man, so that all that saw him or heard him, did affirm that he must needs be
a true and natural man, and not any phantasme or appearing only, for he had
all the properties, that belong to this life. And this is the joy, as touching
the which speaks ye Angel. I speak only of the glory and not of the fruit.
For thereof is it wont to be declared in the history of the passion and
resurrection. Now do we speak only of the glory, that GOD is so nighe joined
unto us, that he is of my flesh blood and soul, very man as we be. With this
so great and marvelous glory has he begone this matter, and aduau^ced mankind
thereby to high renoume. And the Angel sets this forth unto men, and says:
I show you great joy, which shall be to the whole people. The word shows yt
his mind was ravished with some great joy: He tells it boldly to the
shepherds. He would that all men with him should know of this great honor,
whereby man's nature is come to such dignity, that GOD which made all things,
is become our flesh and blood.

And if we would ponder this well, although we had no other profit thereby: The
birth of Christ ought to move us, unto mutual charity and love.
yet would it make together amongst us a great flame of charity and love. I
speak not yet as I said before, of the profyt and use, but only of the glory
thereof. If we were moved earnestly therewith, yt would suffer no malice to
remain amongst us. The reason is: Who is there that would hate this kind or
hurt it, which is even as our God in body and soul? shall we not for this
glories sake, where with God has garnished us, love all men? do the best that
we can for all men? The Angels are more excellent creatures, then we men are.
But this glory is not given them. God was not made an Angel, neither an Angel
was made God. Furthermore, the Angels are innocent and holy, which condition
was more agreeable with Gods majesty. But it seems otherwise to him, he
choseth the viler creature, which was subject to syn, which is hold captive
under the kingdom of the devil, and the tyranny of death. Whom the dyuel
vexes and troubles extremely. He could not humble him self any lower. But
should not we be stirred hereby to love and charity, to esteem one an other,
and not to neglecte, but to prove mastries who can do other most good?

Note.
Certain of the fathers, and amongst them, (as it now comes to mind)
Bernarde, thought that the devil when he was in heaven, did se before, that
the son of God should become man, and for that cause envied at man, and began
to hate God, because he had not chosen rather to become an Angel, than a man,
and that for this envy and pride he was cast out of heaven. Whether this were
feigned, or done in deed: yet would the holy fathers signify hereby, how great
is our renoume in that that God became man, and took the very same man's
nature, which belongs to us all, which have been in the dyuels danger, and
captive to sin and death. In what wretched case then are they, which are
ignorante of this renoume. But yet are they much more wretched, which, when ye
Angels or Apostles show such things, that God has visited man's nature, and
took it on him, and made it Lord over al creatures: yet do not rejoice? O how
wretched are they that are not moved with this tidings? If one amongst many
brethren should come to be a king, how would al ye other rejoice? how bold
would they wax? As Joseph's brethren may be an example of this. And this is a
natural zeal. But how cha^ceth it that we rejoice not in such a great matter?
that we are not moved? neither do give thanks to GOD, that our God has taken
our flesh and blood, and now sits at the right hand of God, Lord over all
creatures?

He therefore that would esteem this, as it is in deed, would love all flesh and
blood in the world, for this flesh and bloods sake, and would hate no man. The
only gloriouse sight and contemplation of the humanity of Christ our God,
would so chere us and replenishe us with joy, yt we should never be angry with
any man? Yea, and he that beholds this image continually, that the son of
God is made man, would not look for any wrathful displeasure from Christ, but
hope for all goodness at his hand. For no man is angry with him self, or hurts
him self. Now is Christ one of us and a man. How could he hate him self, yt is
to say us, which are his flesh and blood. And if this sight were well printed
in us, it would sone put away all examples of Gods wrath out of our minds, as
is Noes flood, the punishment of Sodom and Gomor. All that would vanishe away
at such a contemplatio^, if I would muse of this only man, which is God, and
has esteemed man's nature so greatly, that he became man. But be these things
never so inestimable: yet some me^ are so mad, yt they care not, they cast
away this treasure, and set their mind on other things, to heap up riches, to
purchase and get, whereto men's minds are wont wholly to be stirred. And this is
the cause that we feel no joy rise in us at the tydinges of the Angel.

Wherefore this thing may well make us joyful and proud, that we are preferred
before all creatures in this renoume, yea before Angels, and may boaste, and
say: My flesh my blood sits on the right hand of God, and has the rule of
all. No Angel or creature has such renoume, but my flesh and my blood. This
fire ought to melt as it were in one all men's hearts, and to inflame men with
such mutual love, that we should embrace one an other with all our hearts.
But this is the continual working of the devil, to make us forget at home,
that that we learned in the Church. This enemy does corrupt our joy with
other cares, so that we never regard this sight as we ought. If we had nothing
else but this renoume thereof: yet were it a thing worthy to be rejoiced at. But
now besides this glory, this great overplus there is also, that this man is
JESUS and a savior. And this in deed is the true cause, of this joy that the
Angel shows. And here I say again, that they are in a miserable case, which
do neither hear, nor know these things: but they are much more miserable that
here and know, and yet regard it not. For these words would melte heaven and
earth, and make us not to care for death. For who is it that can think this
sufficiently, that a savior is borne for us? This treasure does not the Angel
show to the mother Mary the virgin, but to you (says he) to you is this
savior borne, which is CHRIST the Lord.

He speaks with the shepheardes, which were Jews, What Christ is.
and were well acquainted with this word, knowing that Christ did signify a
king and Lord. But a great part of the people were deceived in that they
thought he should be a corporal king. Christ is no corporal thing
But it was not so. For the Angel has a higher respect, and says almost
this: hitherto have ye ben captive under the dyuell, which has persecuted you
with water, fire, and moreyn. And who can comprise al his myschefe? Under his
most cruel tyranny are you misers. He seduceth your minds with errors, which
hurt the soul a thousand times more, than any moreyn can hurt the body. To
you (I say) to you which with body and soul are under this slanderous and
hurtful spirit, to you is borne a savior. For with whom does he speak?
Christ is the savior of me^.
Not with the stones and brute beasts, but with you men, and not with one or
two, buth with the whole people.

Why dare we than be so bold as to reprove the voice of this Angel, when we
take Peter and Paul for our savior? But do we flee from him, because we be
sinners? For if thou say this: I have nothing to do with him, then will I
demand of thee whose he shall be? Was he borne for the beasts? For thou must
have respect to this, who he is: for if he would have been the savior of any
other creature, he would have taken on him the form and shape of that creature.
But he is become the son of man. Who art thou? who am I? are we not men? yes
truly. To who^ than does this child belong more then to men? The Angels have
no need of him, the dyuels despise him. But we have need of him, and for us is
he made man. Wherefore we must count him ours, that we may look surely for help
of him. As the Angel says: He is borne for you. And above: This joy shall be
great to all people.

But is not this an honorable thing, that an Angel from heaven brings this
tidings to men, and after that so many Angels come with gratulations and
melodious verses, that we men should rejoice and receive so great grace with
thanks giving. Wherefore this saying is vnco^parable, that we hear, yt to us
is borne a Savior. For what other thing does he say than this? this birth is
not belonging to me, I can requier no part thereof, I rejoice for your sake. But
it is yours that are, that are miserable, corrupt, and damnable men. He is the
savior of such. Wherefore embrace him: for you have need of such a savior,
that thynk how ye might escape ye dungeon of syn and death.

The glory whereof I spoke before, in that yt God is made man is very great, but
this passes it far, for that that he is a savior in things that be eternal
and spiritual. He that knew this and believed it, and had the fruition of a
whole joy, would peradventure die for joy. But as long as we are in this life,
we shall never receive and know this joy. For this life is narow and straight,
and we are weak. For if it were possible, that man's mind could truly
esteem it, it would not be able to hold it self for joy. But for as much as
this can not wholly be performed, let us yet at least learn so much hereby,
that we may show mutual love, and cease from slaundering, deceauing, and
other vices, by this marvelous example, that God is made man. But here is
perceived a great infirmity, this joy can not perce so far as it should, and
we forgett both, ye words of the Angel and also this savior, and give our self
to customable vices, to covetousness and such like And this is a toke^, yt we
believe this word very little. For if we did believe it in deed, there would be
excedi^g great joy inwardly in us, because this savior is given to us. In time
of syckenes and plague, a man would have a good hope, if he knew some remedy.
And this hope should be open and sensible. But here, whereas we have put before
us a sure remedy, against sin and death, no man is made chereful thereby.
Wherefore we testify of our self, yt we hear this good tidings as me^ yt be a
sleep, and herby we declare our great frowardnes, yt whereas we have this great
treasure before us, yet we are nothing moved by it. He therefore yt ca^ not
regard this great thing, does worthily bewail his own misery. For what thing
might make ye mind joyful, if yt so great virtue of ye angels tidings, yt a
savior is borne, ca^ not do it? He that is not ye better by these words,
neither applies him self to godliness herby, he yt is nothing affectioned at
these most comfortable and effectuous sayi^gs: ye man ca^ not be amended with
grace, but must needs be tamed with evil and cruelty. And this is a sure toke^,
yt al such are damned and cursed. But if so be yt he have any grace at all, let
him make his humble petition to God for ye holy Ghost, to bring into his heart an
other understanding and sense.

And where as ye angel says, yt a savior is borne in ye city of David, and
calls him ye Lord Christ, yt he does to make us have respect unto ye
scriptures. For so was it prophesied of before by Micheas, Miche. 5.
yt Bethleem should be ye place of his nativity. And whereas he calls him
Lord, it is not to be taken for such a lordshippe as masters has over their
bondmen. But as God says to Ada^, yt he our Lord will defend us, and resist
ye devil, Gene. 3.
and do ye office of such a lord, yt he may challenge us to his kingdom, and
withdraw us from ye devils power, Why the Angel calls Christ a Lord.
seeing yt all the power of ye devil falls hereby, when Christ does take us as
his own not only because he made us, but because he redeemed us also with his
body. Wherefore he contendeth with all his might to have that that is his. So
that Christ after this sort may be taken for a Lord with a right to challenge and
reclayme for our salvation, because he disturbeth ye false usurped power of the
devil, to recover his own from him, and comes before his enemies face, and
indighteth him openly of robbery, in yt that this cursed spirit has taken so
much upon him, that he has cast us misers headlong in to sin and death, and
in that he has used craft and gile in entycinge away his covenant servants,
which belonged nothing unto him, for that that he is the true Lord, and not the
dyuell, which usurps power over them by violence.

Christ is true and natural God.
And for as much as the Angel gives him such a great title, and calls him
Lord, it is a sure token that this child the son of Mary, is verily by nature
eternal GOD. If it were otherwise, he would never have called him Lord. Our
Savior him self and not an Angel, (as the Angel says with express words)
for you is borne a savior. And he is not only our Lord, Christ is the Lord of
Angels also.
but Lord also of the angels, which (as touching this Lord) be all of one
family with us. They are counted under one Lord with us, that we men, that
were the thralls and slaves of the dyuell, might be advanced by this child to
so great renoume, that we be received with the holy Angels, as it were into
one city, which are now ioynte fellows with us: so that we may well boste,
that in this child we are come to the most familiar fellowship of the
Angels, and may be as bold and homely with them, as we would be with our
household fellows. The Angels might well behave them selves stately with us,
because they pass us in worthiness: first, for their nature and substance: and
also because they are without sin, but they are not disdainful of our
fellowship, neither despise us for our misery. But it greueth them to see us
vexed with death, sin, and calamytie. And this is the cause that they are so
glad of our salvation, that comes to us by this child. They are as glad to
see our salvation as their own, Why the Angels rejoiced in the birth of
Christ.
therefore they rejoice, that we this day have gotten that child, which is their
Lord, and brings us to the same degree, so that now we are become their
fellows and the members of his body. They despise us not, they say not: Away
with these sinners, that are stinkinge and rotton dead carcases in their graves
with adulterers, and wicked doers. They are not proud, but glad with all their
heart, that such sinners are come into their fellowship. They give thanks to
God, that we are delivered from sin, that we come to dwell with them in one
house under one Lord. And for this grace they glorify God, although they have
no profyt thereby. How much rather were it our deutie, to give God thanks, to
love one an other, as the son of God loved us, which is made our flesh and
most nighly joined unto us? He that regards not this, and loves not his
neighbor; can not be saved.

This is the first sermon, that was made after the birth of Christ, as touchi^g
this child, which endures after that for ever, to ye end of the world.
Wherefore every man ought diligently to have his mind thereon. For hereby is this
mystery opened, how the angels are become our friends, and brought us joyful
tidings, commanding us to put aside al fear, for as much as this child is
borne for us, which is our savior. This is an high, true and most excellent
confort in the which the mercy of GOD may be perceived and felt very sensibly
and conuenie^tly, that God for our sake has humbled him self so low, yt he
gave us his son, after a most bou^teouse sort by a mayde^. He lays him in
her lap, and sends us word and tidings, that he is our savior. Let us
seek help of him in our need, let us trust surely to him for succoure: that
all wroth between God and us may after this depart for ever, and that we may
use all kind of humanity and gentleness one to an other. And now judge here thy
self whether God is to be blamed of unrighteousness, since that such things are
declared unto men, and they regard it not, but despise their own salvation,
even as the mad Papists do, that think that this savior is not sufficient,
setting up other besides, to whom they may trust. But the sermon of the
Angel is not obscure as touching this only child to be our savior, that he
as the very ground of our salvation, may confort us, and replenishe our
hearts with joy. And this man only is he that tourneth both the Angel, and
also Gods eyes on him self. He puts not only this treasure in the mothers
bosom, but also he gives him unto us as our own, and all that belongs
unto him, both in heaven and in earth. He that hears this, and is not moved
therewith, is worthy to be cast into hell with lyghtninge. Esai. ^. Joan. 3.
Romans 8.
Wherefore let us give God thanks for his grace, and pray instantly unto him,
that he will printe this sermon of the Angel in our hearts, that we may
conceive true hope of this savior, and that by him we may overcome death and
the dyuel. The which to obtain, our Lord and savior Jesus CHRIST, grant us.
Amen.

The third sermon of the song of the Angels.
HItherto have we spoken as touching ye feast. And first of the history, how ye
son of God being made man, was borne into this wretched world miserably of
the virgyn Mary. We ought never to forgett this, least we be found unkind to
God for so great a benefit, that he has bestowed on us by this birth of his
son.

After the hystory, we entreated of the godly sermon of the Angels whereby this
nativity is declared unto shepherds, with a great brightness, which shyned round
about the shepherds. Which thing was vnwonte, yt God letting pass the great
potentates of Jerusalem, sends this his magnificent legacy of so many
thousand Angels, to ye miserable shepherds watching in ye night. And the
Angels gives him such honor, as Christ gives to us al. They submit them
selves to this lowely service, neither do they disdain at our vileness, in
showing unto us most miserable beggars this plain sermon, which is yet extant
and shall be of a surety in ye congregation unto ye worlds end. Who may not
marueill at these most humble and modeste spirits, in whom is no pride or
statelynes at al? The Angel is an humble spirit
Whose examples it might become them to follow, yt would be counted most holy
and mighty princes, and not to be puffed up for their virtue, wisdom, power
and such other things. For if these gifts had be^ given to y^ mainte^a^ce of
our pride; then might ye Angels had just cause to disdain these poor and
beggarly shepherds. But this is not ye manner of angels. The shepherds ca^ not
be so abject and vile persons, neither ye Angels so fortunat, noble, and
mighty, but yt they are greatly delighted in doing this message. So ought we to
do also. We ought to use our gifts without pride, to other men's profit and
salvation and to despise no man.

The example of Christ as touchi^g this, is more evident. He regards every
man so much, Christ's people are pore and nedy.
yt as he came poor and nedy into this world, so he takes unto him the pore
and nedy that seek help, and yt has need of him, and for this cause is he
called savior. The great estates of Jerusalem never thought that Christ
pertayned unto them. The bare shepherds have need of this, and therefore are
judged worthy to hear first this short sermon of ye angels as touching the
birth of our savior Christ. Wherein the Angel would us to understand ye a
savior is given us against syn death and the dyuel. For these are the words of
the sermon: Fear ye not, this day is borne for you a savior, which is Christ
ye Lord. These are no man's words, neither have they their beginning of man's
heart. For ye wisest that be, know nothing of this. But these words are put out
with a godly revelation. And we, thanks be to God, are chosen to this
fellowship. For it is al one, whether thou read or hear these words of
ye Angel, as though thou had heard them presently of ye Angel. For the
shepheardes saw not ye Angels, only they did see a light and brightness, they
heard the words of the Angels, which yet are rehearsed in sermons, and read in
books, if we had the grace to learn them, and put them in practyse.

Now if any man should compare this word of ye angel, with yt word of Moses,
which he heard of ye angels in mount Sinay, he shall find great difference. For
this it was there: Al things were applied there to terrify me^, almost both
body and life was in danger by thu^der, lyghtning and such other things. But
here do ye Angels preach to banishe fear, to make men cherfull, to put away
dread, and to trust for salvation, and to begin to look for better, and that
they might be of a good courage, specially for this childs sake, which is
called our savior, and is so named of the Angel, and entitled Christ ye
Lord. For whatsoever there is written, it is, that we should always hope and
wait for him, that is called Christ. For the law could do no thing against
syn and death, works, and every man's righteousness prevailed not. All the
salvation was set in Christ, that he might be trusted unto in trouble. This
does ye angels behold, and testify that it is he, in whom depends all hope
of salvation and remission of sins.

Then must we cast away al doctrines and religions, If Christ be the savior
th^n can not the saints and works be.
whereby salvation and eternal life is wrought without Christ. For if Christ be
he, the^ ca^ not Mary his mother, Peter, Paul, nor Austyne, Frances nor
Dominike, with his rules: whereas in the Papacy, their doctrine led men to
intercessions of saints and observations of Mounkerie. But how does this agree
with the angels sermon? Yea or how does it agree with the verse that is song in
the Church? Wherein we that glorify Christ condemn the Pope and all his
Iusticiaries of a most greuouse wickedness, whereas we sing after this sort: If
this child had not been borne for us, surely there could have been no way found
to save us? If all them that are without Christ are damned, what helps the
Mounkes rule or the Priests Mass to salvation? All things are subject to
damnation. There is no exception because the speech is universal. If they look
for salvation, they have it not, by Mounkerie, massinge, fast, and canonical
hours, but by Christ, which has yt name and is called a savior. By the
ministry of the word is the doctrine preserved.
This sermon of the Angels was left in ye Papacy, with that verse that is
used in the church unto this time, but no man understood it. For there lacked
true and faithful preachers, therefore where as no preaching, and where these
words are not set forth effectuously, There be these things both song and
read, but no man understands them. For no man ca^ deny this, but that all
the other things were in ye Papacy, Baptism, ye Lords supper, the text of
the Gospel, the prayer of the Lord, the articles of the faith, the ten
commandments. And even now ye Papists have all these things with us: saving
that they have changed the supper of the Lord, and has perverted his
testament. But al these things are domb with the^. Wherefore when they rehearse,
read, or otherwise use them, they neither understand ye words nor ye
ceremonies. Al ye fault is, yt they regarded not ye doctrine, yt by it men
might be certified of ye meaning of ye words, that are daily used in hearing,
reading and singing. But he ca^ not well stir up other, yt is a sleep himself.
The preacher must be earnest and vigila^t. For if he be cold, he will make his
audience weary be they never so atte^te: as we may se this true by ye Pope,
for he was dalying in all kind of Idleness and pastance. Wherefore he cold not
take heed to this sermon. And although he set it forth with versicles and lessons
as we do, yet they know nothing of it, nor understand it. And by this means
both these things are among the papists. They read in the Gospel yt a savior
is borne, they singe it in ye Church: yt if this child had not be^ borne, no
man could be saved, and yt this salvation is for all men. Yet never ye less
they call on ye virgin Mary, they fast, they worship saints, they go on
pilgrimage to their relikes, they hire and bye masses. What is this then to
make an other savior, and not to be content with ye testimony of this sermon,
but to set up Mary and other saints, yea and the beggarly works of men, in ye
rome of this savior and borne child.

Good preachers help much.
Wherefore we have no small cause to pray to God, for courageous and earnest
preachers, to enke^dle ye light of this doctrine, yt we not only hear and
read, but also understand: where such preachers be not, there is no other
hope, but yt we fall thereby in peril, as it is now. What good can a nutt do,
if thou can not come by the kernel? what profits a treasure, if we have no
power to bring it abroad? The sermon of ye Angel is evident enough: To you is
borne a savior. Yet it is not so pythye, yt an old papistical doctor ca^
perceive it. For if he did perceive it, he would not council men to mounkerie,
to pray unto saints, to purchase the merits of men, and to seek other
saviors. But where God sends a diligent and witty preacher, yt can stir up
ye vehemency of such words in ye mynds of ye hearers, he gives a great power
by this doctrine, to judge of all false doctrines and deceytfull spirits.
Neither is it possible, By the Angels doctrine are al false doctrines to be
judged.
although the dyuell tourneth him self in to all sorts, but yt he must needs be
perceived, and reproved with his crafts and deceytes. For not as much as the
spiritual wickedness in heavenly things can lie hyd from him. As Paul does
boste of this also 2. Corinthians. 2. that he knows the mind and the thought of
the dyuell. And here is need of no other wayse then to compare this doctrine
with this child, whether they do agree.

The Papacy extolle them selves hyghely for their gorgiouse ceremonies and
rites. But who may not perceive, yt al is idolatry, in that they believe to
merit salvation thereby: yt is, men put their trust in them to be saved
thereby, and that they be pleasant to God as his due service: where as yet it is
plainly declared in this place, as touching this child, that he must be our
savior. Wherefore the Pope and the Bishops may be worthily accused for their
false doctrine and wicked service. For all theirs agrees nothing with this
doctrine of the Angel. He that has this savior as a rule, is never ouerseen,
is never deceived, whatsoever he take upon him to Judge.

Wherefore this thing is most worthy to be prayed for, that the light of this
child may never go out of our sight, which opens unto us all the wicked
prankes of the dyuell, and of the world: that we may be sure against all
things, and soon confound with our judgments whatsoever is set up against
this child, for the doctrine of our salvation. This matter has not need of
far compassinge and many words, the meaning is plain, It is not so in the
sermon of the Angel. Wherefore do not thou contrary this counceller sent from
GOD, which teaches me on this sort, yt to me a savior is borne, whose name
is CHRIST, and not Peter, Paul, or the rule of Augustine, or of Frances, not
masses, pylgrimages, to saints, or pardons. The proper office of this savior
is, The office of Christ.
to minister unto me al things necessary for our salvation. Go not about to
take this doctrine from me, I will not suffer my eyes to be bleared with any
other. This sermon of the Angel is passing all comparison, at the which a
great multitude of Angels mustereth together, and sets up quiers of
Music. And the syngular order and process of their verse is as much to be
marueyled at, as the sermon it self. For they singe such a Genethliacon and
birth verse as was never heard of before in the world. And the words thereof
are these: Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will toward
men.

THIS hymn consysteth of three parts. The first part is not only so to be
taken, as though the Churches office were thereby appointed, what is expedient
for it to do: But it is also as a Prophecye what effect should hereof ensue, and
that GODS great glory should rise hereof. And the meaning of yt Angels sermon is
no other, but that it was far other wise before this child was borne, and
that there was blasphemy and Idolatry at that time in the world. For whatsoever
is without Christ, be it never so glorious and glystrynge, Note well.
yet can it be counted no other thing then blaspheming of God. There can be no
wais to worship and glorify God, but by this child. For in Christ only may the
true bounteousnes, mercy, and humanity of God be known, where as he spared not
his only begotten son, but sent him into the flesh for our sake. The
greatness of this benefit causes the herts to conceive true love trust and
hope toward God, and to give him largely thanks. This fruit song yt Angels to
be to come. And that now it takes his beginning, whereas god is truly glorified
on high, not by our works, which cannot reach so high into heaven, but by
herts which from the earth are raised and surmou^t upward to ye merciful God
and father, with thanks geuyng, and great confidence. Wherefore look where this
child is not truly known, there can not God be truly glorified. Without
Christ god ca^ not be known nor glorified.
As the example of the world, and specially of the people, declares that to
be true, when all things were full of idolatry, when they followed diverse
sects, and ordained so many kind of worshippinges, as there be groves or
hills in the world, as testify the Prophets of this thing.

Yea, and this was above all other, a most damnable idolatry, where as their
good intent was to God and to him they did sacrifice, fast, vex their bodies,
and spared not life it self: yet all was diuellyshe, and of their own
imaginations. In these things was gods glory bestowed. This is the shame and
blasphemy, where with God is dishonored throughout all the earth, where as Christ
is not known. God is diversely dishonored in the world.
Of this therefore does the angels rejoice in the behalf of all things, that
this blasphemy is now at an end. There is moreover an other dishonoryng of
God, which is less fine and more sensible then the former, when men worship
Mammon and such like. All things of the world are full of this idolatry.
All men both great and small, worship this gross imagerie, and in it put al
their trust in time of need. Wherefore on all parts God is dishonored and
blasphemed, both of them that make an Idol of their own righteousness, and
also of such as worship Mammon. But now the Angels sing, that it shall be other
wise at the appearyng of this light. Men shall put no longer trust in their
own righteousness, they shall not care for their parents, nor for those things
that other strive for. They shall only embrace this savior, and trust in him.
And this shall be the beginnynge of gods true glory: so shall he be truly
known, glorified, and worshypped. Such glory lost Adam in Paradise. For so
are all men's wits corrupted by nature, that they had rather have the glory
them selves: Original syn brought in ambition.
take for an example the Pope and bishops. They are very rich, yet can they
not be brought in mind to promote the word of GOD. And how can they but
greatly esteem it, seeing the basest persons that be, love to be glorified?
Seeing therefore that it is so in the lowest persons, that none would be
without glory, how much more must it so come to pass with them, that has
such high matters in hand, such holiness, righteousness, good works, civil
honesty, and behauioure? These will not well be content that GOD should have
his honor. They will not suffer their own honor to be dimynished thereby.

Such ambition besieged men, when the first of mankind in Paradise, were
brought of the devil to that point, that they would be like unto God, and we
can never live without it. Wherefore al men for yt gyfts of God, as science,
riches, imperie, and diverse virtues etc. seeks the^ selves glory: yea in very
trifles this vice cannot be escaped. But the angels mean, that through the
light of this child it shall come otherwise to pass, and that now Gods glory
shall be surrendered unto him again: and therefore they rejoice and sing, both
for Gods and man's behalf for the true difference of things. For all that shall
receive this child, shall confess their righteousness and holiness, knowledge,
power, and altogether to be nothing, and that this child is all. So is Gods
glory restored unto him: For that that he only is our wisdom, strength,
riches, and we do rejoice and boste only in him: for we know him so well,
that we put all our trust in him: as for Mammon and such other gifts, we
count them no otherwise, but as necessity requires, so we use them, and
receive poor men to use them with us also, turnyng all to the glory of God,
and the salvation of our neighbors. We transpose all the trust that other has
in riches into Jesus Christ, the son of God.

And this is the true glorifying of god, To glorifye God.
to render unto him his due honor and majesty. yt we may freely confess: All
ours are thine, we are not the authors thereof. Furthermore in that we escape
the tyranny of the devil, and are delivered from sin, all comes of Gods
power, and not of our own. Wherefore this glory is proprely thine, and not ours.
Such a confession does God require of us, as his most necessary ornament,
that all things be referred unto him, that we in no case challenge any part
thereof, and that we knowledge our selves to have received all from him, as well
the great as the small. And this is one part of this verse, wherein the angel
compriseth all things that are ours, but especially the spiritual gifts, as
are rightousnesse, holiness, wisdom, good works. And they command us not to
usurp them as ours, but to restore them to God, and to give unto him all the
glory thereof. This thing shall be done by this child, as the meaning of the
verse shows.

The world does change this verse.
The untowardness of the world is great, which does wholly change this verse to
a contrary sense. For so must it needs com to pass, for lack of the knowledge
of this child: All things in the world are full of pomp, all things tend to
renoume and glory. All village men, citezens, knights, lords, princes,
couete higher degrees: which is a token that they are not in Christ, and that
they know not him. Furthermore, this is their verse: Glory be in the depth, in
great riches, of power and friends. etc. The world can not be withdrawn from
his folly. But at the departing it shall perceive his madness, in that that it had
rather sing glory to Mammon, and the devil in hell, then to God on high.

The second part of this verse. In earth peace.
THIS is to be understood after ye manner of the first example, that they
wish and show forth such a success to come hereof amongst them that
know and receive this child, that all things shall be ioyfulle and
prosperous. For what is, where Christ is not? what other thing is the world
then hell? where all things are full of lies, deceites, gyles, frauds, There
is nothing in the world but sin.
subtilties, extortion, surfetyng, slaughter, theft, and robbery? And here
especially may thou know, that the devil is gouerner. And the very men
themselves speak no otherwise, but that this is the manner of men, that he that
would be safe from their craft and guyle, must ever be contrary to their
opinion. There is no faithfulness, no godlynes, there is no man safe one from
the other. There is as much peril to be feared at our friends hands, as at
our enemies: yea and oftentimes more. This is the kingdom of the world, wherein
the devil is grand capitayn. Christen men are peaceable
And as they that receive this child, according to the Angels song, give
glory to GOD: so in their verse they declare this that all such men shall be as
gods toward other men that is peaceable and ready to do good one to an other,
eschuyng contention and discord, that great concord peace and good will may
be amongst christians, where all the enticements of ambition and concupiscence
are void, and all things prosper with mutual love to help each other. And
hereof it will easyly follow, when due renoume is given to God, and he knowleged
as a Lord, of whom comes all that we have: Then will there be great
benevolence and mutual love between man and man. There shall be no hatred or
envy, no emulation, no railyng, but every man shall set by an other, and pray
that he may be helped with an other ma^s prayers as his brother. And this shall be
plentiful peace and great felicity. Peace what it signifies.
For the hebrewe word of peace is more large, and compriseth all kind of
felicity. Such kind of christian living is described with high humanity and
concord, that every man should gratify other, and beware diligently to
offend him. They that do not this, hear not the verse of the angels, but hear
the howlynge wolf, that sounds this in his ears, The dyuell changes this
verse.
thief, aduoutrer, murderer. etc. this is the devils song. But it must not be
so amongst christen men. The angels by their verse appoints them how to
live. They do teach very well what belongs to Gods service. First, that
glory be not plucked from heaven, that praise and renoume be given only to GOD.
Then, that this life be full of mutual amity and benevolence: this do the
Angels with all their endeavor studiously commend and set forth. But as
touching the lamentable success: they can not be ignorant, in that that a
great part can by no means be brought to this child. Wherefore they add the
third part in the verse.

The third part of this song And good will toward men.
By this they show, as though they would say: We would wyshe that there were
such success of this matter: but there will be many, that shall not regard
the Gospel, that shall not receive this son of God being borne man, but will
go about to persecute him. Therefore God is at hand with his, to comfort and
confirm them truly, that they might think this surely with them self: the
matter is certain as concerning my savior, the way of my salvation is perfectly
tried. Wherefore although I shall be handled cruelly for it, I will not suffer
my good opinion that I have as touching gods good will to be taken from me, I
will take it in good worth: yea and count it an honor to me, if I must suffer
any pain for this savior his sake. Such a mind do the angels wish to all
that believe, that they should be joyful in adversity, and learn to despise
all the ragynge of the devil, and to make him to hang up him self for
sorrow, that he can no more prevail.

The third part therefore of the verse is to make us to have cherefull minds
and bold against all trouble that may chance: That we may be always redye to
say this against the devil: Thou shall never defraude me of this joy by all
that thou can do, what is good will.
which I conceive by this child. (...) does signyfie a cheerful,
peaceable, and courageous heart, that cares not greatly how the world
goes, so that this answer may be given to the devil, and to the world: I
truly will not cast away my joy for thy sake, neither do I regard much thy
displeasure. Away from me, I have more pleasure and delight of Christ, then
thou can work me sorrow. Such a mind does the angels wyshe us in this
verse.

The dyuels song is clean contrary, wherein GOD is blasphemed, and cursed
where slaughter is committed, and all things so ordered, that all things are
defiled with care and sorrow, and most miserable calamytie. And to the
furtheraunce hereof, do the Sect masters bestow all their labor and
dylygence. They are the dyuelles mouth, Papystes.
they banne God in heaven, they set Princes at varyaunce and discord, they
think nothing of Amity and Peace, they feyne good will in syghte: but
priuilye they entende myschiefe by most subtle deuyses. This pleases me well,
says the devil. And it is this: Glory be to the dyuell in hell, and sedition
in earth, and amongst men a desperate mind, and full of all care, and whote
blastynge myserye. And many are found to be of such a mind, which has
store of all goods, were it not for this, that their minds are possessed with
vexation and diverse torments and grypinges: It helps them nothing although
they be in the myddle of all pleasure. This does the devil wish to al his, that
gods gifts may be unfruitful unto them

But the Angels song is contrary: They wyshe a bold and courageous heart,
that is as immovable as the Marpese rock, and that glories against all
storms of temptation and most bitter tribulation. This is the song of ye
angel yt is found in no other books. For it was not made amongst me^ in earth,
but sent down from heaven. Our God with his holy spirit help us, that we may
hold it fast, and fulfill it in deed, thorough Jesus Christ his son, and
our Lord. Amen.

The fourth Sermon as concerning the history of Mary, and the Shepheardes.
THus far in the history have we proceeded and taught, The sermon of
thangelles was not unfruitful.
how God sent his angels, eue^ that great Princes, to preach unto two or three
shepherds. The which were not only a few, but also were rude people, to sing
unto them the joyful verse, as touching the child Jesus: after the which now
follows this history.

And it came to pass, that when the angels departed from them into heaven,
that they said one to an other. etc. BY this does it appear, that the sermon
and song of the angels, was not unfruitful. For the shepherds set not so much
by their flock, but that they take their journey to the child, whom the Angel
called their Lord. And this is one fruit that spronge of the Angels sermon. An
other is, that the very shepheardes are made preachers, and show to other men,
all that they heard of this child. And the Evangelist says, all that herd
these things, yt were declared by the shepherds, meruailed. But this
admiration continued not long with the greater sort. For this thing does
testify, The world forgeteth Gods miracles.
that such men are belongyng unto the kingdom of God, that can not keep long
in mind neither Gods mercy nor wrath, neither his punyshemente, nor
benefits. So wicked is man's mind, that it quickly forgets the examples of
God showed unto us, and thereby provoke God always to show new examples, by
signs and plagues, that he may not utterly fall out of our remembrance. And
so is it to be taken, whereas the Evangelist says: All that heard merueiled, so
that this communication and talk was of no long continuance, but endured
only, a few months: how that a child was borne in Bethleem, for whom ye
Angels triumphed in the air, and for whom, wise men came from the east to
great and worship him. But after one or two years all this was clean out of
memory, and after that no man cared for it, and whereas after thyrtie years
CHRIST began to come abroad by teaching and doing miracles, no man called to
remembrance these first things.

And we verily are not much better than they. For a man may scarsly find one
amongst a thousand that remembers ye miseries, and in especial, We also to
forget the miseries in the Popedom.
that great calamity, under ye which the doctrine and worshipping of God lay
oppressed in the Popedom. In all places was there torme^ting of conscience,
and no where confort. The Jews were in like case. There was no measure nor end
of complaining and lamenting, when they were vexed in Egypt. They had scarsely
been four days in the desert after their deliverance, but they desired to
return into Egypt, being mindful of their old state. Such is the
unstableness and inconstancy of man's mind. It forgets almost in a moment
greuouse punishements, how should it long remember a benefyte? And in this
case can not the proverb seem untrue: Nihil cit^us senescit quam gratia.
Nothing is so sone out worn as the remembrance of a good turn. Although GOD
shows examples of his wrath by sendinge sycknes and such other euyls, yet
there comes no more profit thereby than if he should wash a tyle on a house.
When there is grefe and pain in the body, we are somewhat moved: but as soon as
that is at an end, all is quite forgotten. And this it is in all things. This
is the meaning of ye Evangelist, whereas he says: Men did marvel. But this
marvel had no long continuance. Yet there were some dilligent disciples to
observe this matter. Certain of great gravity were there, which set not
lightly by all these things, as the world does. For the Euangeliste says
moreover: Mary kept all these sayings, Mary forgets not.
and pondered them in her heart.

And this is now an example, how the word of GOD is truly to be heard. Gods
word.
She pondreth it in her heart, and has diligent meditation thereon. As they
do, that keep Gods word diligently, serchyng and puttyng it in practice. Such
are daily increased more and more in understanding, and surely confirmed. It
chances not so with the negligent, which receive with the one ear, and forget
with the other. Whatsoever is put in them, it fyndeth no more place of abiding,
then water does in a botomles barrel. But Mary does otherwise, she keeps and
po^dereth it in her heart. She perceaueth, that it belongs unto her:
wherefore she prynteth it in her mind, she pondereth it, and bestows great
study in so great a matter, how it could come to pass, that she should be
called the mother of this child, whom the Angels called Lord, and as
concerning whom they preach so magnifice^tly. And after this sort did these
thoughts cast so deep roots in her heart, that if all the world had
afterward spoken against this matter, yet she could not be persuaded to think
otherwise. But she was very certainly assured hereof, that her son was the
son of GOD, and the savior of the world. The word of God would have it self
so familiar unto us, The word of God is not lightly to be regarded.
that it might by custom be turned in to our nature. As it is in the Balad of
Ballades.8. Put me as a token of remembrance upon thy heart, and as a bracelet
on thy arm. Here it requires a sign or mark, not only that it may flow
above in the heart, as foam does in the water, or spettle in the tongue, which
is cast out, but that all things might be surely printed in the heart: that
it might be so surely graued therein, that no man might abolishe it, no other
wise than if it were given by birth and nature, which can be extinguished by
no power. Such was the heart of Mary, which kept these words as sure as
though they were graued therein. And all that does receive the word on this
wise, has the true mark of CHRIST, the true cautery and sign. They will not
suffer the word to be wreste out of the hands of their heart. Whatsoever
sectaries or scysmatykes rise against it, ye or the dyuell him self, as they
have once believed and known of this child, so they keep it constantly.

Great diligence is to be given to the learning of Gods word.
But we must mark this also. If we will and desire that Gods word should enter
after this manner in to our hearts, we must also take more head. Let us learn
of this little example. How oftentimes one thing is taught and repeted to
childern until they bear it away? And think we yt such great matters be
gotten with so little care? By and by as soon as the sermon is done, we go unto
other busynes, we care not for that that we heard, we use deaffull
ouerthwartnes in all things. We ought first to seek the kingdom of God, and to
have diligent study thereon. But we think that that may be done last, Math. 6.
we do all our own busynes first, as concerning our wordly wealth and
pleasure. etc. If this were not, we would set by Gods word as much as we do
our business. But men can not be persuaded so to do. Wherefore it is no
marueill, if there be such great infirmity, yt we quickly forgett altogether,
as it appears in temtation. Yet Christian men know their duetye. They count
nothing better or more precious then GODS word. Wherefore their minds dwell
only in it. And although they have much wordly business to do, yet their mind
inclines to this, wherein lies matters of greater weight. And this far have
we spoken of the example of Mary, which the Evangelist thought worthy to be
rehearsed, because it is of no small commodity and profit. It follows: The
shepherds returned glorifying and praising God, in all things which they had
heard and seen, as it was said unto them. He that will serve God, must not
change his vocation as Mounkes do.


AFTER that the shepherds hade spread abroad the fame as touching this child
IESV: so that it could now be unknown to no man in all the town of Bethleem,
they return to their flocks, they glorify and praise GOD. For the Angels
gave them this commandment, in their verse. This doctrine therefore beside all
other, is to be taken as most worthy to be remembered, that the shepheardes
after they had gotten the great light and knowledge of Christ, they go not to
the desert, they take not up their lodgyng in a monastery or abbey, after the
manner of Mounkes and Nonnes. But they see to their vocation, and bestow them
selves to serve and help their neighbor. For they that leave this kind of
lyuinge in this body, and take on them to live after an other sort, be never
made such by faith: As the Mounkes were of this opinion, that they could not be
saved, except in the end, they showed them selves to be unlike other men.

For except they wore other apparel, and did eat after an other sort, and
also watch. etc. they thought the^ selves also to be profane and vnreligious
as other. Wherefore they inverted out an unused trade of living peculiar to them
selves, for their apparel, meat, time, and place. This did they count
Christianity, naming it religion. And in deed it was religion, but yet of ye
devil. For he also has his religious. But Christ came not, to change
external things, Christ comes not to change external things.
and to subvert his creatures and make new. Wherefore the body may be appareled,
fed, and constrained to labor as need and necessity requires. For the
creature is to be used by Gods ordinance without any changing. He came not to
change any thing thereof. It is permitted to man's free will to change
apparel and meat, when the matter require it. And as for this change, it may
be done in beasts also. This change is a thing of no great estimation,
neither was it is necessary for CHRIST to set it forth. How much more is it
against reason, that such mutation and change should be esteemed for Gods
service and for a religious observation?

But herein consists the true mutation, for the which came Christ, Christ
changes the heart
that men should be changed inwardly in their hearts. Before this openinge of
the Gospel at our time, I thought that God had no regard of me, and that the
governance of my salvation consisted in my self. I knew nothing hereof, how
sin or death ought to be ordered. And therefore many fell unto Mounkerie. But
there is not so great virtue in a cowle, apparel, eating and fast. etc. death
is not slain herby, syn is not put aside by this. For both they remain under
a cowle as well, as under other garments. But this thing is here gone about,
that the heart it self may purchase a new light, and a new token of remembrance
as it was said before, that it may be surely persuaded, that GOD has respect
unto it, and regards it. For he sent his son into the flesh, that I by him
might overcome death, and obtayn everlasting life. This is the true change. For
before my heart knew not, but now it knows. And this change is now brought
by CHRIST, that the heart and mind may be renewed, and that an other
understanding, will, and affection might rise therein. For where as before there
was great love of money and riches, now after that Christ is known, not these
things only, but also body and life, and all other things, are rather to be put
in peril, than that Christ should be forsaken and his word. Before thou
would not bye Christ's favor for an half penny, now there is nothing so high
of price, that thou would set more by than Christ. Before thou thoughtest
that thy salvation consisted in a friars wede, now thou hate it worse than a
mad dog or an adder. Before we counted it a great sin, if we hade eaten
flesh on frydaye, now do we abhor and execrate their wickedness, which
made it deadly sin to do it. This is an inward change which belongs to
the heart, whereas is an other will and affection of the heart than was before,
and yet it forsakes not his vocation, but keeps his old kind of life, as the
example of the shepheardes teaches us to do.

At the first the shepherds never thought that a savior was borne. The
example of the shepherds.
But after that they knew it by the Angels, they make haste to the town, and
seek the child. And when they had seen him, and declared the praise that was
given of him, and rendered thanks for his great benefit, they return to
their heardes, and change no part of their apparel. They remain shepheardes
as they were before, they keep their accustomed kind of life. And this is a
very Christian doctrine and life. The change of creatures in the last day.
For Christ came not to change these creatures, until the last day. When the
soul shall be perfect and renewed, (which thing is begone in this life)
then shall the body be changed, and all man's vnperfections taken away. We
shall go up and down in the air like Angels, and be as bright as the star.
And there, because our body shall be spiritual, we shall need no help to our
natural necessity. Then shall the external things be channged. Before that
come to pass, nothing is to be innouate of our customably life. But all Gods
ordinances are to be observed, and virtue is to be exercised in them. For they
are no hinderance to Christ's religion. Neither does CHRIST regard of what
condition and state thou art of. For in him is neither man nor woman, Lord nor
servant, Galat. 3.
neither superior, neither inferior, neither circuncision neither
vncircuncision, but a new creature. And when that is gotten, as touching other
things that thou have, he changes nothing. But commands the in that kind of
life to show obedience to God, and to care diligently for it.

Wherefore there are no more things set forth in the hystory of the shepherds,
than that they praised and glorified GOD. They cast no new addition to Gods
religion, to institute after that new ceremonies in solitary places, and to
live a strange life contrary to the common example, worshipping God with
contemplations. For this is not Gods service nor true religion, but it is as
much as to despise obedience due to God, and to delight them selves in their
own inventions and fantasies. Whereas this is the true worshipping of God, to
execute diligently that kind of living as God gave them, to be content with
thy state, and to desire no more. Think for a suertie that it is thy duty to
beautify and order that person that is given to the of God and nature, that
every man in his degree may know God and glorify him. This service is pleasant
and acceptable to God if it be done. God requires not a garment of hear,
neither fasting, neither a coule: But that thou should obey his word, and
glorify his son. He is pleased with this service, and with no other.

The Prophets describe the great wrath of God, The prophets do alwais
require the inward change
when they rebuke the hypocrites on this wise: Why offer ye so many sacrifices
unto me? take to your selves your burnt offringes, with your offered beasts,
If I hunger I will not tell you. The world is mine: and the plenty thereof. I
gave ye no commandment as touching burnt offerings. etc. But this did I
co^mande ye, Hear my voice, glorify my name, and give thanks. I gave beasts
unto you, to eat thereof, but you refer them to my worshyppyng and service,
as though I should receive them at your hands. By the which and such like,
the Prophets declare, that it was also at that time their duty to entreat
men of the change and mutation of their heart and inward sense. This does God
require especially by his word. And as for the residue, it causes no change or
mutation in our kinds and vocations of life. Look what soever any man has to
do after his inward renouation, let him show his odedience with diligence
therein.

And this truly is the ecclesiastical doctrine in the example of the
shepheardes, that they returned with thankfulness and joy. They do that that
belonged unto shepeheardes as they did before, only this joined thereunto, that
they praise and glorify God. ^
There is an evident example of this in Vitis Patrum, of a certain man, which
seemed to him self very holy: And when he would be more certain hereof, what
place and degree he should have in heaven, he was bound to a mynstrell, to
learn by his example what should be his degree. He demanded therefore of him,
by what things he could do his duty: The mynstrel answered, by no special
thing, but in that he bestowed his work and labor on the husbandme^ when they
dance: and that where as his companions would at a certain time have
rauyshed a maiden, he let them, and defended the maid against wrong. Not
long after he would know the second time also the same thing. And he was
commanded to go to two married women. Neither did they give him any other answer
when they were demanded of their duty, then the mynstrell did before: but
that she did use no other holy exercise in her life, than in seeing to her
family and children, and to cause them to do the best they can with all
diligence. And that ever she endeavored to have this commodity, to refrayn
from braulyng and chiding. He learned so much by these two examples, that he
confessed openly to be no kind of living so vile, that is to be despised,
and that a man can no where lack occasion to do the works of charity and
godlynes, and that GOD does allow obedience in all kind of living.
Peradventure this was not done in deed: yet was it necessary, that such a
fame should be spread with wisdom, that the world might avoid monkerye. For
Christianity and pleasyng of God, consysteth not in external observations,
but in the inward heart, where as thou may this think surely, that Jesus
is thy Savior, and have thy trust in him, and for this be myndful and kind,
and praise him. And after that, God will not count the common practices of this
life for vnpure things.

True godlynes consists not in outewarde observations.
Wherefore we must stick surely by this, and beware that Christen righteousness be
not separated from the word, and that it be not coupled with appointed
vestures, which are oftentimes for their color worthy to be iested at. That
is surely a very fond thing, and contrary to the propre and true sentence of
Christian godliness, which the heart requires. Let there be outwardly no
change, but as God has called every man, and as it is used in men's honest
conversation and custom. And this trade ought to endure to the end of the
life, and to the life to come, when the body also shall be rydde and strypped
clean from all his fylthynes and impedimentes. The which thing god grant us,
thorough the healpe of our Lord Jesus CHRIST. Amen.

The sunday before New years day. The Gospel, Luke. ii.
ANd his father and mother meruailed at those things which were spoken of him.
And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother: Behold this child is
appointed to be the fall and risyng again of many in Israel, and for a sign
which is spoken against. And moreover, the sword shall pearce thy soul, that
the thoughts of many hearts may be opened.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe chiefest part of this Gospel is, that Simeon does prophecy of Christ and
his kingdom, how first the Jews and the people of Israel should receive it,
and then the Gentiles: That is, that it shall be to the ruin and fall of a great
part, as we declared upon the third sunday of Aduent. But nevertheless in the
mean season herby should come resurrection and abundance of Salvation to many.
Besides this, there be diverse other lessons, which we purpose to run lightly
over, as it were by the way. This history befell, when the child JESUS was a
month and a half old, and brought into the temple after the manner of the
Jews and redeemed of the Lord by an offering, as the first begotten were wont to
be: As it is wont to be taught in the day when Christ is offered in the temple.
Then came Simeon into the temple by the holy ghost, and began to preach of this
child, that he should become a salvation and light, not only to the Jews in
one place but to all the Gentiles in the whole world. The Evangelist says,
that Simeon caused the father and mother to marvel greatly at his Sermon
that he made as touching the child. He called Joseph Christ's father, speaking
after the common sort of other men. But the Evangelist was circumspect and
wary enough be fore: where as he wrote, testifying that Christ was conceived by
the holy ghost, and born of the virgin Mary. Wherefore that is to be noted, Luke
calls Joseph the father of Christ
that no man take hereof an occasion of error, in that Luke in this place,
and the scripture in an other place does use the very same words as the other
does, Math. 1.
in declaring the matter. For this was the privy working of God: That the
virgin Mary wared great with child? which thing it was Joseph's duty to
believe, after that the Angel opened it unto him in his sleep. And in that that
ye old man Simeon comes, whose eyes were dim for age, and preached so
magnificentely of this child: doubtless there were many that judged, that his
words came not of a right mind, and that it was no marvel, that an old
dotysh man spoke so dotyshly. But the testimony of the Euangeliste shows the
contrary. Such was his sermon (says he) that the father and mother were
taken with great meruail. For as touching this matter, they were not so well
instructed of the angels as they are in this place of Simeon, that is, that he
should be a light to the Gentiles. Wherefore there can be no place for that
exposition here, which shows that this meruailynge signifies doubt, but it
is more rather a token of a great faith. For this is the disposition of
faith: the greater it is, This meruailyng ryseth of faith.
the more admiration and marvel it causes, and the more incredible joy it
brings. But where as is no faith, all things are cold, without affection,
without all motions. And yt we may take this for an example: we have heard now
a few days of Christ's nativity and birth, that this child is made our
flesh and blood, that he might be our savior, to deliver us from sin,
death, and the kingdom of the devil, And if thou haste true belief: this
faith can not be without admiration. Neither can the eye be satisfied by
seeing, neither the heart by thinking of this child. Wherefore, this is a
praise both of the fathers and mothers faith. The mother was excedyng glad,
that this child was put forth as a light to lyghten the Gentiles, in
comparison of whom, all other kings and princes should be but very darkness
and night, which has no store of counsel or healpe for other men, for as much
as they are oppressed and bound them selves with sin and death.

If we were not of such a corrupt nature, we ought not to be void of
meruailyng^.
we should not be void of marvel, when we hear these tydinges, but our
minds would be exalted and puffed up with a proud joyfulness, and would
boaste on this sort: I am a christian, and baptized, I doubt not but that I
have the maistrie over sin and death, thorough Christ, and that Heaven, and
all creatures shall turn to the best for my salvation. How greatly does a
great gift of some great manne delyghte a poor man? But what is that in
comparison of this? If the Turks dominion, which is now the greatest upon
the earth, were mine, yet were that in no point to be compared with this, that
I have a portion in the inheritance of Christ, to live with him for ever. But
how many are there, that are truly delyted herewith? All we have learned, and
know this: but we believe it not, as it is easy to prove. For we marvel
not thereat. Wherefore this faith must needs be very cold, and scarcely half
alive. For they that believe truly, are not only glad, but also are proud with
gladness. And let no man marvel at this, that pride in Christians is
commendable. It becomes a christen man to be proud.
For this is their excellent manfulnes, that they have high minds against the
dyuell and all adversity. For they know, that through Christ, they are
lords over them all. Thou must ever have respect to that little people, and
chose their fellowship, that never falls, but embraces this king, and ryseth
to salvation.

How offense is had in Christ.
Wherefore be not offended, if many peryshe by heaps. For this is the very
course of all things, according to the prophecy of Simeon. The Pope banneth
and curses our doctrine after such an horrible sort, as never was heard of,
and goes about with all his might to destroy it. Not because he fears to be
seduced thereby. For he understands very well, that it is the truth, but it
is of very malice and stubbornness, wherewith he is moved against us. There
be other that are offended, even they that take it heauylye, and are grieved,
when they hear that this child is a Savior. For what (say they) should this
be nothing that I do? Should all they be damned, that hitherto have followed
this kind of doctrine and religion, as I have? This is a principal offense,
of the which Simeon speaks in this place. Therefore when soever thou see
these things, call this to remembrance forth with, that they are not done
after Gods commandment. For the Child. whom Mary has brought forth, is
an offense, and a stumblyng block at the which, the wise of the world, and
the holy, shall stumble, and fall headlonge. Wherefore, where so ever he is
not received, we must pass by with closed eyes, and deaf ears: neither must
we change any thing of our purposed order.

The Jews in this matter gives us an euidente example: The offense to ye
Jews.
They were greatly offended when Christ disputed with them, and spoke unto
them on this wise Ye shall dye in your sins. John. 8.
They judged this to be the saying of a fool. For how should this people be
ignorant of the truth and will of GOD, that has Moses, and the Prophets?
Should this nothing prevail, nor healpe us to salvation? Are we condemned
to such myserie, that a carpenters son shall teach us the way of salvation?
These men stumbled, and brake their necks, and were thrown down headlong into
destruction.

After like manner, do our Monks call our doctrine dyuellyshe and
heretical. The offense to Monks.
They show forth their prayers, and fastes, they crake of a great burdein.
What (say they) should this be nothing? should God be against all this? Then let
us do evil, let us surfeit, and be whooremongers, that by these things we
may make our self allowable to GOD, and get salvation, seeing good works
prevail nothing to this. Their offense also is dampnable, and stumblyng, to
their confusyon, that they can never arise.

Wherefore if thou be delyghted trewely with the state of Christianity, so
behave thy self, that thy Prince CHRIT, thou thy self, thy doctrine, and all
thy trade of living may not please men. For here thou hear without any
long circumstaunces, that Christ is in the world as a stumblyng block cast
in the way, at the which, all the myghtie and holy men shall stumble.
Wherefore if thou do not refuse to be called an heretic, a fool, and a
seducer, join thy self with this king. Christen men are offense to other.
If thou myslyke this state, have nothing to do with this king. For it is an
vnmutable law of this king, and of his kingdom, that according to the
Prophet, both the master and his disciples, the lord and his servants,
which the lord him self have given, be for a sign and wonder, for a
stumbling stone and rock to fall at. But after this terrible Image of the
grievous wrath of God, there is put forth an other example full of humanity
and sweet comfort, which is not to be passed by. For many (says he) he is put
for to rise by. Now therefore turn thy self unto them that receive this king,
and that doubt not for his sake to put their life and that they have in
ieopardie. Christ is put forth to be a risyng.
These do rise up by CHRIST. For they know this, that in them selves they
have no hope of salvation. They that are fallen down on this wise, find help
to rise by in this sign. Other ware fierce against those things, they
blaspheme, they curse, with great impudency and pride.

Take diligent head, that this offense move the not: But as a man would say,
turn away thy eyes, for as much as it can be no otherwise with this child.
Seek for to delyght thy eyes in beholding this poor and nedye people, which
find in this child a way to rise by. Whatsoever is in combrance or heavy
laden, braste, or disconforted in heart: finally whatsoever is ready to perish,
all that is appointed to this king. All things condemned are restored by him,
folishe things learn to be wise, and things that are blamable, are justified
and sanctified by him. Stycke sure to this comfort, and never fall thou from
this man. In the Popedom say they, all things were quiet, there was no
trouble, neither by heresies, neither by dissension. But by and by at the
springing of this doctrine sprung up also all trouble, so that very little good
or nothing at al is come thereby. To such reprouers such an answer may
thou give: That the Gospel of CHRIST shall never be preached earnestly, but
with the fall and overthrow of many, which afterward do become the begynners
of great turmoylings. But yet never the less, we must not leave this
commodity unspoken of, in that certain do embrace, and recover their fall.
And these be consciences that be in myserie and affliction, which in their
fear receive confort by ye Gospel. This thing will not our adversaries
consider, they behold only the fall and offense, which could by no means be
escaped, not for the fault of the doctryn, which is good, sincere and perfect,
but by the fault of men, which will not apply the^ selves to this doctryn,
neither obey it. But here consider the matter uprightly: whether it were not
much better, that the Papists should be offended by our example, than that
the dyuell should rule in all places without offense in quiet possession by
Idolatry and false doctrine, and the miserable men driven to perdition by whole
flocks? For who had not rather suffer a short punishment for a time, than an
endless punisheme^t? And this punisheme^t was everlasting, and unrecoverable,
in that that in the Popedom was corrupt doctrine, without any knowledge of
God, without any true service. We have proved this and tried in many general
Councels, how this doctrine might be applied to all men, and offend no man. But
the matter is evident, that if thou take away this offense, Christ can not
remain. For at the sight of this man, forthwith rises trouble, ruin, and
falling. And unto us also, at the last is Christ come by his Gospel, and that
whilst we do think little thereon, even as he came also to the Jews. Which
thing we ought to repute for a great renoume, and to give great thanks
therefore, for that that we are thought worthy of so unspeakable grace and
goodness of God. The Pope and the Bishops be angry, because God called not them
first to Council in this matter, that the reformation of the Church might be
set upon by their assent. And because God used not this order in so doing,
there rises offense every where. Christ after his manner preaches freely: the
Pope and the Bishops will not suffer that. Hereof comes this trouble. And the
prophecy of Simeon endures for ever, in that this child is put forth to the
falling of many in Israel, yea rather in all the world. Wherefore it must
needs be, that offenses come. Math. 18. 1. Cor. 11.
As Christ says in an other place: There must be sects and heresies. The
doctrine is not without persecution. Yet remains Christ in ye midst of
their furies and madness, and some men rise in him, and be saved: Other do fall
and perish, that would feign have Christ to be after an other sort, than he is
sent of God the Father, that he should be a block to help, that he should
lift up and make men rise. And whereas the madness of many is such, that they
will not crepe humbly to this block, but strive against him with a styffe
neck, and so by their own desire put them self in peril of falling: Here is
no fault in Christ but in these mad men, which thorough their pride make
Christ, which is put forth for a sign to rise by, a sign of falling and ruin.

Wherefore the Gospel is falsely slaundered to be a troblesome and a seditious
doctrine, The Gospel is not ye cause of trouble but men's stubbournes.
as the Pope and Bishops say it is, as though no evil rose by them in the
common wealth, and as though they did not stir up all kind of myserie and
plagues by their sins and Idolatries. If they would give place to this
doctrine, and cast no stop against it, there should be no dissension nor any
other evil. But where as they set them selfs stubburnely against it, and
think not them self mete to give place, what marueil is it, if God does not
always after their desyers? Ye the Jews also were offended in Christ. There was
no fault in Christ, which would rather have them saved, and came for the same
purpose, that men should believe in him, and obtayn salvation by him. But where
as they will not, there is no fault in Christ. For it were mete that they
should live after the manner of CHRIST which is their Lord, and not Christ
after theirs. And the Gospel is for no other cause. And we ought to have
respect thereto. But he that is loath to do so, can blame nothing but his own
stubburnnes and damnable wickedness, and not the Gospel, which is without
fault. And this is the first part of this prophecye.

But where as Simeon turns his speech to the mother, with these words: And
the sword shall perce through thy heart, that the thoughts of many hearts may
be open. That seems little to agree with the words of the Evangelist, where he
said: Simeon blessed her. For what blessing or wishing of any good thing can
there be, whereas he prophecieth so to come to pass, that her heart shall be
perced with a sword? This is not only written for Christ or Mary's sake, but
for our learning is it written, that have need of it, that we may fashion our
judgment thereby. For what man is there, The Gospel opens the hearts.
not only I but of the chief Apostles, that would have suspected, that the
malice of the world would have been so great, except the Gospel had given us a
revelation hereof before. For there were many good men before this revelation,
which lived very soberly and godly. There were many wise, for whose honesty a
man might well pronounce with an oath. And this is no little renoume of the
world, without the Gospel, to have such science, wisdom, and honesty. etc.
But it is also a greater thing in religion, that the world has invented and
ordained these religiouse orders. The Popedom is an example. For what man, when
he beholds it, will not conceive a great opinion of godlynes? This is it in
the world, if the Gospel be not, there shyneth wise men, honest, sober, and
upright men. And all this is by the reason of civil virtues, and partly by
iugling ceremonies: that except the goodness of God helped, all should be cast
headlong into destruction, with this pretense, that they were just, holy,
wise, and pure from sin. But when the Gospel is opened, and the child Jesus
preached, The Gospel plucketh of the visards of the world, and opens the
hearts.
there is it almost proved to ye senses, and declared with pictures, yt these
saynctes are most sinners, and these wise, most foles, and these sober men,
most cruel tyrants. Neither has the Gospel any enemies more spiteful,
than these men, that are great, wise, prudent, upright in living, good and
holy. And the more they excel with these virtues, so much the more they behave
them selves enuiously against the Gospel, as we prove by experience. The more
religion the Mounkes show in praying, fasting, and other chastisings, the more
furiously do they behave them selves against the Gospel. And this it is, that
Simeon speaks of, in this place. What a great show (says he) makes the
world in both administrations, as well civil as religiouse? They live
honestly and holyly with great sparing and defrauding them self of their
pleasure, and they may soon be taken for Angels, and the sons of God, for
their great wisdom and holiness. Who could believe that there might lie hyd such
corruption under such a fayer show? And here is no art so full of knowledge,
out of the which, this might be judged and perceived, except this only text,
whereas he says, that the Gospel shall utter this poison.

Wherefore when this is opened, it moves to wrath these so great and so holy
men, so that they must needs betray them selfs, and show before all men, that
all that they do, is but hypocrisy. The Gospel opens the hearts.
For there are other examples beside this, cast against this: There are very
wise Princes, that are earnestly moved with the care of saving their subjects:
they are not couetouse, no dronkards, no gluttons: they be diligent in doing
the business of their realm, to defend men from wrong, they are chaste
husbands: and to be short, if a king should be prayed for, and wished, they
would be thought most mete for their virtues, prudence, goodness, holiness. etc.
But will thou know how the matter goes? For scarsly at the publyshing of the
Gospel may a man perceive this incredible hypocrisy, and this blood thyrstye
heart, which gapeth for the shedding of innocents blood, which myngleth all
things with great deceites, and lets pass no kind of subtiltyes, to
oppress the Gospel, and to ryd it out of the way, so that yet by this
occasion, that is made open, which before no man would believe, that so great
sins should lie hyd under such an holy apperance. It chances by the launcing
or cutting of no thing, that this pestilent poison, gusheth out, but only by
the Gospel. My reason is this: The holiest hates the Gospel most.
that if the Gospel should with man's consent be taught, that they should be
the first alowers thereof, that do of set purpose profess religion. But who so
ever thou art, answer me this: Is not the Pope, the Bishops, the Priests, the
Mounkes, the universities with their Doctors, the most spiteful enemies of it
that be? Which thing Simeon means here, and says to Mary: This thy child
shall be author of so great a tumult, and shall bewray them, that might sone
have lain hyd from al men, ye that would scarsly know them selves, he shall open
their hearts, that they that were counted for most holy, may be known to be
blaspheme^s, full of gyle, deceit, perjury, hate, envy, and all malice. Such
fylthynes shall be opened in them by him, which never the less for their
diverse virtues, wisdom, innocence, vprightnes, and holiness might be counted
worthy to rule all the world, ye and heaven also. This opening of the heart
is administered by this child.

At the first, when the Gospel came abroad, I never thought that the world
would be so mad. I Judged all men after my self, whereas I thought this, that
all men would triumph for joy, that they are delivered earnestly. From the
tyranny of the Pope, and by Christ made partakers of all that good thing, the
which before they studied with great cost and pain to purchase, and yet all
in vain. And I thought that these things would specially please the scoles and
Bishops, if it would please any. But how are we handled? For this doctrine are
we entreated without all mercy. And no man hate us more than the religiouse
men. We must accustom our selves to suffer this iniquity, and must not cast
of the Gospel, for this wickedness of the world: But set forth the doctrine
thereof the more earnestly. For it is such that bewrays the dyuell and his
members, how great an enemy of God is the world with all his gifts and
virtues. For I could never know by my self, that so great wickedness and
contempt was in man's heart. But the Gospel teaches us, to know well what is
the Pope, the Bishops, the Princes, the Nobles, the Citizens, the Rustykes:
even that they be vexed as dyuels, for as much as they do not only refuse this
wholesome doctrine, but persecute it also with all spite, and despise it very
prowdlie. This opening pertayneth to Judgment.
I perceived not this before that I learned the Gospel but thought that the
holy Ghost had reigned in their doing. And this is the pith of this saying,
whereas Simeon says, that Christ shall open the thoughts of men's hearts.
But why does he open them? Truly for our instruction and comfort. To
instruct us after this sort, that we be not offended and troubled, when the
folishenes of such men betrayeth it self. For this matter can not be without
admiration, when these goodly and wise princes, and other good me^ proceed to
such madness, that they can not suffer the word of God, but do curse it most
wickedlye. For this thing the Gospel gives succoure, and opens this
mystery. Before time the thoughts of the hearts were secret, but now comes
he forth that both is in deed, and also called the opener of ye hearts. He
does so open the secrets, that it may appear, what men's thoughts be,
which neither they them selves, neither any other knew before, and yet were
they to be opened: for they were no better before than now, but they were over
covered with a color, that they could not be seen, and the thoughts of the
hearts lay hyd. But now after that the Gospel is set forth, it appears as
plain as the son, what was hyd before, even a very pit of al myschefe. And
there is no state of man, wherein it goes not after this sort, ye as well
amongst the hye Lords, as the low loordaynes. And look how much the better and
holyer they be in both parts: so much the more they hate the Gospel, and are
full of poison and blaspheming of God. And that Momus thought to be omitted in
the perfect making of man, that is accomplished by the Gospel, even an open
place to se into the heart and breast, that ye priuities of the hearts may be
seen, and that nothing, according to the saying of Simeon may be hyd.

The opening pertayneth to confort.
Seco^darily, this opening of the hearts is for our confort, seeing the world
can be brought by no means to allow Gods word, and yet it shows outwardly a
great pretense of holiness, that we should not fear it, but think this surely:
that whatsoever apperance of righteousness there be, yet for as much as it is
found guilty in this vice, The greatest vice is to prese^te the word of God,
and to despise it.
even that it can not abide Gods word, but persecute it, that it is condemned
with the dyuell, and with all that thereto belongs, and that all his holiness
and works are but counterfaited. For if things be considered by their proper
nature, The greateste vice is to persecute the word of god and to despise let.
it is no evil thing, to be endued with wisdom, rightousnes and sobernes.
But this is evil when excellent virtues be used for clokyng of most grievous
sins, that is, of cursing God and persecutynge his word. Uirginitie is much
craked of, as it is in deed a rare and great gift. But what commendation
would thou leave for that Uirgin, that would commit murder. The commendation
of this gift should not seem so great, seeing it is joined wit such a great
crime, that it might be thought worthy of life.

Likewise also goes the matter in this case, it is according to the saying
of Simeon speaking this unto Marye. Thy son shall conuicte the world of
great crimes, of theft, of man slaughter, of murdering of fathers, and that
even them that are now almost counted for gods. He shall so open them and
their hearts, that they shall declare euidentlye themselves to be the extreme
enemies of god. This hypocrisy is now to be suffered wherein the outward
apperaunce hydeth great offenses, but this will not continewe long. Let
CHRIST only come abroad with his gospel, and it shall be evident, that all the
world is full of leude persons, of the enemies of God, of thieves, and robbers.
They can not patiently suffer themselves this to be named: yet before GOD they
can not purge themselves of these crimes. For although the outward living be
upright, yet is there this fault, that there is so great ungodliness in them,
that they can not suffer gods word, which can make good that this name is
most agreeable to men. For the tongue and hands are with a little thing, and by
a small occasion driven to slaughter, whereas the heart before is full of
slaughter. This vice is opened by the Gospel, which otherwise no man could
know, and no man also believe.

Wherefore Simeon adds now furthermore in his spech to Mary: A sword (says
he) shall perse thy soul. For she was feign to behold and feel this
outragiousnes of the world, and not only she, but all the universal church.
Now it is impossible for a man to see all this without sorrow and great
trouble of mind. As Peter says by Loath. That he dwelled amongst them being
a righteous man both in seeing and hearing, 2. Pet. 2.
and from day to day vexed his righteous soul with their unrighteous works.
This is then the sword, that perseth the heart, (that is to say) the heart
is tormented for that the wickedness of the world is so great, Note.
and so full of dissimulation, and works in the mean time all kind of
injuries and infamies against God and his saints.

And this is one of the crosses of Christian men, even the sorrow of the heart,
which passes all other things that grieve them, and causes them being so
vexed to grove for pain. Which when they have, doubtless the pains of the
wicked tarrieth not long after. And this is spoken as touching ye Prophecy of
Simeon. With this prophecy of Simeon, is joined the hystory of Anne the
Prophetess, which testifies and preaches also herself through the holy
ghost, of christ. Of her this reports the Euangeliste: How she served God
day and night in prayer and fasting. This do our adversaries the Papists
cast in our teth, as thought it made for them. Fast and prayer are the
service of god.
Whereas yet we never denied that God must be served with fasting and prayer.
For seeing that fasting (that is) temperance in eating and dr^^kynge, and
prayers also are commanded of God, we also count them to be a portion of gods
service. For obedience is commanded. But the Papists are not content with
this, but they cast an addition thereto, But remission of syn comes not thereby.
requiringe that this obedience should belong to the obtayninge of remission
of sins, and everlasting life. But we deny that precisely, and answer with
the angel, that that is don only by the child Jesus, which is called Jesus and a
Savior, that he may save his people from their sins. But here let us make
an end, and call to god for his grace, that he will be merciful unto us, and
defend us against al offenses, and give us so much power, that we may rise
in Christ, and never stumble with offense at his doctrine, the which thing
Christ our Lord vouchsalf to grant us. Amen.

The Circumcision of Christ and of the Jews. The first sermon. Galat. iiii.
WHen the time was full come, God sent his son made of a woman, and made bond
unto the law, to redeem them which were bond unto the law, that we (through
election) might receive the inheritance that belongethe unto the natural
sons. Because ye are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into
our hearts, cryeng Abba, dear Father. Wherefore now, thou art not a
servant, but a son. If thou be a son, thou art also an heyer of God,
through Christ.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis day are they wont to preach of two matters. First of Circumcision, Then
of the name Jesus. The which thing the Evangelist does especially notify, for
that it was prophesied of, before that the child was conceived in his mothers
womb. Wherefore the virtue of this name is hereby greatly adua^ced. And for
as much as we intend to make the doctrine of circuncision plain, this
difference is in especial to be marked, that it consists not in the thing,
but in the persons. For if we consider the thing, there is great difference
between the circumcision of the Jews and of Christ. And that because the
person of Christ is fare unlike the person of the Jews.

The beginning of circumcision is declared in the bible in the first book of
Moses, The beginning of circumcision,
it has also an appointed end, to the which it shall endure, that is even
unto CHRIST. Abraham is the principal ground of all the matter, to whom GOD
gave commandment to circumcise himself, and all that were in his household:
And also whatsoever of the male kind was borne, it should be circumcised the
eight day after their birth. They therefore that came with such a sign in
their body, had God their protector and Savior as GOD promised he would be.
This was not appointed of GOD for nothing are for a little cause, Gene. 6.
that not only Abraham, but also all in his family, and whatsoever of the
male kind was borne: should be subject to Circumcision, that not only the
Jews might boste them self to be the people of GOD. For he receaueth the
servant of Abraham, which were Gentiles, to be of his people and sons, and
to have right of inheritance which was appointed to Abraham and to his
seed. And these did obtain it before Isaac, to the which nevertheless
afterward the promise was joined, where as yet these bought servants were
of the Gentyles. Wherefore the Jews have not the chief occasion to boste of
this. For although they extolle circumcision very much, yet this they can not
deny, that GOD has called unto it the Gentyls, which are not the sons of
Abraham, Circumcision abrogat.
but boughte servants. As touching this Circumcision, there is nothing else
left for us but the type and figure of faith. As it is also as touching the
other hystories paste, which only profit us in this, that we may take
thereof examples of faith and true godlynes. We are not bound to ceremonies,
yet have we need of such obedience and such faith as theirs was than, which
lived under such ceremonies. Wherefore the doctrine of Circumcision is not put
forth to the intent, that we should be Circumcised. (For this ceremony is
disanulled) but that we by the rehersall thereof, should remember to show
obedience to GOD, as Abraham showed.

If CHRIST hade not come, Circumcision should have been necessary even at this
time for us, if so be we would be of the people of God. For the condition is
straight and without exception, he that is not circumcised, his soul must be
exempt out of the people of God.

Wherefore the example, that we take of the old Circumcision, is this. That
GOD in this Image declares unto us, how contrary to reason he works and
commands, if a man use the judgment of reason. For amongst the proud
Gentyls it seemed a thing to be laughed at, that GOD which is so wise, should
set forth such a mad precepte, whereof is made mention in preaching contrary
to the law of shamfastnes, honesty, and chastity, and especially when they
be aged that are commanded so to do. For Abraham at that time was four score
and nintyne years old. And hereof rises contumelious names, The wisdom of the
world is offended.
so that the Jews were named Recutiti, and Appelles among the Gentyls, that is
to say, men whose skin is grown again, or men without skin. But this is
the true cause thereof, as it was said in the Gospel next before: whatsoever
is of GOD put forth: it is done with such a fashion, that all men laughthe it
to scorn, no man aloweth it, but all testeth upon it, as though it were old
wives fables. And contrary, look whatsoever he commands not, but is of our
own imagination, this do we require to be acceptable unto him. This would we
have observed for an everlasting law. But this can never be allowed of GOD. 1.
Cor. 1.
And hereof springs the cause of a great offense. As Paul says: After that
in the wisdom of GOD, the world knew not God by wisdom, it pleased God to
save them that believe by folishnes of preaching. What may be more against
reason then that bread the body of Christ and the cup the blood of Christ is
received for the remission of sin? The supper of the lord against reason.
How should a little bread and wine work such and so a great thing? This
thinks reason, neither can it think any otherwise. But GOD therefore
purposes not to change this. If reason does not believe nor allow it, gods cause
is never the worse for that. Baptism is against reason.
Likewise also goes it in baptism. How should this seem proueable to
reason, that if the child be washed with a little water, that thereby he is
purged from his sins, and translated out of the kingdom of the devil into
the kingdom of God. In deed it might stand well with reason that sin should be
washed away with water, if sin were a spote: but for as much as sin is
fastened in the mind, bones, and in the inermost part of the body, it is not
agreeable to reason that water should perse so far and wash it away. But now
consider well Circumcision. Cercumcisio^ against reasone.
Might not Abraham by like reason allege for himself to refuse it? What does
this profit me to salvation, that I am Circumcised in mine age? what good does
this to a child? or what profit at all does a man take by Circumcision? If God
would have the body changed, he might have made it so at the beginnynge that
it should need nothing to be cut from it. If reason had been taken to council at
that time, it would have said even so, neither does it think any otherwise now
a days, when it proves her wisdom. But it is to be learned in this place,
Reason ought not to make search of gods commandment.
that whenever question is moved why god should give such commandment, the
devil has ye upper hand. As ye example of Eve in paradise does show.
Co^ma^dement was given, yt they should not eat of ye tree. But when she began to
regard little the commandment, and hard the devil reasonynge, why God made
such a law, she fell down hedlonge, and was cast into such disobedience,
that all we unto this time suffer the blame and penalty thereof.

Wherefore let this be a law for the congregation. When GOD gives a
commandment think it to be thy duty, to honor it with all submission, and
make no further search. If he command, obey, if he speak, be attent, and
disalowe nothing that he does. For out of this most certain principle does God
diriue and set all the other of his doings, that all men are fools, liars and
evil and of so great madness, that they never ought, nor may be able to
understand his word and his workynge. As Jeremy says, lewd and
unsearchable is the heart of man.

Saying therefore our leudnes and vice is so great, we should of our own
accord correct our judgment, and think this as to uchynge Gods works and
commandementes: If this seem contrary to my reason, truly it is for no other
cause, than that I have such a corrupt understanding, and dull knowledge. And
nothing hinders me in iudgyng gods wisedo^, but mine own natural folishnes.
Wherefore Circumcision is an example of faith and of singular obedience: Whereas
Abraham and his servants were nothing offended with this commandment, but
obeyed it without reasoning, and thought not thus: that Circumcision is a
folish thing for them that are aged. This is peradventure Gods meaning, what
if he thought otherwise, yt the sin of ye flesh should be restrained and as a
man would so cut of: this is doubtless ye true circumcision, why should God
command such a thing that is contrary to reason? that the body should be
circumcised? for what intent is that done? But these men thought not so, but
were obedient to the commandment, and this persuaded them selves: Sith God
does requier that, seem this never so much against reason, yet shall I be
saved, because I obey his precepte. Wherefore this is an example of steadfast
faith, wherewith Abraham and his servants were endued. And it is put forth to
us, that we should follow them, and not give our selves to our own wisdom and
reason to be deceived.

And this have we spoken as touching the circumcision of the Jews, Why
childern are circoncised the eight day.
which has no longer power then the law it self, (that is) unto the coming
of CHRIST, as it is signified in that y^ childern were circumcised upon the
eight day. For this order was in the law: after six days is the Sabbath, and
that day that follows the Sabbath, is the eight day, even the beginning of the
weke following. For Christ by circumcision, began to fulfill the sayings that
were prophesied of him: even to be a savior, and a light to lighten the
Gentiles, which should have his kingdom not only limited by the borders of the
Jews, but should by his Gospel extend his kingdom throughout all the world.
And hereof is that now the beginning.

Wherefore, as I said before, we must put a great distance and difference
between the circumcision of the Jews and of Christ. For the persons are
unlike, A difference between the circoncision of Christ and of the Jews.
although the thing that they do is not unlike. Circumcision was given to them,
which were sinners, and condemned to everlasting death. But Christ is without
sin, and the Lord of the law, upon whom the law has no stroke: for y^ law
is only against sinners, but he is no sinner. But for as much as he is
circumcised after the law, as other chyldern that are sinners, the law is
ouerseen and does him wrong. And for this cause is the law compelled to make
him a recompense, and therefore, his power is disanulled and abrogate. If it had
pleased Christ, he might abolished and abrogated the law by power. For he is
the Lord over the law, with whom the law have naught to do, for because he is
without sin. But he would do nothing presumptuously after rigor, but order
him self humbly after the equal trial of the law. And all this is done for
our sake, that we might take confort thereof in our doyngs. Christ has no
need of circumcision.
For in his own behalf CHRIST had no need to obey his mother, or to be
crucified. But he does it for our sakes. For we had need of such a man, that
was without sin, and that should fulfill the law for us, and so turn away
the wrath of GOD. For this cause was he made subject unto the law, and
afterward gives us that victory, which he had of the law, that we might so
be helped by him, that the law should have no more power over us than it had
over him, least it should accuse and condemn us. For he that embraces CHRIST
with a true faith, obtayneth by him deliverance from the law and damnation
thereof.

Wherefore remember well this difference, for all the matter restethe therein.
Abraham is subject to the law and to circumcision, because he is a sinner,
and the law has power on him for sin. But Christ is no sinner, and therefore
he is not constrained under the law, yet does he submit himself to the law:
that all that receive him by faith, may be free from the curse of the law.
Wherefore this history of Christ's circumcision gives no small conforte, in the
remembrance whereof thanks are worthily given to God, that although we are in
danger of the law by syn, yet this is not to the peril of our salvation,
but by Christ we have deliverance from the curse of the law, Gal^t. 3.
which for our sakes suffered the curse of the law, and made himself subject
to the law. And that it was necessary on this wise, that we should be
delivered from the law, it is the saying of Paul to the Romans, where he
says: The sentence of Paul to the Romans Romans 2.
Circumcision preuayleth nothing, but the keeping of GODS commandments. It is a
confident kind of speech. For it is as much as to say: No man circumcised and
fulfilled the law of God, or kept the law of GOD. What other thing is this,
than that the circumcised, are not circumcised? For Gods commandment is ever
joined with this prescripte: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind. Now let one be brought forth of
all the men that be, that may boste that he has done or can do this. The law
commands: Thou shall not desyer: Show me one that can boste, Deuteronomy. 6. Deuteronomy. 5.
that he has done it, or can do it. To be short, chose out whatsoever
commandment thou will amongst them all, and thou causte not deny but that
thou haste not kept it at all times. But what sentence is given against them
that keep it not? The condition of the law is impossible.
Ueryly no other than is pronounced of Paul: Cursed are all that are under the
law, for they can not do it. For if we could do it* there were no peril. But
since we can not do it, this is certain, and sure, that the law accuses us;
kills and delivers us to the dyuell, and condemns to hell. Wherefore we
have need of a more high and profound doctrine, which may do more to us than
the law: which does nothing but command us to love God with all our heart,
and our neighbors as our self, yea and that when he hurts us also, and
when we would desire to be revenged. But the law preuayleth nothing by her
controllinge. Needs must there be in our nature, anger, variance,
vnpacientnes, hatred, envy, pride, and such like, there is no other remedy.
Wherefore there is no man that can obey this doctrine. Neither can this any thing
prevail in the judgment of God, if we fulfill the law as much as we can.

And this is the cause, why a greater, even Christ the son of God comes
into the world, which by great moderation submits him self to the law, to
take it wholly away. For he it is, that may plead with the law on this wise:
Thou doste not as men look thou should do, thou make them not
righteouse, thou doste not purify their hearts, as we prove by experience. For
else what cause should David have had to say: Psalm. 19.
Who can comprise his faults? Purge me Lord from my secret sins. Likewise
in the 143. Psalm: Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no man is righteous in thy
sight. And again in the 130. Psalm. 130.
Psalm. If thou mark straightly our iniquities, Lord who shall be able to
stand in judgment. And such like sentences do testify, that no man can say:
Lord we have done this work even as thou co^mandedst, there is no doubt of
that. For as much then as the law has us bound unto it on this wise, and
dryueth us from the sight of God, Law.
yea and beats down our confidence and faith which we ought to have in God,
we must of necessity grant, that we have need of a more perfect doctrine,
that we may come into Gods sight. This is the doctrine of the Gospel, Gospel.
which Christ procures to be preached to us and to the Jews after this
sentence: that we are damned for our sin. And it profits the Jews
nothing, that they are circumcised. For this circumcision delivers them not
from sin. As the Prophet says: Although they have the flesh of their
foreskyne circumcised, yet their heart is uncircumcised and vnpure. But this
delivers, in that the Gospel preaches on this wise, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, which ought nothing to the law, because he was without sin, made
him self subject to the law, and would be circumcised that he might have to do
with the law: for as much as he, where as he was Lord of the law, yet was
challe^ged as a bondsman to ye law: now again abides the controling and
dominion of Christ. And this power that Christ has over ye law, does he make
common to us all, Christ's actio^ against ye law.
he benummeth the law of his power, which it had against us sinners, and
delivers us from it, not to the intent, that we should nothing regard it, or
give over our self to lusts, but this: that when we have done that we should
not, it might be forgeuen us, and not be laid to our charge, neither turn
away our salvation.

Wherefore they that believe in Christ has no need of circuncision. How Christ
delivers us from the law.
For they are not only free from these and such like burdens of the law, but
they have also remission of their sins, and promise of everlasting life by
Christ. This does profit me that I believe y^ Christ was circumcised. For this
was done for my sake, that he might be a suerty for me, whatsoever action ye
law have against me. Wherefore I will trust to the innocence of him, and that
shall be my confort: that although for a time the law as Lord in heaven (for it
accused us men before God, and we had no safegarde against it, neither could we
complain of any wrong, because our syn was open) yet now is the matter
otherwise. For by ye circumcision of Christ we are delivered from the curse of
the law. We can not put so great confidence in our circumcision, and love
toward God, and obedience toward our neighbor. We can not trust and stycke
to these things. All our trust is in this, that Christ is obedient, innocent
and holy. This trust shall not deceive us, for it is certain. Before that this
was opened unto us, we thought that we must needs fulfill the law, or be
damned. But now we knowledge that it is impossible for all men to do, and that
we can not bear that burden. But Christ has taken it from us, and put it on
him self, and began the matter by circumcision, and fulfilled the law. And
herein is our trust. We ought not truly to be careless in taming of the
flesh, and in instructing it, that it may obey GOD, least I be found utterly
disobedient. Whatsoever I am not able to do, I remit it to this safeguard. For
whatsoever I have not done, that did Christ for my sake. For we shall never be
in such good taking, that we may do all that we ought to do. As Paul says:
The saying of Paul Romans 7.
I am delighted with the law of God after the inward man, but I find an
other law in my members repyninge against the law of my mind, and subduynge
it to the law of syn, which is in my members. Which is as much as to say: I
must of compulsion obey the flesh, but after faith I do not so, it greueth me,
and I abide this bondage against my will.

After this sort Christian righteousness is made perfect, when I acknowledge
my sin, Christian righteousness.
that I can never fulfill the law of God, and yet I despair not therefore.
For in this example I knowledge, that CHRIST regards me, and for my sake made
him self subject to the law and fulfilled it. Hereof after that ensues a new
zeal, and a new affection, Christ fulfilleth the law.
even love toward God, because he loved us first, that we may be obedient to
his will, with all diligence. Hereof according to the Psalm rises a willing
people, which begins to love GOD, and to do after his law. And although
such doing is slack and imperfect by the means of the flesh, yet is it allowed
of God for the faith in Christ. Note well.
For whatsoever is vnpure and imperfect in it, it flees to remission of sin
as to the only mean left to escape by.

And this have we now spoken of the two sorts of circumcision. The first was
commanded by God, And the Jews have obeyed unto it hitherto as unto a law, and
yet they obtained not salvation thereby. For no man could fulfill the law.
Wherefore although they had the law, yet nevertheless the law accused and
condemned them before GOD. But salvation and holiness is obtained hereby, in
that that Christ subdued him self to the law, and bore the curse thereof.
Wherefore the Jews that believed this, and had their salvation consisting in the
promised sede, to them was circumcision outwardly a seal to assure them that
they were righteouse before God, not for circumcision, but for their says in
Christ. Which thing since it is so, the hystory of the circumcision of Christ
is worthily esteemed to be full of confort. In the which this doctrine is set
forth: That if we desyer the way that lead us to God, it may not be obtained
by the law, which commands: Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall love thy Lord thy GOD with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy
self. For we do never so, nor can not do if we would. But this is our only
safeguard, to the which we make our refuge, even CHRIST Jesus the son of God
and our Lord.

He has satisfied the will of God, and made him self subject as a sinner to
the law (for if it had not been for that, he should never have been
circumcised as other chyldern be upon the eight day.) This was done for all
men's sins, that all men may have trust in him. For it was no need for him
self. Wherefore this pertayneth unto us, and we do well put our trust in
him, that we may be saved for his righteousness and holiness. And that I may
briefly in one word note this matter: we must only stick to the righteousness
and justification of Christ before God. This is a most certain and aproued
way, and it has most suer aid and succoure against sin and death. The
which thing God grant us through our Lord Jesus CHRIST. Amen.

The second Sermon of the name Jesus out of the Gospel of Luke ij.
ANd when the viii. day was come, that the child should be circumcysed, his
name was called Jesus, which was named of the Angel, before he was conceived
in the womb.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have spoken of one part of this Gospel (that is) of circumcision. In the
which CHRIST would signify unto us, that he became subject to the law for
our sake, that we might be free from the curse of the law. Now follows the
other part as concerning the name IESV. Whereof the Evangelist makes diligent
rehersall, Math. ^.
as though it were a great cause, why this name ought not to be unknown of
men, and specially because it is of no man's invention, but brought from heaven,
and showed by the Angel, before the child was conceived in the womb. Which
thing is a token, that the name is such as is allowed of God. If we expound
this name in English, it is as much to say as a Savior. But why this name was
given to Christ, Gabriel the Angel declares, whereas he speaks to Joseph:
The name Jesus. Math. 1.
And thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins. This name is most worthy to be remembered, and most worthy to be
regarded for our own behofe, for that the child Jesus is called a savior,
which can save us from the greatest evil, that is, from syn, and from no
small myseries and calamities that befall unto us in this life. And where as
corn feldes are destroyed by enemies, and the graynes corrupted by tempests,
and men's bodies vexed with diverse diseases and infirmities: against all this
has God provided help by other things, as by the Princes and Kings he
defends from robberies, by the parents he provides for the liuelode of them
that be in a family, by physicians he heals diseases. But as these things
are not the greatest, so are not these men the chief saviors, in comparison
and respect of this savior, that saves from sin. The savior Christ is
necessary to salvation.
Wherefore he that regards this child earnestly, has a very Jesus and
savior from all myseries? Let him not require that salvation of him, that
belongs to this present life, which God has committed to other (as I said
before) but that that is against death and sin. For when syn is taken away,
death also must needs be taken away. Wherefore first consider this thing well
with thy self, whether thou may hope for greater salvation from this savior,
or from them that are the mightiest in ye world? If thou have no feling of the
everlasting life to come, thou shall have no need of this Jesus. God has
appointed the safeguard of thy bodyly health, to officers, parents, physicians,
etc. But if thou believe, that there is an other life after this, thou shall
have need of this savior. For there is no help in other to everlasting life.
Which thing nevertheless is not so straightly to be taken. For if the powers
and parents cease from succourring and helping, so that there is no aid or
goodness in them: we must look for the easement of these present euyls from
Christ also. The office of Christ.
Howbeit this is not his chyef and propre office. Wherefore the doctrine of the
Gospel is not referred especially to this corporal life. But this is his
propre office, and there will he declare this his name, where as deliverance
from syn, death, and from the kingdom of the dyuell is in hand. To this also is
he necessary. For if it were not for sin and death: there should be no need
of this Savior. The belly gods have no profit by this savior, for of what
things he is the savior, those things do not they regard. And hereof it
appears, how great the contempt of these Epicures is, which thynk that
there is neither God nor life everlasting. But he that believes this, yt there
is a God, must needs collecte and gather that al things are not ended by this
life, but that there remains an other life that is everlasting. For this we
prove by experience, Signs that God regards not much this present life.
that God regards not much this present life, since the wicked has such
liberty, and prospers so well. He promises us an other life: and that he may
seem to have great respect to this life, this child Jesus is set forth to be
a savior for us. And when he gives us this salvation, no other thing is
greatly to be required of him, although other things in this life go not as we
would, and although we perceive no great signs of Gods help in our matters.
For his salvation is everlasting salvation. Let this be sufficient for us, be
the difficulties and encombrances of this life never so great.

We see that the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, God regards not this life
specially.
and all that persecute the word, do live in great security, and that they are
vnshamfastly bent against the word and all Christians. God sees this and
suffers it, and makes as though he saw it not, in so much, that he may seem
to have showed more care for the Gentiles than for his people. But if thou be a
Christian, let not this move thee. For even for this very cause, that God has
promised us sure salvation to everlasting life: he suffers us in this life to
wander as men destitute and without the help of God: that we may know this by
faith, that the child Jesus is such a Savior, which nevertheless saves us,
although in all things beside there can be no help gotten, that is, when syn
shall either accuse us, or has now already condemned us to eternal death.

Except this time, it appears that we have no need of this savior, neither
do we much regard him. For he that is in health, and has plenty of goods,
has no need of Christ, for if he must redeem the matter by price, he has
money enough to do that. And this is it with all ye other corporal gifts, wit,
wisdom and power. For in them is their store of help and salvation, as far
as God has appointed them to be to our salvation. The mother brings forth
chyldern. The physician helps the sick. The lawyer by the exact law
defends against the wrongful doers. But when this life is at an end,
neither can the conscience hyde her sins before Gods judgment, then is there
place made for this savior Jesus. For then is there no store of help in any
thing beside. All things do fail, no power is so great or will so ready, yt ca^
defend against the evil of the conscience, and of death. In this case if thou
demand, from whence thou most look for help? have respect only to this
child. For that cause is he named Jesus, that he might be present, and save
all that knowledge him, and look for salvation of him. But in this rests ye
whole matter, that thou suffer no other name to be given to this child. And
then that thou grant not that this name that belongs to this child should
be transposed to other, This name Jesus must be made common to no man
as to Frances, Dominike, to the Carthusians, Masses, Uigiles, Pardons, alms,
fastings, and such like. For all this is abominable: And a good cause whi:
there ca^ no other savior be invented against sin. Wherefore he that would
have an other savior, whether it be the rule of the Carthusians, or any other
thing, he goes clean without salvation. Therefore he that could name this
child by his true name, and could inculcat, Christ into himself, were blessed.
For in this name are al things, wherefore store of salvation is there to be
looked for and no where else. But now the dyuels endeavor lies all in this, that
this child might have an other name made, that men should perceive him to be a
judge, and chose them other saviors and helpers against Gods wroth. But the
matter is certain, The dyuell goes abough^ to give this child a new name.
and can never be other wise, or made frustrat. Jesus has not his name, that
he should healpe the with corporal benefits. As touching this matter, the
disposition and order is certainly ordained Gene. 2. where God says: Bear
rule over the fishes of the sea, the birds of the air, and the beasts of the
earth. But he is called Jesus, because he is a savior: and then shows
salvation, when al things do fail and are void of help, when we must now
depart into an other life.

Wherefore this name casts of all things, whatsoever without Christ is cast
before us for the remission of sins. For when the Mounke thinks, my rule is
able to make God merciful: Jesus and no other savior.
It is nothing else to say in deed than: My rule is with the name Jesus. And
whereas the Pope and all teachers of that sect, holds, that only faith
justifies not, but works also be necessary to salvation: It is no other
thing than: Good works are with the name Jesus. But it is abominable
sacrilege, that my work should be with the name Jesus. This name belongs
only to this child. The Pope, the Bishops, and Mounks, etc. does not so.
Neither do we also at all, when we give place in our conscience to fear for
our sins sake, than to confort for Christ's sake, neither when we think
this: If I had lived on this wise, if I had done this or the work, I should
have an easier case before God.

The holy Ghost can not abide this, but indeuoreth with all might, that this
child may have his name remaining whole, and that no other may be received into
the fellowship thereof. That when we have need of salvation against syn and
eternal death, we put no trust in our works or in the merits of al ye
saints, but that we stycke unto this child only by faith, which has this name
and is called Jesus. Neither can it be taken from him without sacrilege. But
they that go about to take it from him, as the Pope, Turk, and Mounkes do
presume, they shall perceive in deed that they have committed such sacrilege,
that shall never be remitted. Co^trarily, if there be but two or three of us,
that trust in this name of the child, all the might and power of hell is not
able to cast us from salvation. I will not speak how the world should somewhat
fear, for hindering of this salvation. For the Angel brought this name from
heaven, and named the child JESUS, before he was conceived in his mothers
womb. Wherefore when they that persecute this name, and set up other
saviors, shall go against Gabriel the Angel, or shall reprove him of a lie, he
him self shall appeal to God and say: Lord thou have given me this
commandment, that I should give this child this name. And then shall it be
known, what the persecuters do prevail against this name, they have remaining
for them self neither God, neither Jesus. And they shall dye and perish for
ever in their sins. This shall be the end of this matter with their most
greuouse destruction.

Wherefore let us never forget this name, but let us surely bear this away,
that this child is the only Savior against death, syn, and the dyuell. If the
world shall hate us therefore, surely it can not do it with good luck and
prosperity. If it will not knowledge this child for a Savior, we can not
constrayne it. But let it consider, from whence it shall receive salvation,
when death shall fall on his head, whether there be any defense against it in
men's works, in fast, prayer, alms, masses, invocation of saints. etc. Let
this be the stablishement of all our matters, to know for a suertye, this name
to be given from God to this child, that it should be called Jesus or a
Savior. For we shall know and feel this our Savior without coaction, that
is, we shall have a suer trust in him, when the dreadful senses of sin and
death shall be cast against us, that there is prepared in him for us most
sure salvation. We know that this hope and faith is greatly allowed of God, and
that it receaueth great renoume. Where as contraryly, he suffers the great
indignation of God, which does either seek other saviors, or else will not
know this savior at all.

Now therefore, compare the name of the child and the thing that was done when
the name was given. The name agrees with c^rcumcision.
The child Jesus receaueth circumcision, as other chyldern do, where as
nevertheless he has no need of it as a sinner has, because he is without
sin, and need not to be purifyed, for as much as he is pure all redye. But
this is done because his name is JESUS, that he may be a Savior, against
sin, and an evil conscience, against death and all evil that comes of
sin. For he is circumcised, that he might be under the law, and let none of
al things undone, that were enjoined of God at any time to men for to do. That
when we see our uncircumcised hearts, and our incredible disobedience, we
might not despair therefore, and so cast our self on Christ, and say: I am a
sinner, who denies it? neither did I ever fulfill the will of God: Christ has
done this for me. Doughtles the law can not condemn him, that he has left
the least point of righteousness undone. Wherefore I have nothing to do with the
law, that it should accuse me, or condemn me. For I am not alone, but Christ
is with me: Him do I embrace: his righteousness lay I before God for me and my
sins: let the dyuell and the law therefore do the worst that they can to
trouble me for my sins.

This must we use circumcision and the name of Christ. And he that has
leisure may gather long sermons full of confort as touching Christ and his
kingdom: After what manner, he shall remit sin, justify, and give everlasting
life. For the Angel does briefly comprise these long sermons in one word: that
Christ shall be a savior, and have the name of Jesus. And to this belongs
especially the singular prophecye of Esa. 9. Esa. 9.
Where as the Prophet names Christ with six names, A meruailouse one, a
cou^celler, virtue, strong, the Father of the world to come, the Prince of
peace. For all these names belong to this only, that we by him may obtayn
salvation against sin and death, and after that, righteousness and everlasting
life. And here it behooves Antichrist to give account of his doings with all
his rabble of sophisters, which takes this name from Christ, and then
describes him to men as a cruel and an angry Judge, to whom no man may come,
but by the intercession of saints, and good works. And here they offend two
ways. First in that, that Christ is spoiled of his name, that he may not be
Jesus and a Savior. Then in that that this name is given to saints yea and
rather to our works, as though that CHRIST refused to be a Savior, and were
delighted with our destruction.

These great deceites of the dyuell are not to be unknown, when he defyleth
our hearts with thoughts, that GOD is angry, and casts us away, and has
no respect unto us in temptations. But I pray the how do these thoughts
agree with this name, that the Angel by the commandment of GOD names this
child JESUS? If this name then be true, it is not Gods will, that we should
perish, but this is rather his will, that we should be recovered from evil.
Therefore let us lay up this name in our armary, that we may in our
temptations trust unto the safeguard thereof, in that that the son of God,
CHRIST our Lord is called JESUS. As it was in paradyse declared as touching
hyme, Gene. 3.
that this seed should break the head of the serpent (that is) should help
and succoure us against the dyuell and his kingdom. GOD the Father of all
conforte and mercy, give us always the increase of this faith, and for this
Saviors sake preserve us for ever. AMEN.

Upon the Epiphanie of the Lord, otherwise called the twelfth day. Matthew ij.
WHEN Jesus was borne in Bethleem, a City of Iewry, in the time of Herod the
king: Behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying: Where is
he that is borne king of the Jews? For we have seen his star in the East,
and are come to worship him. When Herod the king had heard these things,
he was troubled, and all the City of Jerusalem with him. And when he had
gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people together, he
demanded of them where Christ should be borne? And they said unto him, at
Bethleem in Iewry. For thus it is written by the Prophet. And thou Bethleem in
the land of Iew^y, art not the least among the Princes of Judah. For out of
thee there shall come, unto me the Captain that shall govern my people
Israel. Then Herod (when he had privily called ye wise men) he enquired of
them diligently what time ye star appeared. And he bad them go to Bethleem,
and said: Go your way thither and search ^iligently for the child, and when ye
have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.
When they had heard the king, they departed, and lo, the star which they
saw in the east, went before them till it came and stood over the place
wherein the child was. When they saw the star, they were exceading glad,
and went into the house, and found the child with Mary his mother, and fell
down flat, and worshipped him, and opened their treasures, and offered unto
him gifts, Gold, Frankensence, and Myrre. And after they were warned of God in
sleep that they should not go again to Herod, they returned into their own
country another way.

THE EXPOSITION.
THIS is the day of the Epiphanie. For this they say, that there befell three
revelations in one day, but yet not in one year: when Christ opened him self
to the wise men, that came from the east by a star, when he was baptized of
John in the flood of Iordaen, and when he did the first miracle in the marriage.
But whether this chanced in one day, The feast of Epiphanie.
we make no great matter of it: But this is specially to be considered, that
all these hystories be, to describe a special doctrine, as is that history
of this day as touching the wise men. For Christ would have him self to be
known, not only among the Jews, but also among the Gentiles. Least the
Jews should lay for their excuse, that he had kept him self so close, that no
man could know him.

For where as this was confirmed by prophecies, that he should be borne of the
Jews, This opening was necessary
not as a gorgiouse and magnificent king, but so poor, that he could scarsly
find a place to be borne in: it could no otherwise be, but there must needs
rise a great offense by his coming. And the Jews were not a little offended
thereby. Wherefore very necessity required to make such an open revelation of
him self amongst the Gentiles, that although great poouertye was with this
king, yet that there might be evident commendations of him. For it is not to
be counted a small matter, whereas the wise men came from the east, and
bring tidings of this child to Jerusalem. Even as Simeon also in the temple
and Anna does commend hyme, and the Angels in the air, and the shepherds in
Bethleem. All are occupied in this child, they extol and commend this child.
There lack no gloriouse commendations for this child, to bring hyme to light
among the Jews, and to make him known of them. But this revelation is most
famous, where as the wise men comme from the far costs to Jerusalem, and
do open the matter only there as touching the birth of the king of Jews, so
that Herod and all the City of Jerusalem with him were troubled and moved,
wherefore the Jews can not make any excuse of their ignorance, as though they
knew not that this king was borne. For they were troubled by the tydinges of
the wise men, yea and for a greater witness also, they declare to Herod and to
the wise men the place where Christ should be borne. Wherefore they are convicted
both by their own record, and also by the record of the wise men, that this
kings birth was not unknown unto them.

The doctrine therefore of this example is put forth to us, that we should look
for no other ways. No man can come unto this child or find him, but he that
follows the word as a leader, and never goes from it the bredeth of a nail.
For if we let pass the word, The word only leads to Christ.
we stumble every where. This child is to little regarded and to much despised.
Wherefore it is not possible, but the reason must needs stumble and be offended
every where, when it considers with how great pouertye this child was borne
into the world. For what other thing is all his life else but very pouertye,
myserie, affliction, calamity, contempt and reproach? He therefore that
sets a side the word, and cares not what he hears, or what be preached of
this child, but will only take his eyes for his judges in this matter, can be
no more joined with Christ than the Jews were.

And this thing is most perilous, Without the word nothing is done.
when it is done in the conscience. As the example of the papists does
testify, which omit the word, and apply their mind to such Imaginations,
yt they fantasy Christ to be such a one, as they conceive of their wit and
reason. They allow not this in him, that he only should be their savior,
wherefore they patche thereto their works, and look for salvation as well by
the^ as by Christ. They pray unto Marie also, that she may reco^cile her
son to them. And in such prayer they hold opinion, that she is a Savior,
where as it is not so in deed, but a very false imagination. For what soever is
bestowed in the search of Christ without the word, all that goes to the dyuell
(which afterward causes men to think this, that Christ is a judge, and
appoynteth most cruel punyshementes for men:) but he that would not be
confounded in his presence, must be well defenced with the intercessions of
Saints and of Mary. Wherefore this was a manner in the popedom, to put more
trust in their supplications, then in Christ him self. And it can never come
to any other point, where as the word is cast aside. And verily the dyuell,
because he understands, that his chief safeguard of al his matters consists
therein, he laboreth all that he can to make men forsake the word, and to follow
their own imaginations. For he perceaueth, that by this means he shall be sure to
have the victory over us. Wherefore nothing is more necessary then to hold
fast by the word, and to have no other trust as touching matters that belong
unto godlynes and holiness, than as the word it self prescribes: but this is
not so easy for men to believe and to persuade them selves.

There be many that can not be entreated to believe the words of the Lords
Supper: Christ ca^ not be found at Jerusalem.
They will believe no more, then their reason and sense can perceive. They
behold the work it self without the word, and they see no other thing than
bread and wine. But this is nothing else then to behold the outward shale, and
to let pass the thing which is in Christ's words.

The wise men also had first high cogitatio^s as touching Christ, when it was
opened unto them by God even that a king of the Jews was borne. They take
their journey forthwith to Jerusalem, thinkyng that they should find this king
there in his noble court, It seems contrary to reason, yt Christ should not
be found at Jerusalem.
and gorgious palaice. For what other thing could reason conceive in such
matters? But when these thoughts are without the word, they come soon to
naught: neither do they find the child at Jerusalem, which nevertheless was the
holy city and habitation of God. They must needs have the word to bring them
to Christ. This is the true star and son, which leads to this child.
Wherefore this example of the wise men is to be counted a singular and an
excellent thing, where as they remove out of their eyes and hearts all their
thoughts. which they and other men had, and follow the word, which was put
forth to them out of Micheas the prophet. For they are abashed and offended
when they be sent into an other place, from Jerusalem, where the true service
of God was, and where God abode himself, and from God himself and his temple,
unto Bethleem, a vile town, whereas nevertheless they came not to salute any
person of low degree, or any workman, but the king of Jews. They follow the
word straight way, and care nothing for any other thoughts. They have only
respect to this, what Micheas says, they stick sure to that. This faith is a
thing of no common example. For if I had been in this case, I would not have
departed from the Temple. For where is it more like, that the king of Jews
should be found, which is so famous, than where God has his habitation, where
the priesthode and all the religion has his fundation? But it goes otherwise
with this king. He allows it not, that his place should be among the
priests at Jerusalem, as he is neither at this time found with the Pope and
his congregation. But he gothe about rather to abrogate and take away both the
priesthode and the kingdom, where as they had so great confidence in these
things, in that they were the Priests Levites, and people of God, and had his
temple. This does Christ think that it ought not to be suffered. For such a
defilyng of the Temple, priesthode, and of all the service might not be
suffered, or if they would stubbornely proceed in suspendynge it, Moses, and
all the service was to be disanulled for that profanation and defylynge. As at
last it came to pass. But the obedience of the wise men comes of true
godliness, and therefore they have their doings confirmed by GOD, so that
their way is showed unto them from Jerusalem unto Bethleem, and to the house
where the child was, by a Star. And they had no little need, this to be
confirmed, least they should be offended by that strange sight. Poverty was
euidente every where. Joseph and Marye were not at their own home. The Child
was laid in a maunger. There were there no things necessary. How should this
be with such a great king? It might rather be counted a thing worthy to be
laughed at. But the good wise men be not offended with such things, but
regard rather the saying of the Prophet, and the sign of the Star. Wherefore
how soever the matter gothe, they give and perform that honor due unto the
king, they fall down before the child and worship him: they open their
treasure, and take forth a kyngly present.

And this is the history. In the which this is the chiefest point, i. Christ
cares not only for the Jews, but also for the Gentiles.
that GOD calls the Gentiles also to his kingdom, and makes them his people,
although they were not circumcised, neither subject to the law, as the Jews
were, This is a great benefit, neither is it mete, that any christian men
should be unkind for it. For it is a sure evidence for us Gentiles, that we
may not despair, as though we had no part in Christ but that we may think
surely, that Christ pertayneth to us, as well as to the Jews, although we are
not his people, as the Jews are. For there is no doubt of this, but yt the wise
men were Gentiles, which had neither priesthode, neither service, nor word of
God, nor circumcision: and yet notwithstanding all this, they come, although
they were strangers, without any commendation or setting forth of them
selves, to the fellowship of Christ's light, and acknowledge him And he
acknowledges them also, he allows them for their worshippyng and reverence
done to himself. All these things belong to the confirming of us yt we may show
our selves thankful to God for that that he has set up such a kingdom in the
earth through Christ into the which, we, that were not his people, are
received, not of merit and deserte, but of mere grace. Then must we learn in
this history also, ii. What is our duty to do toward the child.
what is our duty to do to Christ again, even to resist manfully all
offenses as these wise me^ did, and to confess Christ before the world as
they did, to seek him, and worship him as our Savior. And because his kingdom
for the weak and simple sight thereof, is oppressed with many and great
difficulties, to bestow our goods and substance gladly to the maintaynynge
thereof. And we have store enough to open our treasures, as the wise men did
unto Christ, and to offer presents unto him. For this is it written: That ye
do to the least of mine, ye do it to me. Math. 25.
Wherefore he that healpeth the nedy, the miserable, the wretched: he that
fyndeth charges to this, that fit men may be instructed in the study of
learning, and in holy Scripture, that in process of time they may do
profitable service to the congregation, he offers to the nedy child Jesus,
The wise men brought victual for Christ, when he had fled into Egypt.
which as soon as he was borne, was not only poor and nedy, but was
constrained also to flee into banishment into Egypt to escape the tyranny and
peril of his enemy. Wherefore the providence of God by those wise men prepared
wayfarynge victual for the child and his parents in their journey. It is very
like by ye words of the Evangelist, that it was no small gift, which says,
that they opened their treasures. But seeing it is evident, how great the good
will of the wise men was toward the child, who can doubt but that their
magnificence and liberality was great? Which thing ought to admonish Christen
men, not to despair, when they suffer persecution, and when they are tossed up
and down by banyshement. For God can so little abide that christen men should
perish for hunger, that he will rather stir men that dwell far of, God
never leueth his people succouries
to bring succor and aid for them. As we are sufficiently confirmed by the
exaumple of his only begotten son, as touching this matter.

We must join also with this history, that that is put forth in the prophecy
of Micheas, wherein is contained an evident description of Christ, with a
syngular doctrine and lesson by it self. Whose words are these.

And thou Bethleem of Judah art not the least amongst the thousands of Judah.
Michee. 5.
For out of thee shall come he that is governor in Israel. In this sentence,
as the Jews testify themselves. God gave a plain and evident prophecy, that
Christ should be looked for at Bethleem, and that there should be the first
swathling bands of his apperyng in man's nature. Bethleem, ye little town by
Christ's birth has great renoune.
This is that chief renoume, which sets forth this little town of Bethleem
more magnificently, then is the most noble and excellent city Jerusalem. And
this is the cause, why the Evangelist seems to change the words of the
Prophet: The Prophet calls it small. The Evangelist will not have it
counted small. For the Evangelist beholds not the outward sight, as the
Prophet did, but the spiritual glory, Because the Son of GOD is borne
there. To the which honor there is none of all the honors that ever was given
to any City, to be compared. Wherefore they are magnificent and glorious
words, with the which the Euangeliste commends Bethleem: Out of thee
(says he) shall there come forth a Capitayn for me, which shall feed my
people Israel. And this is a most sweet Prophecye, which describes Christ
unto us on such wise, that although before the world he be a man despised for
his poverty, and borne in an obscure and an unknown place, yet is he that
captain and prince of Israel, that is over the people of God. But what manner
of kingdom this is to be taken for I declared before in the sermon of the
Angel, Christ the captain.
which him self also calls Christ the Lord. Not such a one, as is a tyrant,
and that will vex men with his cruel imperye. For even for that cause (says
the Prophet) Bethleem that art small. As though he should say: If this
Lord would have had imperial majesty, that he might seem terrible unto
other, he might have chosen an other place for his birth. But here is no
princely provision, no armor, no riches, no waightyng men, no appointyng of
offices. And that the very first principles might foorthewith declare, what a
kingdom this was to come, he chose not Jerusalem as the most holiest, nor
Rome as the most mightiest but he was content with a poor town, that it might
forthwith be declared thereby, that he should become a lord not after the common
facion, What manner of lord Christ should be.
but poor and nedy in the sight of the world, how^eit rich in spirit, and in
all spiritual gifts. For this is his title, to be a Lord and a Prince. But
yet all the sight, when he is borne, and when he is born in Bethleem, and what
soever thing is apparaunt to the senses, as touching him, was like no princely
pomp. Wherefore since he is a Lord and Prince, and yet not glorious before the
world, but poor and nedye: what other glory can it be, than even as he is
miserable in respect of worldly Felicity, so contraryly he is mighty and
great, in those things, wherein the world is found to be needye and a
stark beggar.

And here of it is, that he is excellent in righteousness, where as the world
is oppressed with sins: that he is eternal, whereas the world is casual: he
is the lord of the dyuell, where as the dyuell has the world yoked under his
most cruel bondage. He is good, whereas the world is all naught: he has God
merciful unto him, where as the world struggleth with the wrath of God: He is
the lord of everlasting life, where as the world is appointed to hell.

This is the imperie of this child, and for this condition and state does the
fruit redound unto his people. He will give no bodyly salvation, but as far
as the souls health and his glory requires: for he is poor and nedy.
Wherefore let no man come to the kingdom of Christ, to the intent that he may
enlarge his goods and increase his substance. Ye may look for this of the Pope,
and of men of that sort. He aduanceth his creatures to imperie, he gets
them riches, parts among them all Provinces, as Daniell prophesied. But the
princely power of this child, is to be felt only in this, that thy sins may
be forgyuen, that he may iustifye and save thee, that he may give his holy
spirit, and transpose thee out of the kingdom of the world and of death,
into the kingdom of God. And to this now is Faith requisite, and as I said
before, that thou keep sure the word of God. For he that lets pass Gods
word, and follows his own thoughts, shall lose Christ, neither shall he
know him for a king, but for a Judge, he shall be in hatred and fear, as the
dyuell is. For they are wont to fear him also, when they feel them selves
gyltie for their sin, least he should take them to be punyshed: whereas
Christ in the mean season confesses him self to be the lord and prince of
his people, to deliver them from sin, and to transpose them into the kingdom
of grace. For his people are no other, but miserable sinners, which tremble at
the felyng of their sin, and are afraid, and would feign be in Gods favor.
So that herby may the plain description of the Prophet be perceived. First,
that he shall be no bodyly prince, nor yet exercise spiritual punyshementes
against wyckednes, but to give salvation to all men, that believe in him.
against sin, the devil death, and hell. For of such a prince, there is sure
hope of Salvation.

And thus far do the Scribes recite the saying of the Prophet, and no
farther. They fear peradventure lest this be to much: For they perceive well,
that this is Herodes intent to seek some way how to slay and to take this
king of the Jews out of the way. Wherefore they rehearse not the whole sentence
before Herod, and they do almost profess by word, that at this time they
acknowledge no other king of the Jews, beside Herod. And yet is it in the
Prophet, that a Prince of the Jews should come, and should proceed out of
Bethleem. Therefore they leave this imperfect, neither dare they to pronounce
any farther. But the Prophet although he was not living at that time, yet
does he proceed and describe what manner of captayn or king this should be:
which belongs also to his person in these words: Et egressus eius ab
initio a diebus aeterni tatis. And his out going has been from the beginning,
Miehee. 5.
and from everlasting.

This did not the Scribes rehearse to Herod, A testimony of Christ's true
humaniti^ and godhead.
no neither they them selves did understand it. For there is more obscurity
therein, than was in the words before. And that his birth should be in Bethleem,
and he him self be a captain over all Israel, it is not obscurelye spoken,
and there is a sure sign, that he shall be a man. But whereas the Prophet says
furthermore: His procedyng is from the beginning, and from the days of
eternity: It signifies that he is the eternal and everlasting God, which had
not his beginning in Bethleem: Of a troth he was born in Bethleem, and this is
one manner of procedyng. But there is an other also beside this: Which is said
to be from the beginnnyng and from the days of eternity. The words of the
prophet are not to be changed. From whens Christ should be borne.
First he says: Out of the shall proceed. Here do the priests and scribes
testify, that to proceed and to be borne, signifies all one. Wherefore the same
word afterward must needs signify the same thing, when he says: Whose
procedyng is from the old days, and from eternity, that is before yt time
that dais and hours were. Wherefore if thou will know, from whence this child
is borne, mark this prophecy: He is born (says he) from Bethlee^. But what
more? has he no other birthe then this? the prophet says furthermore: yes, he
was rather borne before al creatures heaven, earth, the son and moon. But
that may be determined by no words, and it is nothing else, then that he was
borne without beginning eternally, before there was any time or dais. This did
neither Herod, neither the Jews understand, neither were they worthy to
understand it. And this is the prince and king which was born at Bethleem, a
very man, which nevertheless has this name also, Procedyng from the old
days, which proceeded and was born before the world, that is, Christ is god
which is a true and eternal god, and also a true and a natural man. And this
is the cause of so great stir rings and motions in the world. For it can not
understand this to be procedyngs and birthes without discention, that this
child also should have his procedyng before there was son or moon. The Jews
could not abide this, and afterward there sprang up many heresies, which spoke
against it. But this matter is left to be considered of the, which have gods
word put forth unto the. Out of whom then was he borne, if he was borne
before ye world? Uerily of no other, but of God only. This must reason needs
confess, if it believe that God made heaven and earth. For what other thing
could be before heaven and earth, than God? If this child then proceeded, and
was borne, before heaven and earth was made, it must needs follow that he was
borne of God, and is very God. For besides God and his creatures was there
nothing.

And this is surely a sentence, For that that Christ is god he does the works
belonging to God.
which conteyneth the ground and foundation of all things. For if Christ were
only a pure man, death would have confounded him with all other mortal men.
For in that, yt he was born of a virgin, it has not so great strength against
death. But this is a greatter miracle, where as God made Eve of a ribbe, tha^
in that that a virgin brought forth a child. For a virgin is of that sex and
kind, which is borne to bring forth children. Wherefore that thing could not
repress the dyuell nor death, because he was borne of the Uirgin Marye. But
all the healpe consysteth herein, that the virgin Mary, is not only great with
child, but also with such a child, which was borne before the world.
Wherefore the dyuell, death, and all the kingdom of the dyuell is ouercom in
that they prove maistrie with such a man, which had his procedynge or
beginning before the world.

If it were not for this, and if he had his procedynge out of Bethleem only,
Christ dies as a man* but as he is God he can not die.
he could have the upper hand over death no more than we all: he should be in
danger thereof as well as his mother Mary, and John the Baptist, and other
excellent saints. But his procedyng is named to be from the old days.
Wherefore death could not show such strength in this child, wherewith hitherto
he killed all men. For where as he was God, he could not sin, neither be
made gyltie by the law, neither be killed of death, neither damned of ye devil.
And yet for all that, forasmuch as he had his procedynge in time out of
Bethleem, and was borne into the world as other children were, he could not
but dye. Hereof it is, that death and the dyuell lays snares for them
selves, which consider no more then the procedyng out of Bethleem. And after
this procedyng, the child is in danger of death. But when he was now in his
Sepulcher, he tries his right by these words: I was borne before the world,
and so by the divine and godly power, he breaks the bands of death, of
sin, and of the devil, that they can take no hold upon him at all.

Such a memorial would this Prophet set forth as touching this king, that
we should not be ignorant of his two manner of procedynges, or as we say, of
two manner of byrths. For he is such a person, which is both a true GOD, and
also a very man, but yet on such wise, that he is not two persons, but one. So
that he confesses, that CHRIST is the son of Mary, which sucked at her
breasts, and increased in the body as other men did. But yet nevertheless he
was borne before the world, without beginnynge, so that now these two
several substances of manhood and godhead, be without separation united
together, in one person, and joined together. This did not the high priests
tell Herod, neither was he worthy to know so great mystery. This birth is
exceeding meruaylous, which if we desire to know, The procedyng out of
Bethleem, ought first to be learned.
we must take our beginning of our discipline and meditation out of his
procedyng in Bethleem. As this also is the order of the Prophet, as soon as he
reherseth the carnal birth. Yea and he makes more large mention as touching
this, than as concerning that birth that is eternalle. For he that will
meddle with matters belongyng to God without peril, must begin at the lowest:
and first of all learn, what thing he doothe in the earth, and how he
reueleth and opens him self to men. Then shall he go forth with out
stumblyng, as the order of the Prophets description, appoynteth, and shall
know that this child was borne from everlasting. Then shall it not be
terrible, but pleasant and comfortable. The thoughts of Predestination.
But the overthwart nature of men marreth and confoundethe all things, because
that all begin their discipline at predestination. Sith God knew all things
before, why did he not take heed, that man should not have fallen. And if thou
take this way to the knowledge of God, thou shalt fall down headlong. For
this was the fall of Lucifer which coueted so high renoume, that he could not
comprehend him self for pride. But if thou will go the right way to the
knowledge of God, take thy beginning at Christ's swathing bands. As the prophet
sets forth this order, that a man should first go to Bethleem, and
afterward clymbe up into heaven, and to eternity. As Christ him self
teaches, where as he says: Philyp, I am the way, he that sees me, John. 14.
sees the father. He that despises these principles, and tends or goes
forthewith to the highest, as to search, what is the government of God, how
he punysheth: This reward of his folishnes he takes, even to stumble to his
damnation, As the wise man says: He that is a searcher of the majesty, shall
be oppressed of his glory. Proverb. 25.


How God is to be known
Wherefore this is the true way for him, that desires the true knowledge of
this child, first to come to Bethleem, Then when he has sufficientely beholden
and considered him in the maunger, this will succeed of it self, that he is
not only the son of Mary, but also the son of God, borne of God, before
there was any creature created of God. And so the matter shall be without
peril. For when thou can truly comprehend this man Christ, thou shall know
God also. If thou beleuest in him, thou beleuest in God: If thou call upon
him, thou call upon God* If thou blasphemest him, thou blasphemest God. And
this is the Prophecy as touching the child Jesus in Bethleem.

But consider also therewith the perverse and unreasonable reason of Herod,
Herod and the Scribes are mad.
and of the Scribes. Herod persecutethe this child, the Scribes despise him.
This way of God is worthy to be had in mind, which puts forth a most
evident scripture to men, whereof they may talk, sing, and speak daily in
their communication, and yet they understand not a word thereof. For is not
this a strange and monstrous thing, that the Scribes recite this Prophecy?
Herod after the judgment of the Prophecy sends to Bethleem, and adds
thereto him self, saying: Make dyligente search for the child, and whenne ye
have found him, bring me word, that I may come and worship him. And yet
they understand not one jot of the meaning thereof. They are always kept
busye with the shadows, they never attain to the body of the matter.

Neither goes the matter any otherwise at this time among the unkind, yea,
Many of our gospellers understand not what the gospel is, whereof they talk so
much.
and that not only among the Papists, which have the Bible as well as we,
which read it, and know it as we do, but also among men of our part. They
reason of the Gospel, but they understand nothing thereof at all. For if they
understood it, they would with all their heart declare it in their living. As
the Scribes and Herod reherseth this Prophet by mouth. But if they had
understand, they would have surely gone with the wise men to this child, and
woorshypped him. But in that they do not so, and in that they despise these
great things as the brute beasts do, it is a token, that they know not
that thing, which they teach other. Wherefore Christians have this above all
other, that they do not only hear, but also understand the words, and
conceive an exceadynge meruaylle and pleasure thereof. Wherefore, although
that the world, the Pope, and our proud Citisens, and husbandmenne, do far
pass us both in richesse, strength, and dygnitie, yet we know, that we
pass them again far in this: and that this is their incredyble
punyshemente, that notwithstanding they do hear Gods word, talk of it,
and teach it unto other, yet do they understand nothing at all thereof.
Esai. 6. Math. 13.
As their own life may be an euidente proof of this, that they have ears,
as the Jews had, and hear not, they have eyes, and yet see not. Let us pray
to GOD, that he will through the star of his most holy word, lead us to his
son Jesus Christ, and preserve us for ever, against all offenses, of his
goodness. Amen.

An other sermon of the Baptism of Christ upon Twelfth day. Math. iii.
THen came Jesus from Galile to Jordan unto John to be baptized of him. But
John forbad him, saying: I ought to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me?
Jesus answeryng, said to him: Let it be so now. For thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him. And Jesus as soon as he was
baptized, came straight out of the water. And lo, heaven was open unto him:
and John saw the spirit of God descendynge like a dove, and lightyng upon
him. And lo, there came a voice from heaven, saying: This is my beloved son,
in whom I am welpleased.

THE EXPOSITION.
OF the feast of the Epiphanie have we entreated, how that it has his name of
this that Christ opened himself, not only by the star, Of the baptism of
Christ
but also at Jordan, where he was baptized. But forasmuch as this revelation
is the greatest and chiefest, and most comfortable unto us, it should not be
against reason. if it were called the feast of Christ baptized, Math. 3.
and opened at Jordan, when he was thirty years old. The Evangelist does
show the history plainly. That he moved from Galile, and came to John unto
Jordan, to be baptized of him, as other sinners were, which knew their sin,
and desired remission of them. John is troubled with this strange case. For he
knew Christ from his childhode. And he thinks him self not worthy to baptize
him. But Christ says, suffer me, this must be done, that all righteousness may
be fulfilled, that is, Math. 3.
that he may bring it to pass, that all miserable sinners may come to
righteousness, and be saved.

Wherefore herein is now set forth a confortable example unto us, Christ has no
need of baptism.
whereas the son of God offered him self to be baptized, which nevertheless
sinned not, and does that that he was not bound to do, whereas we do not that
yt we are bound to do. And it is far unlike, that we should do more than
our duty, when we through our wickedness are very far from that that we
should do.

Wherefore this ought especially to be marked in this place, that Christ the
son of God, Christ came to baptism. Baptism therefore is a waighcie matter.
which is holyer then al baptism, is notwithstanding baptized, and gave
commandment, that baptism should be kept in the congregation, and that all that would be saved, should be baptized. And by this is it now evident, that al
men are damnable and accursed, and stryken with madness and blindness of God for
a punisheme^t, which can not entreat and obtain so much of their eyes and
ears, as to mark what is done in this matter, but conte^ne and dispraise
baptism, and speak vilanously thereof. For why doste thou, and thy childern
refuse baptism, seeing ye son of God received it? what great madness or what
great fury is this in the, that thou should deny such a great work? Does
not baptism seem worthy of great renoume for this cause, if it were
profitable for nothing else, yt this so great a man used it? where as this is
evident, yt he is ye son of God, and came to baptism, yt thou sholdest come
to baptism for ye renoume thereof, if thou had no other commodity thereby?

Baptism is profitable for us.

The Father reueleth him self unto us at baptism.


But this matter is not without our profit. For what good it does unto us, it
appears in this, where as God by this baptism shows forth him self
wholye. For as the Evangelist bears witness, John saw the heavens open.
Which is a sign that God is delighted with baptism, which Christ him self
the Son of God sanctifies with his body. Wherefore heaven is opened which was
shut up before, and now above the baptism of Christ is ye gate and window of
heaven made wide open: so that from henceforth there is no distance between us
and God, because GOD is now fallen down unto Iordane. What is a revelation
then, if this be none? Wherefore if the feast of Epiphanie (that is) of reueling
and appearing, be requisite, why is not this constitute and appointed, whereas
so plain a manifestation and opening of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost is set forth? The reueling of the holy Ghost.
For the holy Ghost proceeds here after a most gentle sight, as a simple
dove, which amongst all birds is most tame, and is affirmed to be void of
all wrath. To the intent that we might conceive hereby a sure token, that the
holy Ghost will declare no crueltye toward us, but bestow that on us thorough
Christ, whereby we may be justified and saved. And for this cause is Christ also
opened after such a gentle sort to be the Son of God: The son of God.
and where as he had no need of baptism for his own behalf, he is present
thereat, and receaueth baptism, not only for an example, but also for a
sacrament, that his baptism might profit us also, and may cause us to have
sure trust, that God is merciful unto us.

Beside this, whereas ye Father opens him self by a voice: This is my dearly
beloved son, in whom I am delighted. This is an other manner of voice, then
was showed in ye mount Sinay, when the earth and hills did shake, and the men
that heard it thought them self to be in danger of their life. He shows not
now such a cruel voice. All things are full of swetnes and humanity. And God
does almost pronounce with this, saying on this wise: To you mortal men, is this
man put forth in baptism. If ye desire to know him, it is my dearly beloved
son, in whom is my chief and only pleasure. Neither is there any cause why
ye should fear him. He is set forth to you, as naked, without armor, and
without all cruel sight. And there is no cause, why ye should fear me. For I
come not now with thunder and lightninge, with a horrible and a dreadful trumpe
as I came to ye mount Sinay, but all things are peaceable, quiet and calm. For
what spice of crueltye may here be? The son of God, which is innocent and
without sin, stands in Iordane and receaueth baptism. The holy Ghost
comes with the meek form of a dove. Besides this God shows forth a very
humane and gentle voice, declaringe that he sends unto us no Apostle, no
Prophet, no Angel, but his Son, in whom he may greatly delyght.

What greater record can ye have at al, The baptism of Christ is comfortable.
to make us to mark, and observe the son of God? Since it has pleased God to
give this commendation, yt his son is with us, that all may be sure of this
most certain and tried will of God: If they will have God merciful unto them,
let them embrace his son only, from whom ye Father can by no means turn his
favor, and for the sons sake, all his must need be accepted to ye Father.
Wherefore let all men regard diligently this commandment, that they hear him,
and obey his precept. For he had no need of circumcision and baptism, because
he was void of sin. But the baptism of John was made of God for sin, that
all that acknowlegde their sins, and be sorry for them, and desyer that they
might be pardoned, should go to baptism, and think for a suerty, yt God is
merciful unto them. But why is Christ baptized, which nevertheless is without
sin? Not for his own behalf but for ours, which are sinners. For he takes
our sins upon him, and delivers us from them. And for this cause he comes
to baptism, as the Evangelist shows very properly, whereas he says: Christ
forbidden of John, answers: Suffer me, for this is it mete to fulfill all
righteousness. Which is as much as to say: In his baptism is contained ye
righteousness of all the world. For whereas al ye worlds sins are put on me, if
the recover of the world be sought for, I must do that that God commanded
sinners to do, (that is) that they should be baptized of the. Do not thou
forbid it, but rather further it, that even as I do gladly take upon me
baptism for sins sake: so do thou gladly procure baptism for me, that the
wrath of God may be pacified, and remission of sins ordained. To this meaning
sends the Father this voice out of heaven: This is my dearly beloved son,
Math. 3.
in whom I am well pleased. He speaks these words at that time, when Christ
is baptized, that we may understand, that this is our baptism, and think
surely that the wrath of God is pacified, and our sins purged by this
baptism, and that God will receive us again into favor for his sons sake.

No difficulty or combrance be it never so great, should take the sound of
this voice, and so magnifice^t a revelation out of our sight and mind, whereas
the Lord our GOD opens the heavens, and sends down the holy Ghost in the
form of a dove, and where as God the Father him self sends forth such a
pleasant voice saying: Behold, here is for you my son, whom I love and
esteem above all things, yea and my self also wholly for you. But what does the
son? he behaueth him self as a miserable and wretched sinner, and is
baptized of John. There could be no gentler and meker revelation of all the
godheade according to ye three persons in three sorts, than this was, so that
all men may be sure of this, that he that receaueth Christ, and believes his
word, and trusts in his working, pleases God in all points. Which thing is
set forth and confirmed in this place. Whatsoever he commands, says, or
does, all that is verily after the will and pleasure of the Father. Blessed
were we, if we would obey his will, and embrace his son with a steadfast faith
and confidence.

But who would not meruaill at the great madness of them, The unkindness of the
world.
which at the sound of this most magnificent voice, pass by as deaf. But yet
the rabble of Papists add to this contempt a more greuouse crime. They curse
and persecute this voice, and they speak with open blasphemy, that Christ is
not only he, in whom the Father is delighted, but that he is delighted also in
Mounkes, Masses, Pilgrimages, and such like. He that would earnestly ponder
with him self, what a blasphemy this is, to dishonor and disgrace Gods
goodness and humanity with such pride, would thynk it better to dye then to
live, least he should feed on that air with this wicked kind.

Wherefore my childern learn this, while ye have occasion. An adhortatio^ to
baptism.
A few years paste ye knew not these things. Then was heaven shut up. Then
were we feign to hear and believe Mounkes dreams as touching purgatory, and
terrible spirits, and souls, and such other lies. But now other things are
taught, and only it remains that men learn. But for as much as we prevail
nothing with the world as touching this, at least wise let us remember our
duetye, and give GOD thanks for this benefit, for that he reueleth his mind
unto us on this day, giving unto us a thing of inestimable price, even the
holy Ghost, in the lykenes of a dove, his own son at Iordane in baptism,
and him self in a voice full of majesty and confort. Who would not therefore
condemn him worthily, which gives not thanks, which rejoices not, which
receaueth not the son of God with a fervent desyer, which stands here in
Iordane, receueth baptism as a sinner. Upon whom comes the holy Ghost in the
sight of a dove, where the Fathers voice is so nighe, that it can be no nigher?
There is no doubt but that the angels of God were present. For where as is the
Father, the son, and the holy Ghost, there must needs be a great multitude
of Angels. Wherefore see that ye esteem this hystory hyghly. In deed it is a
revelation where as CHRIST opens him self to the wise men by a star. But
this revelation passes that very far. For these are three especial kings,
God the Father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost, which are al present
together, when Christ is baptized. If it had so pleased him, this revelation
might have been done as well either in the wilderness, or in the temple of
Jerusalem: But it was showed even at baptism of the set purpose of God, that
we might learn religiously and reverently to esteem baptism: And because we
also are baptized, let us esteem our selves no other wise, then fresh and new
made saints.

The pratynge of the Anabaptists is very great, where as they say now,
Baptism is not water only.
that baptism is nothing else than water. But with what word might a man
sufficientlye curse these execrable heddye persons? This is the Judgment of
brute beasts, and not of Christians. For there is not only water, but also the
word of GOD as it is seen at CHRITES Baptism. For God the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost is present. Wherefore it is no more water of the Element,
but such water as in the which the Son of God is washed, upon the which the
holy Ghost is carried, God the Father preaches, that this water might not be
counted simple water, but sanctified, whereat God the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost is present. Math. 23.
As Christ also for that cause appoynteth the form of baptism, that it should
be given in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Wherefore when a child is now baptized, the Son of GOD is present at this
baptism, which with his body, The holy Ghost, which with his presence, God
the Father which with his voice has consecrated and hallowed baptism.
Wherefore it can not be said, that it is but water. For all the Godhead is
present. And for this cause we judge baptism no man's work. For although a man
baptiseth, yet he baptiseth not in his name but in the name of the Father, of
the son, and of the holy Ghost, which come and are present at the work of
their own accord. Or else that would never follow at baptism that ought to
follow. Now who is he, that would count this vile and of no value, that God the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost, is present? who will be so bold as to
call it very water? Is it not evident, what God of his own adds to the
water? If water be mingled, now it loses her name. Baptism is no work of man.
Why then do we in this place seven the word from the water, and pronounce it
to be water only, as though the word of God, or as though God him self were not
in this water? But it is not so, for the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost
are present, and be in this water. As in Iordane, when Christ stood in the
water, the holy Ghost was carried above it, and God preached by it.

Wherefore baptism is such water, that takes away syn, death, and all evil,
and gives salvation and everlasting life. So great price is now added to this
water, in the which God demitteth him self. But God is the God of life. And
since he is in this water, it must needs be ye water of life, Baptism takes
away syn and death.
which takes away death and damnation, and gives life everlasting. This
ought baptism truly to be known and highly esteemed. For he is not baptized
in the name of any Angel or man, but in the name of the Father, of the son,
and of the holy Ghost. Or as it is in the acts of the Apostles, To baptize in
the name of Jesus.
in the name of Jesus, which is as much. For he that confesses Jesus Christ
truly, with the same confession compriseth the Father and the holy Ghost. For
Christ says, that he comes from the Father, and that he sends the holy
Ghost. He then that confesses truly Jesus Christ, can not dyminish the
authority of his word, but shall believe that the son is not alone, but that
the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost, be there together, although the
Father and the holy Ghost be not named.

Wherefore let us not lightly esteem this, let us not separate ye word from the
holy baptism or water, where with he is baptized, but let us confess, What is
the use of baptism.
that this is therefore appointed of God to purify us from our syn for Christ's
sake, through the holy Ghost. For if it were not for this, what should the
Father, the son, and the holy Ghost, have to do there? Wherefore if thou
beleuest that a newborn child is sinful, dippe him into baptism, that God
may work his work in him, as his word commands, and does promise a new birth
by the water and the holy Ghost, and also this, Marc. 16.
that he that believes and is baptized, might be saved. Likewise if thou
confess that he is in death, dippe him in this baptism and lauer after the
commandment of Christ, and then shall death be swalowed up.

Neither must thou, that art baptized, think any otherwise, than that
baptism is a seal and pledge of assurance, that God has forgeuen thee thy
sins, and has promised life everlasting for Christ's sake. For baptism has
a godly power, to take away death and sin. For therefore are we baptized. And
although sins be committed after that, and the works of godlynes not
perfectly done, yet they that repent again, do not forfeit their covenant of
baptism and the promise thereof. For this can by no means agree, that a man
should desyer remission of syn, and also give up him self wholly to sin. But
this is in all points necessary to repent, and to consider with him self
uprightly and truly, that God has promised us his grace and favor. When he
came to the baptism of his Son, and that we should return to that grace,
and believe surely, that our sins are forgeuen, not for us or for any
creatures sake, but for CHRIST our Lord, which has commanded this baptism,
and was baptized him self also as a sinner.

Wherefore this revelation passes not a little the other, which was showed to
the wise men by a star. For out of this the fruit redoundeth to all Chrystian
men, where as in that revelation of the wise men, a few Gentiles only came to
the knowledge of the king of the Jews. Wherefore it were not without a good
cause, if this were called the day of the Baptism of Christ, and in the which
Christ was baptized. Then should we have a just cause given, to plead the
matter of Baptism against the Anabaptists and the dyuell, which may sooner be
entreated of us for any matter, then that we should consider the busynes of
our salvation. For there he sets against us with tooth and nail, that we
may not come to the sight of our inheritance. As the example of the Popedom
does yet admonish us, under the which little or nothing was set forth in the
congregation, as touching this revelation at Iordane. Wherefore think this to
be a thing most worthy to be remembered, where as God this day, with a most
evident sermon as touching his Son, opened him self, even that all matters
that are between Christ and us do highly please God the Father. For he that
obeys the son and keeps his word, he is accepted to God, and receaueth the
holy Ghost. Which opens him self at this Baptism in a very amiable and
pleasant sight. And hereunto also it agrees, that the Father sends forth a
very bounteous voice, when he says: Behold, here is for you, not an Angel,
nor a Prophet, nor an Apostle, but my son, and my own self also. What
revelation can be greater? And what service can we do that is more acceptable
to him, than that we obey his decree and proclamation? But he that is not moved
with this, let him after his seeking perish with the dyuell, neither is he
worthy to hear this Godly sermon. Wherefore let us give thanks to God for
this great and unspeakable grace, and let us pray that he will preserve it in
us, and thereby at lenghth save us.

AMEN.
The first Sunday after Twelfth day, upon the Gospel, Luke ij.
THE Father and mother of Jesus went to Jerusalem after the custom of the
feast day. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned home, the
child Jesus abode still in Jerusalem, and his Father and mother knew not of
it: but they supposing him to have been in the company, came a days journey
and sought him among their kinsfolk and acquayntaunce. And when they found
him not, they went back again to Jerusalem, and sought him. And it fortuned
that after three days, they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst
of ye doctors, hearing them, and posing them. And all that heard him were
astonyed at his understanding and aunswers. And when they saw him, they
meruayled, and his mother said unto him: Son, why have thou thus dealt with
us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorowing. And he said unto them:
How happened that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must go about my fathers
busynes? And they understood not that saying, which he spoke unto them. And he
went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient unto them. But his
mother kept all these sayings together in her heart. And Jesus prospered in
wisdom and age, and in favor with God and men.

THE EXPOSITION.
THIS Gospel has a very deep and profound understanding, and it is a hard
thing to attempt the interpretation thereof. It is contained in this history,
how the matter goes, when the child Jesus is lost out of the heart. But we
for this time will let pass this high mystery, and will defer it unto an
other time. And will now take that upon us to expound, which is most plain
and evident. As touching the last feast, this have we said, that it is named
the Epiphanie or appearing of Christ. Which thing was done to the intent that
this child newborn should not be kept privy, but be opened to al men. For
otherwise should we have no use of this child, if we had not gotten the
knowledge of him. And for this cause other hystories are put forth, out of the
which it appears, how Christ has reveled and opened him self: As when John
baptized him in Iordane, and he opened his glory by a sign in the marriage of
Canaa^, even that he is such a Lord, that has full power of the creature. And
that he should not only be known amongst men, but also be counted famous for
a power far passing the power of man. And because he is known to be such a
lord, whose power is most highest and almighty: we ought to take him for our
Savior, unto whom we should have refuge in all difficulty and adversity,
and look for help of him. And to this thing does this present Gospel
belong. For this is also a revelation, by the which CHRIST does declare, that
he is a child not after the common sort, but after a peculier manner and
trade, whereas he comes away him self pryuily from his mother, he regards
not obedience, which otherwise all other chyldern owe to their parents after
Gods commandment. How Christ was lost at Jerusalem.
This matter chanced by such an occasion. The parents, as other Jews, were
bound every year to keep the passover. They came to the temple of the Lord to
Jerusalem. And whereas they had brought the child Jesus with them, when the
feast was done, the child followed not the company of his parents, but tarried
in the temple. At the beginning the mother was not so sorrowful for him,
peradventure because he was wont in times paste to go to his kynsefolke. For
Christ followed nothing in the first years but after the common capacity of
that age, he was not grym and sad, otherwise than it was agreeable to a
child. In runninge and play he showed not him self unlike to other chyldern,
except that that there appeared not such seeds of vice in him. And hereof it
is that Joseph and Marie were sone persuaded that he was with his kynsfolke,
and are not careful for him. But when they had iorneied one day, at evening
they inquire in the Inn for the child: And when they found him not amongst
their kynsfolke, they were greatly moved. For this child was committed
peculiarly to the mother. And Joseph also had no little commandment, to see
diligently to this child. But yet was Mary the only mother. Wherefore she took
this matter most grievously, and feared very greatly, for that she found him
not where she sought him. And it is easy to judge that it was no small fear.
Doubtless they returned by night the nigheste way, but they find not the
child. What they thought in this case and what heart they had, judge thou of
thy own felinge, although it be not like? For one day was passed over without
care, in the which he was lost, upon the second they make inquisition, in the
third day at length they find him. And as for two nyghtes together they
slepte not, but passed it over with careful thoughts. And doubtelesse the
mothers mind was grievously wounded with such most bitter suspicions,
reasoning this with here self: God has taken away thy Son from the, he will
not suffer thee to take any longer joy of this gift, because thou haste
kept him so negligently. Joseph took it for a punishment of Gods wrath,
because he took no better head to this only child.

This therefore is most worthy to be marked, that Christ would declare his
privilege, Why Christ would hyde him self.
that he is not bound with like force as other chyldern be, to be subject to
the parents. But that whatsoever he did, he did it for an example of a free
will, and not constrained by the rigor of the law: For he was not only the
son of his mother, but also her God and Lord. Wherefore he is not here
subject to his mother, as we shall hear next, where as he says: Woman, what
have I to do with the? So does he here also, and declares that he is not a
pure man, which can be constrained by necessity to obey his parents. But this
does he openly profess, that he has a higher parent, to whom he is more
bound then to Mary and Joseph. How is it (says he) that ye sought me: Knew ye
not, that it behooved me to be about those things that belo^ged to my Father?
As though he should say: I am your son, but yet on such wise, that I am
more bound to obey the heavenly Father.

Wherefore he is made open and manifest for our behalf, that we might well know
him, and repose and lay up within us the true example of him, that he is not
only man, but also God. Wherefore as soon as his mother said unto him: Son, why
dyddest thou deal thus with us? He answers, I am not disobedient unto you,
I have not despised you as ye thought. Wherefore he defends his right against
his mother, and because of his parents sorrow and great vexation of their mind,
their case seems so much the worse. For they might have called to mind the
words of ye Angels and shepherds, as touching this child, and might know,
that although this child followed not them, yet he ought not to be blamed as
disobedient, but it was their part to think of a greater obedience which
ought to be showed to the heavenly Father. Christ's example tends to this
purpose to know that God must be more obeyed then man.
And for a necessary cause was this example to be put forth of Christ against
our reason and overthwart manner, which do always judge that ye service
inverted by man is better than the service appointed by God. Wherefore this rule
is here to be learned, that when the matter comes to this point, that we
must either deny God of his service, or else our parents and magistrates, we
must aledge CHRIST'S word for our defense, and say: I must rather be about
these things that belong to my Father, which is in heaven? Beside this case,
I will gladly do all that I can to fulfill my duty toward my Father and
mother, toward the powers, and satisfy the family and master. But in this
state I must declare that I have an other Father, which ought more to be
obeyde. This thing had CHRIST'S parents forgotten in this place, wherefore Christ
calls them again into the way, and admonishes them as touching their duetye.

Wherefore Christ puts forth an example for reason. We must obey God mor
then man.
Which, when it ought to obey and serve God, excuses it self by this
pretense, that God has commanded obedience also to be done to parents and
magistrates. Even as the persecuters of the Gospel do now at this time. They
have learned of us to have the magistrates in high reverence, and they extol
very much the obedience to magistrates. We know (say they) that this is true
and according to scripture, that both kinds of the Sacrament ought to be
received: But we are bound to be obedient to the magistrates. Our parents are
against it, our king is against it, which forbids it, wherefore I may not
do so. If thou doste magnify the power, which is appointed unto the by GOD:
verily God which is the geuer of all power, is more to be magnified, which
before his decree, whereby he gave this power, speaks on such wise of the
greater obedience which is due unto him self. I am the Lord thy God. Ought
not this then to seem a just cause, that thou sholdest do what soever he bid
thee to do, yea at that time also when thy gouerner command thee the
contrary, and that thou should also say and object to all thy instant
adversaries? I must go about these things that belong unto my father. Note.
For Gods commandment and charge ought to be more esteemed then all things
that be. If that be fulfilled, then afterward thou must fulfill also other
ordinances of the emperors, parents, magistrates, that the commonalties be not
disturbed thereby.

The vtteryng of this history of Christ, belongs not only to faith, Christ
utters him self to be an ensample.
as does the revelations made by the star, and opened in Jordan, and in the
marriage: but it pertains also to giving an ensample, that as touchi^g matters
of religion, and things pertaining to the obeying of God, we should have respect
to no man, neither to parent nor prince. For in this we are bound by obligation
to a more higher lord, yt is to god: whose commandment must needs be don, and
him must we only serve. If thou have performed this obedience* then may thou
not deny that obedience yt is due to inferior gouerners, but yet on such
wise, that they be not a let to the performyng of the greater obedience,
whose service must be done before all others. As touching ye high temptation
wherein Christ is lost out of ye heart, I will not speak, I will only have in
mind the uttering of this child wherein he declares himself to be such a one,
that has a greater right then other me^. For that that he casts, of the yoke
of obedience, which was made without power, and waits not upon his parents,
but causes the^ to com back unto him again, to the intent yt he might confirm
that they heard spoken of the angel: And he shall be called the son of the
most highest. And that the meaning of this saying might be had in remembrance,
and not forgotten, it was expedient that it should be renewed by this deed. So
that this revelation does very well agree with the other. For here is it made
evident that Christ is the chiefest man as the shepards, and Simeon did
testify of him. Wherefore he thinks sure yt his cause and state is chief
above al other children, howbe it he had not yet forsaken the fellowship and
pastime of his play fellows. But that Christ's business was in the temple, the
Evangelist does sufficiently declare. For his reasonyng was not as touching the
dearth of victuals, What busynes Christ had in the Temple.
or of such trifling matters, but he conferred and disputed with the scribes,
as touching ye word of god. First he knew of them, how they understood and
expounded scriptures, and then he reproved their errors, but yet on such wise
as did agree to his age. Math. 5.
And yt I may bring this for an example out of Matthew, where as yt scribes
disputed of the fifth commandment, and so expounded it, as though yt murder
with the hand were only forbid there by. He himself comes forth with a more
perfecter meaning and sense thereof, how yt al railings, false accusatio^s,
cursyngs, hatred, braulyngs of ye angry, ar to be taken to be against this
Precept. For the pythe of the precept is to exclude private reuengyng, and all
things that give occasion and inticement thereunto, that there might be a
merciful affection and gentylnesse toward al men.

After this sort did the child at that time teach to make inquisition for
the most weyghtye and perfect things in the law. He him self also
demanded of these things, that this reason and meaning that was new and
never heard of amongst the Scribes, might get admiration and wondering.
How may it be, that a child should have so perfect Judgment of so
great matters? For this is doubtelesse, that he thought, that the vices and
faults of the teachers, and the errors of the interpreters were not to be
ouerpassed of him.

And this is a thing very lykely, that he did confer with the Doctoures, as
touching Messiah, where he should be borne, and what his office should be.
Yet did he all things with such moderation and with such a meaning, as though
he had learned these things of the discipline of his mother, that they might not
judge this child to be Messiah, but yet to be replenyshed with the holy ghost,
and with the towardnes of the chiefest virtue and power. For what hope of
virtue and godly towardness there is in a child, may well be perceived by
certain tokens at that age.

And this is the history, Christ is subject to his parents for ou^ example.
how the child Christ opened him self toward his mother and Joseph, and how
that he is above the common capacity of children, because he will not wholly be
under the controllyng of his parents, neither does he suffer his office to be
blamed in this. This history does the Evangelist conclude, when he says: He
came down with them, and was subject unto them. This child used here his
privilege, when the matter required, that he might rather obey his
celestial Father. But here he suffers him self to be brought in order
again, and submytteth him self to the commandment of his parents,
although he were bound thereunto by no law. As Luke sygnifiethe this,
whenne he says: And he was obediente to them. As though he should say,
he obeyed them of his own free will, and not of co^pulsion. But in that ye he
was subject unto them, he did it not for his parents sake, but for an example,
that as touching his service in the household, we should not doubt, but yt he
was very obedient to the commandment of his parents, that he was ready to
healpe his father in his work, and that he did other things belonging to that
age, in helping the family, and that he thought not him self to good to do
it.

This example is put forth to be remembered of children. For if the Lord, which
is the God of us all, did not refuse to do this, and behaved him self unwilling
in nothing that he was bid to do of his parents, although it were not all
without drudgerie, but many things thereof were full of seruilitie: verily
children ought not to be loathe to show obedience and modesty to their
parents. For this pleases God, and as the first precepte shows, he
requires that of all people, that they obey their parents with all their
hearts.

To this very time do I remember, that there was in time paste a question: Of
what sort was Christ's chyldhode? And the Monks feigned a book of the infancy
of CHRIST. And there is told a fable of a certain bishop, that he would
have known this. And for that cause he had a dream, in the which he saw a
carpenter, preparynge wodde to build, and by him a little child, caryeng the
chyppes of wood, until at last a vyrgine in graye clothing, having in her
hand a cauldron, came unto them, and called both the manne and the child.
And here the bishop in his dream, seemed to follow them, and to hyde him self
within behind their gates, that he might know what meat it was, that they
did eat. And that when the mother had set meat before the child by him self
alone, the child asked what this man behynd the gates would have, and that the
bishop was cast in such a fear by these words, that he was waked out of his
sleep. But if thou wylt have true knowledge as touching the chyldhod of Christ,
have respect in this place to the words of the Evangelist, which are these.

And he was subject to them. That is to say: He was obedient to their
commandment, and thought nothing to base for him to do. The childh^^ of
Christ.
And this ought to make all children and servants ashamed, when they hear
this history of the child Jesus. For they obey neither masters, neither
parents in the family. For this do men pretend both by thought and word,
that they would gladly follow Christ, if they knew how. As the Franciscan
friars will have them selves known by this, in that they follow saint Francis
in vesture, watchynges, and such like. But forasmuch (say they) as no man
has knowledge of Christ's chyldhode, the matter is without example. They say
not true in this, that no man has knowledge thereof. For here is put forth an
ernest testimony of it. And he was subject unto them. By these few words the
Evangelist compriseth all the chyldhode of Christ, and all the time of his
adolescencie and youth, yea rather all this whole space unto the thirtieth year.
But what is the meaning of this? And he was subject unto them: Uerily nothing
else but that he looked in the first precept, as in a glass of all his doings.
Now this commandment shows what children and servants are bound in the
family to do to their parents for their service, in setting things necessary,
in procuryng them in the household, and in the fulfyllyng their commandementes,
And the child Jesus thought, that this was belonging to his duty. And here
now ought al children to understand their renoume and honor, in yt they have
Christ the author of all their works, where as they follow Christ's steps,
and do their taskes that are appointed them of their parents, if so be they
only delight in doing their duty, as they see that the child Jesus especially
endeavored him self to do.

There is no need to have long commentaries or gloses as touching the acts
of Jesus in his chyldhod, if we consider but only this, what taskes and works
parents do require of their children in families. For they have an evident
testimony in this place, that he went not into any wyldernes or cloister. But
he comes to Nazareth: He highly estemeth the civil fellowship: he obeys his
parents, and as other children are, so is he subject to discipline. The
unsavory and foolyshe flock of monks makes mention of the child Christ in
their writings, that he made little birds and small beasts. But these are not
works of obedience, neither was he commanded so to do of his parents.

For the obedience of a child is of an other sort, and in other things, that
is, to make prouysion for the famylye, and that the governance thereof may not
be neglected, not in the smallest matters that there be. The Euangeliste makes
mention hereof, and with one word of obedience declares the wholle duty
toward the parents, that the meaning thereof may be certain, and without
doubt. Neither let any manne think otherwise, but that this whole obedience
of the fyfthe precepte is sanctified and consecrate by the child JESUS, So
that it ought to seem unto us a thing most to be regarded, that we
depart not void of this most perfect virtue. But the world has no
ears, it hearethe no good counsel. Wherefore men did lay aside true
obedience, and regarded only mounkerie, and the relyques of saints: they
vysited them with great labor and cost. Every man thought, that they would
do better, and more precious things, than the child Christ did.

We did not perceive, that the works belonging to an householde be
sanctified, by this glorious person the son of GOD: Which in his youth
thought it no shame to do fylthy and servile works at his parents request.

Wherefore we ought to think nothing more excellent, more precious than this
history, and hyghly to esteem this our felicity when we show such
obedience. For the example of Christ is not obscure unto us. And all things
that are thus done by the following of Christ, are a thousand times more better
and more holyer, then all that ever monks have done, or do, or ever shall
do. For the monks have not Christ for their captain, which (as the
Euangeliste affirms) went not into a cloister, but he went with his parents
home, and was obediente there unto them.

But this is the sum of the Gospel, CHRIST the Lord is above all, and yet
he humbles him self for an exaumple to us. He does obey his parents, that
we might have full knowledge of both offices. First, that we may show
obedience to God, then unto our parents and Magistrates, and that with
greatte Faith and Reverence. God grant that the example of the child Jesus
may admonish us to do our duty perfectly, and that we may pay unto God, that
belongs to God, and to Caesar that belongs to Caesar, and to the parents,
that belongs to the parents. Amen.

The second Sunday after Twelfth day. The Gospel. John. ii.
ANd the third day was there a marriage in Cana, a city of Galile, and the
mother of Jesus was there And Jesus was called (and his disciples) unto the
marriage. And when the wine failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him: They have
no wine. Jesus said unto her: Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine hour
is not yet come. His mother said unto the ministers: Whatsoever he says unto
you, do it. And there were standing there six water pottes of stone, after
the manner of Purifyenge of the Jews, containing two or three firkyns a piece.
Jesus said unto them: Fill the water pottes with water. And they filled them up
to the brymme, And he said unto them: draw out now, and bear unto the
governor of the feast. And they bare it. When the ruler of the feast had
tasted the water turned into wine, and knew not whence it was (but the
ministers which drew the water knew) he called the bridegroom, and said unto
him: Every man at the beginnynge does set forth good wine, and when men be
drunk, then that which is worse: but thou have kept thy good wine until
now. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and showed his
glory, and his Dysciples believed on him.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis is ye first miracle, that our Lord Jesus Christ wrought, wherewith as
John says, his will was to open his glory unto his disciples, Christ declares
himself to be God.
that by such a sign and miracle, they might know him, and believe for a
surety, that he is the son of God, and the true Messiah: Forasmuch as he
can do that that no other man could do: that is, to change a creature and to
make wine of water. These things are only in Gods power to do, which is the
lord of all creatures. They are not in ma^s power. Wherefore this sign and
miracle is to be referred and applied to this end, that we truly learn to know
Christ, and that we may flee unto him with a sure trust, when we see our
selves in poverty, and in any straight combrance, to ask help and succor of
him, which we shall perceive at due time. This is the chiefest part of this
Gospel.

But forasmuch as this is a common doctrine in all signs and miracles which
Christ wrought, we will take this matter now specially to be entreated, that
Christ wrought this sign especially at a marriage, that the doctrine as touching
matrimony might not grow out of use in the congregation. For it is a thing
most necessary. All men know in how great contempt matrimony was had in the
Popedom, The popedom allows no matrimony*
and with how great praises they extolled virginity and chastity, which
nevertheless could be seen in few of them. But how God has requited these
marriage haters the spirituality, and has revenged the wrong and vilanie done
to his ordinance, it is easy to show. So that they hated not only marriage, but
also clean extinguished the love of womankynd out of their heart. And there
was so great contempt and such hamousnes of these sins, that it was
marvel, that God drove not mounkes, Nuns, and Chanons, with all such like,
into hell, with a blast of lightnyng. But that we may judge otherwise of
Matrimony, and that we may not be against it, or flee it, as the Pope does,
this Gospel may much profit us thereunto. For that that the Lord showed his
first miracle in a marriage, in an unknown town called Cana, Christ honoreth
matrimony.
when he was thirty years old, being now baptized of John, and taking on
him the office of preaching.

By the Popes Canons and laws, Christ should well and orderlyke have done
this, if he had opened his glory in the marriage, before that he was called to
the office of teaching, and anointed of the holy ghost. But this is an
excellent exaumple, not only against the dreams of the Pope, which are
cast and thrust out of our church with clapping of hands, and hissyng: but
against the sects to come, which count this the chief religion, to despise
and forsake matrimony, to go into wyldernes and desert places, where as is a
more quiet life, and less dangerous then is in matrimony. In the which are
great braulynges, chydyngs, and much trouble with thy wife, with thy children,
servants, evil neighbors etc. The monks set forth their life for an holy life.
The life of monks and priests.
But if they say ye truth, it were rather to be called a sweet, quiet, and an
idle life, where they have lived in great abundance and plenty: where as y^
miserable married, has in ye mean time, striued with miseries and hard getting
of their living: and yet they were clean banyshed and put beside this title, by
these pope holy monks, that this kind of life in matrimony might not be in the
kingdom of God, and go into everlasting life. And although this example yt
Christ has put forth unto his congregation, be magnificent, glorious and
evident, yet has it nothing prevailed with the wicked. It was rehearsed in the
church, but there was no man there, yt could gather so much light thereby, that
he could truly ponder the matter on this wise: If it be such a great matter to
go to the wilderness, and to the cloister, why came Christ to the marriage? If it
be such an unholy thing to be occupied in the world, and to become a married
person, why did Christ with his presence and first miracle honor marriage?
These tragical myseries might have been mytigate, if this state of monkerie
and heremitage had been put forth but a few years. But now sith they are
not only against marriage, but also abjure them selves from it by an oath for
ever, that is no holy kind of life, but it is a following of rest and idleness
contrary to Gods commandment and ordinance.

We therefore learn and know in this place, how greatly the lord god honoreth ye
fifth commandment. For parents and matrimony, are not without a family,
without gains, without household stuff, without other means of encreasyng
the substance. All these things therefore has commendation by this fact of
Christ, as holy things: with the which, true godlynes may well be joined: that
all by Christ's example may not despise these things, but have them in great
reputation, and magnify them as things commanded of God: and that the
doctrine of this Gospel may instruct the youth, to understand that God is
highly pleased in the governance of a family, and that there is no need of
new institutes, as the monks has corrupted ye path of godliness. For the
householder that applies all things in the gouernyng of his house to the fear
of God, Matrimony is holy.
does well instruct and fashion his family, lives in such a kind of life as
is acceptable to God. Yea the wife also, that provides for her children all
things necessary for that age, let her not seek an holyer kind of life. The
servants also, are subject to their bodily masters when they diligently
execute their work and commandment of their master, and do hyghly please
God: and if they hold fast by this principle, that they continue in faith: the
vylest and basest works that they do, are more acceptable to God, then all the
fastes, hours, prayers, masses of the monks, yea and whatsoever they boste
of, Matrimonye is no prophan thing.
as most chief amongst al their ceremonies and rites.

Wherefore all these things that are belonging unto marriage, are not to be
counted vile, neither is the example of the monks to be followed, which judge
all these things worldly and unholy in respect of their own. Christ with this
his deed does signify, where as he is present with the marying persons, that
he favors all this kind, and that God requires, that all things
appertainyng to the housholdes gouerna^ce might be had for great and high
matters, and not for unholy things. As the first precepte bears record,
which is the chief in the second table. Wherefore let not the married
persons, nor the servants think vilely and basely of their offices. For these
things please God, and God himself has blessed matrimony, and has honored
it for the nonce, where as he now being a Preacher of the Gospelle came to the
marriage at his byddyng.

If marriage had not ben holy enough, he might have alleged for his excuse
the holiness of his office. and so absented him self. But he being the chief
prelate of all other, is not let by his most holy office to come to the
marriage, which is the first foundation of all housholdynge. But gets unto
all such commendation and estimation, that who soever are in this kind of life,
do highely esteem the judgment of God, in that he has so placed them in
that room, that whether they be man and wife, either children, either
servants of the family, they may be sure, that their office is after the will
of GOD. Christ honoreth marriage.
For who would not be moved with this notable example of Christ, in that that
Christ being so great a teacher, yea and God him self, is not only a renoume,
but also an healpe to marriage. declaring there his good will most euidentely?
This doctrine is first necessary against heretics. And we can not be at this
time without it in the congregation for because of the sects, Complaints
against marriage.
which diminishe the estimation of matrimony, and raileth on it, as though in
it were an occasion of all disco^modities, with servants children, neighbors,
wife, household stuff, so that sufficient care of God, and of his kingdom may
not be had. And therefore they seek an other devise, they take upon them to
live unmarried, they make them selves colleges and abbeys, where they may live
without such pains. Then after that by the authority of the dyuell, they
have followed these devises, every man embraces a rule and kind of living,
that seems best unto him self.

Against this peril this doctrine is necessary, and the example of Christ
most evident, which at the marriage was not the cause of separation or
diuorcement But that their copulation might be more straighter and narower and
more beneficial with them selves, he does as a man would say admonyshe them,
by his own benevolence and goodness. For if he would have disallowed the
marriage there made, he would not have been present at an unlawful thing. If
he had not favored with all his heart the married persons, and sons, and
thereby had declared the favor of God toward the married, he would not have
blessed the marriage by the gift of excellent wine, neither would he have given
a token in this to the married, what succor and comfort they should surely feel
at Gods hand in such miseries, Christ blesses the married persons.
if they fear God.

And this is one meaning in Christ's exaumple, that hereby it might be
gathered, that Matrimony ought to be honored and counted among the most
godly sorts of living, against the fantastical imaginations of the monks,
which so long before were reproved by the Judgment of the Apostles, 1. Timo.
14.
where as they are called seducynge spirits, and the doctrine of deuyls,
forbyddynge to marry, and to eat meats, The other meaning is, to the comfort
of the married persons, that they may surely believe, that God is present with
them, be they never so much vexed with poverty, need, and other myseries.
Only let this be thy care, that thou never lack this gueste at thy feast:
neither be thou any longer ruled with such rules and Canons. Then
doubtless he shall always for thy sake make wine of water, when he shall so
prosper thy doings with his blessyng, that thou shalt never be lacking of
the great glory of GOD, where as he also in thy tribulations, which do
seem paste all cure, shall succoure thee at his time appointed.

The examples daily chauncynge in man's travail show this to be true. For
when the married persons are godly, they feel the blessing of God, in
preparynge their living: the which is promised by the Psalm: Ecce dat
dilectis suis dormientibus. Psalm. 27.
Behold, he geuethe to his elect even when they sleep. Let us take an
experience hereof, from the craftesmen (I mean of the godly, and them that
labor dilygently in their vocation) if the whole sum of their gains that
they can get by their years labor, God blesses the labors of the faithful.
were put before them in a plain sum and number, they would utterly
despair to find them and theirs thereby. But the prime blessing of God is
among them, where as necessaries are ministered unto them, when they perceive
it not, and are given unto them by Gods secret woorkynge, so that they may
perceive Gods priuye lyberalitie and bounteousnesse in their most scarcity.
To be short, the presence of Christ shall be perceived in all our houses,
Math. 6.
if we se only to this, that we cast not of the seeking of the kyngedome of
GOD, then no doubt he will daily turn water into wine for us. He blesses
our bread and loaves, that a few may suffice many, that simple meats may
seem to us most delicate, A great comfort.
that the garments may not soon be worn, so that if we could mark with
attente eyes, we might say this: Lord, it is manyfeste, that all the
governance and ordrynge of marriage belongs to thee, and that the offices
thereof pertayne unto thy service. For thy redynesse and good wylll appear
most euidentlye in the marriage at Cana, and is yet seen, where as thou doste
so louyngly make prouysion for the godly married persons. Wherefore I will count
this thing for no light and unholy thing, but will deck and set forth
for my poor marriage, that I may at least seem willing to follow the most
evident example of Christ thy son.

The Evangelist makes special mention, that Jesus mother was present also,
peradventure she was the bride mother in the marriage. Mary the virgin helps
marriage al so.
For she thinks, that the matter belongs to her, when there chanced need
in the feast. It appears, that the marriage was such, in the which nothing
was lacking, but that that was necessary. And here Mary also, by her example
testifies, that marriage is not to be despised, as some superstitious people
despise it. For she is not thereat only in the highest rome, but she has
Jesus her son, and his disciples, which are most honorable guestes joined
unto her in this office also. O what glory and boasting would the monks make,
if this great company of saints, that is to say, Christ with his mother and
his disciples, had been seen on this wise in their matters? The most holy
mother think it no scorn to show her labor and diligence in the most
vylest and base service at the marriage.

All these things lack only the voice of God protestyng and pronouncynge,
that we may behold this kind of life, and consider it, according to her
propre nature and true dignity. The which God has in so high estimation,
that his pleasure is, that his son and his mother, should be as a renoume
and healpe at the marriage feast.

The examples are great, yet they nothing prevail among the Papists, neither
can householders be moved thereby sufficiently. The dyuel is the cause thereof,
which suffers not this light to appear unto them, that they may perceive
that whatsoever belongs to the service of households, that that is taken of
God as his own. For if men would think this for a suertye, The state of
matrimony ought to be esteemed of us also.
the servants would count their works, to be done as a most pleasant show in
ye sight of God, they would obey their masters most gladly, and would beware of
all offense with all diligence. And when they were chidden, they would take it
in good worth, so that they knew yt this kind of life were for a suerty
acceptable to God. They would ever behold this show, that Christ him self was
present in the marriage, and that he declared his singular good will toward
married persons and gouerners of housholdes: least this should seem greuouse
unto them, if they take any labor or pains in the doing of the business of the
household.

But they that are so stubburne, that they regard not these things, neither
are they moved thereby, have stony hearts, where as they may have this power,
Stony hearts
eue^ to serve God in their house, yet they care not to do it: or if they do
it, they are not moved thereby, they show not the^ selves to be joyful, as in a
prosperous case. If the hand maid would know her base works to be of such
felicity, that they might be compared with y^ works of Marie done at the
marriage, should not this cause her to be joyful and of good trust in all her
busynes? Ueryly the works and taskes, that belong to this state, are very
vile. But the persons, that judge truly of things, are excellent. Because they
know, that whatsoever there is of this sort, it pleases God. Whatsoever the
judgment of the world be as touching these matters, be not thou ruled thereby,
which folowest true godlynes. For this is the reason, to judge that great, and
to be the very service of God, which God has commanded, be it never so base
and vile.

How fortunat should this lower state be, if it could acknowledge her
felicity, that God allowed all their doings as his true service, where as
contraryly all the Mounkes must needs be discouraged, because they have no
commandment of God making for their institution of life. There is none
amongst all in this servile kind of life, But, if he would consider his sort
of lyuinge after this manner, would take great pleasure of this, that he
perceaueth that God and all the Angels behold and allow his work. Yea and
hereby should they find their masters more gentle unto them, if they would
with all diligence show fidelity in their office, and they should at due time
have sufficient commodity thereby. For faithful and godly servants are
worthy of honor. But although this be very true of his nature, yet can not
men be brought in belief that it is so. All men set more by the inventions of
man, as touching the worship of God after this or that sort, than that that
God has commanded as concerning the governance of a family. Wherefore it
chances worthelie to the unkind, against the fyfte precepte, that they faule
to Mounkerie, and besides that by doing all that they can, yet do they never
obtain their desyer, The unmarried were punished for their unkindness.
but offend God most grievously by their great disobedience, for he never gave
them any commandment as touching their trade of life.

Matrimony is the best kind of life.
Wherefore this example is not lightly to be esteemed, but hereby ought true
godlynes increase, that every man for his part may diligently further
matrimony, which God has made gloriouse by his commandment. For marriage
preserves Kings and Princes, and that not only because Kings and Princes
spring of marriage, but also because that if married persons were not, they
should have neither men, people, or yearlie revenues. For by the governance of
housholdes it is prepared whereby thereafter, all offices necessary among men
as well high as low are mayntayned. Wherefore God has ordained matrimony to
be as a well spring of all other commodities in the earth.

This council of God is to be known, God blesses the married.
that we might do all things with the more joyful hearts, and that this
kind of life might be commended and furthered of us. But let the married
persons seek especially herby necessary succor and confort for them selves.
For if they be godly and fear God they have this history as a most certain
pledge, that God will help the business of the married with a continual
blessing, and correct and mynish their incommodities. As he testifies in this
place. For it is not to be refused for this, that the married shall needs suffer
affliction in the flesh. But when CHRIST is taken to the marriage, and all the
matter is referred to the worship of God, then is it sure, that Gods
blessinge and help shall not be lacking.

This much therefore is to be learned as concerning this present matter, and all
ought to know this, these things are put forth in preaching to ye intent, yt al
might have yt excellent will at length, to magnify matrimony and to count it
for a renoume, if they be but married or if they can but bestow some what to the
furdering of marriage. And first let them see to them selves by this doctrine,
that they be not lead of the fantastical spirits to superstition which
count these things to be unholy either to be married, either to govern a
family. But he that would live with the favor of GOD, must attayn thereunto
by chastinge and kepinge under the body. The Anabaptists forsake marriage.
The which is the dream of the Anabaptists now a days. They forsake their
wives, their chyldern, their family. And this they take for religion, because
of the perturbation of mind, that there of does ensue. But this is very deceit,
and the dissemblinge of hypocrites. For it is not paynefull in deed, that one
takes on him of his own accord. That that is enjoined men, against their
will, is much more paynefull. Wherefore they are against it, least they should
be feign to suffer diverse pains and grefes. For there are innumerable bands,
that bynd the married.

These bands the Anabaptists break, and take them selves to liberty, least
they should be feign to stryne with these common myseries, as other married men
do. They take no great penance on them, when they shake of this yoke. For this
yoke is of a most hardest sort, when one is bound to a yokefelow, he is in
danger to his Prince, and bound to his neighbors to help them, where as al
godly offices comme and spring on every part, by louinge and sufferinge. For
there are many things brought to sight, to hearing, and to other knowledge,
which are most paynfull to feel, and we would wish to be rid from them, yet
must we endure, neither must we yield or be discoraged by the^. For although al
things are full of miseries and pains, yet this reco^penseth and makes amends
for them al, in that that God does greatly favor matrimony, and is especially
delighted with this function of ye married. This felicity is worthy of thanks
and great joy, that he makes us partetakers thereof, and excludes not us out
of this most gloriouse sacrarie and acceptable state. If thou shall be vexed
with poverty, thou must not despair. As he declares here in this marriage,
that he is delighted with such helpinge of the married. This ought now to be
learned out of this Gospel, and we must call for the help of God, that we may
never forget it, and that we never cease diligently to serve our vocation
according to the commandment of God: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

The third Sunday after the twelfth day, upon the Gospel, Math. viii.
WHEN he was come down from the mountain, much people followed him. And
behold, there came a Leper, and worshipped him, saying: Master, if thou will,
thou canste make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him,
saying: I will, be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And
Jesus said unto him: Tell no man, but go and show thy self to the Priest, and
offer the gift (that Moses commanded to be offered) for a witness unto them.
And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurio^, and
besought him, saying: Master, my servant lies at home sick of the paulsey,
and is grievously payned. And Jesus said, when I come unto him, I will heal
him. The Centurion answered, and said: Sir I am not worthy that thou should
come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.
For I also am a man subject to the authority of another, and have soldiers
under me: and I say to this man, go, and be goes: and to another man, come,
and he comes: and to my servant, do this, and he does it. When Jesus heard
these words, he meruayled, and said to them that followed him: verily I say
unto you, I have not found so great faith in Israel. I say unto you, that
many shall come from the East and West, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven: but the chyldern of ye kingdom shall be cast
out into utter darkness, there shall be weping and gnashing of teeth. And Jesus
said unto the Centurion: Go thy way, and as thou beleuest, so be it unto thee:
and his servant was healed in the self same hour.

THE EXPOSITION.
TWo things are set forth before us in this Gospel. The first of the leapre,
whom the Lord does purify. The other of the Centurio^, which asks help of
Christ for his sick child. And ye Evangelist shows that Christ did these
miracles forthwith after ye long sermon which he made in ye mountain. For
this was the very meaning of his so doing, that first he might teach, and
afterward confirm his doctrine by signs, yt all might judge this doctrine to
be true and without fraud, and believe it the more gladly. We have no need of
miracles. Miracles are testimonies of the doctrine*
For ye doctrine is so confirmed with them already, that no man can doubt
thereof. Yet nevertheless is this very requisite, yt they especially which
bear the office of teaching, pronounce not only ye words of godliness, but also
show and declare their godly life by the works of godliness. For the kingdom of
God consists not (as Paul says) in words but in power. Wherefore when the
doctrine and life agree, 1. Cor. 4.
they move the hearers earnestly: but when the life accords not to the
doctrine, this is an occasion of stumblinge to many.

And now these signs are not only to be considered as testimonies of ye
doctrine. For where as they pass al power and might of men, reason it self
also is constrained to subscribe hereunto. As the example of Nicodemus is
plain. That no man can do these signs, John. 3.
except God be with him. Wherefore these things also ought to be taken for
examples of faith and charity. An example of true charity in Christ.
For who may not perceive the gentle heart of Christ, and his ready will, where
as he is moved with a word to bestow this gift of health, where as otherwise
there was no hope of help in all ye goods of the world: This is a sure token,
yt he will gladly ease ye poor, the miserable, ye wretched, and the vexed: or
else he would have followed our example, which when we are wroth, behave our
selves frowardly and chorlisly to the^ yt come unto us to desyer our help.
This does not Christ. The leaper had scars lie ended his speech, but ye
Christ's will was ready to help, and did help him. This benignity of Christ
should not only move us to ask help of him in trouble and adversity, and to
be of a sure hope that he will not deny us his help: But ought also, to be an
example unto us, to show like gentleness and benignity to our neighbor. And
as Christ did, so we should have no other respect, then the obedience, which
we owe unto God, and the profit and commodity of our neighbor. For Christ
seeks not his own glory or profit by this benefit. He only has respect to
this, that this miser lacks help, that it pertayneth to the glory of God,
and that obedience may be showed unto him. For think not yt this is done to
God, when thou geuest a benefit to him that can requite it, and recompense like
or more for it. This thou do to thy self, where as thou sekest thy own
profit by doing good.

But he that will occupy him self well in doing his duty toward God and his
neighbor, Charity ought to have respect unto necessity
let him not have respect to his own profit, but only to the urgent misery
which requires present help. And to that, where as God would have it done,
yea although the least profit in the world should come unto us thereby, yea or
although the benefit were but lost upon a chorle. As we are taught also in an
other history, where as Christ heals the ten leapers, and one only returns
to give thanks to Christ. Luc. 17.
Nine of them did not as much as remember, of whom they received that
benefit. It is not possible, but that Christ did forsee this unkindness. Yet he
refuses not for this to do good to the misers. When they call on him, he is
ready to help, and as for the residue he commits al to God. And likewise
may it be said of charity, in the second sign with the Centurion. Christ
refers all to this end, that the goodness and bounteousnes of the Lord may
be glorified, and the miserable rid of their miseries. This is true charity,
which has respect to nothing saving to the word of God and commandemente.

The example of faith is marvelous, where as this miserable person, that was
by the law forbidden the company and fellowship of me^, comes to Christ
without doubting, An example of faith in the leaper.
and falls flat before him, and prays: Lord if thou will, thou may cleanse
me. And here are two things to be noted. First, he believes steadfastly and
without waueringe, that Christ has both will and power, and that he can help
in this disease, where as if all men would do their best, they can help
nothing, where as Christ nevertheless differed nothing in shape and behavior
from other private persons. Secondly, although he doubted nothing of this, yet
he yield all to Christ's will. If he will not deliver him from the disease of
the body, that is, if this be contrary to the will of God, and against his own
salvation, yt he is ready to abide this evil patiently more longer.

And this is not only the property of true belief, but also of true prayer,
How a man may pray truly.
as these two are always joined to gether by nature. He that believes truly,
prays truly, he that believes not truly, prays not truly. For this is
wholye requisite to true prayer, that the heart doubts not, but that God is
good and merciful, and that his whole will is to rid us of our myseries.

Yea and especially this faith ought to be most strong, in those things that
belo^ge unto the glory of God and our salvation, as are ye remiss^on of
sins, the restitution from the dyuell and from death, and in that that God
will give us the holy Ghost, and preserve us in his word, help us in
temptation, minister unto us, the increase of faith and charity etc. Note well.
And these be the things, that chiefly pertayne to the glory of God, and to
our salvation.

Wherefore here have we nothing to do with any condition, when we pray unto God
for these things, 1. That ye prayer be joined with faith.
as though that God could herein be otherwise minded. And he that in these
things would use the leapers form in praying: Lord if thou will pardon my
sins, If thou will, save me. etc. should not pray aright. For in these things
we may not doubt of the will of God, whether he will do it. For he has put
forth his express and absolute word, 1. Tim. 2.
that this is his ratified and unchangeable will, that all men should be saved.
And for that cause he procured his son to be a sacrifice on the cross for
the sins of all the world, Math. 17.
and put forth a commandment, that al should hear him, receive and believe in
him.

But where as ye leaper does use a co^ditional prayer: If thou will, In things
temporal our will ought to be subject to the will of God.
thou may cleanse me. The thing is to be considered, for ye which he
entreats. We said before, that whatsoever belongs, to ye glory of God and
our salvation, must be surely looked for without any condition. For the willl
of God is certain, and he has declared it with absolute and perfect promises,
yt as touching these things, there is no mystery more to be required in God.
But in bodily promises, it goes not so. For there may be misery and wordlie
calamities, and yet ye true salvation nothing diminished thereby, as al
christians are an example.

Wherefore since yt true salvation consists not in such bodyly things, yea and
oftentimes, the damage of the body and goods, helps much to true salvation,
he that prays to be rid of them, as we are to this entised by the leapers
example, ought to think surely with him self, that God can help, and that he
will help, yet ought he to join his will, with the will of God: that if this
be against gods glory, and our principal salvation, then that God will not
gratify and fulfill our will. And in such things this is the true prayer, to
believe surely, and yet to point God neither time, neither way how to do it, and
how he shall deliver us from this evil. For we have all this fault for the
most part, that we know not what and how we should ask. Romans 8.
As Paul says: GOD does best know what is for his glory and our salvation.
Wherefore our will ought to be made conformable unto his, and we ought not to
doubt but that he will surely hear us, if such a petition belongs to his
glory and our salvation.

Wherefore this ought to be a very notable example for the congregation, that
first of all it doubt not of the good will of God toward it self, but that he
knows our evils and calamities, and that he has respect unto us. This
ought we to stick unto, and yet not to prescribe any thing as touching the
manner, devise, time, or success thereof. For ye congregation remembers this,
that this sentence is joined with ye promises of such things that it be
obedient in bearinge the cross. As the leapre does here. He doubts not, but
that Christ ca^ help, and yt he has a ready will to help, he nothing
mistrusteth. For what other cause else had he to pray so earnestly? But he
understands, that the salvation and health which he now asks, to be such,
as touching yt which, he ca^ not allege the absolute will of God, as it goes
with the things above rehearsed. Such faith and obedience is meruailously
allowed of Christ. Wherefore he suffers not the desyer of this miser (no not in
this petition, wherein if he had not obtained, yet he might have retained the
hope of true salvation:) to be void and frustrate. This may be set forth as an
evident example in the Church, how greatly God is delighted with the prayer of
a godly and obedient mind.

And hereunto belong the most notable sentences of the Prophets. David says:
We must not despeire if we obtain not forthwith. Psalm. 27. Psalm. 130. Abacuc.
2.
O tarry thou the leisure of the Lord, be strong, and he shall confort thee,
and put thou thy trust in the Lord. Again: My soul does weight for him: in his
word is my trust from the morning watch until night. Abacuk says also: If
the vision makes tariance, look for it, for it will come spedelye, without
prolongynge. For this is known in all hystories, that although help has been
delayde, yet that it has appeared at the last. Yea and in this is the proper
trade of God, where as he hears not forthwith, he does it to declare his
liberality more abundantly toward us, then we desyer or understand, Ephe. 3.
as Paul says.

And it is not a thing superfluouse to make inquisition as touching this. Why
Christ sent the leper to the Priests Leuit. 14.
Why Christ after he had cleansed the leaper, sent him to the Priests, to offer
his gift there as Moses commanded: A man may answer hereto very well, if he
say: that Christ set forth unto us an example of charity, co^corde, and
sobriety, where as he would nothing diminish the right of the Priests, in yt
that was granted unto the^ by God, which thing yet he might have done, that we
should learn hereby to defraude no man of his right. But the chief cause of
this commandment, tends to this end, that there might be common
testimonials yea by the very adversaries as concerning this miracle. For when
the pryest receaueth his gift of him, and he confesses that he is cleansed, he
testifies against him self, and against all rebels, that this Christ, that
wrought this sign ought to be received, and that we ought to believe in him, as
in the true Messiah. For the Prophesies agree hereunto, that Christ shall come
with such signs into the world. And that Christ had respect unto this, he
testifies by his own words, saying: Offer thy gift, as Moses commanded, for
a testimonial unto them. As though he should say: They must needs confess,
yt thou art clean, and that thou art truly cleansed of ye leaprosy. But in
that that they will not know me for their Messiah, they bewray their incurable
stubburnes, which shall be duly punished at their time. Yet in the mean
season this testimony against them shall profit other, yt they may receive
me, and believe in me.

The Pope of Rome would stablyshe confession by this commandment, The Pope
proves confession by this history, but very unaptly.
because sin may be compared with leprosy, therefore that the Judgment of
the priest, and purifyinge from sin is requisite. But there is no sure
establishement for this sentence. For what have we to do, with that that God
commanded the Jews, as touching the busynes of leprosy? We have no such
Priests at this time. And if we had, yet this is evident, that the Priests
cleansed not the leapers: but that they bare record of their cleansing when they
were clean. But I pray you, what makes this for confession, which was
referred to the remission of sins? For the leapers should not offer their
leprosy but a clean body, when they offer their gift to the Priest. But
these things are not worthy to be answered to at all of a wyseman. He that
will needs confess, let him fulfill his fantasy. But we knowledge only that
confession to be necessary, when man's mind confesses freely his sins
before God. This is the confession of the heart, which deceaueth not, as does
the confession of the ears and of ye mouth. And yet such confession before God
cleanses us not from sin, nor justifies, much less the confession of the
ears can do it. But this does only cleanse and justify, even the faith in
CHRIST Jesus. The word is apprehended by faith, and in his name is remission of
sins received, as the promise offers it unto us. And let this be
sufficient as touching the first example.

The second miracle as concerning the sick child, The second miracle,
is also a testimonial of the doctrine of CHRIST. That these things may be
known to be undeniable: If God with signs and miracles be redye to help this
man so gloriously, then that this doctrine is sincere, true, and fautlesse, and
that this is very Messiah or Christ. And beside all this, it is an example of a
singular and true faith in the Centurion. As Christ him self testifies as
touching his faith, that he found not the like in Israel. This faith is hereby
tried, A great example of faith.
that where as this Centurion was no Jew, but a gentile, yet it sends him to
CHRIST, and believes steadfastly, that Christ's will is not contrary to his,
and that as he is able, so he will help him. For if he had not thought this
with him self, he would never according to the wrytinge of Luke, had help of
the elders of the Jews, to entreat Jesus for him. But in that they send unto
him, it is a sure token, that he hoped to obtain his matter. And with this
faith he joined great and incredible modesty and humility, Humility joined
with faith
in that that he counts him self unworthy to come unto Christ, and to ask
any thing of him. But first he sends the elders of the Synagog, and
afterward, when he heard the Lord to be coming, he sends his fryndes to
mete him, that he should not take the pains to come any further, and that he
is unworthy, to have such a great man to come unto him. And that he needs
not so much to weary him self, sith the Lord ca^ bring to effect with a word
that that he desires, although he be not present thereat. And he thinks with
him self that this is so sure, that he takes his own example for a
confirmation thereof, and says: I verily am a man subject to power, having
under me soldiers, and I say unto one, go, and he goes, and to an other,
come, and he comes, and to my servant, do this, and he does it. Wherefore if
my word that am but a man, can do so much, how much more shall it be done if
thou do but speak the word? And in so doing, he does not only believe, but
therewith also put forth a true doctrine of faith and of her nature.

Wherefore this also were to be wyshede, that our faith of CHRIST might be of
like sort, which might help us with so great virtue of his word, although we
see not his person. It is an example of exceeding faith, that this man can be so
diligently attente unto the word of Christ. First he doubts nothing of the
favor of Christ toward him. The Centurion is only attent to the word.
Then he desires no more, but that Christ should speak the word. This does
he look for with as sure trust and persuasion, as though he had obtained all
ready the perfect recoueringe of his child. Wherefore thou that now have the
word, study to follow him in this point. For there are now extant very large
promises, that God will be merciful for Christ's sake. And that we for the
faithes sake in Christ, have remission of our sins and life everlasting. We
have the word, but we use it not in like manner.
But we for the most part lack this faith, where with this Centurion was
endewed as we see, which thinks that if he obtain a word of him, he need not
care for the rest. It will forthwith ensue, yt the word does promise. We can
not obtain so much of our selves. And hereof it comes, that we regard not the
word, but in the mean season have our recourse to carnal succor, where as
the word is almighty, and, as the Centurion does testify here, it can not
deceive. That that he promise is sure to have good success. But this faith is
so much the more worthy to be meruayled at, The Centurion is an heathen.
because the Centurion is an Heathen, to whom the promise was not likewise
made, as it was to the Jews. Wherefore he can not challenge that right, which
was only belonginge to the Jews, as to the people of God. For this is the
nature of faith, that it makes humble minds, that think not prowdly of them
selves, nor are high minded, and therefore they stick only to the mercy and
grace of God.

And this ought to be considered of us in this example, and that for a special
cause, that when any thought of our own sins and unworthiness shall vex
our minds, yet that we cast not of all hope, but constantly embrace the
word of God, and believe in hope contrary to hope. This is acceptable to God,
and this he requires of us. For without this, there could be no grace, if
that we would not apply our selves to the promise, without merit or any
worthynes at all. As this Centurion can not allege, as the Jews, that God
owes any thing to him. And this makes him so humble, that he dares not come
in CHRIST'S sight. He humbles him self with the loweste, Math. 15.
as the woman of Canaan did, so that he sends other to entreat Christ for
him, and yet he has so certainly persuaded him self as touching the goodness
and humanity of Christ, that he thinks with all his heart, that he shall have
help of Christ. And this is verily a true faith, and true humblenes, that our
unworthiness cause us somewhat to doubt, but yet without desperation, so that the
bounty and mercy of God makes us chereful again.

The Jews are proud.
For God requires both. First, that we appear not before him, with confidence
in our selves, after the manner of hypocrytes. Secondarily, that after the
manner of hypocrytes, we despair not utterly in things impossible to reason.
But that according to the Psalm, we may feel that GOD is delighted with them
that fear him, and that trust upon his mercy. But the Jews did not this. For
they persuaded them selves, that God favored and did them good, because he was
bound so to do. For they thought proudly and insolently with them selves,
that they executed the will of God, and deserved the benefits of God, and
understood nothing of his mercy. Wherefore Christ pronounces so grievous a
sentence against them, saying: Many shall come from the east and west, which
shall sytte down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. But
the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, where as
wailyng and gnashyng of teeth shall be. The cause of all this is unbelief, that
they trust so much in them selves, and in the mean season they set nothing by
mercy. Wherefore as it profits them nothing, in that they are the sede of
Abraham, so shall it nothing hinder the Gentiles, because they are not the
children of Abraham, if they do but embrace Christ with a sure trust, and
aspire to the grace and mercy of God. For this is Gods trade, Luc. 1. Math. 5.
to fyl the hungry with good things, and to send the rich empty away. For
before him neither the Gentile, neither the Jew, neither circumcision, neither
uncircumcision any thing prevails, but only the faith in CHRIST, that men
being destitute of their own help, may flee unto ye mercy of god.

And so this Gospel teaches very exactely both of Charity and Faith, what
is the property and nature of Faith, how it imbraceth the word, and looks
after the mercy of god with great humility. Whosoever shall order his faith on
this wise, he shall obteyn his petition as the leapour and Centurion did, and it
shall be done unto him as he believed, that is, as he has the bounteousnes and
mercy of God only in his heart, and coueteth it, and puts his trust therein,
so will God declare his mercy to him, and receive him into his favor, and
deliver him out of all his troubles. Now I pray God to instruct us with the
holy ghost, and to stir up in our minds such trust in his mercy, and by
this means to bring us to everlasting life. Amen.

The iiii. Sunday after Twelfth day. Upon the Gospel. Math. viii.
AND when he entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. And behold, there
arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much as the ship was covered with
waves, but he was a sleep. And his disciples came to him, and awoke him,
saying: Master, save us, we perish. And he said unto them: Why are ye
fearful, O ye of little says? Then he arose, and rebuked the wyndes and the
sea, and there followed a great calm. But the men meruailed, saying: What manner
of man is this, that both winds and sea obey him? And when he was come to the
other side into the country of the Gergesites, there met him two, possessed
of deuylles, which came out of the graves, and were out of measure fierce, so
that no man might go by that way. And behold, they cried out, saying: O
Jesus, thou son of God, what have we to do with thee? Art thou come hither
to tourment us before the time? And there was a good way of from them a heard
of many swyne feedyng. So the deuyls besought him, saying: If thou cast us out,
suffer us to go into the heard of swyne. And he said unto them: Go your
ways. Then went they out, and departed into the heard of swyne. And behold,
the whole heard of swine was cried hedlong into the sea, and perished in the
waters. Then they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the City,
and told every thing, and what had hap ned unto the possessed of deuyls. etc,

THE EXPOSITION.
THE history, A doctrine of faith.
that is set forth unto us in this Gospelle, is not such as teaches us,
what is our duty in doing good works. For it touches nothing the ten
commandments, it teaches us not what we ought to do, but that we ought to
have the aid of Faith in all peryls, and in the most desperate temptations.
Wherefore the doctrine of it, is of the highest sort, and belongs to Faith,
as touching the which all men think this, that they have it, and it has
place most especially in adversity.

Wherefore, that it may be the better perceived, what the matter is, we will
divide it after this sort: First, we will entreat as touching the cross and
affliction. And then as concerning Christ, and the faith in Christ for because
that only he being our sure aid, delyuereth from evil. And last of all we
will entreat of the fruit and profit, which ensues after deliverance out of
temptation through faith. And all these parts shall show how weighty an
history the Evangelist sets forth in so few words, which ought greatly
to be esteemed of us.

The first is, for that that Jesus with his disciples takes ship, and then
there is no tempest, but al thing calm and quiet, yea and the sea also is
pacified, and without all tossing. For ye disciples could not be persuaded to
take ship ship, Christ's company in the ship is no^ without condition of a
tempest.
and especially to their peril. But as soon as Christ takes ship with his
Disciples, and loose their cable ropes and tacklings, they sail with all have
into the main sea, there arises sodeinly such a tempeste, that the floods
cover the ship, and put them in ieopardie of drownynge. This history ought
to be used so commonly of us, that it might be used for a proverb: that when
we will signify the troubles of the Church, we might speak it in a proverb
after this sort: When Christ does into the ship enter, Peace will not long
continue there: Proverb.
But forthwith follows storm and tempest, thou must not look for bodyly
rest.

Trouble with Christ. Luc. 11.
And this order of things is very necessary. As Christ says: A strong armed
man obteyneth his palaice in peace, until a stronger comes on him. For then
all things are filled with enmity and trouble, there is no where peace, no
where quiet. All things by malicious envying and horrible spoylyng, fall
into a flame. To the which thing, the whole history of the Gospel bears
record. Where as before, all things were without trouble: as soon as Christ
enters into his ship either by preaching, or by doing miracles, thou may
see that al things ar turmoiled with fiery minds and seditious. There flocketh
and routeth together the Phariseis, the Scribes, the high Priests, and as the
Poet says, they set on all upon one man: with spite, with darts, with foot
and hand: Neither can their woodnes be satisfied without the death of Christ:
But that tempest is much more grievous, that is stirred up by the devil.
Thereof does Christ prophecy long before in the tenth of Matthew: M^^h. 10.
Think not that I came to send peace into the earth, I came not to send
peace, but the swoorde, for I came to sunder the son against his father, and
the daughter against the Mother, and the daughter in law against her mother
in law, and that a man should have to his ennemies them of his own household.

All these things tend to this end, A christian man must think to bide
trouble.
that thou sholdest well consider, whether it be expedient for thee to be a
christian. For if thou purpose verily to become a christian, look more
certainly for nothing, than for this tempest and battle. Eccles. 2.
Wherefore Syrach in the second chapter admonishes and says: Son, when thou
come to serve the Lord, be upright in Justice and fear, and prepare thy
mind to temptation, subdue thy heart, and be pacient. As though he should say:
if thou co^mest not to the service of GOD, thou shall have no need to be
supported, y^ devil will not trouble thee. But co^trarily, if thou regardest
Gods service, and love christianity, thou must not refuse to bide tempest
and great trouble. Wherefore make thy self bold and strong, and tremble not at
the tempest, but fear GOD rather, yt thou may not therefore fall from his
word. This thing must thou purpose with a strong and vnabashed heart, that
nothing here is taken in hand to win the favor of the world, neither
ought to be let pass for fear of the worlds displeasure. And this is the
very thing, that the Euangeliste entendeth to teach us, in that that he
says: That the tempest then first began, when Christ entered into the
ship, and was carried from the earth into the main sea.

But in the mean season it may profit in this point, even that we may have
whereby to give a checkemate to the raylers, to the lewd which can do nothing
but blaspheme the Gospel, which speak on this wise, The gospel comes with
a tempest.
Before that this doctrine came forth, all things were at quiet, and we had
great plenty: but now there is so great misery and combrance, that no man can
number the sects, battles, seditions, ommotions, famine, Turks, and
encreasement of myschiefe. These may be put to silence very well by this
example, even that at Christ's entryng into the ship the tempest rose. But
this befell not through the fault of Christ, but of the dyuell, which hates
Christ, and can not suffer him. So does he hate the Gospel also, and
endeavors to make it so odious, by many tragedies and commotions, that it
may at length be forsaken of all men. The unkind world.
But a man can not prevail so much with these blind persons, as to make
them consider the thing as it is in deed, they have respect only to the
troubles, and impute them to the Gospel. But they have no regard to those
things which proceed out of the Gospel, as is the knowledge of god, remission
of sins, Justification, and sanctification. Even as the overthwart, The
example of the Jews
unkind, and styffenecked people of the Jews did in the wilderness, when
they were in Egypt, and their taskes doubled, they prayed to GOD very
fervently for help: they had a great devotion and godliness: And it was not
long after their departure and delyuerance, but they forgot all that was done
for them in the wilderness. They had no remembrance of their misery and
anguishe in Egypt. They called to mind in the mean time their pottes of flesh
and their bread, Exodus 16. Number. 21.21.
that they had so plentuously in Egypt. Neither were they unlike our Papists
in this point. They heaped together very counnyngly the commodities of their
old state, and keep close the heinous discommodities, of the which they were
delivered. After that, whenne God gave them Manna plentuously, forthwith they
were weary of it, they set much more by the delicates of Egypt. So froward is
our nature through original sin. Gods great benefit can be nothing esteemed
amongst them. All things are unacceptable, and not worthy thanks, which God
gives of his great good will. And hereby is the long suffrance of God
meruailously espied that he can suffer the most unkind world so long. The
time of the Popedom
If any man twenty years past had put us in choice, whether we would abide
the hardness of one years dearthe, that we might be delivered from the wrongs
and pillages of monks and priests: either suffer these common injuries, and
to have therewith plenty of victual? Who would not than rather have had and
wished for that dearth, then the daily spoilynges of those deuourers and
cormorants. This might than comfort us, that other years should make that good,
which was by one years derth consumed: but yt wicked never leave spoilyng, but
ware daily more and more grievous. But where as this choice is proffred to us
so promptly, that we may be delivered from these cormorauntes by the light of
the Gospel, yet we do forgette all this to soon. And in this case do we
highly commend that quiet state, neither do we consider the end thereof, how
that in yt idleness we could not repelle and put from us, that crafty
conueyinge away not only of our goods, but also of body and soul, where
as all things were made noisome with false doctrine and idolatries.

And yet nevertheless in the myddest of these pestiferous euyls, we could
not be free from other discommodities: Scarsitie, pestilence, battle,
troubled the commonaltie nevertheless. Which things where as they chance at
our time, are thought to have the Gospel as cause thereof. As though that if
the Gospel were rydde out of the way, all men should live a golden life,
and should not be oppressed with such great calamities as be now. But the
long sufferance of God appears in the sufferynge of these unkind and froward
persons. But look how much the longer God doothe suffer, the more grievous
shall the punyshement be, that at length shall fall. God loves and estemeth
nothing more then his word, and we have no safegarde against sin and death,
any where else but in the Gospel, and yet through great unkindness and wyckednes
do we still invent how to defame it.

The punishemente of the unkind, and of them that embrayde the Gospel.
Wherefore these sclaunderers at the last when the time sha come, shall be
punyshed, they shall be stryken of God with madness and blyndnesse, that they
may live void of the great light of God, and then may be hardened and cast
away with the Jews, so that they can speak nothing but blasphemously against
God, until at last they yealde them self wholly into the kingdom of the
devil. And so shall they have at ye last a worthy reward of their folly and
madness, neither is there any other ways for them. Without these troubles and
miseries, there can be no man living, although the Gospel be away. There are
always mutual wrongs, hatreds, battles. etc. The imperie of Rome, which
nevertheless was most mightiest in power could not be without calamities and
diverse co^motions, yea before they had the Gospel. Wherefore it ought not to
be imputed to the Gospel, in yt they were plagued after the receiuyng of the
Gospel. Whereof the euyls in the world come.
All the faut thereof lies in the devil, and in our unkindness. The dyuell can
not abide the Gospelle, he would have it wholly destroyed, and for that cause
he stirs up so great tempests at the coming thereof: and by how much the
clerer the light of the Gospel goes abroad so much the more cruel and
grievous is the devil against it. Note well.
But God is most offended with our unkindness, for that that we regard not
such a great treasure, and will not suffer our selves to be helped in a
matter that brings death. He punishes the unkind as it is mete with all
calamities and plagues, that men may perceive, that there is no help in idols
against these euyls.

And this is the first part of the three matters, whereof we purposed to
entreat: If thou lykest the state of Christianity, refuse not to abide
tempests. But if thou do not, thou shalt not be violently handled therefore:
but thou shall perceive what thou haste done, when thou must suffer the
agony of death.

The second part is as concerning Faith, How faith fails not in trouble,
which in temptations and agonies flees to Christ, and awaketh him. This also
is worthy to be printed in mind. For our adversaries the Papists do all that
they can to deface faith. But they greatly extol fre will. But they should
wyshe for this, that they might be received into this ship, that they might
at the lest prove what power and strength free will has in temptation and
danger. The apostles feel how the matter goes. For although their faith was
very small, yet if this small faith had not ben, they would have despaired
through their free will, and sunk down with desperation, but when there is
but a little faith, as Christ witnesses, saying: O you of little faith, they
are helped so that they do not utterly perish. They flee to Christ, they wake
him, they call to him for help. If a small and little faith can do so much,
what can a great and strong faith do? As of late the examples of the leapre
and Centurion declared. Frewyll in trouble is nothing.
Wherefore freewylle, when his virtue and strength was most requisite, was
nothing at all. It vanysheth away, and can not stand styffe. Then man feleth
no other ways to escape peril but by weeping and cryinge, and wysheth himself
afar of, That is to say, freewyll can give no comfort in peril, but
casts us into desperation, by a little more and more, so that at the last they
tremble at the sound of a leaf blown by the wind. But Faith, although it be
little and weak, yet stands and strives against desperation. As it is
perceived in this place by the Disciples. For the waves fell so vehemently:
that they covered the ship, who would not be afraid in such a doubtful
danger and peril?

But Faith, although it be but little, yet it stands sure as a rock of the
sea, and as little Dauyd holds up him self against great Goliad coming
toward him, that is, against death, sin, and all danger, It despaireth
not, but seeks help there as it should. that is of CHRIST. It styrreth him
out of sleep, it cries: Lord save us, we peryshe. So is Faith wont to do.
Although destruction and myschiefe hangs over us, yet it looks and prays
for help. As says the Psalm: I believed, and therefore I have spoken and
prayde. For no man can pray, except he believe. And free will can not do it.
For it only beholds the peril and danger: Psalm. 11^.
but it consyderethe not the person, of whom he must ask help in such a
time. Neither can a man be defended against sin and death by any thing that
belongs to free will. But faith be it never so little, yet does it apprehend
Christ and obteyneth health. Faith praualleth in peril.
And if this faith were strong and sure, as was the faith of Jonas the
Prophet, which endured in the whales bealy three days, they might have said
to the sea and whaues: We no thing fear you, Jonas. 2.
neither all your ragyng and vnrulynesse, we shall have a quiet haven against
your wrongs, in the myddest of your surges, for to escape all peril.

This is therefore true Faith, which has not respect only to things present,
as has freewyll, and therefore it fears and dispaireth, but it considers
the promise, which is not yet presently performed, and in the myddest of
mischief hops for salvation. Wherefore although he be in the midst of the
wide chaws of death, yet he casts not of hope of salvation, Power is not
taken of f^ewyll.
but trusts constantely that he shall come to land. As it appears in this
place in the small faith of the disciples. Wherefore faith is a thing of no
common and small efficacitie, Romans 10.
neither is it without strength, but it is the power of God, which comes not
by fre will, but by ye word, through working of the holy ghost. Our adversaries
ye papists know not this: for if they knew it, they would not set themselves so
stoutly against this sentence: wherein we say, that only faith justifies and
saves: Only faith justifies and saves.
that is, only faith brings comfort, when sin, death, hell and damnation
falls on us, and shows all their poison against us. wherefore they are only
fierce and stout, when the sea is calm and the wether fair. But when a dark
cloud stands over ye head, that makes it to seem night and winter, and when
the water waxes dark: There does their hearts fall into their heles, and
desperation ensues forthwith. For they have no faith, but freewyll, which is
void and without help, because it forgets the word of God, and fyndeth no
where any place of refuge.

And this a very dangerous thing, that Christ sleapeth when they are in peril
of death and life. Christ sleapeth in the ship.
Which thing perchance came hereby, for that he was wearye of teaching in the
day, and praying, and fighting against temptations in the night. For this do
I surely think, that he was much vexed in the night season of the devil,
which tempted him. As he complains in the.88. Psalm. I am poor and in
great travail from my youth. I have dronk of thy wrath, and was troubled.
Psalm. 8^.
And this was the cause, that he was counted of the people a melancholic
person, which showed merry countenance but seldom, but went musyng and hangyng
down his head, showing outwardlye no pride, or stout stomach. And although
this sleep had a true cause, yet it behooved that it should serve for the
encreasyng of the Apostles faith, as all his works has chief regard thereunto.

Christ also slepeth in the congregation.
And this is it, that Christ even this time also, shows such a countenance of
himself unto his church, as though he nothing regarded it, and as though
he had forgotten us, as he does here in the ship. He sleapeth, and
regards not the tempest, the disciples, the ship. But yet he is in the
ship, be he never so much a sleep. And these be the temptaions that vex the
Church, where as CHRIST sufferethe the fluddes to rise against the ship,
that is, he suffers the devil and the world, to be so troublesome unto
his Christians, so that hereof rises fear, that all things shall come to
naught. And we also at this time see the very same things come to pass. The
Pope with his rabble hates the word, he stirs the high powers continually
against us. The Turks ar set forward by the devil. We are in the ship.
There be tempests and the wyndes, among the which, we can not look for
safeguard. And it is possible, that the Lord may wynke at these things, and
show no token of help for us., And yet this sleep of his is in the ship.

But here we must take a good heart, Christ is to be waked.
and think that we must not utterly despair, because the Lord is with us in the
ship. And although he faineth, that he regards us not, yet this ought we to
declare, yt we do not let him go out of our sight, but that we thynk constantly
of him, yt he may make the sea calm, although it be now never so much oppressed
with waves and tempests. So must we do also in our private temptations: when
the devil lays thy sins to thy charge and fears thee with the wrath of
God, yea, and threatens everlasting damnation also. And herin must thou not
think, but that Christ is at hand, and yet a sleep, and that thou must not
set it light, and be negligent to go unto him, and wake him by prayer when he
is found, as the Disciples do in this place. They think it better to save
them selves, then to suffer Christ to sleep. They think this* Now have we
need to have Christ waked, or else we are undone. Wherefore they cease not from
calling, until they had him waking.

Follow thou this example also. For both must needs be done. If thou enter
with Christ into the ship, Christ follows the true christians always.
the tempest will not be lacking. Christ lays him down to sleep, that we
might feel temptation in deed For if he should not sleep, and afterward
repress the tempest, we should never well perceive what is true christianity:
yea and we might soon be brought in belefe, that we were saved by our own
power. But here is faith strengthened through temptation, that this confession
might be made a thing necessary. No power of man could here have prevailed,
this deliverance came only by GOD, and his word.

Beside this doctrine, Christ is described and set forth unto us as a very
man, Christ is very god and man
and according to man's nature, which consists of body and soul, and
therefore had need of the natural actions, of eating, drinkyng, sleapyng, and
such other things, that are without sin, even as we have. That we might be
defenced against the dotage of the Manichees, which judged Christ to have but
a counterfeit body, and not a very body. And as he declares him self to be
very man by this, that he slepeth as an other natural man does: so does he
declare his godhead and almyghtinesse in this that he makes the sea calm
again by the word. For this is no work or deed belonging to man's power.
Herein is gods power requisite, that the violence of such a great creature of
God may be restrained by his word: That for that cause we might the more
esteem this miracle, forasmuch as here it is open, how God and man is one
person in Christ. For the which cause he both can and will help in all
combrance and affliction all such as call upon him. How this godhead and
ma^hod joins together in one person.
And if this can not be done without the feeling of fear and peril, as well
he declared before, we must be content therewith. For not so much as the
wicked can be without affliction. And therefore they are never free from an
evil conscience, and finally they go to damnation with all that they have.

The third part is as touching the fruit, The fruicte that follows a
tempest.
which ryseth of such a Faith, that is, that other considering this
miracle, fall to repentance, and say with great admiration? What man is this,
that the wyndes and the seas are obediente unto him? It is like, that these
hitherto took him but for a carpenter, neither thought they, that aid
against the peril of death ought to be asked and desired of him. Now
they atteyne to so far knowledge of him, that he has great and sure might
to help, where as in man there is no help. And this is the continual nature
of these things: by how much the temptation is the more grievous, so much the
fruict is greater in the end. Now is the rage of the world very great
against us, so that almost we can hope for none other thing then very
destruction, and that the tempest and the sea shall have the victory to our
destruction. But so that we have this grace to stick sure to the word and
Faith, we shall see a more joyful end, then we could think in heart. The hate
of the Pope and Turk is greater then a man would believe, wherewith they persecute
the congregation: for the which cause we groan and mourn as a woman in her
travail, which hate nevertheless shall bring with it some comfortable thing
that we never hoped for. So ought every man to thynk surely in his own behalf
also, that when he is enuironned and belayd round about with temptations, that
in the end the fruict shall be most certain, sweet, and pleasant.

Wherefore. how great the doctrine of this Gospel is, and how much
necessary aid it has, for to further true godlynes, that may be known by
these things, which are setforth and entreated of, as touching the whole
course of virtue and godlynes. And if we be sure to be in the congregation
among the godly: let us take ship with Christ, and there let us not refuse to
abide the tempeste, and this most grievous and troublous estate in the sea of
this world. And when this grievous trouble comes forth, let us keep our
selves diligently within our hold and defense of faith, and of the word of God,
and let us think truly, that the tempest and temptation shall not only have
an end, but that the conclusion shall follow with such a prosperous success
of all things, and with such abundance of joy, that it shall soon recompense
all myserie, which we felt in suffering, with the joy of the victory, and
with the approved power of faith and of the word: so that we can not be sorry
for the labors and afflictions that we have bestowed and suffered, but rather
we would condemn our own niceness, except we had suffered it. Who then will
tutne from the cross, where as deliverance and great glory are set forth to
all them that are in peril for the gospels sake But great grefe springs
hereof to the flesh, and to the old man. It will not be gladly combred with
this cross. Wherefore we must never let this example go out of our eyes. We
must diligently consider the word that we may be defenced in temptation. Let us
have recourse unto Christ, which sleapeth among us, and shows as though he
had no regard of us. But let us with ardent and earnest prayer ask help of
him, and we shall surely find it most present. The which thing as it is setforth
unto us, with sure knowledge as touchi^g gods will, so god grant it now come to
pass in deed prosperously, unto ye glory of god, and ye salvation of our
souls. Amen.

The fyfte Sunday after twelfth day, Upon the Gospel, Math. xiii.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man which sowed good seed in his
field: but while men slept, his enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat,
and went his way. But when the blade was spronge up, and had brought forth
fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came,
and said unto him: Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field? from
whence then has it tares? He said unto them: The envious man has done this.
The servants said unto him: Will thou then that we go and wede them up? But
he said: Nay, left while ye gather up the tares, ye pluck up also the wheat
with the^: let both grow together until the harvest, and in the time of
harvest, I will say to the reapers: Gather ye first the tares, and bind them
together in sheaues to be brent, but gather the wheat into my barn.

THE EXPOSITION.
IT appears that this Gospel in times paste was very easy to understand,
The expounding of this doctrine is diverse.
and specially because Christ him self sets forth the meaning of yt
parable, as concerning the field, the sower, the corrupter, ye good seed and
the tares. etc. But this difficulty and hardness afterward sprange in this
Gospel yt was so plain, by the doctors not agreing together herein, so that we
must take ye more dilligent head, least ye true sentence should be taken from
us. Some say, that tares signify heresies, and thereby gather that it belongs
not to ye civil powers to punish heretics. Of the which opinion Augustine
grants him self to have been. But he says that he was constrained by sure
reasons and by experience it self, to yield up this opinion. Some make no
difference between a civil officer, and servant of this householder, and
expound tares to signify common offenses, and so conclude that a Christian
officer ought not to be judge in matters of life and death. There be some (of
the which sort is the Pope and his adherentes,) that while they regard not
that Christ forbids to pluck up the tares, by their own Judgment
pronounces the doctrine, of the gospel to be tares, and therefore they never
cease to move persecution against the gospel and the professors thereof by
murderinge and kylling them. Wherefore seeing the meaning is so diverse, first
must we inquire and entreat of the true meaning, and than of the common
question, what ought to be done with heretics.

How the parable is to be applied.
And as touching the true meaning, this it is. Christ puts forth generally
the parable of the kingdom of heaven, and in a manner declares the fashion of
ye church, showing and giving an example, on the which al godly men, and
especially the rulers of the congregation, ought to have their eyes attent,
lest they should by their own imaginations swarne and turn to a contrary
kingdom, and dream of undefiled felowshippes of saints in earth. For this
word, Kingdom of Heaven, seems to receive no kind of man's filthiness. For it
makes with reason, that nothing ought to be received into an holy place but
holy things. As God suffered not man defiled with syn, to be in an holy place,
yea for this cause he forthwith repelled Lucifer with all his, from him.
Wherefore this is the nature of the kingdom of heaven: As the sea can suffer no
dead carcass in it: so no unclean thing, that is defiled with syn, can be
abidyng in the kingdom of God. This is one consideration of the kingdom of
God. But this gospel entreats not especially hereof. For the condition of this
kingdom is impossible for sinners.

An other kingdom of GOD, The kingdom of heaven or the church in the earth.
or of heaven in earth is revealed by the son of God, That, GOD would have to
be such, that in it might be set up the horn of salvation and righteousness
for sinners. In this has sinners an interest and right, and are received into
it for their sins. There rises in this kingdom holiness and justice, 1. Cor.
1.
which is remission of sins, through Christ, which is the wisdom,
rightousnes and satisfyinge. And these things are not belonginge to determinat
times or prescriptions, concerning this or that person. For God will have at
no time that the way to repent should be taken and stopped from sinners, and
there are no other things which are more necessary for the executynge of this
matter: than the sinner coming to the remission of sins. It is not
demanded when and of what kind his sins were done or be: If he can but
provide for one thing, even yt he surely believe yt his sins are forgeuen for
Christ's sake, and that he never counted gods mercy to be less then that it
can be sufficient to pardon his sins. This strange kingdom does God set up
in the gospel of his son, and appoints a certain time to the
administration thereof, which is from the first uttering and reuelie of him,
until Christ come to judge both the quick and the dead, and now Christ whereas
he compares the kingdom of gods salvation and mercy which is only necessary
for sinners, with the capacity of the world, in the which the dyuel that ca^
never be favorable to ye kingdom of God, seeks diverse occasions to fulfill his
will. He forseeth in his mind great offenses to come, which by wickedness shall
rise in this kingdom of Gods mercy. For the word of God takes root in very
few, The nature of true Christians
and this few esteminge the grace of God truly, embrace it with a true faith,
and are renewed with ye holy ghost, which always moves the^ to have faith
thorough Christ in Gods mercy, and to perform such obedience as is mete for
them yt are newborn, and to pray and weight always for certain aid for
Christ's sake, Al ye other multitude, although they will be loathe to be named
forsakers of their Christian profession, and to be counted out of Gods kingdom,
goes to yt profession in word: but for as much as they be void of
righteousness, and without ye holy Ghost: therefore they are subject to the devils
power to work with them as he shall see occasion. For yt dyuel settethe forth
his hypocrisy meruailously by the^, whereas part bears the name of the
Church, but yet is it void of Gods grace and without the holy Ghost, and
therefore it shows forth no work of godlynes by any upright holy and sober
life. An other part there is which is co^tente to have certain enormities and
errors corrected, which seem contrary to reason and unprofitable for the
common wealth. But yet they so order the matter, that they wreste Gods laws to
the maintenance of man's inventions, where as they should rather examine all
men's laws by the rule of Gods word. And hereof sprang diverse heresies of the
Arrians, Macedonians, Donatistes, Nouatians, Nestorians, and such other. For all
these endeavored to make the heavenly doctrine to seem agreeable to man's reason
and judgment. And all this they did because they knew not God and his kingdom:
until at the last the great adversary of his heavenly kingdom by the
Bishop of Rome corrupted the pure sown word of God by all kind of tares,
which fell to so great wickedness, that he usurped his false power over this
kingdom, laboring to have it in his danger by his wicked Canons, Decrees and
Decretalles.

And who can now express with any words the great corruption and hurt that it
has wrought in the Lords field? But we go not about now to show the great
hurt and damage that is done by him? But this is my study to make the true
face and form of the Church to be known, There must needs be sects in the
Church
among so many seducinge sects, that the true Church may perceive that (as
long as it is in this feld, that is, in the world) it must of necessity live
among so many deadly sects and heresies. For there be very many that will by
no means suffer them selves to be counted out of this kingdom, and yet there
be very few that are true hearted subjects of this kingdom. And all the rest
profess them selves so to be in words only. But they declare partly by their
deeds and kind of lyuinge, and partly by their doctrine and opinions, that
they know not what belongs to this kingdom, neither what are the true
virtues and works thereof. But the saints and godly can not abide and suffer
this so great goodness of GOD to be abused. But they ought here not so much to
care for the satisfyinge of there oune will and mind in seeing to the glory of
God after this manner, but to mark rather to what end this their ways shall
come at the last. For as soon as the church begins to seclude from Gods
kingdom all abusers of gods grace as unworthy sinners, and receaueth them for
righteous, in whom is no such kind of vice espied, it abolished the kingdom
of gods grace and mercy. And by this means the Nouatia^s and the Anabaptists
at our time also fell into this error, that whilst they, before time go
about to pluke up the tares from the corn: of Christianity they make a
monkrie, and so take away the kingdom of gods grace. Neither were ye first
monks yt were most vncorrupt, circumspecte and wary enough in this behalf.
For when they went into solitary places and into wilderness, for the auoidyng
of many offenses and euilles that chance amongst the ecclesiastical
ministers in the congregations of the city, they began by a little and a little
to be the maintainers of this lewed opinion: as though that they were the true
children of God, that all other that in civil corporations did govern either
families, or ruled the cities and towns lived in a profane, unholy and ley
kind of living, whereas never the less true godliness requires no such thing.

But the truth is this. First it behooves all men to know the kingdom of the
grace of God, that he may know that he obtayneth mercy and remission of his
sins for Christ's sake. And so after this let every man live in ye evil
felowshippes of men, let the^ govern housholdes, or communalties or let them be
servant and laborers in families, or subjects and citisens in cities, and
let every man for his own part do his own duty. The psalm admonishes us
of this superstition biddynge us to beware of it. Psalm. 35. The psalm agrees
with the meaning of the parable.
Trust in the Lord and do good, dwell in the land, and he shall feed thee in
the riches thereof. Here he forbids us to be careful for pluckyng up the
tares, whereas he commands to inhabit the earth, either as rulers of
families or gouerners of cities. For true godliness can be had by no other
means than by this, least out of the kingdom of Gods mercy there should spring
monkry and other new invented service. And yet the church of God can not be,
but it must needs know the difference of the corn and tares. It knows for a
suertie, that he can not live in the kingdom of God, but through faith in
Christ and in the holy ghost, where by man is new borne and regenerate, man is
sanctified and renewed to be made obedient to God. And yet least it should
overthrow this kingdom of grace, it suffers long after the example of God,
stablishinge his own mind and conscience in the middle of so great
temptations, that it be not seduced. Neither does it look for any help or
succoure by flitting and by auoydyng of men's company by going a side into
wilderness. and into a cloister of a monkrie or nonrie, but it uses
circumspection and judgment, that it fall not into like euilles.

In this parable therefore are both these lessons set forth to be learned of the
church. First it must think it self to be in the kingdom of God, the laws
and condition whereof very few do know and follow at all times. For albeit it
be the kingdom of grace, whereunto all sinners ought most desirously to flee,
yet the devil by ye help of our flesh, which is always favorable to his
part: can do so much, that he even in the midst of Gods holy people and
co^gregations, thrusts in a great heap of hypocrites. Now when the church
perceaueth that within it self in all her matters there is such great
offenses, it must not violently resist it, but defend and save it self
warelie against these offenses. For For although these offenses be evident, yet
the state of this kingdom is such that it can not by force and violence
remedy these offenses, after a civil and worldly manner. The offenses in the
Church may not be remedied by force after the civil manner.
The state and manner of this kingdom must be kept. Which is this, even that
the doctrine of the Gospel be purelie set forth as touching remission of
sin, and that men be well instructed as concerning how they must be renewed by
the holy Ghost. And that mercy and forgeuenes be pronounced to such as
diligently in their vocation do the works of Godly love. This doctrine ought at
no time to be omitted, be the carnal and wordly men never so much offended
thereby. Yet the fear of offending them must not be an occasion to us to
overthrow this kingdom.

Let us consider the example of the Mounkes and Bishop of Rome, which while
they went about to avoid such offenses and seducinges as chance in this common
life, brought in more greuouse occasions to offend, where as they changed
true religion into ceremonies, rites, and obseruatio^s. They utterly abolished
the kingdom of mercy and grace. And this is now also the very practice of ye
devil, for that he slaundereth the professers of the Gospel, because there be
many offenses and evil examples amongst them. For we can not deny, but such
offensive examples be in many hypocrites, which boaste of Gods mercy and
grace: and yet by their licentiouse living and manners, by their aduoutrie,
extortio^, usury, sensual lusts and many other vices, declare that they
regard not the grace of God truly. But what remedy? we are forth with tempted
to pluck up the tares, and to seek such a separation of the evil from the
good, that in the mean season, we corrupt the heavenly doctrine as touching
the grace of God and remission of sins. But if we be wise, we will not suffer
our selves to be withdrawn from doing our duty by their importunite, and
outragiouse behauioure. For it is much better to resist and strive with the
wicked examples of their life and manners by doing the contrary, and so to
preserve this doctrine of mercy and grace, then to correct and pluck it up
violently, and so by that and examples of the Mounkes and Nouatians to flee
from Scylla, and to fall into Charybdis, that is, for avoiding of the less
danger to fall into the greater. And especially sith ye nature of this kingdom
is such, that it can not vterly avoid all offenses, because such must be for
the maintenance of this necessary doctrine of grace. Wherefore where as the
Papists now lay to our charge the fruits of our Gospel, what other thing
mean they thereby, than that this kingdom should be without all offenses and
evil examples? But we may justly lay this to their charge again that where as
they go about by the Mounkerye and other traditions of theirs to make this
kingdom without offenses, they are fallen into such error and blyndnes thereby,
that they have clean lost all the doctrine of justification and godly
righteousness and all the works of true godliness also.

If therefore it should be put to our choice, which of these discommodities we
had rather have, In punishinge offenses we ought to have chief respect to the
doctrine of mercy and grace.
whether of them both should we rather take? Uerily all would grant this, that
for as much as this kingdom can not be without offenses, yet yt it were better
to chose that offense, where with nevertheless the kingdom might be sumwhat
vpholden, than that, whereby the kingdom should quite be destroyed without hope
of recoueryng, and whereby the doctrine and true godliness should utterly decay
and perish, as it chanced amongst the papists and monks. And the doctrine
and meaning of this parable of Christ was put forth to the end that above all
things we might have good respect to know the manner of gods kingdom, and not
be offended with such inconveniences as chance always, in ye wordle unto it.
For whereas it offers free remission of sins to sinners, first it comes
herby to pass, that many hypocrites, come to the fellowship of this kingdom.
Then also some men laboringe to remedy this disco^moditie find out a means to
make a civil separation, that they may falsely boste of the grace of God, and
yet not be in the fellowship with the^ that use it well. But Christ shows what
great damage ensues thereby, even that by this separation they pluck up the
good corn also. For the doctrine of grace is plucked up by men's traditions
which were invented to make this separation. So that now the church is
brought to such a miserable and vnscapable case, that where as before the
members were in peril, now the head is like to decay. Wherefore we must follow
Christ's council which byddeth us to suffer the tares, and not to be so precise
in pluckyng them up, least we by our indiscreet diligence overthrow the
governance of this kingdom as touching remission of sins.

Now must we use this kingdom, that many by remission of sin may be
forgeuen: If there be any as there be many, that had rather be seen to be in this
kingdom of grace then to be true members thereof in deed, what can we do
therewith, if they will needs misuse the gift of God? But if we should be so
extreme against them, that for their sake we would use violence and force in
this kingdom, what shall we get thereby, than that (as we see in the examples
before) while we go about to seperat the wicked for their abusing of Gods
grace, we utterly subuerte the kingdom of Grace?

Wherefore let us leave this to be done of the angels, The Angels shall make a
separation wha^ gods kingdom of mercy is come to an end.
that they may sunder the evil from the good. For after that shall the kingdom
of grace be no longer among sinners. Every man then shall receive according to
his works. There shall be no such peril than, as is now, where as if the grace of
the gospel and of the kingdom of heaven should be taken away by pluckynge up
of the tares before the appearinge of the son of God: then the greatest yea
and the only refuge for sinners might seem to be disturbed and taken away.
And at this separation by the Angels, it shall not need to inquire whether
there are any more left to be called to salvation? But it shall be considered
who has used well this kingdom of comfort and has been true members thereof in
deed, and who has been subjects there unto by name only, and yet in very deed
had never any true fellowship therewith. And this have we spoken as touching the
true meaning of this parable.

After this we will entreat not only what must be done with heretics, but
universally, what they yt has offices to correct offenses ought to do with all
kind of offenders, and whether it is meant by this saying: Let the^ grow: A
question as touching punishyng of heretics and there offenses.
that no kind of offense either in life or in doctrine, should be punished and
restrained? we have declared before what is Christ's especial intent by this
parable. Even that by the indiscreet usage of men, the kingdom of heaven should
not be hindered. Now such things as by Gods commandment are ordained for the
furtherance of this kingdom, ought not to be thought contrary to the same. And
first to begin at the principal matter, Excommunication.
the excommunication used in the Church is not against this parable. For it is
so necessary for the preservation thereof that without it, mercy, remission of
sin and the pure doctrine, thereof can not be retained, for as by absolution
Gods grace must be applied to the penitent, so by byndinge must Gods wrath and
curse be applied to the vnpenite^t. 2. Cor. 13.
Paul him self says that power of binding was given to him not to destroy,
but to edify. Wherefore they that are excommunicat, are not destroyed. First of
all we ought to have singular respect to the maintenance of the
ecclesiastical body or Church. For then is that most in hasard, if these
things that are ordained of God, to bring men to repentance and salvation, be
not openly suffered to be used against them that are unpenitent. Wherefore if the
Church should either for superstition or for a vain ostentatio^ of mercifulnes
omit this authority of byndinge and excommunicatinge the unpenitent, and not
punish very sharply such offenders, and so save it self holy and undefiled,
and not suffer a little leaven to corrupt ye whole dowe, it were greatly to be
blamed. Consider also that this is not done to destroy them that are
excommunicat and excluded from the communion and fellowship of saints. For
herby are they put to shame to the intent they should amend and obtain
salvation with ye Church in Gods kingdom. Or if they would not amend at all, it
may appear that ye Church is not in the fault, which did the same for fear
lest it also should be defiled and destroyed, by sufferinge the wicked to
intermedell with holy things.

Wherefore the Church does as it is commanded for a good cause excommunicat the
stubbourne sinners. Neither do they violat and break CHRIST'S commandment,
which forbad the tares to be plucked up. For Christ him self commanded, saying:
Let him be as an Ethnicke and Publicane. Math. 18.
And yet is he not against his own commandment, where as he forbad the tares
to be plucked up: As it is evident by the former description. For
excommunication hyndreth not the principal intent of Christ: it is not against
the doctrine of his grace, but rather for ye maintenance thereof, where as it
casts out them that behave them selves disorderedly in the kingdom of heaven,
to the intent they may the beter come to them selves, and return again
obediently, or if they will not, to be utterly cast out of this kingdom with
the less danger: where as otherwise they should heap together more grievous
offenses by defilinge and prophaninge the holy company of saints, and the
Church also for her negligent regardi^ge her undefiled holiness should provoke
Gods high displeasure and wrath.

Now al other restrayninge of offenses is amongst the magistrates and
officers, What offenses are to be punished by magistrates.
they are bound diligently to see thereunto, likewise fathers and mothers are
gouerners of families, all informers of other in manners and learning. These
are not forbidden by this commandment of CHRIST to execute their office,
Magistrates.
but they are rather strayghtly commanded and charged to do them. And as
touching their jurisdiction power and governance: they exercise it not in the
kingdom of heaven. They exact not certain offices and rites to be done,
which thing belongs to the kingdom of grace: But they have the regiment of
that kingdom, that belongs to the body and bodily things, to civil manners,
office, order, humanity, honesty, they first procure that the body and
bodelie things may be in safeguard, that thereby the souls and spiritual
things may be the better governed. And the magistrate maintains not only
the second table, as touching the duty toward men, but also the first, as
concerning our duty toward God. He punishes Idolatry, blasphemy,
wytchcraftes, perjury. He punishes and restrains heretics, Magistrates may
lawfully punish teachers of false doctrine.
that are blasphemous against God, and such as teach false doctrine. He takes
to his correction them that are stiff in defendinge of heresy and errors, and
punishes them for malefactors, because they seduce many from the truth. And
when he does this, he is not thought to pluck up the tares, for because he and
his office is not belonging to that kingdom which is forbid to pluck up the
tares. It were a superfluous thing to command or teach that lesson to
gouerners of housholdes or to civil officers or such other. For they have all
their charges given unto them, which they must needs execute in their offices
with all diligence, and yet they pluck not up the tares, for that they hinder
not the kingdom of grace: but cause rather by their order and discipline, the
kingdom of grace to be in better case and to be troubled with few offenses.

All officers should se diligently to quiet and tranquillity to be had both in
house and city, that the church and the kingdom of heaven, might live a quiet
and a peaceable life, with all godliness and gravity, in prayers and
supplications, with thanks giving and intercessions. For to thend that this
kingdom of prayer and true invocation, which is called of Christ the kingdom
of heaven, might be reserved among men, it is very necessary that parents and
maiestrates see straightly to their offices. Wherefore magistrates and officers
of this corporal life do not pluck up the tares against the commandment of
Christ, when they by sharp and straight correction and execution do withstand
these offenses that disordre the commonwealth: But they do the best that they
can to see and provide, that the good corn in the congregation be not overcome
with tares, and so the kingdom of heaven should utterly be abolished in earth.

And this have I said as touching the true meaning of this parable, least it
should by evil understanding thereof cause men through superstition to abstain
from doing certain offices necessary in the common wealth. Now to declare at
large what an haynouse thing it is that Christ here describes, how the
ennemie in the night sowed his most pestilent tares, and how the bishops and
superattende^ts by their sleping and sluggyshnes gave him occasion and leave so
to do, it were a long matter and not fyt to be handled in so short a time: but
at this time I think sufficient for me to have enstructed you as touching the
true meaning of this parable. And to thend that ye may earnestlye regard it,
even as Christ would we should, when he put forth this parable of the tares,
let us pray unto our heavenly father as for a thing most necessary, to whom be
praise and glory for ever. Amen.

The Sunday called Septuagesima. The Gospel. Math. xx.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went
out early in the morning, to hyre laborers into his vineyarde. And when the
agreement was made with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his
vineyarde. And he went out about the third hour, and saw other standing idle
in the market place, and said unto them: Go ye also into the vineyarde, and
whatsoever is right, I will give you. And they went their way. Again, he went
out about the vi. and ix. hour, and did likewise. And about the xi. hour he
went out, and found other standing idle, and said unto them: Why stand ye here
all the day idle? They said unto him: because no man has hired us. He says
unto the^: Go ye also into the vyneyarde, and whatsoever is right, that shall
ye receive. So when eue^ was come, the lord of the vineyarde said unto his
steward: Call the laborers, and give them their hyre, beginning at the last
until the first. And when they did come that came about the eleventh hour,
they received every man a penye. But when the first came also, they supposed
that they should have received more, and they likewise received every man a
penny. And when they had received it, they murmured against the goodman of the
house, saying: These last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them
equal with us which have borne the burden and heat of the day. But he
answered unto one of them and said: Friend, I do thee no wrong. Did thou
not agree with me for a penny? Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give
unto this last, even as unto thee. Is it not lawefull for me to do as me
lusts with mine own goods? Is thine eye evil because I am good? So the
last shall be first, and the first shall be last. For many be called, but few be
chosen.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe meaning of this Gospel is very profound and high, whereby youth and the
rude people can not learn much. And yet because it is appointed to be learned
at this time, we will speak somewhat thereof. We hear in this parable, how the
householder went forth in the morning and hired workmen into his vineyard
which wrought twelve hours. Afterward he hired some, that wrought nine
hours, then also other that wrought six and three, and last one. Their
works were far unlike, and yet their reward is equal, one having no more
then the other. For the householder did according to his covenant only with the
first, and as for ye other, he rewarded at his pleasure without covenant. And
yet he gave as much to them yt were last, which wrought but one hour, as to
the first yt agreed with him for a penny a day. This seems against reason to
the world, which follows this rule. He yt does much work, must have much
reward or wages: he that does little, must have little. And yet can no man there
complain of wrong, if that be paid to any that is due to one, and to an other
that is not due. Howbeit to give equal wages where as is not equal labor, is
not according to the rule of justice yt bids to give to every man his due.
Christ reherseth this parable to show a difference between his kingdom and ye
kingdom of ye world, to teach yt it is otherwise in his kingdom tha^ it is in
the world, whereas ca^ not be had such equality, The state of Christ's kingdom
and of the world are unlike.
by reason yt ye degrees and states thereof be so contrary. For where as there is
one degree of masters and other of servants, and the master has more
substance, and the servant more labor, it is nothing agreeable with this
parable. wherein Christ takes away al inequality, All things are unequal in
the world.
and rewards al states and degrees alike, so that ye one has no more
interest in this kingdom tha^ ye other. But in ye corporal and civil life it is
otherwise. For there must needs be inequality, eue^ as there be differences in
degrees. The husbands life is unlike to the life of ye citisen: likewise ye
lords to ye knight Here can be no equality, neither must we go about to seek
it. But in ye kingdom of Christ, whether he be king or prince, lord or servant,
mastresse or handmaide, or any such like, they are all equal. For we all have
one baptism, one faith one gospel, one sacrament, one Christ, one God. For all
alike as well ye great as the small hear the Gospel: likewise is it as touching
baptism. For our baptism, the baptism of children, and of all other, is all
one. There is one faith of Peter, Paul, and Magdalen, of the these hanging on
the cross, and of us all, if we be christians. There is no other God of John
Baptist, then is of other sinners, when they repent. Neither does this make
any difference or matter before God, that for a civil respect there are
superiors and inferiors according to men's offices and degrees. And this is ye
chiefest part in this Gospel, to learn yt as touching our state and condition
in gods kingdom we are all equal. But before the world this difference must
needs be had, that the father be better then the son, and the master better
then ye servant, the king better then the subject. And it is Gods will that it
should so be, which did ordein and constitute diverse states and degrees. He
that in the kingdom of the world would go about to make the lowest equal with
ye highest, should bring ye co^minalty to confusion. And to this end te^ded ye
co^motio^s of ye rude people and co^mo^s. wherefore how great soever ye
diversity of offices is in ye world, yet let us think for a surety yt before
God, we are all regarded alyke, for as much as there is but one Christ, one
baptism, one Gospel, one holy spirit of us all, neither has one a better
Gospel, baptism, or Christ then an other. The lowest state of servants has
as good as ye highest. For although some has more good things then thou have,
yet he passes the not in yt he has a better god the^ thou have. And this is
diligently to be learned, specially for this cause, eue^ yt every man in his
vocation may from ye bottom of their heart willyngly obey God, for as much as he
may assuredly trust, yt although he be no emperor nor Pope, nor abundant in
riches, neither is equal in power to ye higher states, yet yt he is equal
with ye best, for yt he has obtained baptism, and through the death of Christ
has as sure a confidence and trust yt death shall not hurt him, as has the
highest yt is. It is not mete now, yt we, that have obtained so great riches by
Christ should be of an abject and fearful heart, but rather yt we should learn
little to esteem things yt are glorious in the world, and have our only hope in
this, yt we are baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that he died
for us, and ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the
father almighty, to aid and succor us against syn, death, and all evil.
Wherefore he that knows this perfectly, yt we are all equal in Christ, What
con^ort comes of the equality in Christ's kingdom.
does his business and duty without weariness or grief, and is not grieved
at all for that his state and condition of life is more base and low then an
other is.

For it can not be otherwise in this kingdom, but there must needs be
diversities of degrees, ye one les, ye other greater ye one rule, and the other
serve. But let not this be any grefe to a christian. He must take in good part
this state of ye world, and not bewail his case, nor grudge for his servile
and miserable life that he leads in so base and low degree. But he must
faithfully maintein that state of life, that God has appointed him, and take
well a worth his present degree, until that God shall open him the way to a
better. In the mean season let him comfort him self, for that he has the same
Christ, as the high emperors, prelates, and monks have, and that he is as
much furdered by him to salvation and everlasting life. Or if they will not
grant that the lowest should have equal felicity with them in this kingdom,
then have they themselves no place in it. For it must needs be so in this
kingdom. All are accepted into Gods favor, for that that Christ Jesus suffered
for them all, and washed us with his blood, and that not one more, and an other
less, but all alike. Every man has like right to this tresure, neither will
they after that be so greatly grieved with this inequality, that they will be
sorry for their state, and make any disturba^ce of the public order thereby. But
they are content with their present state how unequal so ever it be, so yt they
may be fellow partners, and have like right with all saints in those things yt
ar hoped for, and are ever lasting. If this were well beaten into men's minds,
how yt al have like right in Christ's kingdom, they would with a certain godly
and spiritual pride war joyful, hearty yea in doing the vilest service and
drudgery yt is, and yt with godliness. For all things must be done there with a
joyful heart: whereas yt christian man perceives and believes firmly yt God is
not displeased with any man for his low degree. ye and for yt great renomes sake
wherein al saints ar equal in Christ, he cannot but conceive incredible joy, in
so much yt he would not refuse to scour sinks, so yt he may be as well accepted
with Christ, as ar they that are chiefest.

Our adversaries the monks and Nonnes do not this They imagine that God has
writing tables or a cou^ting book, to note every man's labors works and
taskes, The Iusticiaries make Christ to be parciall in his kingdom.
and to mark how much one does labor more then an other, that thereby he might
have the higher room in heaven, and have a better Christ, than he is that is
every man's Christ. For this have they taught, that when a priest masseth, he
does such a work, that profits as well the dead as the quick, and that
for-because he is a more worthier person, and of an higher degree in the
kingdom of Christ then the lay people are. These persons can not abide this
equality, which is in Christ's kingdom, but go about to make inequality after
a wordly manner.

After like manner have they taught, that a Nun in her abbey is holyer and
better then a houswyfe in her house, and if a man teach the contrary, they
condemn him as an heretic. And herein they are like unto them that murmured
in this parable: for they require more then other, and show God a roll written
of all the hours that they wrought in, and suffered the heat of the day. But
mark what answer God gives them: As for this inequality in a civil
gouerna^ce he will not reason with them. For there, to the higher degree, the
higher honor is due. But when ye come (says he) to the kingdom of my son,
all are equal, for that they have but one baptism, one Christ. Neither is a
better Gospel taught to some, and to some a worse. For where as the Monks
say, that the married men have but the worst gospel, and the worst
commandementes, and that they them selves have the best, because they are of a
higher degree in Gods kingdom, it is false and contrary to the Gospel. For
thereby they go about to make inequality in the Gospel, where as nevertheless
Christ made all things equal, and especially techeth this only thing in this
parable, that in his kingdom one is no better than an other. To live chaste if a
man have the gift, is no evil thing, neither can it be forbidden by laws or
statutes. But to affirm that a man or woman thereby is in a higher degree before
god, and that he must have a greater reward therefore, is a falls doctrine and a
great rock, whereat the Pope stumbleth, and therefore does falsely accuse us,
that forbid good works. We only affirm this, that there is equality in
Christ's kingdom, forasmuch as God accepts us not for our merit or deserving,
but through his mercy and grace in Christ.

And thus proceeding in this matter, after that a man has obtained this
equality and fellowship: Let every man in the common life apply his vocation,
and see to his charge, either in gouernyng youth in the schole, or teaching the
people in the church, or gouernynge his family at home, or doing any other
lower service. And here let every man do his duty diligently. Neither let
him look to be equal with other in a higher degree For in Christ no man's state
is better than other, but all in him obtain the mercy of God.

The Jews would have inequality in Gods kingdom.
And in this is the world and the Jews greatly offended, when they hear that
we, that are Gentiles and uncircumcised, be received to salvation, which were
never burdened with the Saboth, neither with other burdens of the law, where as
they have carried and borne them with great peine and sweat, as Christ in this
parable describes it very proprely: The first had thought that they should had
received more, and therefore they murmured when every man had but his penye,
even as they had also that were but an hour in the vineyard. But Christ
suffers not this inequality Friend (says he) I do thee no wrong, take that
is thine, and be gone. That is to say, you have now received your wages even the
land of Canaan. But now I will ordeyn an other new kingdom, wherein al things
shall be equal. For all the riches therein are mine, and I may order them as I
list. It does not become you to teach me what wages I shall give to my laborers
and workmen. Therefore the Jews by their indiscreet manner and envy do cast
away the kingdom of GOD, and think it an unmeet thing, that we Gentiles
should be made equal with them, and therefore they accuse God, as though he did
them wrong, and dryueth him to his answer, so yt he is feign to chyde with
them, and say: What aylest thou? are they not my goods that I give and not
thine? Is it not laufull for me to do with mine own goods as me lusts? A
like importunity and indiscreet manner is there in the Pope also and all his.
They abhor this kingdom, wherein al things are equal. They require the
chiefest preeminence for them self as of duty, but for their pride they shall
obteyn no more the^ ye Jews obtained.

Wherefore we must not lightly regard this difference between the corporal and
spiritual life, A difference between the kingdom of Christ, and of the
worldly kingdom.
or (if it must otherwise be named) between the kingdom of the world and
Christ's kingdom. For in Christ's kingdom all things must be equal: for they
are common goods as is God. Christ, the holy ghost, the gospel, baptism, the
supper of the Lord, faith. And because of this equality, they are all like
holy and righteous. etc. And sith we have obtained this, let us be thankful
to God for so great treasure. Let us truly knowledge that, and not be ignorant
of our excellency and renoume. And let us not think that our state and
condition as much as belongs to gods kingdom, is any thing inferior to the
state of all the great and mighty holy angels. And how comes this to pass?
even by Christ. Then when we are this instructed and made joyful and hearty,
let every man diligently and gladly apply their business, according to their
calling and vocation. encoragyng them selves with the hope and full trust of
that tresure which is in Christ. And this must we lern in this Gospel, that in
worldly things there must needs be a difference and degree had as touching
diverse persons and offices. For the state of this life can no otherwise be. But
in the kingdom of Christ, this is a right law: I will give unto this last
even as unto thee. And the right comes of this. The kingdom of heaven being
a deliverance from syn and from death is due to no man of merit, it is given
only by grace. Wherefore we ought specially to beware, that we murmr not, but
rather give thanks unto God, and take this for a comfort in all perils,
labors, and miseries, that chance unto us in this corporal life. Then shall
we perceive and feel great pleasure in all things.

The thoughts of predestination are perilous.
In the last sentence of the gospel (Many be called, but few be chosen) the
curious have taken great occasion to invent wicked and ungodly opinions,
thoughts, and imaginations. For this they think. They must needs be saved,
whom God has chosen: Contrariwise, they that are not chosen, whatsoever they
do, be it never so good a work, yet can they not escape damnation, nor come to
salvation. Wherefore I will not strive against that must needs be done. If it be
so determined, that I shall be saved, I shall be safe, if not, I will not leese
my labor in vain. Every man may easily judge what frowardnes and careless
living springs of these ungodly thoughts. But in the feast of the
Epiphanie, when I expounded the saying of Micheas the prophet, How Gods will
is truly to be learned.
we declared sufficiently, that such thoughts are to be avoided as the devil
him self, and that we must go an other way to work, if we will have the true
knowledge of Gods will, and not to meddle with the priuities of Gods majesty,
neither with predestination and election. For these things pass man's
capacity, which can not as much as think thereof without great offense, that
is to say, either must there needs ensu after such thoughts, desperation, or
dissolute living, with out all fear of God. But he that will come to the true
way of knowing of Gods will, In Christ is God known
he must so walk that he may beware at such occasion of falling, and seek
how he may more and more increase in godlynes. As Christ him self appoints
us, when he says: John. 14.
No man comes to the father, but by me,

Wherefore he that will come unto the Father, and to the knowledge of him he must
go first unto Christ, What Christ is unto us.
to know what he is, even that Christ is the son of god and God almighty. But
what does the son of God? He is made man for us to deliver us from the law,
he is crucified and dead on the cross, to satisfy for our sins. He rises
from death, to open us the way to everlasting life by his resurrection and aid
us against everlasting death. He sits at the right hand of God to make
intercession for us, to give us the holy ghost, and by him to sanctify
govern, and lead us, to defend us against temptation, and all the darts of
the dyuell. And this is the true knowledge of Christ. Now when thy mind is well
confirmed and strengthened with this knowledge, now is the way to heaven
without peril, and thou can have no imagination of God that shall be evil
and dangerous. For sith that the son of God has done so much for man's
salvation, we may be assured thereby, that Gods will is not, but that we should be
saved. How should he have any pleasure in our destruction, sith he let
nothing pass, whereby he may bring man to life and salvation again? And this is
the true way to God, as Christ preaches in the third of John: So God loved
the world that he gave his only begotten son, John. 3.
that every one that believes in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting. And now let these thoughts be compared with the former thoughts
of predestination, and it shall evidently appear, that the former thoughts are
of the devil, whereby men ar seduced to their destruction, so that either they
now despair, or are made void of all godly motions. For they can have no
trust of the good will of GOD toward them.

There be some that expound the words after this manner. Many are called, that
is to say, God offers his grace to many: but few are chosen, that is, he
co^municateth his grace to few, for few shall be saved. This is a very wicked
meaning. For who will not hate God utterly, if he thought this of GOD, that it
came by his will and fault, that we be not saved? Now let this sentence be
compared with the sentence before, where as it was said, that the knowledge of
Christ must be as the ground and foundation laid to build the knowledge of
Gods will thereon, and it shall be evident, that this last exposition is
blasphemous against God. Wherefore this must we take to be the true meaning of
this sentence. Many (says he) are called. Note.
For the preaching of the Gospel is universal, and common, open to all that
will receive it. And gods will is, that it should be so spread abroad, that all
men should believe and be saved. But how does it prevail? even as it shall
follow in the next Gospel: Few are chosen, that is to say, few endeavor them
selves thereby to do as God requires, For some hear, and care not for it:
some hear, and yet set so little by it, that they will not put them selves
in danger for it. Some hear it, but they regard riches and pleasure more then
it. And this pleases not God, and as for such, he thinks them not worthy of
his kingdom. And this means CHRIST, where as he says, Few are chosen, few
declare such godlynes as God requires. But they are chosen and acceptable to
God, that diligently hear the Gospel, believe in Christ, and declare their
faith in good works, and refuse not to suffer any kind of persecution for it.

This meaning is true, and seduceth no man to his destruction, but makes them
learn the way to salvation. For thus should they search out ye truth in their
doyngs, if they would please God, and be chosen. They must beware of an evil
conscience, and not syn against Gods commandment, they must diligently resyst
sin, and attentively here Gods word, and studiously exercise the^ selves
therein: They must desire of God the holy ghost, and never cast away Gods word,
they must always be ready to fight against the devil and his subtilties,
desiryng God alwais to send them help, defense, and patience. And such men
wax perfect christians, where as contrariwise, they that think it Gods will
not to be, that all should be saved: either they fall into desperation, or else
into a dissolute and careless living, which afterward nothing differ from
beasts in their co^uersatio^ whilst that they think on this wise. Now it is
decreed already, whether I shall be saved or damned, Why then should I bestow
labor in vayn. But thou sholdest not on this wise take thy beginning, where
thou should have ended. This commandment of God is put forth before thee,
that thou should believe in Christ, that he is thy savior, that has
satisfied for thy sins. This commandment must thou follow. And if thou felest
that thou haste no faith or very little, pray to god for the holy ghost, and
doubt not, Christ is thy savior, and thou art predestinate to be saved, if
thou beleuest, that is, if thou with a sure faith trustest in him, and
commyttest thy self unto him. The which GOD grant us all through the same our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Amen.

The Sunday called Sexagesima. The Gospel. Luke. viii.
WHen much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of al
Cities, he spoke by a similitude. The sower went out to sow his sede, and as he
sowed, some fell by the way side, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of
the air devoured it up. And some fell on stones, and as soon as it was spronge
up, it wythered away, because it lacked moystnesse. And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. And some fell on good
ground, and sprang up, and bare fruict an hundredth fold. And as he said these
things, he cried: He that has ears to hear, let him hear. And his
disciples asked him, saying: What manner of similitude is this? And he said:
Unto you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but to other
by parables, that when they see, they should not see, and when they hear, they
should not understand. The parable is this. The sede is the words of God.
Those that are beside the way, are they that hear then comes the devil and
takes away the word out of their hearts, least they should believe, and be
saved. They on the stones are they, which when they hear, receive the word
with joy, and these have no roots, which for a while believe, and in time of
temptation go away. And that which fell among thorns, are they, which when
they have heard, go forth and are choked with cares and richesse, and
voluptuous living, and bring forth no fruit. That which fell in the good
ground, are they, which with a pure and good heart hear the word, and keep
it, and bring forth fruit through patience.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel are put forth four kind of disciples, that hear the word of
God, to thend that every man should consider with himself, of what sort he him
self is of, and endeavor with all diligence to be made a part of that good
ground and soil, Four manner of disciples.
that he may be fruictfull. The first (says Christ) be as the sede cast by
the hie way: and that can bring forth no fruict. For because it is either trod
under foot, or devoured of birds. The second are they that hear and profess
it not only in word, but believes, and so grows as though it would bring
forth fruict, as that does that is sowed amongst stones, but yet they can not
abide heat, for that they can not deeply cast their roots, and so by juice
and moisture save them selves against heat. Wherefore they, when there comes
any tempestuous persecution and temptation, wyther away before they yield
fruict in patience, long suffering and hope. The third sort at most easiest to
be known. They are christians, and as a man would say, sede under thorns,
which although it brings forth blade, yet before harvest, it is ouergrowen of
thorns and choked up. But the fourth ar true disciples, when a pure mind is
joined with the word, and is not cast out thereof until it bring forth fruict in
patience. For they suffer all things for the words sake, their study is wholly
to love and obey God, and yeldeth fruict a thousand fold. And these ar the
four sorts of me^ yt hear the gospel. Now let every man search himself, and
consider of which sort he is of. For three of them be naught and vnfruictful.
And specially the first are worst of all, which hear the word, and when it is
herd (says Christ) the devil comes, and takes ye word out of their hearts,
yt they may not believe, and be saved. Mark this well. For by mine own
judgment, I would never have thought yt the herts whilst they hear the word of
God, The devil is the cause that men remember not the word and doctrine.
ar besieged and assaulted of the devil, and that though they here it, yet
little regard it, never remember it, but utterly forget it. It seems to our
reso^, to be but a chance, yt these me^ are so careless, light, and negligent
ene^ as it is a natural vice of negligent and forgetful persons, to take little
head to things yt ar most profitable and necessary. And it seems also to be a
like matter to our judgment, when the word of God is heard and not regarded
but forthwith forgotten. But Christ judges other wise, eue^ yt the devil
steals the word out of the herts of me^. And here ye se, what ye ought to
judge of those men, yt ar forgetful when they here the word. For they behave
themselves so afterward as though they had never heard it. They can not trust
yt they have the holy ghost, for the devil is so nigh the^, yt he puts his
hand into their heart, and steals out the word. Wherefore all kind of vice
must needs ensue thereof, stubbornness, disobedience, unfaithfulness, iniquity,
filthiness, and devilish desire to revenge. For if the word remained still in
the heart, and they had herd it attentively, it would have garnished their
hearts with true obedience, faith, modesty, mercy, and such like virtues.
And these are the first and worst of al. Christ is not a littell offended with
these untoward persons, and therefore he rebukes none so sharply as them. For
this he openly affirms, yt the dyuels flying in the air, steal the word out
of their hertes, yt they may not regard it, nor set so much by it, nor think
it to be so great a fault, if men lightly esteem the voice of Gods word. But
if thou will know, how this trespass is to be judged, hear the judgment of
Christ, which without doubt understands better tha^ all the wisdom of the
world can. And he says precisely yt the devil does it. wherefore, whersoeuer
any such be, that here the word, and yet ar no more moved thereby then blocks,
as we se the plain experience hereof by the examples of the covetous buyers and
sellers of husbandmen and towns men, and especially of our adversaries the
Papists, which regard the doctrine of the gospel no more than the wolf
does the lamb: Think here verilye that the devil dwells in their hearts
and swaloweth up all the word of God that comes therein, yt they may not
believe and be saved. For if the devil were not present, or if this forgetfulness,
came of nature (as we se yt one man has a better remembrance and memory then
an other) yet the fervent desire and loss of it, would constrayn him to thynk
this: How miesrable am I, that I can not remember much? O Lord be mercyfulle
to me, and fashion thou my mind, that I may regard and mark these things,
which are set forth unto me in thy Gospel. With such as on this wise thirst
after the word, and embrace it with their full will, the devil can not
prevail. For this hearty desire and the devil can not abide together. But
these forsayde persons, that are described of Christ, care not a jot when
Gods word is sent unto them. No they think it not so much worth as is a
little gaynes or lucre. Let no man think otherwise, but that these men are in
the devils power. And verily the greatest part of men ar of this sort: they
here the word and regard it not, because the devil plucketh it out of their
hearts.

The other two sorts are not so wicked, but ar weak they despise not to be
instructed, they begin well, and are delighted therewith. Wherefore Christ does
not here say, that they are so far in the devils danger, as the first are,
although nevertheless, there appears not in them the true fruits of
godlynes, that should thereof consequently succeed. And first ar they of both,
that in time of persecution and temptation forsake ye word. Which after the
manner of corrupt fruicte, as long as they are not shaken with the wind, abide
in their place with the other: but as soon as a tempest ryseth and shakes the
tree, they fall of one after an other: So they also according to Christ's
words, for a time believe: but when they see the cross coming, they can not
abide that terror, and they seek how to be out of danger as the multitude
does. So that here can not follow the fruit of everlasting life, nor any other
good fruict that springs of the word and faith.

The third be they, that for love of worldly riches and pleasures regard not
the word. For he that is given to worldly cares, seeks, sercheth, scrapeth
together, and bestows all labor that he can, to get him store of riches.
This man ouerladeth his heart, as Christ says in Luke, and so it comes to
pass, that the fruicte of godliness is choked up, Luc. 21.
even as the corn is with thorns. Substance must be gotten by labor, and
every man acording to his vocation, is bound therein to show industry and
diligence as God has commanded. Genesis 3.
But when all the mind and care is bent, and al thy heart wholly addict and
given to such kind of study and care, that almost thou studiest nothing else:
this is that mischief of thorns yt presses down Gods word, that it cannot
grow up to bring forth fruit. For it is not studied as it should be, but other
things are alwais set more by then it.

And these are the three sorts, in whom Gods word takes no place, neither can
it bring forth in them the fear of everlasting life: which thing is not to be
counted any small loss. Wherefore Christ exhorts all that hear, and says:
Se that ye give good ear. For to him that has, shall be given, and to him that
has not, shall that also be taken from him, that he thinks that he has. By
these words it appears, that he speaks of no light matters. For it is no
little danger thus to neglect and contemn ye word: How dangerous a rhynge it,
is lightly (...) regard Gods word.
As when a man does this devise with himself: I will without cessyng use my
customable trade in bargainyng, in occupying, in gaynyng, in winnyng, in taking
my pleasure, in following my hearts lust, and in dissemblyng what I thynk of
gods truth and word: I shall have time sufficient to hear it, and to live
accordingly thereunto hereafter when I shall have more leisure to take ye
fruition of my goods. But take diligent head, that thou be not prevented in
making thine account. Thou know not how long thou have to live, neither
whether thou shall ever again have such opportunity and occasion to hear it,
neither what chance god shall se^d the. And all this devise is to thine own
peril and danger only. Al thy craft shall turn to no man's hurt but to thine
own. Wherefore hear Christ when he warns thee: He that has ears to hear,
let him hear. By the which saying he means that we should not in this business
prolong, linger, and delay the time, as it is the manner of us all. Begin
now (says he) while thou hear, to study for this, that death may not come
out of season.

Wherefore let us so order our selves, that we may be in the fowerth sort,
although it be small. Let us by prayer and diligence so provide, that our mind
be not sinistrall and untoward. Let us regard the word of God, and keep it,
and bring forth good fruicts. And of this sort is the company of saints, I
mean not of the Pope holy saints, which are disguysed and shorn, which are
Massmongers, and friday fasters, whose holiness is in their wedes and strange
vestures. etc. But they yt hear the word of God, where as contrary wise, the
Pope and his holy ones (as it evidently appears) are very extreme persecuters
of Gods word. They that hear the word, brings forth fruicte, yea a
hundred fold, that is, much and plentifully: or as Matthew speaks in parcels:
Math. 13.
some a hundred fold, some sixty fold, some thirty fold. For as ye ministrations
and offices ar sundry so are the fruits unlike. The ministration of ye precher
in the church, is better in the common congregation, tha^ is the craftesman in
rulyng his own house. And yet both are Christians made free from sin and
death and ordained heirs of everlasting life through Christ. Let us be of this
number, which truly is small.

But we have need of a toward and pure heart (as Christ says) that is, What
manner of thing a good heart is.
such a heart that is not negligent and forgetful, but cares earnestly for
Gods word. For that thing is first of all necessary, that the devil may have
no way in, lest he come and steal away ye word. Secondarily, it is
necessary to have a strong and a courageous heart, and not a fearful and
dastardly, that will be moved with terror and dread, or care for men's hatred
or favor. For except we love God above all things, and dread him, the word
can not long endure with us. For it is never suffered in any place of the
world long without persecution. For the dyuell can not abide it. It is a very
busy and styrryng kingdom of his. He suffers not his servants to be idle,
as we prove and feel by the Papists daily more and more. Thyrdely, he must
take diligent head in this point also, that the thorns trouble it not, that
is, that he regard not his substance, richesse, pleasures concupiscence of the
flesh and eyes, and the pomp and pride of life, so much as he does the
word. And worldly travail is not more to be esteemed, then the word of God.
But as CHRIST says: Math. 6.
First seek the kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof.

When the heart is become studious, strong, Fruicte in patience.
and religious with the fear and love of God, then it is pure and apt to this
purpose, to yield fruict in patience and long sufferance. For the cross,
tribulation and affliction cannot be lacking at al. 2. Tim. 3.
For (as Paul says) all yt will live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution.
Wherefore patience is a necessary remedy in christian men, and so is prayer. For
first of all, our greatest incommoditie is, that we are tangled and combered
with such lettes, we can not by reason of our natural inclination, neglect and
despise worldly things. Besides all this, the devil lets no occasion pass:
but deuiseth all means possible to take the word from us, and to put in the
place thereof, covetousness, pride, wrath, and other things of like sort. As
there be examples to show. For there should be many excellent persons in the
congregation, if they were not hyndred by avarice, ambition, lechery, so that
they can not regard Gods word. Wherefore it is very expedient, diligently to
mark our vicious nature, and not to live so carelessly, as the most part do,
but to entreat God for the gift of the holy ghost (which he promised for a
surety to give us. Luc. 11.
The father gives yt holy ghost to all that ask it) that he may remove from
us all such stops and stays, and that he would cut a sunder these thorns and
snares, that we may hear and keep the word of God, and bring forth true
fruicte of faith in Christ. By the which faith, we may show, not only
obedience to God, but may become also his children and heirs. For this is the
chiefest cause, why this seed is spread, and the Gospel preached throughoute
all the world, even to yield such fruictes into everlasting life.

Now after this description of true godliness and hope of good encreace
thereof, this doctrine is not to be let pass in this parable. Let it not seem
any marvel unto us, The word is not every where fruictfull.
that Gods word should not every where yield fruict. For that we learn by
the distinction that Christ makes of four kynds of hearers, whereof one only
is good, the other three ar fautie. Yet they ought not to hinder or let the
fourth in doing their duty. For the manner of Gods word is such: neither
can it be otherwise. It is put forth to men for their salvation. But in the
most part of men it nothing prevails, as this parable specifieth. Howebeit,
the word and the precher is not in the fault, as the ragious and furious
Papists think, they may boast against us in that behalf, for that there rose
also many sects and offenses with the setting forth of our doctrine.

But if this made any thing against us, what would they say to the example of
Christ, John, and the apostles? Were not all things in their time also full of
grievous offenses and trespasses? Do not hystories record, that there were that
heard John, and yet said, Math. 11. Math. ^14. Marc. 6. Luc. 9.
that he had a devil? Herod him self that so greatly esteemed him, and was
delighted with his doctrine, as the Evangelists testify, at last caused him
to be ^mprisoned and beheaded. They heard Christ, the son of God, and yet
crucified him. Why say thou not now, that John, Christ, and the Apostles
were false teachers, for that there was such incredible stubbornes, and
malice, that very few were converted by their word.

But here they dare not speak what they thynk, lest they should openly betray
them selves to be Antichrists. The word of Christ himself was not every where
fruitful.
They think that they have a lauful cause therefore to rail upon our doctrine.
What is the cause of our doctrine, and by what right we may maintayn it, and
set it forth: I will not show at this time, I have only respect that it is
Christ's word. For thus he says: The sede is the word. And verily it can not
fall into a wicked Papists heart to say, that this word, that Christ
speaks of here, is evil and corrupt.

But now what says Christ, as touching the pure and good ground? what
increase comes thereof? The fourth part (says he) comes to good, and
grows to ripeness.

Who therefore can doubt, but that the world continues in wickedness and
without amendeme^t, although the word and the doctrine be pure true and
without fault? I plead not the cause (as I said before) for our doctrine.
But we at the least prove this, that our adversaries the Papists can not but
confess whether they will or no, that the wickedness of the world can not be
amended thereby or taken away, although that both pure doctrine and
preachers come unto it. The very example of Christ besides John and the
Apostles shows sufficiently, that the matter can not be brought to such
case, that all shall believe and embrace the word. It is the greater part, and
it will be always evil, lewd, and vnfruictfull, and very few be converted
and brought to believe.

Now if it so chanced to the son of God, what marvel is it, if it chanced
so to John, and to the Apostles, and now to us also at this time? Shall the
fault therefore be laid to the doctrine? Why do they not as well blame and
deny the good sede, that fell upon the way, the stones, and the thorns. But
they should rather follow the truth, and refrayn from railyng and backbityng.
His word is the sede that is sown. And that is never evil, neither does it
of his own pure nature bring forth any other fruicts then good. And if fruicts
follow not thereafter, beware thou blame not God and his word. The cause why ye
word is not fruictfull.
The fault is in the ground, wherein the good sede is hurt, corrupt, and made
vnfruictfull. Wherefore this is but a sclander of the Papists where as they
mysreport our doctrine, for that it is assaulted with so many offenses and
sects. Let them condemn them selves rather, and such other that will not
receive the word with a true heart. For the fault is not in the word, but in
the heart and mind. They are corrupt and also stirred by the devil to forsake
Gods word: As Christ shows in an other parable of a good ground, which is
sowed with good sede, Math. 13.
and yet it can not be without tares. If ye demand how this comes so to
pass: the devil (says Christ) sows the^ in the night: which can not suffer,
that all things should be clean and pure, and albeit, he can not utterly root
up altogether, yet he mingleth his tares with ye residue yt is pure. Now who
can blame gods word, as though it were ye cause of al sects? Wherefore let al
me^ take heed to themselves by this doctrine. For this propretie of ye gospel
will never be other. Some shall thereby be restored and brought to ripe corn. But
co^trarywyse, the greater part shall alwais remain unfruitful. Wherefore here
it comes to pass, yt Christ said in the last part of ye Gospel: Many are
called, but few are chosen. For when they will not make their mynds agreeable and
conformable to the Gospel, but hearkeneth rather to the devil, and let pass
the word, they can not by such wickedness please God. Wherefore they fall not only
into common and vulgar sins and offenses, but also (as Christ says here) they
are strike^ with madness and blindness, as with a plague for their vnclenlines,
so yt in seeing they see not: and in hearing they understand not, nor know not,
how yt matter stands. Wherefore let every man here beware he fall not,
neither let him blaspheme ye Gospel for it. For it never comes forth without
offenses and falling: which is not the fault of ye word, but of the malicious
and devilish heart: As the fault is not in ye sede, yt in the way it brings
forth no fruit, nor among stones and thorns. We must fight against this
offense, and labor rather yt every man may get this sede and pray God, that he
will fascion form and frame our hearts through his holy spirit, and so
prepare a way, that when we hear the word, it may perce into our hearts, and
bring forth fruict in patience, and that we may obteyn salvation by our faith
in Christ, which the holy ghost by the word of God and the sacraments
works in us. Which thing God grant luckily to come to pass. Amen.

The Purification of S. Mary the virgin. The first part of the Gospel. Luc. ii.
ANd when the time of their Purification (after the law of Moses) was come,
they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord (as it is written in
the law of the Lord: every man child that first opens the matrix, shall be
called holy to the Lord) and to offer (as it is said in the law of the Lord) a
pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN the history of this Gospel is set forth how the child Jesus was
presented in the Temple after the time of his mothers in lying. And the
Evangelist after the manner of the law, calls the whole time of her lyinge
in, the days of Purification. For the same term is used of Moses. Leui. 12.
This was not the law of nature, wherefore the Gentiles used it not. But God did
constitute this law among his people for a peculiar purpose, that the mother,
if she brought forth a man child, should after.xxxiii. days come to the
temple: but if it were a woman, after.lxvi The very same law has the Pope made
for churchyng (as it is named) of women that have layne in child bed:
co^mandyng that after certain days they should return to the church to be
purified and hallowed of their uncleanness. As though by a certain law, they
were unclean, and therefore unmeet to be present at any holy ceremonies, or to
have company with the congregation. But the Pope does this without right. For
ceremonial uncleanness was not natural, but a ceremony commanded by a certain
law, whereunto none were bound but ye Jews, neither ought other to be yoked with
this law.

But this was specially commanded in the law, that the first begotten after
the forsaid time was expired, The first begott^n male must be presented to the
Lord.
should be presented and dedicate unto the Lord. For so is it written in
Moses law: Every man child that opens the matrix, shall be called holy to the
Lord And that not only of men, but of beasts also: All that was called the
Lords, and was the Lords. And hereof sprung the prerogative and interest of the
eldest son or first begotten, so that they were preferred in the priesthode and
in other things. And because that in so great a number of people, Exodus 13.
Nu^^. ^.
this would have grown to an infinite multitude, if all the first begotten
should remain in the temple to serve the Lord: therefore GOD permitted the
parents to redeem their children by price, as by a lamb of one years age: or
by a pair of turtle doves, according to every man's ability. And so the
son was restored to his parents, and yet was called the child of the Lord.
Here it appears, that Mary's substance was not great, for that she offered but
a pair of turtill doves, which was the gift of the poorer sort. By this
gift she redemeth her son, and so by this means confesses: that although
she be the true mother, yet that it is not her son only, but the son of God
also as well as her own. For he was the first begotten.

The Turk takes the first borne.
The Turk in this counterfeiteth God, where as he takes from the parents the
most towardest sons and daughters, causing them to be brought up for his use.
And this is the cause yt he has such store of mighty warriors. But god dealt
more gentilly. He required the first borne for him self, after such manner,
that he nevertheless gave power to redeem them: and to the end that the Jews
should know their God, to be such as delivered them out of the bondage of
Egypt, and destroyed in one night all the first borne of the Egyptians.
Therefore he commanded that the first begotten of the Jews, Exodus 11.
for a memorial of this wonderful deliverance, should be presented and
offered in the temple. And this law is now also abrogate and abolyshed,
neither are we Christian men bound to this law, no more then we are to other
ceremonies made peculiarly for the Jews.

Christ an example of obedience.
And in all these things there is no great thing for us to learn, except that
only, whereof we have entreated before as concerning the circo^cision of Christ:
even that Christ is under the law, as though by no right he was subject nor
bound thereunto. Wherefore this obedience of Christ I will now show forth, but
yet not applying it to such an high degree, as I did before. For as I applied
my doctrine before to the furtherance of righteousness before God, that is, how
we were made rightous in the sight of God: so now let it be unto us an
exaumple of charity and good works. For the humble obedience of the child
Jesus: is so hyghely praised and set before our eyes to make us ashamed: for
that he by all his labor and long travail can not stir us to do half
our duty. There is so much crookedness in us, that we can not do that,
that is commanded to be done under pain of damnation and everlasting
punyshemente. Where as Mary neuerthe less, which was a virgin, and therefore
not bound to the law. For Moses law is for such women as were brought
with child after the common natural course) yet she demands no pryuiledge
more then other womenne had, but humbly obeys the law as all other did.
And the child JESUS, which is lord of the law, with whom Moses is not to
be compared: yet submits him self so lowely, that he obeys the law of
his servant. These examples be such as prove our virtues and doings little
worthy of praise, and therefore are described in sermons, and set before us to
make us ashamed, for that we for this lords sake, of whom we have all
things, do not so much as our necessary duty byndeth us, where as he for
our sakes, does that that his servant commanded him. He therefore that
has any understanding like a man, would deteste and abhor him self:
that where as he sees so great an exaumple of CHRIST his delyuerer, which
so much humbles him self, and shows such obedience, as men could never
have invented the like: yet we not withstanding that, little regard to obey
him, which has power, either to cast us into hell, or else for to receive
us into heaven.

Wherefore CHRIST'S obedience puts ours to confusion and shame, and it ought
to admonysh us of our great dishonestie, yt we may reason thus with our selves:
What do we caytiues? what mean we? Shall we never come to our right wits,
obey him, and follow his example, which became man for our sake, which cried
in his swadelynge bands, which was accused at Jerusalem, which is obediente
to Moses his servant, to whom he was not ^ounde? For he is the Lord: and as
for Moses, is scarcely worthy to be his servant, and yet he does that that
he was not commanded. And as for me I do not that that I am bound, and charged
to do under pein of damnation.

And this is the first simple and plain doctrine, wherein by the example of
Christ, we are put in remembrance of our duty, that when we consider his great
obedience, we may be pricked with shame, concerning our lewd nature, for that
we refuse to be obedient, for our own necessary cause and behofe. Of the
first borne.
The other doctrine is of the preferment of the first born, for that yt God
has ordained him to be of such an high degree, as to be called the son of
God, and his proper god. This is a great honor, a great privilege whereof the
Jews were not a little proud. For they disdained all their other brothers, as
though that they in comparison of them selves, were not of the number of them
that pleased god. As many evident exaumples are ready to declare this true, where
as none did more degendre from their kind then the first borne, none did less
behave them selves to the contentation of their parents minds. For they could
not know or measure them selves for pride, they thought them selves only holy
before God, and despised all the rest. Neither could we at this time if we
had such preeminence, refrain from like statelynesse, as we may perceive
this by the manners of monks: If they could have any thing to declare this
their preferment and honor, and say truly: We are the holy sons of God, this
privilege have we by his word and ordinance: how glorious would they be, seeing
that now they take so much upon them, for a stinkyng coules sake? The first
begotten by pride waxed worst. Lucifer. Cayne.
And this pride was the ruin and overthrow of the first borne: As it was to
Lucifer the chief angel. Cain also was the first begotten, and therefore he
thought himself most happiest. And this does Eve declare by the name that she
gave him, when he was borne, even that this was the man, that they should look
for. She gave him this name to garnyshe him as with a diadem or kings robe,
as though he should be that promised heroical person to come. But even as of
Lucifer was made a devil, so of Cain was made a wicked prince. Ismaell.
There was also no small pride in Ismaell, which could not suffer his brother
Isaac in the house. for he persuaded himself, that he should be head of all.
And such pride for the most part was of them all, as though they only were
the holy ones of the Lord, and that all the residue were esteemed but for
underlings. Wherefore GOD could not spare them. Esau for his first byrthes
preeminence, thought to become the chief. But God provided otherwise. Esau.
For when he thought by the privilege of birthright, yt he might without
let oppress and neglecte his brother, it pleased GOD to take his right
from him, and to put him beside the blessyng, even as he did with Ismaell and
Cayn.

But for the proof of this matter the example of the Jews passes al other.
The Jews
For they by good right should have been the first begottten in the kingdom of
God and in the church, and we Gentiles their younger brethren. But when they
waxed stout and proud, and would pluck unto them things due by birthrighte,
God cast them of, for that they trusted so much in the^ selves, and despised
other. Where as it had been mete for them for that cause to be more gentil, kind,
and obedient. And for this pride were they rejected from God, and the Gentiles
received. David at Gods request preferred in his kingdom, David.
Solomon the youngest, before his elder brethren, to exclude all prouocations of
pride. And the chosyng of David to his kingdom was after no other manner: when
God sent Samuel the prophet, to anoint the son of Iesse to be king for Saul.
First came the eldest, whose pride appeared, for that he so cruelly rated his
brother in the tents, as though he counted him for his bondma^. But the Lord
answered that it was not he, until seven sons of Iesse were passed by, and the
pro? phet was fain to ask whether he had any other son besides? To who^ the
father, as though he thought no likelihode in David, answered that he had a
little son fedyng sheep. For Iesse could not think, yt God would auanced his
youngest son to such a chief fortune and state. 1. Reg. 16.
But this was he that God accepted. The first begotten pleased not God, as he
says to Samuel: I judge not by the outward show, but I behold the heart.

Carnal prerogatives ought not to be applied to pride.
But what shall we say to be the cause, that God so greatly neglects the first
birthright, which he ordained him self, and aduanceth David to the kingdom,
that was the youngest amongst his brethren, whereas yet by Gods ordinance, the
right of the kingdom belonged to the first borne? Ueryly all his entente and
purpose is, to persuade, that privileges in bodily things, are not regarded or
respected of God: Neither will he that the use of his privileges and gifts
should be referred to such an end, that thereby should spryng pride,
statelynes, and contempt. GOD would have his children sober and lowly, and not
proud and lofty. But they that thereby take occasion to be disdainful and
arrogant, although they were thereunto advanced by God, yet be they soon
brought down again. Wherefore when the Angels, Cain, Ismaell, Esau, Elias,
and the Jews waxed proud, and applied their preeminence and privilege, given
unto them to knowledge Gods goodness thereby, first to their own private
pleasure and commodity, and then to the oppressyng of other: they were
reprobate and cast out of Gods favor, notwithstanding their first birthright,
and outlawed out of Gods kingdom into the kingdom of the devil. And this
practice of God is described in the Psalm. 103. Psalm. 103.
Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling on high, and yet
humbles himself to behold things in heaven and earth. He raises the simple
out of the durst, and lifts the poor out of the mire: And the virgin Mary in
her song: He has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the
humble and meke. Luc. 1.
This is Gods manner. He wholly resysteth the proud: neither does he enryche
and beautify men with his gifts, 1. Pet. 5.
that they thereby should become extorcioners, and oppressors. And lest he
should seem to be overcome of the proud, he aduanceth now and then* most
basest persons to high honor, and contrariwise throws down kings from their
thrones, and brings them hedlong to extreme calamity, whereout they can
never escape,

Wherefore among the Jews the first borne had great privileges in the
priesthode and kingdom was due to them by gods ordinance. But when they
proudly abused this honor, Genesis 49.
God did not alwais ratify this law. Ruben also was the first begotten, but
he is so cursed of his father Jacob, that he obtained by his birthright neither
kingdom nor priesthode. Abraham also (as men think) was the youngest among
his brethren. But GOD bestowed on him, that was due to his brother: And this
may ye learn by many examples, that the first borne did for the most part
degenerate. And there was no other cause of this, then pride which thought
this: I am the first begotten, wherefore my privilege is chief in this house,
I am Gods holy one, and his peculiar good.

Wherefore let no man be proud, if he excelle in any gift of God more
then other. If thou be endewed with the gift of learning, use that gift to
Gods glory, and to the profit of thy neighbor. Boast not thy self so
much thereof, as though thou receauedst it ^^t. They that pass other in
holiness, beauty, richesse, or any other gift: Let him beware of this, as
much as he would of death, that he challenge not those things as his own, and
so cast him self out of Gods kingdom by committing sacrilege. For GOD in the
first most excellent and ancient Patriarchs has declared, how greatly he
was offended with pride and statelynesse: where as they all for the most part
degendred. John the Baptist continued according to his first birthright, and
almost none else. But all other for the most part were of such intolerable
arrogance, that they obtained not this chief commodity of this renoume:
until at last the Jews by their fall and ruin gave up their right to us
Gentiles: For now the byrthryghte of the church before God consists not in
civil and corporal matters, as the Pope boasts, They that believe in Christ
are the first be gotten.
countyng himself chief Bishop, whereas he is scarsly a dream: But the
privilege of the Church is in baptism and in the word of GOD. For although
our bodily and corporal birth makes great diversity in us, yet by baptism
we are all equal. For we are all borne out of the church, which is an
undefiled virgin in spirit. For it has the pure word of God and his
Sacraments. And the church is pregnant and great with child, and always
brings forth Christians, which are the first fruits and proper goods of God.
And one man no more than an other. God will have us acknowledge our honor and
renoum in this, that we through baptism are borne the sons of God, and his
proper goods. He did not so by all nations, he showed not the judgments of
his mercy and grace to them, whether they be Turks or sarasens. For they
regard not these privileges of the first begotten. Neither will they hear or
see these things that make us first borne before God. And for as much as we
obtain this honor from God and his grace all Christians a like, we ought not
by our fault so to behave our selves, that the things that are given to our
comfort against the wicked, should through pride be our destruction. It is the
greatest renoum of Christ's church. For she, as a mother, by baptism, the
word and faith brings forth Christians, and the members of the church.
Wherefore in all those things if christian men will have respect to their birth
and condition, they shall have no occasion to be proud. For whatsoever they be,
it comes of the grace of God by baptism, faith, and the word, which are
equally belongyng to all Christian men, making no man more Christian then an
other before God through his mercy. All before God are priests and kings. And
of this renoum can neither Turk nor Sarasyn boast. Yet is not this renoum
granted to our ambition to corrupt and seduce, as the Pope does, that
usurps the supremacy over all christendom without the commandment of God,
by the instinkte of ye devil only. For this is a continual and unchangeable
rule among the Christians (as it is taught in the parable of the hired
laborers) that no man in dignity and worthiness prefer himself before other.
Math. 20.
For there is but one baptism of all. And where as there must needs be teachers
and pastors: yet these be but ministrations and offices, Ephesians. 4.
that have no power to make the children of God. For baptism and the word,
and faith in the word causes us to be the children of God, and the first
borne.

God hates pride.
Wherefore it is well set forth in the church for a doctrine, that the example
of the first borne in the old Testament, and their pride, should teach us
that GOD can not suffer pride. And he that would be safe from this danger,
must needs humble and submit himself. But this tale were as well told to a
deaf man as to the world. For it abuses the most folishe and vain things
that be to pride. And for as much as the world will in no wise follow better
council, Iac. 4.
GOD cease not to withstand the stubborn and proud. They are by daily
examples cast down, ^. Pet. 5.
even as Lucifer and his angels were out of heaven. And this is one part of
this gospel, as much as belongs to the history and the presentynge in the
church. Job. 4. 2. Pet. 2.
After this does the Euangeliste rehearse, what chanced, when they presented
Jesus, as their first begotten son in the Temple, and redeemed him with a
gift. We will take that in hand at an other time to entreat of. And now let
us pray unto GOD, that he will preserve us by his grace against all pride, and
keep us in obedience and lowlines to his most godly will. Amen.

The second Sermon of Simeon in the Temple. The Gospel. Luke. ii.
AAnd behold, there was a man in Ierus a lem whose name was Simeon. And the
same man was just and godly, and looked for the consolation of Israel, and the
holy ghost was in him. And an answer had he received of the holy ghost, that
he should not see death, except he first saw the Lord Christ. And he came by
inspiration into the Temple.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis is a notable hystory, wherewith is joined also a notable Sermon, How
Christ is reveled.
which Simeon preached openly in the Temple as concerning the child Jesus.
And it pertayneth unto other revelations opening this child to the world, and
especially to make him known among his own people. The first revelation was
made to Marye by the Angel. The second to Joseph and that also by an Angel.
Luc. 1. Math. 1. Luc. 1.
The third by Elizabeth John's mother, wha^ she receued mary great with child,
and when the child sprang in her womb. The fourth by Zachary John's father.
And although he named not the person, yet he declares evidently, that Christ
was come, and that it was the time of Messiah to be borne in, whereas god being
mi^dful of his holy covenant, now performs it. And after these reuelatio^s,
which be fell before Christ's birth, other followed when Christ was new borne.
Luc. 2.
The first was of the Angel unto the shepherdes watchinge their flock. And
the shepherds also kept it not privy, Math. 2.
but spread abrod the sermon of the angel every where. After yt was there made
a revelation by the star unto the wise men. Luc. 2.
And last of al these two revelations by the testimony of Simon and Anna the
prophetess: which both bare record in the temple of this child: That he is the
comforth of Israel, which shall help the world against sin and death.

And first, let us according to the description of the Euangeliste consider the
matter, The revelation of Simeo^ came by the holy ghost.
as concerning Simeon: And he (says the text) was a righteous man, godly,
and such a one that feared God, lokyng for the consolation of Israel, that
is, having a full hope, that God would shortly fulfill his promise, and send
Christ. And it is a sure token that he had a pefect hope and faith in this,
for that it was reveled unto him that he should not see death, before he had
seen Christ the anointed of the Lord. And this faith was not a vain opinion
nor rashlye conceived, as men do commonly imagine in matters that fall by
chance and fortune: But the holy ghost had touched his heart, and that
doubtless by gods word, after that he had considered the prophecy in Genesis.

Gene. 49.
That Christ should come at that time when the scepter was taken from Judah, and
foreiners had it, likewise he had cast the count, and duly numbered the times
as touching the weeks of Daniel. These prophecies compared with the times,
seemed plainlye to him, that the time was come wherein Christ should be reveled.
But this motion in his mind was wrought by ye holy ghost and by his peculier
operation, that he should live unto that time, and see Christ the Lords anointed
with his eyes.

Wherefore by the singular procurement of the holy ghost, when Marye and Joseph
came into the temple to present the child before the Lord and to redeem him
by an offeringe: Simeon also comes into the temple, not by chance, or of
custom, but by the motion of the holy ghost, which put in his mind, that it
was the very hour, wherein he might behold ye borne Messiah in the temple,
whom he had hitherto looked for. Wherefore he took no doubtful deliberation
about the matter, when he saw the child: but went forthwith and took him in his
arms, shewinge therewith all manner of joy and mirth, that is accustomed to be
shown in such great and comfortable matter. And there he pronounces before
them all such an hearty thanks geuinge unto God, that teaches that he truly
estemeth this gift, and certified other also of this great matter.

And he appeared to other and especially to the priests not to do this of any
custom, Simeon seemed to them not to have his right wits. For all that was
done, was little esteemed, the child being young, the parents poor, and nothing
had in estimation. But Simeon is nothing moved with this poor show, neither
regards he the judgment of other in this behalf, but boldly and frelye
affirms, that this is the very child, in whom God has ordained succor and
salvation not only for the Jews, but for the Gentiles also, and for all men. If
a man should demand of Simeo^, how he knew this, where as there appeared at
this time in him no notable thing more than in other, and where as there had been many before this time more likelye persons, which for their magnificence
might seem more apt for this purpos: he might have had a just cause so to
have done. Wherefore, this is a merueilous case, that causes the parents Joseph
and Mary to wonder, when they see this man Simeon, without external signs to
perceive such an inward light in this child, as whereby he acknowledges
Christ, notwithstanding that he was hid by that poor show. The parents were
certifyed of this child what he was, by the Angels, neither could these things
appear to be opened and reveled to Simeon by flesh and blood. And this was a
certain token of the church and congregation of GOD at that time, when certain
were confirmed by revelations from GOD. They that were chief at Jerusalem, as
the high priests Herod, the Scribes, the Levites, and Phariseis, did not much
regard the scriptures and the promises as touching Messiah. All their minds
were bent, to increase their power, their dignity, their authority and
riches. And among them was there a little number despised and unknown, of the
faithful. Of the which was Mary, Joseph, Zachary, Elizabeth, the sheppeherds,
Simeon, Anne the prophetess. These had all their hope fired, not in wordly
things, but in the promises as touching Christ. They looked for them to be
fulfilled, and with them they comforted themselves, and obtained them as they
trusted, whereas the hye Priests and such like were sent away empty. And
after like manner is ye state of the church at this time. There is always a
people that is poor and hungrye, which has God and his word for their
falsegarde: That does it only regard, without any further care. The state of
Christ's church in this world, is poor and miserable.
Whereas the Pope and his adherentes in the mean time, which are named the holy
church, knows nothing of God nor of Christ nor of his word. For they regard
and esteem only things of this world, and boaste themselves for Christian men,
because that they can do more with their riches and power, than the other
common sort in the congregation.

Wherefore you must beware in both parts, yt ye be not seduced. The hie priest
execute ye administration, and yet they are not in ye true church. And so y^
pope and ye bishops take upon the^ the governance of ye church, and yet are
they not ye church. For if they were, they would not persecute y^ word, but
rather reuere^tly extol it. In the contrary part, Mary, Joseph and Simeo^ are
without al nobilite, and of ye common sort, and therefore are unknown with such
like. But these are they that know Christ, in whom dwells ye holy ghost,
and governs the^, yt they may increase in ye knowledge of Christ and be
saved. In both parts (as I said) ye must beware ye stu^ble not. This is no
toke^ of ye true church, for yt the pope and his usurps their administration
in such po^pe, neither may we gather hereof, yt they can not err and be
deceived, or yt they must needs be gods people. This appears to be false i^
this first history of Christ. and on ye contrary part, ye little flock is not
therefore to be despised. Neither is ye fellowship of gods light to be taken
away, for because that they that bear it, are in the world abject persons.
For this is the manner of gods kingdom in earth, eue^ to be neglected and
abhorred of the wise, and to be advanced and set forth of the poor, to whom
it is truly reveled. For they can put their trust in no worldly aid, as they
do, which lean al to power, riches, councels, decrees, etc.

And let this be sufficient as touching, the first part of this history,
wherein Simeon by the holy Ghost acknowlegeth the child Jesus to be the
anointed of the Lord. After this I will take upon me to entreat of his sermon.
Whereby he signifies to other, what great help and what things he surely
knows to be to come of this child.

And furthermore, what is his office, and the greatest thing that he works in
all the world: that we herby by this example may knowledge Christ, and be
saved. The evangelist before described that Simeon received an answer of the
holy Ghost: that he should not die before he had seen the anointed of the Lord.
And when that promise now was fulfilled in the temple, he beheld with his
eyes, the child Jesus, and took him into his arms, and pronounced these words
with a joyful spirit: saying.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word.
That is: Now will I gladly without any refusing yield my self to nature. Death
makes hearts to fear.
Flesh and blood has no such kind of speech. For we know all very well,
how it goes at that time, when we must depart out of this world. Then is
there sorrow without hope, the^ is there conturbation, trouble, and anguishe of
mind, death, desperation, and lamentable cries, etc. Neither can the natural
man otherwise do, as it is to see, by the example of brute beasts, whereas is
only a natural death. But in men it is called the death of syn. Romans 6.
For death is enjoined to us for syn. And what fear and despair comes by
sin, we feel by experience. Wherefore man's death is much more greu^ous to
them, then it is to all other things, that by the law of destiny are
appointed to die. For they must abide the wrath and judgment of God, which are
joined with death, and never has end. If these things accompanied not death,
it would not be so terrible a thing for me^ to die. It is no little grefe that
comes by departing from things most delectable and dear unto us, whereas we
must therewith leave wife, children, friends and such like: But yet it passes
al grief, to feel sins, to dread gods judgment, to be oppressed with death
without any ways to escape. Wherefore the world can not singe this song with
Simeon, when death comes. But it begins rather to sing this morneful
verse, O Lord, I am guilty and condemned for my sins, Wherefore I can not be
suffered to depart from them in peace. My mind trembles and shakes, I see
no help offered to me. I know from what things I must depart, but I can not
tell what things I shall have hereafter, except this that I am sure of Gods
wrath and damnation, such is man's mind toward death. Neither can it find in
nature or reason any help or remedy against such fear. And therefore it
must needs at the consideration of death fall in despeire.

Wherefore this lesson and doctrine, Simeon learned not this way to dye by man.
that is put forth here to us in the example of Simeon, is not of man's wit.
He drew to his death without trembling: he despeired not to be saved after the
manner of other. He knew that he was old, and that old men have no long
continuance in this life, he feleth his strength more and more to decay. He
perceived not only by the necessary course of nature, but also by his own
peril, that the time was nigh, wherein his frame should be disolued. But yet he
is not dismayed thereby, but even now desires and wishes for the resolution
thereof, the which all other, and especially old men would wish never to come. It
appears that he had marvelous help, sith that he went to death, with such
strength of mind, and joyful courage. For if it had not ben for that, he
could never have been so glad at the beholdynge of death. But what thing shall
we say that it was, wherewith he was armed against it shall we say he was no
man, or that he was without sin, and therefore feared not gods wrath. But the
manner of obtaining salvation through this light, utters plainlye, that he
felt himself to be a sinner and a man in danger to gods ire and wrath. And
sith it goes so with men and sinners, what peace is it, that this old man
boasts of? His words show evidently, that he had such sense and felyng of
peace, as cold be hindered neither by man's frail estate, neither by contagion
of syn. And this is the thing that ought well to be marked in this man, that
we sinners also may surely trust to the same. And herby it may comme to pass,
that sinners may obtain peaceable and quiet minds against death, as we see
Simeon to be endued with so great and incredible confidence and trust. He had
hard before that he should not see death. Now he perceaueth what was unperformed
of the covenant. Yet he thought it not good to use any unlucky words and to
say, that he must die, saying he has obtained and gotten him, that is the
Lord of life and peace. Wherefore he expounds death, to be but a license of
departing in peace, as soldiers after battaill are licensed to return home
unto their friends and acquaintance.

But now let us learn of him this kind of wonderful exposition. For he is a
gentle and free instructor. He shows very lovingly the full reason and meaning
of his opinion and judgment without askyng, whereas he says.

For min eyes has seen thy salvation. Here he speaks of the child Jesus,
namynge him salvation, saving health or savior. Therefore whether he alludeth
to the name of the child, which he knew and learned of his mother or whether
he knew it not, yet properlye he touches the thing that was meant by the
name, so that he consents in all points with the Angel, Math. 1.
which brought this divine name from heaven, causynge him to be named Jesus,
because he should save his people from their sins. Simeon calls him the
salvation of the Lord, that is, whom the Lord himself ordained to be a
savior. And as touching this name, I have spoken before of the child Jesus:
that whereas God has ordained the maiestrate, the parents, and such other
necessary offices to be our saviors in corporal and temporal affairs as the
physicians in sycknes, lawyers in expoundynge what is every man's right: So if
this child had not come with an other kind of salvation, Simeon could never
have had such great confidence in his matters as to expound that his death was
but a license to depart, or a salfe conducte to go in peace, he could never
have regarded sin and death so lyghtlye.

Wherefore since Simeon confesses, that he shall depart in peace out of this
life, because he has seen the salvation of God, he defines plainly that he is
a savior against sin and death. For how cold he else have such sure
confidence of peace in a savior that was a man? This description is not
lightlye to be regarded. For it co^prehendeth a great wayghtie matter in few
words. It is but one child, whom Simeon so names. Wherefore it is herby
evidently proved, that whatsoever is beside this child, seem it never so
commendable through the name or outward show thereof, yet can it have no power
to bring to salvation, or to put away death and sin. But whosoever suffers
it to be applied unto him for salvation, works his own damnation.

Where Simeon by this word, minds to abolishe and derogat all rites, The law
and good works ca^ do nothing against sin and death.
and ceremonies and all the observations of the law, that no man should put any
hope of salvation in them, and that whosoever trusts in the law and in his
works, shall never obtain to be saved. For whereas he by a notable praise
calls this child the salvation of God, it is easy to gather thereby, that all
aid and remedy against death remains only in him. Whereof then comes
this hope in the Jews, that put such trust in the law and his works? What
means the Pope and his adherents, so highly to extol Masses, Pilgrimages,
pardons, as though salvation came by them? sith this is the name of this child
only, neither may it be given and communicate to any thing or creature besides.

The world ordains his saviors beside Christ.
The only words of Simeon may be taken for an argument, against these wicked
persuasions and opinions. For mine eyes, says he, has seen thy salvation, I
say, even that thou almighty father have ordained him to be a salvation to
sinners. For the world must needs find out saluations against sin. The
Jew thinks it salvation, if he observe the law. The monk and religious man
thinks it salvation if he bind himself to a certain kind of life by a
vow, and some chose certain of the saints to be their patrones and
defenders against sin and hell. All think that purchasyng of salvation
consists in their manner of living. But who can number the works that proceed
of men's traditions, and Idolatrous service in the popedom, wherein consisted
their chief hope of salvation? If they had well considered this verse of
Simeon, they should have perceived that this ought to have been avoided as a
most heinous sacrilege and robbing God of his dew honor, and they would not
have ordained any other saviors, tha^ was determined by the saying of Simeon.
They would have suffered him only to have this glory, whom God had appointed
so to be, in whom no man that trusts can be disapointed. For to this end
came this child, and for this purpose was he sent of God, even to bring
salvation unto us.

Wherefore in this salvation which God has prepared, there is such store of
saving health, The salvation of God canonly save.
that the conscience may thereby have perfect quiet, and never more dread the
cruelty of death or violence of sin, or the ragyng tyranny of the devil,
for as much as he has the saving health of God prepared ready, that is, the
almighty and everlasting salvation, which lacks no kind of succoure and
help to save us against sin and death, and give us abondance of life and
righteousness. Let us only with this Simeo^ embrace this child, that is stycke
unto him with a true faith, that we may conceive a sure comfort by him. For
when this is surely printed in our heart, that this child is that prepared
salvation ordained to help us against sin and death, then does ensue thereof
such peace of conscience, that syn and death skeareth us but in vain. For our
savior is redye to help us against it.

How this savior says.
And to entreat more at large of the salvation, that comes by this child, let
us take the record of John the Baptist discribynge him thus: Behold the lamb
of god that takes away the sins of the world. In these words is described
the sacrifice upon the cross for syn, John. 1.
and the conqueringe of death by his resurrection to justify us and to make us
rightuous. Wherefore to the obtainment of this salvation, he by his death and
resurrection gives us help against sin and death. And albeit that a Christian
man must not omit to do good works, yet is not salvation obtained thereby,
neither remission of syn, but this is only obedience due unto god, which god
requires. And he that will not perform it, is not delivered from his sins,
Good works.
for his disobedience. For this is the only true way to obtain that, even that
he that seeks how to be delivered from syn and death, should wholly flee to
this salvation, that is prepared for us of god, that it might take our sins
upon him, and make satisfaction for them, and so deliver us. He that does this,
may say with Simeon. Whatsoever fear or dread by death and other perils is
set before us: this is my sure comfort against them all, that thou Lord
let thy servant depart in peace. He that trusts to any other thing,
shall in stead of peace find anguishe and extreme misery in such a time.
For he shall not have this saving health, but in death and damnation shall he
perish. Neither must we make any such difference between us and Simeon, as
though he might more boldlye trust in this salvation, because he had power to
take the child in his arms and to behold him: and we not so, because we have
no such power. For as touching the effect of the matter, the bodily presence
is not auaylable, or has no great importance. Simon has no more preferme^t in
this salvation then we have.
Many other Jews doubtless did at that very time behold CHRIST, and yet
obtained no salvation therbie. Only this was effectuouse in Simeon and
furthered him to salvation, for that he through the inspiration of the holy
Ghost embraced this child, which nothing differed from other children, by
reason and sense, as that only savior, which was promised to the fathers,
Abraham and David. And in this are all Christian men equal to Simeon. For the
very same Christ is offered to them by the word of the Gospel for their
salvation, whom Simeon could no other ways know to be the salvation, then by
the word. And whereas he beheld him with his eyes it was the gift of GOD
proper to him and not to us, and yet he obtained not salvation thereby, but that
was given unto him to be saved for that he believed the word as touching this
child. Which is as able to save thee, as Simeon.

And for this cause Simeon rehearses in the verse following all them to whom
this salvation belongs, least it should seem to pertayne unto few, saying.

Which thou haste prepared before the face of all people. Christ is the
salvation of all men.
This child is a salvation against death and syn, and this makes Simeo^ to
depart in peace. But he is moved by the consideration of this sauinge health,
to open unto al other, by geuyng so evident commendation of it, for what
purpose God has prepared this salvation. This salvation (says he) is not only
ordained for my sake. But many belong unto the felowshipe and fruition of this
saving health. Simeon puts no difference between the Jew and the Gentile.
For God has prepared this salvation before the face of all people, so that
this child is not my savior only, neither his mothers, but the savior and
salvation of all men. Simeon saying is large and great. He pronounces him to
be the savior of all nations, as well as of the Jews, notwithstanding that
there was a great difference between them, by reason of Moses law and the
divine ceremonies. But when he co^sidereth this child, he can make no
difference. For both have like need of salvation to be delivered thereby from
death and sin. For the observing of all the law nothing preuayleth in
deliueringe from sin and death. By this savior only is all salvation
prepared. Gene. 22.
This savior is not such a one, that came for some, and for some not. God
has prepared (says he) this salvation not before the face of certain, but
before the face of all people. The which sentence is all one with the promise
made unto Abraham, where as he promises blessing to all kyndredes in his
sede. Neither can the Jews be excluded from all tribes neither from all
people: But they that are blessed, were not blessed before, but lived in gods
curse. Wherefore the meaning of this is no otherwise to be taken, but that if
this be the salvation of all people, than is there none at all that can be
saved, which lacks this salvation. And this is one thing, that Simeon
makes all men equal, pronouncyng that as well the Jews as the Gentiles are
such as should be damned for their sins: except they obtained salvation by
this saving health.

The second thing is, well to consider the pythe of these words: What reason
thinks of
and to conceive a delectation and comfort by them. The cause and spryng of all
our misery is this: our conscience can not deny hyde and cloak sin. And
sin must needs abide Gods wroth, which is the most peinfullest styng of
death to fear the judgment of God. For we can not deny but that sinners must
abide punishment. Now through this perceuerance and felyng of this dread,
there is no hope of pardon and grace. If these thoughts be well considered,
they be so heinous, that they count God to be a cruel and an unmercifully
judge, that will remyt no part of the rigor of the law, but execute it with
extremity. Thus can we conceive no other opinion of God, and thus are we
ouerladen with the heaviness of the burden, and oppressed with the rod of the
taskemaister, and beaten with the shoulder wande, Esai. 9.
according to the saying of the Prophet.

But Simeon doubtless having respect to the saying and description of this
Prophet, as touching this child, describes God after an other manner, than
any man's conscience is wont to conceive or think of him. For if it were the
will of GOD to punysh sinners with extremity, without grace and favor, then
were it a vain thing to trust in mercy showed in this Savior. Now are the
words of Simeon plain, that God has prepared salvation before the face of
all people, Wherein all men may be saved. Wherefore hereby may it be
euidentlye perceived, what is the will of God, according to Paul. 1. Tim. 2.
even that God would have all men to be saved, not only with bodily salvation,
1. Timo. 2.
but with everlasting salvation prepared against sin and death. For to this
end is that salvation ordained, which God has prepared for all people. Who
therefore would dread this God? The cause why all are not saved.
Who would tremble at his judgment, seeing that he declares so openly, that
it is his will we should be saved, and seeing that he has provided all things
necessary for our salvation? And where as many peryshe, and be damned, not
obteynynge this salvation, God is not the fault thereof, but the stubbornes of
man, Note well.
which despises Gods will, and cares not for this salvation of God, which
is ordained of God to save all men. If there were a remedy provided for the
succoure and relief of all beggars and nedye folk, and yet some would not
use that benefyte and remedy provided for them, the fault were not in them
that provided for the suste^tation, but in the^ that should have received it.

In like manner goes it with men in the world: The saying of Simeon is true.
God has prepared this salvation before the face of al people. if the Jews
judge them selves unworthy to receive it, if the Pope and the Turk despise it,
and thou canste not find in thy heart to accept it, if now it comes to pass,
that thou and all these be damned, ye can blame none but your selves, which
refused the salvation and grace of God. If this salvation seems not agreeable
to thy reason, thou may search with thy self where it may then be had. There
is no salvation but in Christ alone.
But thou shall not find in all the saluations in the world succor against
sin and death, if thou let pass this salvation. Wherefore if thou carest
earnestly for thy salvation, embrace this child. Know for a surety that God is
merciful unto thee, and pardons thine offenses for this chyldes sake, and so
shalt thou well perceive, that thou art saved. For he is the only salvation
against sin and death. But if this way of salvation pleases thee not,
accuse thine own stubbornness, which causes thee, that thou canste not escape
Gods wrath and damnation.

For GOD is not in the fault. God has prepared salvation. Which is a sure
token, God is not the author of any man's damnation.
that he would have mercy on sinners, and deliver us from our destruction. And
he has not prepared it only, but also proffered it to all people, that all
might remember, that all their salvation consysteth therein. Not only Marie,
Paul, Simeon, Peter: but all people ought to trust in him. Who soever has
need of help against sin and death, herein may they have a sure hope
thereof. For thus has God, that most merciful father prepared and ordained
it. Wherefore hinder not thy self by stubborn refusing of him: For so shalt
thou make thy self void of all comfort and healpe, the which GOD has not
only promised, but also performed it faithfully, as Symeon here testifies.
And least small credence should be given to those words for the shortenesse
thereof, he adds thereunto an evident exposition of the will of God as touching
this salvation, saying: To be a light to lyghten the Gentiles, and to be the
Glory of thy people Israel.

Now he utters the matter playnelye, that it might be understand, which
all those people are, that God will have to be received. First therefore (he
says) if thou know not which be all people, they be the Gentiles and the
Jews. Let no man come and mystake my words. Then that thou may know whose
salvation this is, and in what myseries and euyls we must use him, consider
that the Gentiles are drowned in all ignorance and darkness. For sith they be
without Gods word, they can have no certain knowledge of God. Christ gives
light to the Gentiles.
They put no difference between GOD and the devil, they fear the devil as
well as God, for their destruction. Yea, they have more hope in the devil then
in God, as we are taught by examples. And out of this ignorance, there proceed
other sins, idolatry, blasphemye, and many other vices. And such are the
Gentiles.

But God prepares salvation for the Gentiles. If they were not delivered out of
darkness, they should find no salvation for all that ever they can do. Wherefore
this saving health helps them against this ignorance and darkness, geuynge
the Gentiles light, that is, the knowledge of God by his word for their
salvation. These things are given to the Gentiles which are idolaters and
filthy sinners, through Christ, by the appointment and will of God. By this may
the loving and liberal bounteousnes of God the father be esteemed, that we flee
not from him for fear of his wrath, or cruelty, As Christ says: So God
loved the world, yt he gave his only begotten son, that as many as believe in
him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Wherefore there can be
done no greater dishonor to God, John. 3.
then to think that he hates us for our sins, and that we shall peryshe in
our sins, and yet this thought causes great trouble in our hearts, A syngular
comfort for all sinners.
so that the light of Gods mercy can scarsly be kindled therein. For if we were
not combred with this evil, we would not be of such fearful and desperate
hearts, which dare scarcely in adversity and trouble to look unto God, and
to his word, or put any trust therein.

And hereby is it now evident again, that Simeon bestowed great study in
readyng the prophets. The diligent study of Simeon in the prophets.
For he conceaueth not these things of himself, but as he had marked the time
by the prophecy of Jacob and Daniell, and as he knew by the promise made to
Abraham, that this salvation was appointed to all people and kynredes of the
earth, that hereby they should be saved from malediction and curse, Genesis 49.
Dan. 9. Esa. 49.
and be defended against syn and death. So learned he also of the prophet Esai
that this child should be the light of the Gentiles. For thus says the
Lord by his Prophet Esai. It is but a small matter (says he unto Christ)
that thou should be my servant, to stir up the tribes of Jacob, and to
turn the remnant of Israel. I have given thee to be a light to the Gentiles,
that thou myghtest be my salvation, to the uttermost parts of the earth. It is
like that Simeon exercised himself well in the understanding of this sentence,
forasmuch as he applies it so fitly in this short sermon. Wherefore ye Gentiles
have a great gift in this child to be their light, to open unto them the
joyful tidings, and to set up for them a kingdom of salvation. And for this
cause was he prepared and brought forth of God.

But the Jews in this behalf are preferred before the Gentiles, Romans 3.
for that that God committed unto them the law and the Prophets, and named
them his people. Wherefore in this the Jews have a great prerogative and
preeminence before the Gentiles. But what then? Is Christ therefore not
necessary for the Jews? have they therefore no need of his salvation? It is
said before, that this salvation belongs to all. Howbeit, all are not of like
state and condition, that are healed by this salvation. For the Jews are not
such sinners, as the Gentiles were, as Paul puts a difference in his
epistle to the Galathians: yet forasmuch as they are not justified by the
works of their law, Galat. ^.
they have not to glory before God: Wherefore Christ is become their glory.
For although that God has greatly glorified this people in co^firming their
service with his word, and in geuyng them many other excellent things, as
priesthode, and a kingdom. etc. yet could they never obtain pureness of
heart thereby: whereby they might be delivered from sin, and death.

And this dyshonoure is such in the presence of Almighty GOD, that they could
never obtain the true and glorious heritage of God thereby. Wherefore Symeon
says furthermore: The Jews glory is, for that they are not so foolyshe and
unwise as the sinners of the Gentiles were. But yet it is a greatte dishonor
to them, that where as they have the law, yet they are not justified by the
law. And now is this salvation prepared also for them, that they might be
justified by Faith in Jesus Christ, and so obtain glory, for that that they
could not obtain it by the works of the law, and that so they might be
heirs in Gods kingdom, for this salvation Christ's sake.

And this is verily a plain and euidente Sermon of CHRIST, showing after
what sort Salvation shall be given: so that all should be saved by him, as by
an only Savior, and that we should with a ioyefull heart, and a constaunte
mind, ouercomme the assault of death, and such other myseryes belonging
thereunto thorough him. And after this meaning should the Hystorye of this
feast be handled, and especially for that that Simeon as an exaumple laid
before us, shows the way to all teachers. But behold, the Pope in his stage
with his hallowed candels: Is not this, Halowyng of candels.
I pray you, necessary gear to have, least any christian man should depart
without blessyng of an holy candell? And thus has the dyuell by his Papists
mocked Gods Church and congregation: And where as they should have extolled
this light and glory of the Gentiles, even this child JESUS, they have in
stead thereof ordained this triflyng custom of halowynge Candels, that the
congregation being kept occupied thereby, might not regard this true and
necessary light. Look what salvation was ordained in this child by GOD,
that have they taught to be in an hallowed candell. Then have they ordained
also a pomp, wherein every man must bear a burning candell. And so by this
means ye Papists pass over the day with shows and triflyng games, and yet
they cloak al their doing with an holy pretense of Gods service: Willing
that it should be taken for a memoryall of the coming of Joseph and Marie
with the child into the Church: They make diverse expositions also, what the
candelles should sygnyfye. And if a man should demand of them, The Papists
borowe the most part of their religion of the Jews and of the Gentiles.
why they do all these things: Here they doubt not to answer, that it was a
manner of the Gentiles, at the Calendes of February, to carry about fire brandes
both in cities and towns: And that Pope Sergius ordained, that it should be
turned out of a Gentile ceremony, into a christian ceremony. And here ye may
see how well they do, that learn of the Gentiles how to honor God, and so
ordeyne their christianity thereby. For the most part of all their service is
grounded on such a foundation, that either they follow like apes the law of
Moses, or else while they go about to correct the abominations of the
Gentiles, they ordeyne by law in the church more greater abominations. And
they are even well rewarded for their foolyshnes. For why would they not hear
Simeon preaching of this salvation, and light of sinners, and glory of the
righteous? Now is it convenient for us to have respect to this light, and to
give God thanks for it, and always to be myndfull of this doctrine of Simeon,
as touching this child. God our heavenly father, bless the gift of this
light, and grant us salvation thereby. Amen.

The Sunday called Quinquagesima. The Gospel. Luke. xviii.
Jesus took unto him the twelve, and said unto them: Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and al shall be fulfilled that are written by the Prophets, of the
son of man. For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles and shall be mocked, and
despitefully entreated, and spitted on. And when they have scourged him, they
will put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again. And they
understood none of these things. And this saying was hyd from them, so that
they perceived not the things which were spoken. And it came to pass, that as
he was come nigh to Hierico, a certain blind man sat by the high way side
beggyng. And when he heard the people pass by, he asked what it meant? And
they said unto him, that Jesus of Nazareth passed by. And he cried, saying:
Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me. And they which went before,
rebuked him that he should hold his peace. But he cried so much the more,
thou son of David have mercy on me. And Jesus stood still, and commanded him
to be brought unto him. And when he was come nere, he asked him, saying: What
wylt thou that I do unto thee? And he said: Lord that I might receive my
sight. And Jesus said unto him: Receive thy sight, thy faith has saved thee.
And immediately he received his sight, and followed him, praisynge God. And all
the people when they saw it, gave praise unto God.

THE EXPOSITION.
THere be two parts of this Gospel. The first is a prophecy, wherein Christ
shows his disciples of his passion to come. And these be the words which
are repeted by the Angels to the women at Christ's sepulcher: whereas they said:
Remember that he said unto you before, when he was in Galilee: Luc. 24.
The son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinners, and be
crucified and rise again the third day. For this journey of Christ is now
from Galile to Jerusalem, where as he was crucified. The second part is a
miracle of the restoryng of sight to the blind.

The disciples of Christ understand not Christ.
Thyrdely, the Euangeliste says, that the Disciples understood not the
Prophecy of Christ. They suspected that it was an allegory, and that it
ought to be taken otherwise then it was spoken. They could by no means
believe the words to be true as he spoke them: They gathered the miracles
which Christ wrought when he raised up the dead, and gave sight to the
blind, that god was surely with him And that the kingdom seemed hereby to
become his, and that they should be lords, dukes, and Earls, in that kingdom
under him. For what danger in ye world or what case would put down such a
mighty man, that could with his word take away death and all evil: Neither
could they think, but that there was fellowshyppe, unity, and conjunction
between God and him: and therefore that he could not be so forsaken of God,
that any evil should have the upper hand of him. And what man that is
ignorant of the great secrets of God, could judge otherwise?

But in the mean time herby is it signified, that this is the nature of al good
works, The works of God are not understood before they ^^me to pass.
that when they be showed before they come to pass, they pass man's capacity.
But when they are fulfilled, they are perceived and appear open to the senses.
And thus does John oftentimes rehearse, that the disciples of Christ,
perceived afterward, that Christ had spoken unto them.

Wherefore Faith is of necessity required to the word of God. For when God
speaks, he does it after his manner, Faith is requisite.
on such wise, that his words are of such things, as are far out of the
capacity of natural reason. And so long is faith requisite, until the
thing be fulfilled, which was spoken of before.

As for an example. The word of God teaches us of the resurrection of the
flesh. Reason understands it not: they that take reason for their guide, as
the wise of the world do, they mock and scorn christen men, because they
consent to this article so soon, that there should be an other life after
this. Likewise it can seem nothing agreeable to reason, that god should become
man, and be borne of the virgin Marye. All these things are to be received
only by faith, until that in the life to comme, they shall be felt and
perceived in very deed.

It seems a great folly to reason, that by the water of baptism, Gods grace
and favor should be obtained without desert or merit, or that remission of
sin should be given by absolution and preaching of the Gospel. It counts
christen men to be very folyshe in this point. What thynkest thou (says
reason) shall be done by these small tris^es? Thou must rather do such things,
as are comendable before God for their peyn and great travail that must be
taken in doing them. We need not to go far to prove this. The Popes
doctrine tends wholly to this end, to make men obtain remission of sins
by their works. For it seems but a fable to reason, that men should be made
acceptable to God and meet for Gods kingdom by Baptism. The word it self is
but a despised thing. And the professoures thereof are but weak sinners. Why
should not reason therefore think it a madness to commyt life, riches, and all
things else to this word? We may thank reason only, for that notwithstanding so
great knowledge and light of the word, yet so few believe. All the other
multitude hates this doctrine as a pernicious and erroneous thing, as though
it set men at liberty to do all kind of mischief, and to live without
regard of honesty and godlynes: neither can reason judge otherwise. And
therefore is the doctrine of faith set forth to christians, for that the
things set forth in the word, are not agreeable to natural capacity. But yet
they count it worthy to be believed, because it is Gods word: which will, when
the time is come, bring it to pass. Then shall we have perfect understanding
of that that now passes our capacity.

The example of David.
But the Scripture is full of examples. David, before that he fought with
Goliath, believed that he should overthrow and kill that huge and mighty
gyaunt. And this he declared to Saul: The Lord (says he) that delivered me
out of the hand of the lion, and out of the hand of the bear, shall deliver me
out of ye hand of this Philistine. 1. Reg. 17.
Likewise he says again: This uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of
them, that revile the host of the living GOD. And again he says to the
Philistine: The Lord shall give thee in to my hand, and I shall strike thee,
and cut of thy head. These words be spoken of the mouth of David. but if
they were David's words only, and not the words of God, they should never
have taken effect. But they are Gods, and David believed them, before they came
to pass. Wherefore afterward they took effect, and it makes no matter, that
some thought it a foolyshe enterprise: and therefore could not believe, that
it should come to pass as it did afterward. For it seemed impossible, that
David, being but a young man should with such a little stone overthrow such
a great Giant. But David believes it, and does it in deed. Then the matter
appeared certain, and not feigned. When he came first and spoke the word,
reason judged it a vain and a foolyshe enterprise. For after this manner did
reason count: David is young, and a shepherd without knowledge of the feats of
war, and now he gothe forth unarmed with a staff and a slyng, as though he
would fight with a dog. But the giant is harneissed, and comes with his
shield and spear. Wherefore he cries out and says: Thou foolyshe boy,
take thou upon thee that, that none in the host durst take? And David him
self saw no more then this by reason, but he believed more, even that God
would revenge this blasphemy, and save him: and so it came to pass.

But to be short, this is the manner of all good words and works, that before
they are done, Baptism and the resurrection of the dead
they seem impossible, and yet they take effect. And when they are come to
pass, then they seem easy to reason. But before they are done, they belong
not to reason, but to Faith. For where as we are washed from sin by baptism,
and shall rise again from death in the last day reason shall never understand
it. And especially since the saints and godly men have so diverse chances.
Whereof some are cast as a pray unto wyld beasts and fowls of the air. Some
are burnt, and their ashes cast into the flood. What cruelty used the Pope
against that holy manne John Husse at Constantia? Here reason thinks: How
can God recover his body again? Nothing woorketh this but Gods word.
Wherefore no man ought to count it impossible, although it seem to sight so to
be. But nothing is impossible to them that believe. For all the effect and end
of the matter lies in Gods power, which is almighty, and makes all things
of nothing.

What were we an hundred year agone? No more than a child that is borne
thirty or forty years after us? God is almighty, and can do what he will.
Wherefore sithe this is Gods manner to make all thing of nothing, then can he
much more make again, somewhat of that, that was before. Wherefore the godly
must not consider, whether a thing be possible, but whether GOD has said, it
shall be done be it never so impossible to sight. For although that can not
appear to me, Math. 19. Luc. 1.
yet God him self is he, that makes things impossible to be possible, and of
nothing, all things. Wherefore all, that call Gods word to the trial of
reason, Reason ought not to Judge Gods works
are worthy to be abhorred. For is not God able to raise the dead, because
it is not in my power? Wherefore let every man esteem it a great
wickedness to try or ponder Gods power and word by reason and carnal
judgment. For if all things might be understand and comprehended by our
reason, God neded not to show forth his word. But for as much as he gives
his word, it is a token, that there be things, which our reason can not
conceive and comprehend. And we learn by experience, that the word of God, is
above and against all reason. I show thee the remission of sins, and
absolve thee by the commandment of CHRIST. Math. 13. John. 20.
Thou hear the word, and when thou have heard it, and received
absolution, yet thou do not perceive how great familiarity thou haste
thereby with GOD and the Angels. Thou know nothing of that great joy,
whereof Christ speaks, how greatly the Angels in heaven, reioycethe
upon one sinner, Luc. 15.
that doothe repent. So whenne thou art now baptized, there appearethe in
thy flesh no other form, then was before. But I pray thee is absolution and
Baptism therefore of no strength? Think not so, but hyghly esteem them, for
that they are belongyng to the administration of Gods kyngedome, and
commanded by his word Wherefore we must by faith surely believe for the
words sake that thing that thou should never perceive true by thy sense and
reason. And this Faith as touching the great benevolence of God toward him
self is surely persuaded, beleuynge that the father takes him for his son,
and CHRIST for his brother, and that the angels greatly rejoice of his
prosperous estate. If it please not the Pope to believe this, what is that to
us? God is showed to have respect unto them, that esteem his word, and
think it woorthye to be believed. And the Euangeliste poynteth an example of
such a Faith in the blind. He perceived by reasone no lykelynesse of the
matter, but susteyneth an incurable evil. But as soon as the word of CHRIST
sounds in his ears, Looks up, he believes it, Luc. 18.
and the thing came to pass. This word was by it self pronounced, before the
effect appeared.

For the eyes of the blind were as yet not open, but forthwith after the word,
because it was believed, followed the effect, and then the understanding of the
matter was easy to the blind. After like manner goes it with the disciples in
this place, Christ reherseth unto them the history of those things that
should be done at Jerusalem, and they because they understood them not, took
it for no truth. Not because they suspected any vain talk in CHRIST, but
they thought that his word should have been taken otherwise.

The word of God deceueth not, although it seem impossible.
And this is the first part of this gospel, even that we should believe Christ's
words boldly, and without wauerynge. The Pope is ignorant of this Faith.
But we must know, that this is the Christian faith, to hear the word of
God, wherein is promised remission of sin, and by no means to doubt of it,
but to believe constantly, and to assent to that promise, although neither
reason nor sense understands or perceaueth any thing of this matter. And
such a faith and heart is always requisite to gods word. This faith
whersoeuer it be first, it is sure afterward to take effect: so that all
that obey the word shall say, they were happy, that they went not from faith
after the manner of other. But the Pope, the Turks, and the Jews shall then
curse them selves, for that they were so stubborn against the word of God.
And then they shall perceive the pride and folly of their own reason. But it
shall be to late, when all hope of salvation is paste.

This is therefore the doctrine, yt we go not from gods word, if reason be
offended, no although it seem without reason, contrary to judgment, vain, and
impossible. But let us stick sure to this invincible argument. If God have
said it, Note.
it is a thing most certain: demand not whether it be possible, but whether God
has spoken it? For if God has spoken, he is so mighty and true of promise,
that it may be counted done as soon as it is spoken. Wherefore the word of God
is forthwith to be believed. He that believes not, is a blasphemer of God. The
first commandment requires such faith to Gods word, that God by this means
might be religiously and devoutly glorified of us. When we believe consta^tly
that there is nothing that he speaks, which comes not to pass. This word
does God speak unto us every where, in the lord supper, in baptism, in
absolution, in the gospel. He absolueth us. Of him we receive the body and
blood of his son. This must we believe constantly, and think it to be true,
without all doubtfulnes. This is the first part of this gospel.

In the second part, the Euangeliste by the example of the blind teaches us
the craft to beg, How we must pray.
even that we should lay a side al shame, which is unprofitable for beggars: and
never cease from crauyng, but to be earnest. For he that is shamfast, cold and
weak hearted is sone dashed out of countenance, and is unapt to be an orator
or spokes man. He must not be ashamed. For god requires them that make suit
unto him, to be bold and importunat. For he takes delight to have his glory
known, that he may give bounteously, and that all may understand that it is
most acceptable unto him, when men look for most at his hand. For he yt
looks for a time, We must be instant in prayer.
wherein he may be worthy to receive gods gifts, shall never be mete to pray.
Wherefore there is no better way, then to lay a side al shame, and boldly with
confidence to open our griefs and troubles to GOD. Beggars in this behalf
have no need of this precepte. For they are of their own accord very
troublesome unto men. But God counts it no trouble or pain, as men do, but
takes it rather for his renoum, to be stirred of unshamefast beggars to
exercise his great liberality. We have an example of importunity and
vnshamfastnes in this blind man. All his suit is to obtain sight Wherefore when
he sees ye multitude pass by, first he asks what this meant: As Soon as he
heard of Jesus, he never spares criyng: Jesus so^ of David, have mercy upon me.
They yt went before, rebuked him, to put him to silence. But he cries the
more, and at their rebuke wareth more earnest in prayi^g.

This blind man is set forth here for an importunat and unshamefast suter,
wherewith god is greatly delighted. Wherefore we ought to take it for an example
to bolden us, and to come unto Christ to pray before hi^: Lord I am a sinner,
grant yt thy kingdom may come unto me, and forgive me my dettes. Help me in
all places. He that prays earnestly after this sort, does well, and god
accepts it tha^kefully. For it is not tedious to god as it is unto men. It is
troublesome to us to be called much upon. The prayer of the blind.
But god cou^teth it a glorious thing to him, when we trust most to his
liberality and goodness. Such prayers are of great force to impel God to
hear us. When we after this manner of necessity entreat him: lord this is thy
glory, and this belongs to ye honor of thy name, for me to ask of thee.
Wherefore consider not how unworthy I am: But how much need I have of thy
help. For my prayer unto thee is to thy glory, and also for my necessity. And
after this manner craving and almost impudent prayers are acceptable to GOD, as
it appears in this blind man. As Soon as he begins his prayer, Christ
commands him to be brought unto him, all are commanded to make rome for him.
Nether is the blind man afraid, he goes boldly unto him. Christ asks? What
will thou, that I do unto thee? herby is declared his great redines. For ye
blind is put in choice, what benefit he would ask of Christ. Nether does ye
blind take long deliberatio^. Master (says he) that I may see ye light,
Christ answers: look up therefore. christ has a greater will to hear, the^
ye bli^d to ask.

And this boldness is to be used of al men in prayer. when the Pope reigned,
there was no such teaching in magnifying of prayers. We ever did put more trust
in other men's prayers. But this rusticall shamfastnes ought to be far from a
Christian. Whenever peril or danger rises, we must not prolonge and doubt,
we must go to some solitary place, and show forth our destresse and
necessity, and ask help of god with the forsaid co^ditio^, yt although we be
unworthy, yet yt we have need of gods succoure, and yt it behooves god to see
to his own glory. And we must judge this to be agreeable to the office of
Christians, when they regard no law or ceremony of sha^fastnes in their
prayers. And god can not but see to our salvation and profit: John. 16.
for his promise, is evident: Whatsoever ye ask in ye name of Jesus, it
shall be done unto you. Only stick co^sta^tly to it. For he is not offended with
the importune beggyng and craving. And it is possible yt a fervent and earnest
prayer shall out of hand obtain, where as contrary wise a cold and weak
prayer is long before it prevail. For fervent prayers impelle and enforce god
to give spedie help. And for this cause I trust that the coming of Christ is
not far hence, but yt it will spedily approach, as he puts forth an
example of ye wydow yt called often on yt Judge: And at last ye judge, which
feared neither god nor man, Prayer provoked God.
was so ouercom, that he said: least this wydow should always be troublesome
unto me, I will revenge her quarrel, so that she will not trouble me hereafter.
And should not god (says Christ) revenge his elect, Luc. 1^.
that cry unto him day and night, yea though he differ them? I say unto you,
he will soon take vengeance. As though he should say, prayer and crying makes
god not to prolo^g or to differce ye matter, which else he would padue^ture do.

This is then the fruit of prayer, even to obtain quickly that, that should
otherwise comme slowlye, yea rather there to obtain, where without prayer
nothing should have been gotten. Wherefore this example is not lightly to be
regardede, because it admonishes us of a great matter, that when we pray
before God, we be not ashamed: but put forth our request boldly after this
sort: I am a sinner, I grant, yet therefore I count not my self in a desperate
case. Certain things move and prike my conscience. But what than? I count not
what I am, but how nedie I am. And I think also that thou art ready to give,
whatsoever shall be necessary either for body or soul: therefore when thou
have prayed and ben instante, then will God answer thee, as he did this blind
man: what will thou, that I do for thee? look up, thy faith has saved thee.
For to pray an not to believe, Prayer with out faith is a mockyng of God.
is to mock God. Faith stays only on this point, that god is merciful to
us for Christ his son sake, and that therefore he hears and defends us,
reuengeth, and delivers us. The which thing Jesus Christ our savior grant
us.

Amen.
The first Sunday in Lent. The Gospel. Math. iiii.
THen was Jesus led away of the spirit into wilderness, to be tempted of
the devil. And when he had fasted xl. days and fortye nights, he was at the
last an hungered. And when the tempter came to him, he said: if thou be the
son of GOD, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and
said: it is written, man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that
proceadeth out of the mouth of God. Then the Devil takes him up into the holy
City, and sets him on a pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him: if thou
be the son of God, cast thy self down headlong. For it is written: he shall
give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall hold thee
up, least at any time thou dashe thy foot against a stone. And Jesus said
unto him, it is written again: Thou shall not tempte the Lord thy God. Again
the Devil takes him up into an exceading high mountain, and showed him all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and says unto him: all
these will I give thee, if thou wylt fall down and worship me. Then says
Jesus unto him: Avoid Satan, for it is written: Thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Then the Devil leaves him, and
behold the Angels came and ministered unto him.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel ye hear of the three temptations of Christ: which chanced
unto him forthwith after baptism after that he had fasted fortye days and
nights in the desert, or as the description of Luke shows, Luc. 4.
these temptations continued day by day for the space of fortye days and
fortye nights, so that with each of them he wrasteled certain days, not
peradventure after that order as Matthew describes. This Gospel is very large
of matter, if it be applied to the body of the whole church, which is always
tempted with hunger, persecution, heresies, and at last also with the kingdom
of the world, as Christ was. But this meaning is more meette to be entreated
of in schools then in congregations of the common people.

Wherefore it is convenient for you, here first to learn, that every Christian,
Temtatio^ is (...) for Christians.
as soon as he is baptized, ought to knowledge that he is ordained to fight
continuallye against the devil, and not to look for any other state as long
as he lives. And this enemy is so eger and so fearce, that when he can not
come to his purpose by temptations, Diversity of temptation.
which is to pluck from the Christians the kingdom of God, then he endeuoreth
by all means possible, to consume and wast the^ away by persecucio^, and so
to dispatche the^ wholly out of the world, How we must stand sure when we
are tempted.
as his purpose was to do with Christ. And this peril belongs to all the
Christians. The deadlye hatred of ye ennemie can by no means be pacified.
But he laboreth both with hand and foot, to make men to fall from Christ and
his baptism unto desperation, or presumption through famine, and persecution,
through heresies and false interpretation of scripture. And when he prevails
nothing by this, he falls upon us with death, and sleeth us.

Wherefore the example of Christ is to be known and learned, yt we may be armed
against our enemy, and that he may not prevail against us by te^ptatio^. And
this shall we obtain by faith, and trust in god and in his word. He yt has
these two weapons, and uses the^ well: is salfe from the devil. And this ought
to cause all Christians, gladly to hear the word of God, and diligently to
learn it, to put it in practice, and in the mean time to slack nothing in
prayer, but to desire for the spedie coming of his kingdom, that we may not
be lead into temptation, but be delivered from all evil through his fatherlye
goodness.

The evangelist begins the history, Christ lead of the spirit.
how yt Christ was led into the desert of ye spirit, that is, of the holy
ghost. For since he had no other superior lord to command him, he was obedient
to the commandment of the holy ghost, whereby he was called into the desert.
And the evangelist speaks this not without a singular meaning, even willinge
thereby, that all men should beware of their own inventions and imaginations.
For Christ came not into desert by his own council and will, to wrestle with
the devil, as many does, which institute diverse things without the spirit and
word. Whereas it is forbidden so to do. For no man must take any thing upon
him, Note well.
or go forth as a pilgrim to any place to serve god: except he know for a
surety, that god has commanded it, either by his word, or by men, which
has the power from god to show us what God byddeth us to do. For they that
take any thing upon them without this vocation, as the monks and nonnes went
to their cloisters, they not only do no service to God, but offend also
greuouslye, contrary to the obedience that they owe to God.

Wherefore this example of Christ is very worthy to be had in remembrance,
Our proper imagination without the word. is nothing.
whereas he came not into the desert of his own mot^on. But was commanded so to
do by the holy Ghost: That we following Christ should institute nothing of
our own wit, so that in all our doings we may boaste, that we take
nothing in hand but to the intent to obey Gods commandment. This is now a
doctrine much used of us, that first in all things that we take in hand, we
have respect to gods commandment, and do nothing contrary thereto. And as
touching the common works of charity and love, there is no need of a new
commandment. For they are commanded in the ten commandments. There does God
command to hear his word, to love god and to call upon him, to obey the
parents, not to kill, to abstain from fornication. All these are the
ordinances of God, and gods commandementes. Wherefore we ought here to inquire
for no other commandementes of the holy ghost, that he should put us forth any
other special commandments of marriage and such like. The commandment is
given alredie. But whereas the monks follow their traditions, keep their
cloisters, fast.xl. days, and abstain from certain of godly hymns, as
Gloria in excelsis, and Alleluya, in le^t: here have they no commandment of
god, nor word, to maintain their doing or to ground their faith on, without
the which all is but sin. Wherefore all their doings are abomination before
God, Romans 14. Math. 15.
and no gods service. Now let us consider these temptations in order.

The first is, when the devil says to Christ, perceauing him to be hungrye:
The first temptation that he should have no trust in god
if thou be the son of God, speak that these stones may be comme bread. This
temptation to sight seems not to be so sore. For this do we think: how should
it have been prejudicial to Christ, if he had turned stones into bread, since
that afterward he wrought greater miracles? But yet for the temptations sake,
he withstandeth the devil. For he perceaueth to what end the devil tended.
For the devils will was not so much to provoke Christ to work a miracle: But
his purpose was only, (as it appears by the words of Christ) to take from
Christ all trust that he had to the goodness and mercy of God, and to make him
believe that God had forgotten him and cared not for him, but set so little by
him, that he would not as much as provide a little bread for him. Wherefore
Christ answers to this saying of the devil: The matter is not so, as thou
would make me believe to be. For man lives not only by bread, but by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. So that a man may gather this as
touching the purpose of the devil, that he would that Christ should think of
nothing but of bread, and that he should believe that nothing came from God but
bread. This temptation endures yet to this time, where as the devil byddeth us
to reason on this wise: If thou be the son of God, god can not be angrye with
thee. Therefore seek thyn advantage, apply thy self wholly to thy gains,
exercise all craft to get substance, there is no peril in so doing. Thou
can not sin, thou art the son of God. If he would deny the food or
clothing, how should he do the duty of god or of a father, which would have his
mercy and goodness known? By this reason men are enticed to wickedness, as well
in the country as in Cities and towns, so that they give them selves over to
covetousness, and think this: that God is not despleased therewith. For it is
expedient (think they) to get their living. Our house and children must be
provided for. And so the devil, by this saying (thou art the son of God)
daseleth their eyes, that they see not their sin. As though he should say,
thou can not offend, or syn. And there be many examples hereof in the world.
For no man thinks it to be an offense to regard lightly the word of God, and
to set al their care to get bread and other lyuelode. Wherefore this temptation
is always in the world, wherein the devil defaceth the word, and drives men
with all his power to set more by their substance and worldly wealth, the^ by
the word. But now must we consider how this temptation may be ouercomme. We
must after the example of Christ diligently mark that craft of the devil
which goes about to make the to be despised. But contrary wise, that mind is
so to be stablished, that it may not for fear of hunger and lack of living,
come in danger of losyng gods word. For one of the^ both must needs be put in
danger, yet it is better that the body perish, then to be preserved with this
meat, and the soul to perish and to be cast into hell.

Herby is our salvation confirmed, but yet not without great conflict and
peril. For the devil withstandeth it with all his force and power, employing
all his diligence to make us only to have regard of this corporal life, and
not to esteem the word of God to be necessary or profitable. He hides also
and cloketh this ungodliness with guile, that we are the sons of god, and he
our father, that would not have us unprovided of bread and liuelood. But Christ
admonishes us by his example to beware of the serpent that lies hyd in the
grass. For it is the temptation of the devil.

And this temptation is so to be taken and judged as Christ here appoints:
Two sorts of bread.
man's health and salvation, is preserved by two sorts of bread. The first is
the word of God, sent down from heaven. The second is this corporal bread,
which comes of the earth whereby we maintain this present life. When the
first which is the better, is not lackyng unto us, and when we suffer it not
to be taken from us: the second, which is corporal can not be witholden from
us. But stones should be turned into bread before, that they that trust in
gods word should be destitute of bread. And they that regard not the
heavenly bread, having only respect to the corporal bread, after that they
have their desire, and now must die, they are clean destitute of all other
treasure and goods. And yet they can not spend all their selves, but according
to the psalm, Psalm.
they shall leave unto other their riches, and in an other life they can not
live. But we must be ware of this preposterous manner, wherefore we must take
diligent head unto this temptation of the devil, when he casts among us
persecution, penury, famine, and such other miseries. Play the man, and suffer
boldly hunger with Christ when thou perceauest that thou artmoued by the
spirit thereto: even to apply thy vocation. For at the last thou shalt feel
the Angels come to serve thee, and to fulfill thy desire, as the Evangelist
makes mention that they did by Christ. And this belongs to the first
temptation, John. 6.
to esteem the word highlye. For it is such bread and meat that he that
eats of it, that is, he that believes ye word, has everlasting life. And
these things must be pri^ted depely in ye heart, for they are pithie matters.
For this present bread, for the which men so diligently and busely travail,
endures but to ye end of this life, after yt shall follow everlasting famine
with eternal distructio^.

The second te^ptatio^ is, The second temptation is to make to trust more in
god then his word requires.
when ye devil takes Jesus into the holy City and puts him upon a pinnacle
of the temple, and commands him to cast himself down, and that it should be
without his peril or hurt, if he be ye son of god, promisyng yt all his
Angels should come to serve him, rather then he should, but stu^ble with his foot
at a stone. This is a hard gostly and a spiritual temptation, wherein he
endures to bring him from grace, faith, and from the favor of God, even as
before he studied through syn, desperation, and wrath of God to trouble him.
For when the devil is not able to make us to despair and to fall from hope of
salvation, he goes an other way to work, he proves the right hand, when he
preuayleth not by the left, if he can make the^ full of false trust, and to
presume to much on gods favor. This temptation is to bring him from the
fear of God. The first was to bring from trust in gods help to despair and
flee from god, and that by gods word. In the second he works by craft and
gile, to bring that faith, wherewith Christ was surely stablished against
temptation to presumption and so to put from him the fear and dread of God. He
uses that way to tempte Christ again, as Christ used to overcome his first
assaut: Thou requirest the word of God to be thy guide in thy doings. Psalm.
91.
And this is gods word: God shall give his Angels charge over thee, they shall
hold the up in their hands, that thou dashe not thy foot at a stone. Wherefore
cast thy self down, prove whether thou trustest in God in very deed, for
this promise sake.

Mat. 27.
In this place ought the infirmity of Christ to be considered, wherein his
godhead lies all hid by the humblenes of his manhod: even as it did also on
the cross when he desired help, and cried for succor as though he had been
forsaken. So here also he will be nothing but a very man. And by this infirmity
the devil conceaueth a good hope, that it should be easy for him, to turn
his faith into presumption, and to make him to tempte God by a miracle not
necessary. He alleges a text out of the psalm: nevertheless for fear of
bewraying his purpose, he rehearses not all, but part* lettyng pass: In thy
ways. By this authority the devil goes about to bleare Christ's eyes, and to
cause him to forget his vocation and charge and to follow that, whereof he has
no charge or commandment. For Christ is now a man, and in that taking and
case not to do miracles by his godly power, but to sustain and overcome those
things, which sinners should have sustained and ben overcome without
Christ. For as (the Prophet says) he ought to be a man that knows
infirmity. This ways does Christ walk in. Deuteronomy. 6.
But the devil appoints him other glorious ways by miracles not necessary,
which were not belongyng to Christ's office. But Christ repelleth him by this
saying: It is written. Thou shalt not tempte the Lord thy God. For there be
steps and stayers to comme down by, and therefore is there no need to
attempt this unused and unwonted way. This were against God, if I should cast
my self in peril without gods commandment, and without an urgent cause,
whereas there is a common way to go down by.

This doctrine is not lightly to be regarded, being so necessary. For herby
we may learn, To te^pte god,
that they te^pte God, which regard not his commandment and appointed ways,
but seek out some strange device without his word and commandment. As the
religious of both kinds choseth the^ ways of living of their own voluntary
motions, and then maintain their doings by Christ saying: Go and sell all
that thou have and follow me. Here not only bare reason, but also scripture is
alleged for the confirmation thereof. The devil vse^h scriptures. Math. 19.
And so the devil uses scriptures, to allure men thereby to be deceived. But
mark wherein his deceit consists. He alleges not the hole and perfect
sentence, he recites no more then makes for his purpose. He lets that
pass, that is not for his profit.

Anabaptists
Such is the craft also of the Anabaptists, they allege many scriptures that
men must not put their trust in creatures: then they join thereunto, that
baptism is but a creature, that is to say, water: and therefore that we must
not trust in baptism. They will not believe the grace of god that is in
baptism, but feel it with their hands. They allege scriptures: But yet not
truly. Baptism.
For if it were not the word of God yt says: Except a man be borne of water
and of the holy ghost, he can not see the kingdom of God: it were a wicked
thing to think that ye grace of god were in baptism or water. John. 3.
But here is the word of god sure and evident: he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved. Marc. 16.
For faith and baptism, the word and water must be joined to gether, But these
mad brains can not be persuaded so to do.

When that angels defe^deth us not.
And thus does Christ also withstand the devil, and answers: if I walk
after gods commandment, then I know well that I am defended by the angels to
keep me. So when a child does his duty obedie^tly to his parents, and the
servants apply their vocation, know for a surety, yt when they are
compassed about with peril and danger, then god by his angels defends the^ and
maintains the^. But when they walk not in this ways, they have no promise,
to be helped by angels. But they are in the devils power, which may vex them
at his pleasure, and that not without their own desert. For it was not meet for
them to follow any new or strange ways. For that is nothing but a tempting of
God.

And this is such a temptation, that no man perceaueth it, except he feel it.
For as the first stirs to desperation, so the second, to presumption and to
such ways, that are beside gods word and commandment. Here must the
Christian man keep the middle way, so that he neither despair through
adversity and trouble, neither wax proud by gods gifts and prosperity,
presumi^g to te^pte god in things unlawful, but simplye to cleave to the word
with a true faith and fear, then shall we never be destitute of the angels
help and succoure.

The third temptation is most full of impudency of all ye other, The third
temptation is to make the^ cast away true religion for riches and poor.
whereas the devil takes upon him to change kingdoms, as though Christ should
receive the kingdom of the world by the devil, and give unto ye devil the
kingdom of god. All this temptation is set forth not by art of logic as the
other were, but by rethorical amplifications and externuations. He shows him
the kingdom of all the world with glory and power, and beautifieth this his
great gift, with magnificent words, and so he assayeth to overcome him with
gross matters when he could not by fine and subtle means. Riches corrupted
religion.
But as for worshippynge him self, and Idolatry, he makes a light matter of
it. And that that he could not work by guyle, he assayeth to bring it to
pass by power and might. For there is no redier way to destroy and peruerte
the truth, then to give the setters forth thereof rule and worldly dominion.
The example of the Pope shows, what great strength and force this temptation
has, whereas he esteemed so greatly the occasion to take the kingdom upon him,
yt he has ever sythens behaved himself as an obedient servant in all points
to the devil for that. For it must needs be, yt as they which are appointed to
bear any office in ye kingdom of god can not come unto dignity and power
except they have a certain kind of life appointed to them: so the devil
makes room for them in his kingdom, A change of the spiritual kingdom, in
to a wordly and of the wordlie into a spiritual.
that they may like wise make room for the devil in the kingdom of God.
They must crepe up to this kingdom by the pretense of religion. And this is
the very worshipping of the devil, when religion is pretended, and yet all is
done and applied to outward holiness and hypocrisy, Worshippyng of the devil.
and well allowed by reason. And in so doing they perform two things. First
they pay, the devil his reward for his kingdom, and then obtains great
authority with reason for the beawtiful show of cou^terfet religion. And this
is the subtlety of the devil in this temptation. He sets forth the kingdom
of the world to be a wayghtie thing, profferyng it upon a co^ditio^ that he
may be worshipped, how be it there is no great peril in this temptation. But
when he goes so to work, that religion hereby may seem beautiful to reason,
and worthy of kingdoms, and all high renoums and promotions: either that
through religion thus transformed, great patrimonies of kingdoms and other
things may be retained and kept: now is this a deuyllishe condition of
worshipping.

Wherefore it is necessary to have ready before our eyes a description of
godly worshipping and holiness: That as often as we be moved by the stirringe of
the devil, to think that the true religion should be so fashioned that it might
please reason, or have the profittes and commodities of wordly things joined
therewith, and not be vexed and troubled with the kingdom of the devil: that
then we may have recours to the true manner of worshippinge. For who do not
perceive, that there appears to sight greater praise and commendation in
men's traditions, then in all the obedience that is given to Gods word? For
where is it counted so holy a thing to be a married person, to find and maintain
his children, to do household business, to show obedience and fidelity therein.
As it is to wear this wede or that, not to dwell or live as other do, not to
eat flesh on friday, to keep vigils and prescripte fastes, to visit saints
relikes. etc. This observation of traditions is so beautiful and glistring to
sight, that the heads of the world, as emperors and kings are in love with
them, and highly reverence them. The Pope by such service invented by man's
traditions, rose to such renome with all his sect, so yt it might better be
called a trym then a true religion. The popes religion is rather trymme then
true.
For he should never have risen to such power by ye true service of God and
pure doctrine of sincere godlynes. But this made me^ look up upon the^ when
they went aside into an abbey, and forsook all the world as they say, and
applied them selves to Gods service, laying a side al worldly cares. For these
were ye co^ma^datio^s of ye monastical lives, although we know yt it was
nothing so. But to be brief, this was a diuellyshe temptation. For this
religion came not of Gods commandment, neither is this ye true service and
worship of god, which yet nevertheless is only to be worshipped, and to be
served (as Christ says here.) And when ye worship is not given to God only,
forthwith it falls and turns to the worship of the devil, which rewards
his worshyppers as he promised here to Christ. A general admonition.
He gives the^ the commodities of this life, as fat prebends, lordships, and
such like. But he that will worship God, let him follow the commandment of his
word. If they be children, let them honor their father and mother: if they be
servants, let them do their duty and service in the family with diligence and
fidelity: If they be masters of households, let the^ beware of all kind of
offenses, let the^ do their duty, and cause their servants and al persons in
their family diligently to apply their mind to godliness. What is worsh^ppinge
of God.
And this is the service that is due to God, and to his word, not to diverse
persons. For his word is plain. wherein he commands such things to be done.
Therefore, whatsoever name before ye world such offices and duties have, yt are
done to fathers and mothers, to masters of housholdes, to neighbors, to
children, and to citeze^s they are all counted Gods service, because they are
commanded by Gods word, which says: Thou shall love thy neighbor, and shall in
thy outward works declare the office and duty of love unto him. In that the
Pope regards not this commandment, and appoints certain peculiar
worshippings of god devised of his own brayn, as the wearyng of coules, the
necessary use of certain meats, oil and fyshe to be eaten in stead of
flesh and butter, and such other triflyng traditions: it is altogether
diuelyshe. God ought to be worshyped according to his word, and not after men's
traditions.
For they agree not with the commandment of God. Yea they make as much unto
the true justice before God, as it does unto the building of a substancial
house, when children make them houses of papers. And this is the reason. There
can no worship be given unto God, but that only, which is agreeable to his
word. Therefore, where the commandment of God is not: we worship not God, but
frewyl and only alone foolyshe fancye. And unto such worshippers God says:
Ask thy reward of him, who^ thou seruest. For I commanded thee to obey thy
parents, and the higher powers, and to love thy neighbor. But this thou
regardest not, but do that which I never commanded: and yet wylt thou that
and should be taken as a true worshyppyng of me. But it can not so be. Of
these things it is evident, that the Pope, and all his, are plain Idolaters
and worshyppers of the devil. For he does not only despise the word, but he
also persecuteth it: and yet will he be counted a good religious man, for these
outward worshyppynges that he has devised in shaven crowns, in coules, in
vows, in fastings, in meats, in massyngs, and such like. And yet from this
wickedness he can by no means be brought. The cause is. The devil has showed
and promised him the kingdoms of this world. And this is the cause, why he
mocketh us with our doctrine and woorshyppinges of God. For we mainteynynge
the true religion, live in poverty, in hunger, in thyrste, and daily suffer
persecution. But the Pope extollethe his woorshyppynges even unto the very
heavens. For he sucketh out of them no small profit, lucre, and advantage.
For by this means he has gotten such and so great richesse, estimation,
authority, rule, and power that he has brought kings and Emperoures under
his subjection. And hereof does it appear how greatly the devil has over come
the Pope with this tentation. But it is our duty that fear GOD, stoutely and
manfully to resyst the devil when he tempts us, and to answer him, Deuteronomy. 6.
as Christ did: Satan, it is written: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him alone shalt thou serve. That is, have a special regard to the word
of God, and obey that alone, and without that, admit no worshyppyng of God. So
long as we live, we shall never be fre from these three temptations. Christ our
Lord, which has ouercom them, make us strong that we also through him, may
overcome them, and obtain everlasting salvation. Amen.

The second sunday in Lent. The Gospel. Math. xv.
Jesus went thence and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sydon: And
behold, a woman of Canaan (which came out of the same coasts) cried unto him,
saying: have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David: My daughter is
piteously vexede with a Devil. But he answered her nothing at all. And his
Disciples came and besought him, saying: Send her away, for she cryethe
after us. But he answered and said: I am not sent but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel. Then came she and worshipped him, saying: Lord help me.
He answered and said: it is not meet to take the chyldrens bread and cast
it to dogs. She answered and said: Truth Lord, for the dogs eat of the
ccummes which fall from their masters table. Then Jesus aunswerede, and said
unto her: O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou wylt. And
her daughter was made whole even the same time.

THE EXPOSITION.
The dignity and excellency of this gospel
NOtable and of great dignity is the Gospel of this present Sunday. For it
treats not of chyldysh and trifling matters, ^ut of most grave and weighty
things, as of the battle or conflict of Faith, and of the agony of death
before God: wherein we learn, that nothing ought to fray us, and to pluck us
away from calling and crauyng of God, although God him self seem utterly to
contemn and despise both us and our prayers, The devil is most buly at the
hour of death.
as they that lie at the point of death have experience of this matter. For
at that time the devil laboreth to the vttermoste of his power, to persuade
us, and to bring us into this opinion, yt God neither beholds us, regards
us, or hears us. And this is such a misery, as excedeth all man's capacity,
namely when the most horrible and dreadful clouds of Gods anger do shadow
the son of Gods grace and favor, and utterly remove it out of sight. Such
conflict or batail is described and set forth unto us in this our Gospel,
concerning this woman, The woman of Cananee diversely tem^^ted.
which comes unto Christ to entreat for her daughter. For not only the
reason, but also all other circumstances are so evil, that none can be worse.
For first of all, 1. She is a Cananite.
the woman is a Cananite, and an hethen creature, which thing does greatly
hinder her cause, forasmuch as she is not of the kynrede and stock of Abraham,
and so has she no right to ask any thing of Christ, because she is a
stranger. This one thing is of such force, that it might easily take away from
her all hope to obteyn any thing at the hand of Christ. Math. 10.
What should an heathenyshe woman obtain of a Jew, yea and of such one, as
is sent unto the Jews? If such a block were laid in our way, it would
surely take away from us all hope to pray. Neither may we think it to be a
matter of little purpose, when our conscience answers us: Thou art nor of
that number that ought to pray. Thou belongest not unto Christ. Let Peter,
Paul. etc. pray, which may laufully do it. A grievous stomblynge block.
Thou haste naught to do with this matter. GOD will never hear thee: thou
art a sinner, thou have no faith, and peradventure thou art not of the number
of Gods elect and chosen people. Thou art no mete man to take so great a
matter in hand, nor to stand before God, and to ask any thing of God. If
such things ones enter into a man's heart, it is an easy thing for the dyuell to
cast him into desperation. For this is a torment passing al torments. But what
is to be done in so great danger, we must learn by the example of this woman,
and see how she behaved her self in this so great and mighty conflict. Headlong
and without any consideration, Faith obteyneth al things of Christ
that she was a Gentile, and Christ a Jew, (so blind was she in her mind)
she comes boldly unto CHRIST, fearyng nothing that might be a let or
hindrance unto her. Only her faith that she had in Christ, was so great, that
she doubted nothing at all, but that he would healpe her. And with this Faith
she overcame not only her Gentilitie, but also whatsoever otherwise might be
a let or hyndraunce unto her. Any other not having this Faith could never
have done this, but would have thought on this manner: Thou haste none
access unto this holy man. Thou shall pray in vayn, for as much as thou art a
sinner. His people may pray unto him, as for strangers they have no right so
to do. For he that believes not, can not pray. But all these things can move
this woman nothing at all. She reasons not on this manner with her self.
Thou belongest not unto this famylye and common wealth. Thou art an Heathen,
utterly banyshed out of the fellowship and company of the Jews, yea and such
one as is not worthy to tread upon Gods ground. This is an hard and perilous
tentation, when the devil puts us in mind, and says on this wise unto us:
What meanest thou thus to pray? Pray never so much, yet art thou mine. Leave
therefore to pray, and curse God. For do what thou will, thou shalt never be
saved. All hope of salvation is utterly barred from thee: Such thoughts and
imaginations would easily take away from them that are but yonglynges and
unexercised soldiers in Christ's camp, Why this history is set forth.
all hope and confidence of praying, yea and throw them into desperation, and
finally into damnation. Therefore for our sake, for our consolation and comfort
is this storye set forth, that it may be a bulwark unto us against these fyry
darts of Satan: Thou art no christian. Thy prayers are to no purpose. Leave
of, and give over. Take heed thou be not persuaded by these subtle
suggestions of most subtle Satan: but rather answer on this manner: What
soever I am, I care not. For although I be never so evil, yet is Christ good
and rightuous, neither cease he through my wickedness to be righteous and
merciful. All things must be asked of God alone for Christ's sake.
I will therefore call upon him with a strong and stout faith, and not admytte
any thing that should be a le^te unto me. There is now no time to dispute of
Predestination This woman prayed, and regarded not her gentilitie: What should
hinder me, but that I may also pray for such things as I have need of? And of
whom should I ask these things but of God alone in heaven for Christ's sake
his son, and my Savior? This is an hard and grievous conflict, and marvelous
to be found in a Cananite, which was an heathen woman. Now says the story,
that she cried: Oh Lord, 2 Christ answers nothing.
thou son of David have mercy on me. This is an humble and right worthy manner
of praying, precedyng from an earnest and fervent faith. For in this her prayer
she makes a noble confession of her faith concerning Christ, yt he is the
promised Messiah and savior of the world, which should come, being born of ye
sede of David. Of this his office she puts him in remembrance, and opens
her need unto him, saying my daughter is miserably vexed of a devil This her
cry Christ well hears, and yet he answers not a word. This is an other
grievous temptation. For she feleth God to be such one toward her, even as she
her self is, that is to say, a stranger. For she was an Ethnicke, and utterly
estranged from the common weal of Israel, and therefore pertained there unto
her none inheritance, neither could she claym any fruit of Gods gift and
liberality. For this cause when she follows Christ, and makes intercession
unto him he speaks nothing at all, as though she pertained no thing unto
him. The strongest that are, might have been dismayed by these two blocks that
were cast in her way. For how could she otherwise then think with her self,
that what soever she had heard of Christ, and of his gentleness toward all
people, yt came unto him, was nothing else then mere vanity and utterly false.
As though she should say: Is this the man, that has been so commended unto me,
that he is merciful, and at all times ready both to hear and to help so many
as come unto him? But as far as I see and prove, he hears whom he will
hear, We must continually prayr and not cease*
and when he will, and not when we have need of his help. Yet for all this,
the poor woman suffers not her self to fall from all hope, but remains
still constant and steadfast in calling on Christ, in so much that the
disciples of Christ were even weary of her continual crying, in so much that
for the dispatche of her, they spoke unto Christ, so that there appeared in them
a greater clemency and a more mercy toward the woman, then in Christ.
Neither seemed they to commend in him this hardness, inhumanitie, and
ungentleness, and therefore they make intercession unto Christ for her. Oh Lord,
(say they) Grant this woman her request, and send her away. For otherwise
she will never make an end of crying.

This is a notable example to declare, that we ought not to cease from prayer,
but diligently continue in the same, till we have obtained our desire. Taulerus
writes in a certain place, that we must sometime give over prayer. But men
ought not so to teach. For the geuyng over of prayer comes soon enough, yea
and to soon, even of it own accord. We ought rather to styre up our
affections unto prayer. And this example testifies sufficiently, that we ought
by no means to give over prayer, but to go forth and continue in the same,
and to say with the woman: Note and practice.
It is no time now to dispute whether I be good or badde, worthy or unworthy.
I have no leisure to consider these things: I have a greater and more
necessary matter in hand. My daughter is greuousely vexed of a devil: Here
have I need of counsel and of healpe. Where such a feruente desire of the
mind is, there are all stoppes and hynderaunces soon dispatched and put out
of the way.

But now comes the third stomblynge block, 3 Christ denies to help.
torment or grief, when Christ says unto her: I am not sent but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. And thus he rejects and casts away the
intercession of the disciples: neither the woman, nor other that labor for her.
will he ones hear. This might have been unto her a sure token, that Christ was
of an hard mind, and would by no means be entreated, seeing he would not hear
other, which being not desired on her behalf: made notwithstanding
intercession for her. And truth it is, Christ in all the Evangelical story,
is not set forth to be so hard and vngentyl to any person, The constancy of
this woman.
as unto this poor woman. Notwithstanding the woman gives not over her
suite, neither is she dismayde, but still stoutly goth she forward with her
purpose. Being now thrice most grievously strike^, yet as a noble warrior, that
has so many times ben assaulted, she comes more stoutely unto the battle.
And now when her alone crying, and the intercessions of other profited nothing
(she as Mark says) entered into the house, Marc. 7.
whether Christ repaired. With her importunity she may seem to bewray her
impudencye and vnshamfastnes. In the street she cries out upon Christ: now
that Christ has gotten him into an house for to avoid her importune suite,
she enters into the house with him, and continues her suit, falling down
before him. Continue in prayer.
And this is written yt we may know, how greatly this pleases Christ, when a
prayer so oftentimes denied is notwithstanding still continued, and will by no
means receive any repulse, 4 Christ recou^teth the woman as a dog.
or be said nay. And yet can not yt thing be obtained of him, that is
requested. For hear what he answers the woman: It is not good, to take the
bread of children, and to give it unto dogs. I at such an answer would have been so dismayed, that I would have thought verily, there had been no more hope
of help to be looked for at his hand. For this is a wonderful hard answer,
when she is so cast away, that not only she has no place among the children,
and is counted an Ethnike, but also most spitefully is called a dog. That is
much harder, then if so be she had been called an heathen or Pagan. And this is
as much as though he should have said: Thou art utterly estranged from the
kingdom of God, neither have thou any portion therein. Therefore get thee hense.
The matters yt are here in hand, belong nothing unto thee. This is a tentation
passing all tentations. If Peter or Paul had spoken such a word unto me,
they should utterly have dashed me out of countenance. What shall we then
think of these words, Faith is before God a thing most exc^llent.
that Christ himself spoke to this simple poor woman? Therefore is this a
notable example to consider, wherein we may evidently see, what a great thing
Faith is. For Faith (even when CHRIST is most angrye) takes Christ's words
unto the best, and turns them unto her own commodity, making them of angry
words, most comfortable words. She denies not the words of Christ, but
grants them to be true. Thou (says she) call me dog. I grant I am a
dog: Faith interprets all things to the best.
neither do I desire to be in better case then dogs are. Let the children
have those things that are most fine, pleasant and dainty: Only let me have
the crummes that fall from the table, and are not regarded of the children.
This shall right well suffice me. Here snareth she Christ in his own words.
And by this means comes it so to pass, that she which did humble her
self to be compared unto dogs, is now received of Christ among the
children.

This is a most singular and notable example, set forth unto us, to
declare, that we ought to be, not waueryng, but constant in Faith, John. 1.
and continually to call upon, yea, as I may so speak, even make wearye Christ
with our prayers, and not to leave of, till we have obtained our desire.
Let us be moved nothing at all with the contumelious and reprochefull
words of Dogs, Ethnyckes, Paynymes. etc. For dogs are not without
masters, neither are they without their meat. And the Heathen also have a
GOD. Roma. 3.
With this hard hold and strong faith of the woman, By faith and prayer
Christ is overcome.
is the Lord Christ taken, and overcome, so that he answers and says: O
woman, haste thou so much strength in thee to resyste such, so many, and so
great tentations? Uerily, great is thy faith. Be it unto thee, according to
thy desire and faith. For it seemed unto him a rare thing, and seldom found
in any other. As touching the Jews, he knew right well, that they were
offended straight ways, even with one word, when he said that they must eat
his flesh, or else they could not be saved. ^ohn. 6.
But this woman, not withstandyng all these unkind words and overthwart
answers of Christ, continued still in her promise, nothing doubtyng, but surely
beleuyng, that at the last she should obteyn her desire. Why Christ showed
himself so hard to the woman.
But one thing is not here to be passed over, I mean, the cause, why Christ
showed him self so hard to this woman. Ueryly not to the end that he would not
healpe her, nor grant her her request, but that by this means, the woman's
faith might be proved, and set forth unto other for an example: and that the
Jews, which were chyldern and heirs, might learn of this Cananite, which
was no heir, how they should believe in CHRIST, and repose all their
affiaunce, confydence, and trust in him. For this is the thing that Christ
requyrethe, wherein also he chiefly delyghteth. Therefore having trial of
this woman's faith, he could no longer hyde and keep secret his mercy and
loving kyndnes from her, but said: Go thy way. Be it unto thee according to
thy desire. And by this means he makethe not only her daughter whole, but he
also of his own free will promises moreover, Faith obteyneth all things of
God.
to give unto her, what so ever she will or desire, yea and geuethe unto her
also the dignity and right of the sede of Abraham. Perseuera^ce in prayer.
And all these things are brought to pass thorough faith, so yt now she is
become the daughter of Abraham, and an holy woman. And hereof may we lern, that
though God sometime when we pray unto him, do make delay in grauntyng us our
desires, yet we should not be weary, but continue still in prayer, faithfully
believing that he will at the last grant us our requests, and abundantlye
satisfy our desires. For although he seems sometime by outward appearance,
to neglect, not to respect nor regard our prayers, yet in his heart he bears
always an hearty good will toward us, which in his time he will openly
declare, and bring all things unto good effect, so that we cease not to pray
unto him, nor give over our suite: as we may se not only by the example of
this woman, but also of many other. Joseph being in prison.xiii. years, cried
unto God for help. But the more he cried, Genesis 49.
the worse went it with him. And so goes it now adays with the Christians.
When they have long cried and called upon God, they feel no relief or ease of
their pains at all, but the longer the worse, even as it came to pass with
Joseph. God for tria^ of our faith sometime deferreth his help.
If God had sooner delivered Joseph, it had been to the great joy and comfort
of Jacob his father, but then should the dignity of Joseph never have been so
greatly beautified and auanced. His abode was long in prison: but it was
abundantly reco^penced. For after this his so long emprisonme^t, he was made
the myghtiest lord and greatest governor in all the land of Egypt, next
unto the king: Neither do we read in the holy scriptures, that any of a subject
and captive, came unto higher dignity, under his prince, then Joseph. Even so
^ouyngly and favorably will God deal with us, although he hears not
straight ways our prayers, Gods promise is to be apprehended with strong and
co^ +stant faith.
nor grants us our requests. Let us hold fast his promise with a constant
faith. Let us not wax weary of praying but stylle continue in supplication
and prayer, until he have mercy on us. For he will at the last undoubtedly
come, and perform his promise. For this his word must always abide true:
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, John. 16.
he will give it you. Our nature can abide no delays, but would have our
prayers heard and granted out of hand. God geuethe more then we can, or dare
ask.
We must therefore enarme our selves with strong Faith against such tentations.
Let it so be, that God a long time seems to deny our requests, and makes
delays a great number of years: yet must we diligently take heed, that we
by no means suffer our faith and hope to be taken away from his promise. For
the end will be, he will give us more then we have asked, as we may see in the
storye of this woman. If she had asked mo things, without doubt CHRIST would
never have denied them unto her. Ephe. 3.


By this example therefore we are taught, that it is not always for our
profit, when we pray straight ways to be heard. An extremities God hears
our of hand.
When we be in greatest danger and almost paste all hope, then God hears us
out of hand: As when we be in peril of drownyng, or in danger of ennemies.
There is no taryance to be made, where peril with destruction is at hand. But
where the matter may be deferred, there let us know, that GOD doothe it to
exercise and to try our Faith: When God ^eferreth to hear. Abacuck. 2.
yet so, that he will in his time come and healpe, (as the Prophet Abacucke
says: If the Lord make any tariance, see that thou patiently abide his
coming. For he will surely come, and not tarry. In these our days also he
seems to make delays. He suffers the Pope and the Turk to do what they
will against us. We cry and lament. He hears not, and makes as though he
knew us not. In the mean season we are myserably handeled, as though we had no
God at all. But the matter will one day otherwise fall out. The Pope and the
Turk extreme enemies to the Church of Christ.
Therefore let us most certainly persuade our selves, that our cause is most
true, and most undoubted before Christ our Lord, and before GOD his father,
although it appears not now, that God cares for us any thing at all, but
that the devil and all his have the upper hand over us, treads us under
foot, and triumphs against us. Rather assure thou thy self, and say: I know
for a certainty, that God will not forsake his church, and that he will ever
be at hand to help and defend it, if she be diligent with fervent prayer to
call upon him for aid and succor. Our state and condition is certain and
good, because of this his promise. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my
name he will surely give it you. Wherefore I will not dispute whether I am elect,
and woorthye to pray, John. 36.
but I will most certainly persuade my self, that his promise is certain,
sure, and most undoubted, when soever that I do pray, and be constant in the
same, And that he will deal with me, and with his whole Church, according to
his word and promise. Which doctrine is both nobly and notably set forth in this
our gospel, worthy at al times diligently to be considered. For it describes
and lively sets forth Faith with her exercise, Prayet made in faith
obteyneth all things of God.
which at the last obteyneth all things at the hand of God, if we faint not,
after the example of this woman. For she although diversely proved and tried,
fainted not in her faith, neither ceased she by fervent and continual prayer to
call upon Christ, ever persuading her self even in the midst of those
storms, that Christ was gentill, loving, and merciful, and at the last would
undoubtedly help her, and give her her desire which thing, as ye have herd she
obtained. The Lord our God be merciful unto us, and give us grace to follow
the faith of this woman, and to hold fast his word and promise without
wavering or doubting, and to continue in the same unto the end. Amen.

The third Sunday in Lent. The Gospel. Luc. xi.
Jesus was casting out a Devil that was dumb. And when he had cast out the
devil, the dumb spoke, and the people wondered. But some of them said: he
casts out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the deuyls. And other
tempted him and required of him a sign from heaven. But he knowing their
thoughts, said unto them: Every kingdom divided against it self, is
desolate, and one house does fall upon another. if Satan also be divided
against him self how shall his kingdom endure? Because ye say I cast out
Deuylles through Beelzebub: If I by the help of Beelzebub cast out deuylles? by
whose help do your children, cast them out? Therefore shall they be your
judges. But if I with the finger of GOD cast out deuyls. no doubt the
kingdom of God is come upon you. When a strong man armed watches his house,
the things that he possessethe are in peace. But when a str^nger then he
commethe upon him, and overcomes him, he takes from him all his Harness
(wherein he trusted) and deuydeth his goods. He that is not with me, is a
gaynste me. And he that gathers not with me, scat^ereth a broad. When the
unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking
rest. And when he fyndeth none, he says: I wy^l return again into my house
whence I came out. And when he comes, he fyndeth it swept and garnyshed. Then
goes he and takethe to him seven other spirits worse then him self, and they
enter in, and dwell there. And the en^e of that man is worse then the
beginning. And it fortuned that as he spoke these things, a certain woman of
the company lift up her voice, and said unto him: happy is the womb that
bare thee, and the pappes which gave thee suck. But he said: yea happy are
they that hear the word of GOD, and keep it.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe Gospel of this present sunday sets forth unto us ye story of a certain
man possessed with a dumme devil, which Christ did cast out, and healed the
man, so that the dumb man spoke unto the great admiration and meruellynge of
all the people that were present. Christ ouercometh the devil.
In this our gospel many things are contained unto our great consolation and
comfort. But our cheiffe and principal consolation is this, that Christ
casts out the devil, that by this means we may certainlye know, that
Christ has greater power then the devil, and all his kingdom: And that this
work, which was the^ corporally done, does not yet cease, but is and shall be
continually exercised, Christ at this day casts out devils by the word and
Sacraments.
while the church endure. For all things, yt are given to the curch of Christ,
as baptism, the Lords Supper, the word and absolution or declaration of the
merciful promises of God unto penitent sinners, and all other things that
pertayne unto the ministry of the word, as instruments, are provided unto
this end, that by them the kingdom of the devil may be destroyed again,
that men may be received out of Satan's kingdom into the kingdom of god:
and in fine, that by them the devil may be put out of men. For as it is written
in the Prophet: Esaias. 55.
my word shall not return void or without fruit. As the rain that falls
upon the ground that is dry, is not without fruit, for grass or blades come
forth, and all things ware grene: so is the word of god always fruitful with
some, for the holy ghost is with the word, and by the same word lighteneth,
kyndleth, and purifieth the hearts, and by this means delivers them from
the tyranny of the devil. And although man's reason can not comprehend it, how
the devil is the^ cast out it makes no matter. For ye world is not worthy to
see so much as a sparcke of gods power, but remaining in darcknes to curse and
to blaspheme all things that belong unto God, as they do here unto Christ. But
we that receive and embrace ye word, ought to know, and to comfort our selves
herewith, that god has given us power here upon earth, Baptism.
whereby we may continually cast out ye devil. Let us take an example of ye
child that is newborn. Every child yt comes into ye world, John.
is borne in the devils kingdom, where he through sin as a Lord rules, and
exercises, all kind of tira^ny. But when this child according to ye
co^ma^deme^t of Christ is brought unto baptism, whereby sinners are borne
again into ye ki^gdom of god, as Christ says. Except a man be borne a new,
he cannot see ye kingdom of god. For yt is borne of flesh, is flesh, Romans 6.
and that is borne of ye spirit, is spirit. Then must the devil needs give
place, and the child be delivered out of his kingdom. For in baptism ye grace
of god is promised and given to the child, because he is baptized into ye death
of Christ: The declaration of Gods mercy to penitent sinners.
In like manner may it be said of the^, yt have troubled consciences, who^ ye
devil have snarled, and made unquiet through some sin or offense. These men
thus troubled and tormented in their consciences and minds come unto me or
unto some other Chistia^, they lament their most miserable state they declare
their grief and pain, Math. 17. John. 20. Mat. 11.
and desire instruction and comfort. In this behalf may I because of ye
co^ma^dement of Christ, yea I am bound so to do, comfort and stre^gthen my
brother, and declare unto him the grace, favor, and mercy of god through ye
merits of Christ to all the^ yt be grieved and heavy laden with the burden of
sin. And by this means is ye devil cast out of him, not by me, which also am a
sinner, but by ye word, The Supper of the Lord.
which is least unto us of Christ here in earth. Likewise when thou art
troubled in thy mind and disquieted in thy conscience, so yt thou can not
sufficiently receive co^solatio^, nor steadfastly believe, yt god is merciful
unto thee and will forgive thee thy sin: resort thou unto ye lords Supper.
Math. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
For Jesus Christ our Lord has instituted ye sacrament of his body and blod
unto this end, yt when thou in those holy mysteries receauest his body and
blod, you sholdest not dout, but certe^ly be persuaded, yt his bodi was betrayed
and his blod shed for thy sins. where this faith is, there is ye devil driven
out, and compelled to seek other resti^g places, Luc. 1^.
thus is this work of casti^g out devils continually i^ ye church of Christ
through the word and the ministration of the Sacraments* which church through
Christ her head evermore fights and strives against this serpent, and with
all maine impugneth his force and violence, no less then Christ himself did,
if not more, as the Lord him self says: John 14.
verily verily I say unto you: he that believes in me, shall do the works that
I do, yea greater then these shall he do, because I go unto ye father. The
reason is this. The church has a larger office then Christ. For he taught
only among the Jews in a straight place or small circuit, and converted
few. He taught also not fullye four whole years. But the church through the
help of her head, which is on the right hand of god, is continually in this
office, when it, preaches the gospel, Colos. 4.
distributeth the Sacraments, and evermore reproves the wyckednes of the
devil, and now drives him out of this place, now out of yt place, so that it
suffers him to have no reaste, A Christian must continually fight against
Satan.
doing this through out the world, wheresoever ye word is preached, and ye
sacraments truly ministered. And yet have we not so driven him out, neither are
we in all points so free and set at liberty from him, but that we must daily
fight against him, for as much as saint Peter says he goes about like a
rorynge Lion seeking whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.
and continually beware of him. Resist the devil (says saint James) and he
shall flee from you. This greatly greueth the devil, therefore as we cast him
out through ye doctrine of the word and Sacraments: Iac. 4.
so likewise leaves he nothing unattempted, if he cannot utterly subdue us,
yet at the least to take our lives from us through persecution. Thus has it
been, and shall be unto the very end of the world. It chanced so unto Christ:
he drove the devil out of the^, that desiered him. The devil sought to be
revenged on him therefore moved he the Jews to crucify him, and at the last by
death to dispatche him out of the way. Yet had neither the devil nor the
Jews the ouerhand. For Christ overcame them both. John. 12.16.
As concerning the Jews they were so cast out of their country, that there
is no hope at all of their return. The devil, Christ and in him all Christians
have gotten the victory over the devil and the world.
which is the prince of the world is judged and condemned, and shall at the
last day by the Christians accompanied with Christ their head, be so cast
out of both heaven and earth, that he shall never trouble them more. For Christ
has not only driven the devil out of this man (of whom the gospel of this
present sunday makes mention) but he has appeared (as S. John says) that he
should destroy the works of the devil: 1. John. 3.
so that the devil has no power over them that believe. But they that believe
not on Christ, they remain under the power of the devil, and must at the
last come unto destruction with the Jews.

In the Papecie the devil thoroughly stablished (as ye know) his kingdom, The
papecie.
and set it meruelouslye with great wealth, riches, and dignity, in somuche
that although through the singular mercy and grace of god there remained in it
the holy Sacraments and the word, yet was there not at all any true knowledge
either of the Sacraments or of the word, as al men hereof can bear witness.
And yet in the very Papecie the devil found not all things mete for his
kingdom. For even in the ministration of baptism was he cast out, The
wickedness of the minister hinders the dignity of ye word or sacraments
nothing at all.
when the Infantes were baptized in the name of the blessed Trinity, and so
brought unto God. For nothing can make void the promise of God. Neither is the
holy Ghost therefore of the less power in the word and in the Sacraments,
although the person be wicked and without the holy ghost, which ministers
the word and the Sacraments, we therefore are most indebtedly bound to render
unto god most hearty tha^ckes for this his singular goodness toward us, which
has given us such power and strength against our most cruel enemy and
extreme foe, the devil, though he buffeteth us again, it is no merueill. For
how can he abide this, that we miserable sinners should so disquiet him being
a proud and myghtie spirit, only with the word, that he can have no place to
rest in? Therefore he makes against us all that ever he can, by raysinge up in
every place persecutions and other tentations against us. But that thing ought
not to seem grievous unto us for the hope that we know, that we shall not
only drive him out here, but we shall also at the last day (as we
toforesayde) judge and condemn him unto hell fire for evermore. These things
well and diligently considered, we ought to have in great estimation and honor
the word of GOD and the Sacraments, The word and the sacraments ought to be
had in great reverence.
and not so vilelye to think or speak of them, as many do commonly now a
days, and specially the wise and prudent of this world. The Sacraments (I
grant) are outward ceremonies, as the eyes see. The very word also is an
external thing, which is received by the ear, and red with the eye: As
the Christians also are bodily men. But these things are not therefore to be
despised. The reason is this. When a Christen man handles the word of GOD
according to the commandment of Christ, then is that power present which the
devil can not abide. In that therefore the word and the Sacrament do
outwardlye appear so homely and base, we ought not to despise them, but rather
give thanckes unto GOD, that he has given so great virtue, power and
strength to so weak instruments. For what are we poor men in respect of the
devil? Therefore if his power were not repressed by Gods power, by his word,
etc. We were not able somuche as one moment of an hour to stand against him.
But what does God? he kyndleth that poor little straw through his word that
heavenly fire, The word of god drives away Satan.
that it makes such a light and brightness in the world, that the devil
knows not wheare to abide, so that he must this day flee from this place, to
morrow from another place, and so utterly at the last be driven out. In
consideration whereof saint Paul calls the Gospel, Romans 1.
the power of God, whereby men obtain everlasting salvation, that is to say,
such a might and strength, as is named the power of God, and restores man
from sin unto righteousness, from death unto life, from hell unto heaven, from
the devils regiment unto the kingdom of God. These things must we Christians
learn, and thancke god for them, and highly esteem his holy word and blessed
Sacraments, as our most precious relics and jewels. As for the unfaithful
they are not worthy to behold the great power and majesty of gods word,
according to this saying: Tollatur impius, ne videat gloriam dei. Let the
ungodly be taken away, yt he see not the glory of god. And as Esaias said of
the Jews: ye shall hear, and not understand: ye shall see, and not perceive.
We therefore are much bound unto God, that we have both known and felt the
great majesty and power of his word. Esaias. 6.
And in this behalf we ought greatly to rejoice, that although we be poor and
beggarly sinners yet we be endowed with such power, as the devil is not able
to abide. Thus see we, that this work among the Christians is perpetual, I
mean to cast out deuilles, to make the dumb to speak, and the deaffe to
hear, It is a greater miracle to drive the devil out of men's hearts, then out
of their body.
although it be not done corporally. For this is a matter of greater wayghte
and of more excellency, to cast the devil out of men's hearts, and to drive
him out of their bodies. For he sytteth faster in the heart, the^ in the body.
But Christ drives him out corporally also, that we with our eyes may behold
his power, and the sooner believe, that he will drive him also out of that place,
where he must steadfastly sit, I mean the heart, yea and that by plain and
homely things, as by the word, by baptism, by the Sacrament of his body and
blood etc.

These singular gifts and noble graces has God given unto us, and therefore
ought we continually to thancke him, and to use the same unto our comfort
against the devil, that we by that means may drive him out of our
hearts, and not be dismayde, though he suffer us to have no rest in this
world, but continually heap upon us afflictions, troubles, persecutions,
hatredes of men, torments of tyraunts, and at the last death. For these
things shall he be paid home at the last day, when without any return he
shall for ever be cast out into hell fire, there worlds without end to
remain. This is the first part of our gospel, for the which we are most
endebtedly bound to give unto GOD most hearty thanks, and to rejoice in the
same.

Now follows it in the gospel, what the world judges of so great and
weighty matters. And here are set forth unto us in this Gospel three kinds
and sorts of men, Three sorts of people judge of this miracle.

The first meruell at the work.


which diversely take this miracle of Christ. The first is the best sort, I
mean them, which marvel at this work of Christ, and without doubt give
thanckes unto God for it. These be but few in number, and such as be of no
reputacion, whose eyes are opened to see the glory and power of Gods word,
and to know the same. And this thing seems unto them such and so great,
that they can not merueill enough, that the word so quicklye and easily can
turn so many men, and by the power there of cast out the devil. For this
cause can not they hear of this matter enough. But besides these, there are
two other sorts. Their hearts are so hardened, that they seeing, see nothing
at all, neither perceive they, that through the mighty power of God, the dumb
and deaffe do as well now speak and hear, as any other man, and that he,
which before was wont to be mad and out of his wits, is now in his hole
mind, and does all things soberly, quietly, and in good order. But let us
now consider these ij. sorts of people severally, or every one by them
selfs. The first of these ij sorts behold this noble work and marvelous
miracle of Christ, but they are so blind, The second blaspheme.
mad and doltyshe, that after the manner of spyders they gather poison of this
flower, whereof the other, of whom we spoke before, gathered good and sweet
honey: for these men do not only not interpret this castinge out of devils, a
certain art, or singular gift of God, but they also boldly pronounce, that
this work, is not of God, but of the devil, and done by art magike. Should
this be a miracle, say they? yea it is the work of the devil, and done by
Nicromancie: so stockblinde are they, and so hard hearted, that they cannot see
the wonderful work of GOD, but ascribe altogether to the devil. And this
sets forth their insolent arrogancy and exceeding great pride, in that
they call the prince of the deuilles Beelzebub, which sounds in our English
tongue, an humble be, Beelzebub what it is in English.
or a great fly. How can ye devil be more despised? They have so good an
opinion of their own holiness and spirit, that they compare the devil and
flies together. Uerely I can not esteem the devil so lightly, 2. Cor. 4.
neither could Paul, which calls him the prince and God of this world. But
these good holy folk think the more they can despise the devil, the more
shall they make the art of Christ in casting out the devils to be despised. What
great matter is this, say they, yt the greater fly casts out the lesser?
Thus they blaspheme the work of Christ, although they have nothing to say
against the truth. But this they consider not that they them selves have a
legion of devils in them. For they are full of blasphemies, of murders, of
lies, of deceauinges etc. They fulfill the devils will unto the vttermoste, in
that they think that the devil has nothing to do with them, and that they
are in no danger of him. Even thus goes it now a days also, the gospel, The
godly rejoice in ye gospel: the ungodly blaspheme it.
God be thancked, in this our time is taught purely and syncerely with all
quietness and modesty. And this is our comfort, that some good men do truly
receive this doctrine, are glad of it, wonder at the great mercy and goodness
of god, and most heartely tha^cke him for it. Contrariwise, some there are,
that feel no swetnes at all in the preaching of the Gospel, and therefore they
blaspheme it, and persecute it even unto the uttermost. Our adversaries the^
selfs grant this to be the word of god, The adversaries grant many things
to be true, and yet they go forth to persecute.
that ye Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ should be ministered in both
kinds. Again, yt Christ did forbid neither marriage, nor meats. Yet they
condemn these things as heresy. It is wonder, that the Son wax not
darcke, and that the earth does not open and swalow up the teachers of such
blasphemies. Yet they go stoutly on, and are without al fear, so yt where the
true Christians fear ye devil, they fear him nothing at all. For the
Christians have learned by experience, yt the devil is able to corrupt eue^ ye
righteous, and to destroy the work of God, if he be permitted. Therefore they
call him not Beelzebub, 2. Cor. 4.
but with Paul they call him the prince and God of this world. For we have
experience of his power in this wise: When he has made any man his captive and
bond slave, and has cast him into error or heresy, he holds him so fast
in his claws, that he very hardly can with infinite sermons be called from his
errors unto the true persuasio^ of Christen religion. Again, those whom he
hold captive, and has them lincked with the bo^des of fornication, or adultrye
of wrath, of covetousness, of envy, The power of the devil is not to be set
light by.
of hatred, and of such like vices, he holds the^ so fast, yt there is almost
no hope at any time to escape. And if he perceive yt few bonds suffice not,
he puts more unto the^. Therefore ye Christians do not set ye devil at naught,
nether do they make light of hi^, nether call they hi^ a fly, but a mighty lord,
a prince and god of this world, which fills ye whole world with murders,
wars, errors, heresies, scismes, disse^cio^s, desperatio^, troubles, miseries
etc. But ye pope and his sect believe not this, although they both see it and
have daily experience of ye same. Wherefore this is marvelous, and a thing not
to be forgotten, yt the Phariseyes blaspheme Christ and his work. For hereof
does it appear, that although their bodies were not possessed with the devil,
as this poor man's was, yet in their spirit the devil had much more power over
them, The papists in persecuting the true Christians, think they do God
great service.
seeing, after the manner of our papists, they do not only not understand the
word, but they also most slanderously blaspheme it, and most cruelly
persecute it. And notwithstanding it troubles them nothing at all, but they
persuade the^ selves, that they have done well, John. 16.
as Christ says: the time shall come, that whosoever kylleth you, shall
think that he does noble service unto God. And this thing is seth forth unto
us to teach us, that if we do determine to cast out deuilles, and to teach
the word of God we should look for no better things, then chanced unto
Christ in this place. Some shall marvel: some shall judge our doctrine as
ungodly and deceauing the people, by leadinge them into diverse errors: some
again shall condemn it as heresy, and doctrine of devils. Now ought we to be
well fortressed and fensed against these sclaunders, offendicles, or stomblyng
blocks. It is a great greiffe unto our hearts, that the Papists do so
blaspheme our doctrine, and yet they are so careless, that they care no more for
the devil then they do for a fly. For such was the fortune of Christ also in
the highest miracle that he did, when through the finger and power of God he did
cast out deuilles. Then fell they unto such blasphemies, that they said, it
was the battle of flies, and that the devil wrought it for Christ.

The third seek signs from heaven.
After these come the third sort, not much better then the last, but that
their wyckednes is not so open, fayning that they would believe, if Christ would
work such a miracle as pleased them, but they lack no miracle to behold
(for they see one plainly before their eyes) but they judge that an earthly,
or base, and no true sign. They would (if he looked to have any authority
with them) that he should show some heavenly sign, that is, that he should
make a new Moon, new stars, or such like these are marvelous wise, that
will take upon them to prescribe and appointe god, what signs, wonders and
miracles he ought to do. They would have him like a Iuglar to satisfye their
fansye, and to do such miracles as please them. As though God had nothing to
do, but to serve their lusts and folishe desires. Such shall a man find also i^
these our days, specially among the kings, princes, and other rulers of this
world. The wise of the world are offended at the word, because the preachers
thereof are so homly and poor creatures.
For what other talk have the wise of this world among them then this? what
shall I receive this doctrine, which a sort of poor and beggarly fellows
profess? They that first taught the Gospel were in deed unlearned fyshers:
but now what are they, but a sort of fugitive and runnagate monckes, and a
swarm of perjured priests? I could right well allow this doctrine, if the
Pope, the Emperor, the kings, the princes, and other noble men did teach it
and embrace it. These men also appointe God, how he should behave himself,
and set forth such doctrine as may please them, yea and that both by such and
after such sort, as they thyncke good: So that God must do, what it pleases
them to appoint, yea and such are to be found even among them that profess
the Gospel. For in these our days many which will seem to be Gospellers,
may be found both in the courts of Princes, and also in Cities, which shame
not to appoint the preachers, what they must preach and teach, yea and that
to this end, that (as the Prophet says they may speak pleasant things,
and such as may delight, and not offend. For when the preacher according to
his office reproves sins and vices, whereof certain persons are gyltie:
then they straight ways cry out: These things as matters tending unto
sedition, are by no means to be suffered of the maiestrat. The glorious
worldlinges can not abide to be reproved for their wicked living.
The Gospel may be preached without such spitfull raylinges upon men: so
that when a preacher speaks the truth, and rebukes sin, he must be
counted straightwayes to rail upon the maiestrat, and to move sedition. These
men are puffed up with as much pride, as they were, which saw this miracle,
and yet regarded it nothing at all except Christ would work such miracle as
they them selves appointe. They are grown up unto such madness, and so swell
with pride, that they think it not sufficient to have their Realms in
subjection, Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2. Exodus 22.
except they also have jurisdiction, rule and power over the word of God and
other his holy mysteries. But this is not ye meaning, when the scripture
says, ye the higher powers ought to be had in honor: not to be spoken evil
of, nor rayled upon. As though because of that, the temporal maiestrate were
above god and his word. But the rulers are no less bound to be obedient to
God and to his word, Te^porall rulers owe no less obedience to God and his
word, then subjects do.
tha^ their subjects are. If they do it not, they are not to be obeyed, but to
be freely spoken against, although loss of life should follow thereof. For the
gospel spares no man, but reproves the sins of all men generally and
without exception. Therefore let the pastors and preachers diligently consider
the greatness and wayght of their office, remembering yt they must give an
accou^te thereof at ye great day of judgment, Esa. 53. John. 16.
if they freely speak not to all men, and without fear rebuke those things,
yt are worthy to be reproved, be ye persons of hye or low degree. Preachers
have authority to rebuke ye sins of all men without exception.
Why then should we preachers for thy cause (O thou maiestrate) cast our selves
into danger, and serve thy lusts contrary to our office? It is not our
word. Neither are we in this office to serve thy turn, as men hired of thee
to teach such things, as may please thy fansye, ye preachers may not do so,
neither will they do so, nor yet ought they so to do. He yt is not willing to
hear these things, Preachers may be no me^ p^easers. Gala. 1.
let him seek other yt may serve his lusts, so that this ministry be free,
whereunto God has given authority and power to rebuke sins, yea ye sins of
all men. And these are ye three kinds of men, whom Christ in this his most
noble miracle has censoures and Judges. The first praise it, allow it, and
meruel at it, the second hate it and blaspheme it. The third would have such
miracles wrought, as they appoint neither are they any other at all times,
Marcke this well O thou preacher.
before whom ye gospel is preached in ye world. Therefore the preachers in
this behalf must, as Christ did dispute, reason, co^te^d with the adversaries,
and by no means suffer them, or wincke at them, but stoutly and valeauntly
defend the Lord Christ, his cause and word, what soever adversity follows,
and not to regard though they seem to labor in vain and to profit few. We
have done our duty, if we have disclosed their blasphemies. If they hear not,
farewell they, so that they understand what they have done, and whom they have
contemned, despised, set at naught, blasphemed and rayled upon. Christ first of
al, answers the^, that said, he cast out devils by the help of Beelzebub
prince of the devils. Christ confuteth his adversaries.
These he co^futeth with such a reason, as no reasonable man can deny it. That
kingdom, says he which is divided in it self, must needs come to desolation.
If therefore one devil cast out an other, this then follows, that y^ deuilles
are together by the ears among them selves, and so must their kingdom come to
naught. And this is so true, Discord.
yt even in families or housholdes discord makes havoc of al things. For
if the man and the wife be at variance among them selves, strive one to hurt
an other, one to speak evil of an other: then must the family and household
needs perish and come to naught. Examples do teach, that discord weakeneth,
makes feeble, and utterly destroys whole Empires, Kingdoms, Cittes, common
wealths, houses and families. Therefore the Phariseyes and Scribes are here
utterly beside them selves and clean out of their wits, wantyng not only the
Judgment of the spirit, but also of reason, as our adversaries also the
papists are mad, and utterly estrau^ged from all reason, while they contemn
and condemn so manifest truth. For although we had no scriptures, yet were
we able to defend our matters, and confound theirs even with very reason. But
this helps nothing: al our labor is but lost, so styffnecked and
vncircuncised both in hearts and ears are our adversaries the papists.

The kingdom of the devil.
And this here is worthy to be noted, that Christ says: the devil has a
kingdom, and such a kingdom as greatly agrees in it self, and defends
their matters with high concord and perfect agreement, so that whosoever
provoke one devil, provoke and stirs up all. He that hurts one,
makes all the residue his enemies, otherwise if they lived not in such a
concord, we should pluck away many mo from the papists unto our side.
That all do not believe and receive the word, Why so few receue the word.
the cause is, that the kingdom of the devil is so mighty, and defends all
their things by diligent conjunction and coupling together of consentes and
minds. This kingdom doste thou disturb and grieve, when thou receauest
baptism, hear the word of God, receauest the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ. Why the devil prevails not against Gods elect.
That the devil does not ouercom thee, it is because that as in the devils
kingdom there is high agreement: so likewise in the kingdom of Christ there is
most true concord, and singular linkyng together of minds. Therefore when the
devil assaulteth thee, and goes about to vex and trouble thee, he has also
to his ennemy him that sits on the right hand of God the father, even Christ
thine head, as he said unto Paul: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts.
9.
This is to be taken for a mighty and strong defense, yea and an invincible
fortress, I mean, to be a christen man, seeing we have so myghtie a kingdom
against us: yea we should not be certain of our health and salvation one
moment of an hour, if our help were not sure and certain in the grace of
God: if God did not assist us, and be present with us through his holy spirit.
Objection.
But here may an objection be made against Christ's confutation, that the
Exorcistes or co^iurers, although they be a wicked kind of people, Exorcistes.
cast out devils also. Uerily all this comes not of God, but of the devil. We
read of a man that was possessed with many devils, yet a certain priest that
was a coniurer, and used sorcerie, was so bold, as to put his hand into ye man's
mouth that was so possessed. And what other thing is this, then one devil to
cast out an other. I answer: Paul says, that the devil in the latter days
shall work wonders, and do miracles: Answer.
yet shall they not be true miracles, but fained, counterfeit, and false. ii.
These. ii.
For he works not those miracles to advance ye Gospel of Christ, The devil
works miracles to confirm the unbelievers in their unbelief
and to set forth the glory of God, but to bring men from the true faith,
and to cast them headlong into all kind of idolatry. There have been certain
saints, as they were wont to call them, as our Lady of Ipswiche, our Lady of
Walsingham, the Roode of rest, the roode of Grace, S. Peter, M. John Shorn.
etc. to whom they were wont in time past to send such as were possessed with
the devil, that they might there be made whole, and so many times it came to
pass. But the devil was not therefore cast out, as though he could no longer
have there remained, but he was content gladly to depart, to confirm them in
their superstition and unbelief. As the devil also has many times fained,
The subtlety of the devil.
that he is afeard of an hallowed candell, salt, palms, holy water, holy bread,
holy fire. etc. When notwithstanding he did it only to this end, to increase
superstition, to banishe all true faith and religion, to drive men from the
living God, unto dumb and beggarly ceremonies, that they which are all ready
snarled with the bonds of idolatry and superstition, might be holde^ the more
strongly with the same, 2. Cor. 4.
and confirmed, lest at any time they should begin to lean and trust unto the
word of God and his mercy, and so at the last be saved. All such miracles,
signs, and wonders, are wrought by the devil, and ar lying, false, and untrue:
as S. Paul terms them, ii. These. ii.
yea they are nothing else then plain sorcerie and iuglynge, to deceive them
that are unfaithful, because they would not embrace the truth, that they
might be saved. Think thou those to be the true signs and miracles, wherewith
Christ and the Apostles through the word did cast out the devil, so yt he
against his will was compelled to depart. For there was no such daliance, neither
declared he himself of his own frewil to go away. The end of true miracles
In those miracles ye devil was enforced against his will to give place to the
word of God, and yt unto this end, yt the glory of God might be set forth, and
the christen religion confirmed and stablished: this does not the devil
gladly. Therefore in such agony, conflict, and strife against the devil,
crosses, hallowed candels, holy water, and such other trifles do no good at all.
Where it is for the devils profit, Note.
and for the enlargement and confirmation of his kingdom in all superstition,
idolatry false religion, wickedness. etc. that he should be put out, that by
this means the wicked world may receive the punyshemente of their frowardnes,
because they will not call upon Christ, and so be the more depely drowned in
superstition: there it is possible, that the devil will suffer himself to be
expelled and cast out of such wicked persons, as Sorcerers, Necromancers,
witches, and such like are. For this is not done to the end, that the Gospel
may be advanced, and the truth known, but that error may be confirmed that
the more authority may be given to monkerye, to the invocation of Saints, to
Pylgremages, to Uigiles, to Masses, and to such like trumperie. For, the
mayntenance of these things, wherewith the glory of God is obscured, and the
truth of his holy word hindered: the devil is well content to give place, and
to suffer himself to be cast out. But where the castyng out of the devil is
done to this end, that the finger and power of GOD may be seen, and that the
kingdom of God may be stablyshed: there the devil resysteth, wrastleth and
shows him self unwilling to depart, and maintains his abode there so long
as he can, Luc. ^i.
as Christ teaches in the Parable of the strong armed man. Therefore let us
never forget this great exceeding mercy and singular goodness of the Lord our
God, but most humbly and hertily thank him, that he has sent his son to be
an helper unto us against the devil to cast him out, and has given us his
word, whereby even now also that work is done, I mean the kingdom of the
devil is destroyed, and the kingdom of God is set up and encreaced. In this
grace God for his mercy ever keep us for his dear sons sake Jesus Christ our
Lord, and alone Savior: to whom with God the faand the holy ghost, be all
glory for evermore. Amen.

The fourth Sunday in Lent. The Gospel. John. vi.
Jesus departed over the sea of Galile, which is the sea of Tiberias, and a
great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on
them that were diseased. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat
with his Disciples. And Easter, a feast of the Jews was nigh. When Jesus then
lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he said unto
Philip: whence shall we bye bread that these may eat? This he said to prove
him, for he him self knew what he would do. Philip answered him: two
hundred penyworth of bread, are not sufficient for them, that every man may
take a little. One of his Disciples (Andrewe Simon Peter's brother) says unto
him. There is a lad which has five Barlye loaves and two fishes: but what are
they a monge so many? And Jesus said: make the people sit down. There was
much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five
thousand. And Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he gave to
the Disciples, and the Disciples to them that were set down, and likewise of
the fyshes as much as they would. When they had eaten enough, he said unto
his Disciples: gather up the broken meat which remains, that nothing be
lost. And they gathered it together, and filled.xii. baskettes with the broken
meat of the five barley loaves, which broken meat remained unto them that had
eaten. Then those men (when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did) said:
this is of a truth the same Prophet that should come into the world.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel we learn, that our Savior CHRIST has a syngular and special
care for them that follow him, Math. 6.
that seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and set their
chief delectation and pleasure in hearing the word of God, and in practisyng
the same, so that all such shall want no good thing necessary for their
living, Psalm. 34.
but shall have abundantlye what so ever is needful, so far is it of, Christ
provides for his.
that they need to despair of Gods providence in this behalf, as though he
were led with no care at all toward them, and their necessities. This
doctrine the wicked worldlyngs and covetous carles are not worthy to hear,
much less to believe, seeing their minds are otherwise set. In deed they
hear, that Christ bounteously wroughte this great miracle, but they do not
believe, that Christ will do the same for them. Worldlings.
Therefore are they all together given to the world, scrape and rake together,
what so ever they can get by hook or by crook, by right or by wrong, by
laufull or unlawful means, declaryng by all their doings, that they have no
good and faithful persuasion of Gods providence, and that Christ neither can
nor will deal with them, as he did with this people, of whom our Gospel
makes mention. Yea some of them after the manner of Epicures, think God to be
a careless God, and not to regard his people, but to sytte ydell in heaven,
gasing about I can not tell upon what. And therefore they think it to be
their charge and duty, to carke and care, to aforesee and provide all things
necessary for them selves that they suffer not hunger and cold. etc. But such
men, yea rather monsters of men, Christ regards not. They that embrace his
word, Christ conforteth them in this place, The faithful shall want to good
thing.
that he will feed them, not with words, but with deeds, even with all
things necessary. Let us not doubt, think, or compass in our mind, Psalm.
34.
how we should be nouryshed, but let us put our whole confidence in Christ,
which confyde^ce without al doubt shall not deceive us, but bring unto us no
less bounteous blessing, then these men received. For Christ is always at
hand to help, succor, Iosue. 1. Psalm. 55. 1. Pet. 5.
and relieve them, that faithfully put their confidence and trust in him. Cast
thy care upon the Lord says the Psalmographe, and he shall nouryshe thee. Yea
CHRIST is of such power, The blessyng of God makes all things plentiful.
that if there remain no more then five loaves, yet can he so bless them,
that they shall suffice five thousand men besides women and children: And
moreover of them also leave so much, that it shall far excelle in quantity
the former stoare. For the first was scarcely half a baskette full, but that
remained were.xii. baskets full: whereof we are taught: that if we believe the
word of God, and doubt nothing thereof, framyng our lives according to the
same, GOD will undoubtedly care and provide for us, and abundantlye send us
what so ever is necessary for our living, as we may see in this history.
Although all be not godly, that came here unto CHRIST, yet some of them were
earnestly given to godliness, and sought more the word of God, than they
were careful for their bealy. Therefore Christ cares for them, The
providence of God.
and brings it to pass, that they be fed, when they thought nothing of the
matter. As though he should say: First of all, whatsoever thou be, seek the
kingdom of God, believe in me, Math. 6.
and live according to thy vocation: and as for all other things, leave the
care unto me. Though that thou have not excess, though thou haste not
thousands: yet that thou shalt have sufficient, I will provide. For gold,
silver, money. etc. are not meet to be eaten: thou haste need of bread,
which commethe out of the ground. If thou haste not plenty hereof out of
the earth: if thou have not ground, land, possessions etc. only believe, and
follow thy calling: so shall thou not want bread.

Daily experience mynistrethe unto us exaumples of this thing. Labor.
He that in the beginning is but a poor scholar, being dylygent in his
office, through the blessing of GOD becomes a great doctor. A maid servant
being diligent in her service, and studiosly lookyng unto things of the
house, through the favor of God, comes unto such marriage, that she is made
maystresse of an household, having substance, goods, richesse, and plenty of
all things. There is great abundance of such exaumples in all ages. As on
the contrary part, they that fear not GOD, care not for his word, are
negligente in their office, Idelnesse.
are ydell, and give them selves to sluggyshenesse: They fall into myserie,
poverty, and beggerye, yea though they have much left unto them of their
parents or friends, yet comes it to naught, and wastes away as snow
against the son. Therefore many young men now a days, Idelnes is ye chief
mistress of vices all.
geuyng them selves rather to idleness then to labor, to wickedness then to
godliness, are forsaken of God, and by this means fall into all kinds of
mysery and lewdness, so that either they dye in battaylle, or come to
hanging, or else have sum other shameful end. Which thing is to be
understand also of so many as fear not GOD, nor faithfully walk in their
vocation, be it never so base and homely. All such must needs be accursed of
God, and be overwhelmed with myseries. And well worthy, for as much as they
love not godlynes, believe not in Christ, follow not his word, walk not in
their vocation. etc. For if they did this, they should have God in all their
affairs a most sure defender, tutor, patron, prouider, encreaser. etc. so
that they should lack no good thing.

Learn therefore of this Gospel to believe in Christ, and that he will conserve
and keep us, and provide all things necessary for us, if we will apply our
selves to godlynes, and love Christ's word. As though he should say: If thou be
godly, and fear God, look thou for thy meat at my hand, most certainly:
despair not, though thy living be small, I will bless thy stoare, and
provide abundantly for thee. But if thou follow those ways, that are wicked and
ungodly, if then thou fall into misery, marvel not, neither blame thou
God, but thy self: yea though thou have gotten the goods of the world, The
absida^ce and prosperity of the ungodly shall not long continue.
yet if thou be ungodly, they shall not surely prosper with thee, but they
shall suddenly consume and come to naught, so that thou may be well
assured, that he which despises the word of God, and. obeys not Gods
commandment, shall never be pleasured at the hand of God. This thing does
Christ teach us in this his miracle, in that with five loaves he fedeth five
thousand men besides women and children, whose number peradventure was equal
with the other. They all were filled, and yet there remained much. In thus
doing Christ sets not forth the bare word, as he does in the syxt
Chapter of S. Mathews Gospel, but he expresses the same in very act, and
gives an example thereof. As though he should say: I am rich, and can easily
feed thee. Only see, that thou behauest thy self godly. Follow the word of
God, and keep that. As touching thy food, lay the care thereof upon my back.
This is the doctrine of Faith which Christ sets forth in this miracle unto
us. The faithful only understand it: the unfaithful regard it not, but
rather laugh it to scorn, as they do all the other mysteries of God.

But besides this doctrine, there are remaining two things, which the
Evangelist does diligently set forth The first is, that Christ asks a
question of his disciples, and they answer what they think good. The cause of
incredulity co^cerni^g living.
The second is, that he commands to gather up the fragmentes, that nothing
perish. Now as concerning these.ii. disciples, Philip, and Andrewe: it
evidently appears, what is the cause, that although he provoke us unto
faith by this his unlooked for blessyng, yet it can not be found in us so
true, right, and perfect as it ought to be. For that lets us, that was also
an impediment to the disciples: I mean, when we only consider, how much we
have need of, and have no regard, Philip.
how much Christ is able to do, with his blessing. Philyppe leaves to
reason and says, that two hundred penny worth of bread is not sufficient,
that every manne may have a little morsel. If a count be here taken of the
people, and compared with that sum of money that Philip here names: it
seems to be little in deed. For there were not only five thousand men, Math.
14.
but there were also many women and children, as S. Mathewe says, which are
not numbered. Philyp follows the rule of reason, Reason is an evil counsailer
in matters of God.
and according unto that makes his account. Even so we go to work. Reason
altogether rules in us, and we cast our accomptes, how much we have need for
our necessary daily and yearly expenses. But when we perceive that our goods
fail us, then are we out of countenance: then fall we to desperation, and
think verily, that we shall never be able to sustain our selves and our
family.

And even thus goes it with Andrewe also. He perceauyng the good will of Christ
toward the pore people, Andrewe.
would gladly that they were relieved, and therefore tells Christ what
provision there is, and how that a boy had five barley loves and two fishes.
But notwithstanding when he remembered what a great company there was of hungry
folk, and considred how sclender the provision was, he counted it nothing at
all. What are these (says he) among so many? Straight wais considering the
number, he casts away faith, and thinks it not possible yt such a multitude
can be helped and relieved with so little quantity of bread and fish. And this
is a common fault among us al, not only when we think of living, but also in
all our other troubles and dangers. For we run straight wais for help unto
reason. Note well.
if reason se no help, then out of hand we fall unto mourning and lamenting,
utterly despairing of confort. But it were much better, if we did cast al our
care upon God and fall to no reasoning about necessary things. For by this
means there should be but one inco^moditie when any misery should chance. where
as now through our care it is doubled, and yet nothing amended. Care makes no
man rich: Care pro^fyteth nothing.
yea it rather brings disease of body and disquietnes of mind, two great
pestilences to man's life. Examples in this behalf want not. Therefore seeing
that reason can no otherwise do, but be occupied about those things that we
have need of, and show her self careful about necessaries, as though our
whole wealth depended of her carfulness and devise, which is directly
against faith: The Evangelist would not let pass this thing unremembered, that
by the example of the disciples we may learn, how leude and wicked such toys
of reason are, namely in Christians, which ought only to depend on Christ
and his word. After the rule of reason Philippe and Andrewe judged truly:
neither is it possible, The word of God, and not reason is to be considered.
that a man only led with reason can otherwise think, or have any better
Judgment. But we Christians may not look upon Reason, but upon the word of
God. Therefore we ought not so subtly to reason, as constantly and steadfastly
to believe: and where reason fails, there to lean unto the word of god and
faith, and diligently to consider, what a noble and faithful steward Christ is
to the Christianes. We can give no more then we have. But John says here of
Christ: He gave of the loaves and fyshes, not so much as was at hand, but so
much as he would. Neither is it to be thought, that he did this only but
ones, and that he from hensforth will do no more so among his. God is at all
times beneficial.
For, as I said before, his examples and miracles are publyshed and set
abroad at all times, not only concerning food when GOD respects and
healpeth them that are nedye and without comfort, but also in all other
necessities and miseries. For he is almyghtye, and has promised to us healpe
and defense. Therefore all our power is only in this: 3. Reg. 17. 4. Reg. 4.
Where reason suffiseth not, that we should make the matter up with faith and
prayer, and undoubtedly believe, that he is also a God unto us, which is not
only able with his blessyng, to amplify and increase that little we have, as
he did the honey and oil of the wydowe of Sarepta, but also that he is able of
nothing to make all things.

This consolation and confort ought we diligently to consider, and only (as
Christ says) respect this, that first of all we seek the kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof. Math. 6.
As for all other things that we have need of, let us cast our care upon our
heavenly Father, which will give unto his, even when they sleep, Psalm. 127.
as the Psalmograph says: that is to say, they shall be blessed and provided
for, and yet shall they not understand, how and whence it comes, as as we
may plainly see in this miracle. For so soon as CHRIST took the bread into
his hands, and added thereto his blessyng, it was straight ways perceived, how
it was multiplied and increased. The fyshes also when Christ distributed
them, and commanded them to be delivered to the people were increased
marvelous greatly.

Thus would Christ have us both to perceive, and to believe, that we by this
means might attribute more to the secret and invisible richesse of God, then
to our present reason and store. The miseries of this our time.


Miserable is the face of this world. Ennemies are on every side of us.
Discord, debate, and strife increases daily more and more. Our men and our
money decay daily. The wickedness of the bishop of Rome
The common wealth is come unto lamentable ruin. All things go to havoc
generally, neither is there any hope of amendment. The pope also is not ydell,
neither sleapeth he, but seeks all means possible to disturb realms, to set
Princes together by the ears, to bring desolation to all those countries that
resyst his tyranny, cast away his intolerable yoke, refuse his wicked
doctrine, despise his diuelyshe decrees, ydell inventions, crooked
constitutions, unwritten verities. etc. and embrace, believe, and profess the
true and lively Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ. For the Turk hates not
more the name of Christ, than the Pope does abhor the Gospelle that we
profess. Therefore seeks he all corners, and studyeth by all means that may
be, to take away the Gospel from us, and to restore unto us the old
abominations. Which things when a Christen man does remember, it can no
otherwise then grieve him. Now reason begins to compass with her self,
what is best to be done, and what prouysion may be made to wythstande so great
euyls. And when reason with all her deuyses and counsayles sees no way how to
bring to pass that she has imagined, or else can deuyse no apt counsels,
how either to prevent or dyspatche so great malice and displeasure, then
falls she to confusion, and at the last unto desperation. Neither can reason
frustrate of her purpose be free from sadness and desperation. Mark this, and
practice it.
For flesh and blood can no otherwise do, then her nature requires. But
the Christians are in a far better case. For when reason fails, they lay
hand on the word of God, and with steadfast faith believe to receive healpe and
conforte at the hand of God, John. 16.
according to his promise. But what is the commandment of the word or what is
to be believed in such an extremity and difficulty of things? Math. 16.
Uerily even this, that Christ has overcome the world, and that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against his church: Psalm. 34.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the rightuous, and his ears attent unto their
prayers Who shall hurt you (says S. Peter) if ye follow that is good? 1.
Pet. 3.
Not withstandyng if ye suffer for righteousness sake, blessed are ye. The
Lord knowethe how to deliver the rightuous out of tentation, and to reserve
and keep in store the wicked and ungodly against the day of judgment unto
their condemnation and everlasting pain, 2. Petr. 2.
as S. Peter in that place brings in Loath and the Sodomites for an example.

Faith in the word works consta^cie in the heart.
He that on this sort sets before him the word and promise of GOD, and
holds them fast with a strong Faith, him all the reasons of the world,
though they should fail, can not dismay, nor cause him to despair. For he
does know, that the Lord is above them, which rules in the mids of his
enemy, and therefore is he contented with all things, Exodus 3.
that he may gloryfye his name against them, that are adversaries to his
word, vex the church of GOD, and make neither end nor measure against God
and his word, even as Pharao, and the Egyptians did: so that through the
help of the word the Christians thoroughe Faith have a most certain and
sure hope, where reasone sees no hope at all. For reason, when it perceauethe
no healpe to be at hand, despayreth streyghte ways. But the Lord shows
true healpe, if we hold it fast, and follow godliness. For he that
geuethe his mind to wickedness and sin, and cares not for his conscience,
though it be never so much defiled and spotted with all abomination, and yet
thinks to enjoy the promise and the comfort thereof, he is utterly deceived,
and shall bring nothing unto good effect

And this fault was in the Disciples. With reason they were well instructed,
but they had no respect unto the healpe of Faith, neither did they consider,
what a Lord they had of Christ. Or else Phylippe would have told an other
tale after this sort. Two hundred penye worth of bread are not sufficient
for so great a multitude, that every one might have a little morsel. But we
are in case good enough, in as much as thou art with us, which art able to
fulfill and to make good, what so ever we do lack, for as much as we are in
such place, where no prouysyon can be made. For thou haste that power and
knowledge, the which other have not. Andrewe also would have spoken otherwise,
as thus: There is a boy here, that has five barley loaves, and two fyshes.
If I should have the distribution of them, they would scarcely suffice two
persons. But forasmuch as thou art present, put thy helping hand unto it,
and they shall suffice as many as are here, enough and enough again, with a
great portion left. This would the word and faith have taught the^. But when by
the reason of their carefulnes, both the word and Faith was vanyshed away, it
was no meruayl though they could remember no such thing. Note this counseil.
Therefore this rule is to be observed: If thou love ye name of Christ, and
notwithstanding, thou leanest unto reason, and unto the devises thereof, being
compelled, as it were of necessity, yet see that the word of GOD bear the
chief rule, and have the vppermoste place always, so that through Faith, thou
depend wholly upon God and his promise. Otherwise thy help will be uncertain,
yea it will be nothing. For cursed is that man (says the Prophet) that puts
his trust in man, Hier. 17.
and makes flesh his strength, and suffers his heart to go from the Lord.

After that Christ has most noblye declared his blessyng among us, The
world abuses the gyfts of God through riot.
we may not forget this commandment, that Christ gave his disciples,
concerning the gatheryng up of such bread and fyshe as remained, that nothing
might be lost. For as our reason in time of necessity can do nothing but
reckon and acompt how to compass things to serve our ned^, and can not away
with Faith, nor yet constantly cleave to the promise of God: so likewise, when
the blessyng of God is plentuous, the world neither can nor will rightly and
thankfully use the same. For many do abuse the blessing of God unto excess,
prodigally and wastfully they spend it about naught, as experience teachethe
us. If there be a good wine year, so that there is plenty of wine, then fall
the people to drinkyng, gullyng, glosyng, quaffyng, and most unthankfully abuse
that precious and good gift of God, as though god that year had sent such
abundance of wine only to this end, that the people should drink drunk.
The blessing of God they ought to use, and not to abuse: In time of wealth
prouid for death.
and if we have more then present necessity requires, it ought diligently to
be gathered to gether, and laid up in store, that it may supply ye lack and
necessity that is to come, as Joseph cou^celled Pharao king of Egipte, yt with
ye great and plentiful increase of the seven former years, he should provide
for the other seven dear years yt should follow, Gene. 41.
that by this means there might be store of grain for all his land. In like
manner when god sends to artificers and men of occupation a good year,
Artificers.
so that their wares be well sold, and they have good vtteraunce of such
things as they occupy: they may not therefore abuse this blessing of God, and
wastefully spe^de away their gaynes, but they must keep them in store, and
warely lay the^ up, yt they in time to come may serve ye lack yt is like to
follow. But forasmuch as many do not this, but spend as fast as they get, and
spare nothing for the necessity yt is to come, therefore in time of need they
lack, and God withdraws from the^ his blessing. It is mete, that they which
abuse the gifts of God, and riotously and wastfully spend them away, should at
an other time lack, yt by this means they may learn, what it is to neglecte
and not to regard the blessing of god. And as some do, to much wastfully
consume the good gifts of god, so on ye contrary part some do abuse the^ by
hourdyng them up and niggardly keeping them, yea and that unto this end, yt
when a dearth come, they may have ye more gain, though it be unto the utter
undoing of their poor neighbors, as we may see in our covetous
cormorantelyke cornemongers, Cornemongers.
which hourde up corn in the time of cheap, that in the time of dearth they
may sell it the dearer unto the profit of the^ selfs, but unto the disprofit
of other, so that they bring not forth the blessyng of God to the comoditie of
other, as and when they ought, but only at such time as may serve their
covetous desires, and they reap the greater profit. Prou. 11.
Solomon says: He that hourdeth up his corn, shall be cursed of the people:
but the blessing of the Lord shall fall upon the heads of them that bring it
forth, and sell it for a reasonable price. These catarpillers of the common
wealth which only seek their own private lucre, whether it be in Corn,
cattle, or otherwise, are a spiteful kind of people, hated of God and of all
godly men. Note this O ye rich men.
For as touching that Christ commands y^ fragments and such things as wear
left, to be gathered up, it was not commanded to that end, yt it should serve
the covetous lusts of the most covetous worldlinges, but that we having them
in store might be the more able to help the nedye and hungrye. But carnal
reason says: hourde it up that thou maiste be the richer, although other by
that means be beggered. As though God gave his blessinge unto thee to serve
thy covetous affections, and not rather yt by it thou sholdest serve at all
times the common necessities of other. But by this means it comes to pass,
that these gredye gryffes lokyng continually for gain, do not only not work
according to the blessing of God to the profit of other, but they them selves
also through their covetousness take no pleasure nor use of the things, which
they profess. The misery of covetous men.
For a covetous man lacks as well that he has, as that he has not. Therefore
as they yt believe the word of god, although they lack, yet shall so be
increased with goods, that they shall have gods plenty and enough even unto
the uttermost: so likewise they yt abuse the gifts of God unto their own
covetousness, provoke against them selves his curse, that in their greatest
abondance they are most nedie and miserable For this is the misery of the
covetous worldlinges: it is no less grief unto them to distribute and lay
out their goods, then it is to get them, and to scratch the^ together. And
when any calamity or mischance happens, as it many times come to pass, so
that their goods have some misfortune, as their corn to be eaten with
vermin, their wine to wax sower, etc. Then are they so vexed in their minds
(a pain worthy such a sin, and a plague worthily cast upon them) that the
loss of the^ grieve them more, than if they had never had them. What man, if he
be a man in deed, and not rather the monsture of a man, had not rather to have
a little in the fear of god with a quiet and merry conscience, then to have
great abondance with gods anger and disquietnes of mind? namely, when this is
most certain, that such unmerciful Mammonistes have not only God their enemy,
their conscience a continual and unrestful accuser, all good men adversaries,
all poor men out cryers, cursers, and desyerers of vengeance to fall upon
them, but also they have the devil at hand with them, which so be wytcheth
them, and makes them such doltes, that they can not see what good and right
is, nor lift up their minds so much as ones to be thankeful to God for his
blessings, nor yet to consider for what purpose they were given them of God,
but remain in such blindness of mind, yt they know none other god, but Ma^mo^,
the riches and goods of this world, which so long as they abide safe, they are
safe, but if they ones decay, then is all their hope gone, so that through the
suggestion of Satan many of them fall unto desperation, hang up them selves,
drown them selves, cut their own throat, or otherwise rid the^ selves out of
the way, and at the last for abusing the blessings of God, and for their
unmercifulness they have their portion with the devil, whom they have so long
served, in that lake that burns with fire and brymstone. Apoc. ^^.
And this is the pain of this sacrilege, when the blessyng of God is turned
unto a pray of man's covetousness. The blessing of God is not to be cast away
by riot and prodigality, but to be kept and much made of, that it may help
in the time of necessity, and that through it, the better provision may be
made for the poor: Neither is it to be hourded up, but lyberally to be brought
forth unto the sustentation of the nedye, that we may not seem to have
received Gods gifts in vain, but rather unto such an end as he has
appointed, that is to say, unto our own necessary conforte, and unto the
relief of the poor and nedye, as it is written: He has dispersed abroad and
given to the poor: Psalm. 113.
Therefore his righteousness abides for ever and ever. Thus in this our gospel
we have heard a confortable doctrine, how we in all our necessities must have
an eye unto the Lord Christ, and unto his word, and altogether depend upon
the same, and look for blessing at his hand, nothing doubting, but that
whatsoever he has mercifully promised us, y^ same will he most bounteously
perform and give unto us. For he is a lord both of will and power, Romans 10.
and abundantly rich for so many as call upon him: yea he will grant us more,
then we dare be bold to ask, Ephe. 3.
such and so great is his mercy unto them, that faithfully believe on him. God
give us his grace, and bless us, that we may daily more and more increase in
godlynes, seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, believe his holy
word, and live according to our vocation, and calling, and in all our
necessities, miseries, afflictions and troubles, whether it be concerning food
or otherwise cleave unto him and to his gracious promises, always lokyng for
help at his most merciful hand, through our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom with
the father and the holy ghost be all honor and glory worlds without end.
Amen.

The fyueth Sunday in Lent. The Gospel John. viii.
Which of you can rebuke me of sin? If I say the truth, why do ye not
believe me? He that is of GOD, hears Gods words? Ye therefore hear them
not, because ye are not of GOD. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him:
say we not well that thou art a Samaritane and have the devil? Jesus
aunswerede: I have not the devil, but I honor my father, and ye have
dishonored me. I seek not mine own praise, there is one that seeks and
Iudgethe. Ueryly, verylye I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall
never see death. Then said the Jews unto him, now know we that thou have the
devil. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets, and thou say, if a man keep my
saying, he shall never taste of death. Art thou greater then our father
Abraham which is dead? And the Prophets are dead: Whom make thou thy
self? Jesus aunswerede: If I honor my self mine honor is nothing, it is my
father that honourethe me, which you say is your God, and yet ye have not
known him, but I know him, and if I say I know him not I shallbe a liar like
unto you. But I know him, and keep his sayinge^ Your father Abraham was glad
to see my day, and he saw it, and rejoiced. Then said the Jews unto him:
Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said
unto them: Ueryly, verily I say unto you, ere Abraham was borne, I am. Then
took they up stones to cast at him: But Jesus hid him self, and went out of
the Temple.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe Gospel of this present sunday is full of matter, and ministereth many
things to be considered, which all to handle at this present, time will not
suffer. Therefore will we chose out of it only this principal point, The word
of god is diligently to be heard.
namelye that Christ says, we ought gladly to hear the word of God: and that
he which hears the word of God, is of God. Contrariwise, he that hears not
the word of god, is not of god. These words are so symply and plainly spoken
of Christ, that no man will think, that they be of any great weight, or much
to be esteemed. But he that knows these things truly, searches and pondereth
earnestly, what this means, to be of God, or not of God, he shall soon
perceive, that the things whereof Christ here speaks, are of great weight
and singular importance. For this is certain, that man can have no greater
fault laid to his charge, Not to be of ^od is ye greatest misery that can be.
neither can he suffer any greater infamye, then to be reported that he is not
of God. All the displeasures that can chance to a man in this life, be they
never so grievous and many, are not to be compared to this, that Christ in few
words says to y^ Jews, ye are not of god, Therefore all the matter
consists in this thing, The despisers of gods word are the bond slaves of
satan.
that we hear the word of god, and keep it. For this is evident through the
whole story of the gospel, that they which will not here the word of God, but
speak evil of it, and blaspheme it, follow the devil, and, are obedient unto
him, which caryeth them whyther he will, and uses them to what purpose he
lysteth, and the longer the worse, as we may see in the Gospel of this
present Sunday. First the Jews are angrye, because Christ begins to
preach. Afterward they begin to speak evil and spiteful words of him,
calling him a Samaritane, and saying that he has a devil. The enemies of
gods word proceed from wickedness to wyckednes.
This might seem to be wicked enough. Not withstanding they proceed and go
forward with their wickedness, and ware still madder and madder. What make
thou, say they, of thy self? to be short, they give over themselfes so
greatly to all ungodliness and mischife that at the last they bend them selves
unto murder, and take up stones to kill Christ. Into this horrible wyckednes
are they fallen, because they despise the word of God, because they blaspheme
god and his word, and speak evil of the lord Christ. What is to be of the
devil.
And here ye see, what it is to be of the devil: verily, not to hear the word
of god, to blaspheme the true god, to speak ill of him, and to go about to
murder him: Of this sort in these our days are stubborn and disobedient
children, which will not obeir their pare^tes, Stubborn children.
but despise both them and their commandments. Afterward they go forward in
their wickedness: they curse their parents and rail on them. And although they
do not execute the very act of murder upon them, yet wyshe they their parents
dead, or else they them selves live so ungraciously, that their parents wyshe
them selfs rather dead then a live. And all this come to pass, because such
wicked children will not hear the word of god, nor endeavor them selves to
keep it. And thus goes it through out the world where they will not hear the
word of God, and frame them selfs to live according thereunto, as we may see
in evil speakers, liars, blasphemers, fighters, ruffins, and such other
wicked persons, which go forward daily more and more in their wickedness, till
at the last they come to a shameful end. Of this matter have we also
experience in the Papists, The tyranny of ye Papists.
which the longer they continewe, the worse and madder they are. They rail,
they speak evil, they curse, they blaspheme both the word and the preachers
thereof, and never cease from their furious madness and mad fury, till they
condemn the word for heresy, and the professors thereof for heretics and
Scismatikes, aprehending, them, casting them in prison, and afterward most
cruelly murderyng them with fire, The despising of gods word is the greatest
sin that is.
with sweorde, with halter, with water. Uerely the contempt and despising of
gods word is the greatest sin that may be. For in other sins when a man
offends, he may be reproved and taught to do better, and the guilty will
acknowledge and confess his fault, but in this sin, when the word of God is
contemned and blasphemed: the professors thereof are most miserably entreated,
and at the last most cruelly murdered: it is not possible, that the auctours
of this most abominable wickedness will suffer them selves ones to be
admonished of their faults, or be persuaded that they do evil. Yea they
think, they do well, and that in so doing they please god, and do god hye
service. As for the doctrine that they condemn, it is, say they, plain
heresy. John. 16.
And as touching the professors thereof, what other are they, then wicked
heretics, so wers of new doctrine, deceauers of the poor, scismatykes,
Apostatas, forsakers of the te^tes of Israel, enemies of our mother holy
church, troublers of the common weal, and at the last, what not? whom to
destroy and utterly to take away from the face of the earth, who is so far
estranged from the rule of reason, that will not judge it a most reasonable
and lawful act. Prou. 16.
Thus they please the^ selfs in their wickedness: They rejoice when they have
done evil, and joy in their sins, so far is it of, that they are ashamed
of their evil doing, where as in all other sins commonly the contrary is
found. Therefore it comes of the devil, not to hear the word of GOD, but
to blaspheme it, and to persecute the preachers of it. This wyckednes of the
Papists above all things must be eschewed of them, that hope for any part of
gods kingdom, otherwise nothing is to be looked for at the hand of God, but
anger, indignation, and at the last, death and damnation. For this is an hard
and grievous word, that Christ speaks here to the Jews: ye hear not the
word of god, therefore are ye not of God. For he that is not of God, is of the
devil, and is oppressed with the greatest plagues and pestilences, that can be
devised. No man can wish unto him a greater evil, then he is all ready fall
into. It is lamentable to consider, that this great and abominable sin is
now common almost among all states, The despiser^ of the word can not abide
to be reproved
I mean, the contempt of hearing gods word, and specially among them that
be of great authority. If a man say unto them: thou do not well, that
thou co^mest no ofter to the sermons. What do thou set them at naught? this
thing shows euidentlye that thou art not of god. The greatest part of the^
will answer on this manner: what have I to do with sermons? I know my self, I
trow, what is best to be done. If thou be importunat upon them, and tell them,
they must take an other way, or else they can not be saved: thou shalt find
them by little and little to be exasperate and moved, that they will rail upon
thee, and threaten the a displeasure, if thou hold not thy peace. This is such
an horrible wyckednes and grievous sin, that it makes any Christen heart to
tremble and to shake for fear, saying that da^mnation hangs upon it, as
Christ says: he that hears not the word of God, is not of god, but he is
the son of the devil: namely when they are so froward and wicked, John. 8.
that they will not only not do well, but they will also defend their evil, as
the Jews in this our Gospel do, and say: Say we not well, that thou art a
Samaritane, and have a devil? This is ye very devil, that chalengeth unto him
the honor of God, desiereth to be counted holy, and by no means suffers to
be reproved. And this is one part, that whosoever hears not gods word, the
same is not of God, but of the devil. But this is not so to be understand, as
though the devil had made them, and given them their mouth, eyes, What it is
to be of the devil
reason and so forth. Nay all such things are of Gods creation and gift.
Therefore must a man make a difference between the thing and the use thereof.
That man which lies and deceaueth, had a good tongue given him of God, but the
abuse of the tongue is of the devil, because he gives his tongue unto the
devil to be abused, even to blaspheme God and his holy word. So likewise God
gives hole and good eyes: But he that abuses them unto the contemplation and
beholdynge of vain, fylthy and unhonest things, that comes of the devil.
In like manner when the heart thincketh unclean and cruel things: the very
heart it self of the own nature is not evil, and is of god, but the evil use
thereof is of the devil. Contrariwise, that is understand to be of god, when
the ears are put to this use, that they hear the word of God, and can be
contented to be reproved, when they do amiss. Also when the tongue is occupied
in prayer, in teachinge, in edifyinge and confortynge other, such ears and
tongue are of God, and without fault. For they are put unto that use, What it
is to be of God.
for the which god made them. So in like manner, when the heart thincketh
honest, pure, chaste, and godly things, as how our neighbor may be edifyed,
and not offended, how Gods glory may be set forth and not hyndred: such an
heart is the creature of God, as the ears and the tongue likewise are, and
does right well please god* But they are therefore named to be of god, because
they would not, that these their me^bres should think, speak, and hear any
thing, that should be against God. And if it chance at any time that we fall
by speaking evil by being angry, etc. Yet we return again, we confess that
we have done amiss, The property of gods children when they offend.
and ask forgeuenes. This comes sometime to pass through the evil
behavior of other, or by chance, and sometime before we be aware of it. But we
repent us hereof, and make haste to come again into the right way, with a full
purpose never to fall into the like again. But they are the deuilles children,
which stubburnely go forth still on in doing evil, and if they be reproved,
they stoutlye and arrogantlye answer: what care I for it? as disobedient and
styfnecked children do, when they are corrected of their parents. These are of
the devil, and become daily worse and worse. For the devil, will not suffer
them to rest, nor to be quiet. The properties of the devils children.
First they despise the word: afterward they blaspheme, curse, and speak
evil: last of all after the manner of the Jews, they take up stones and go
about murder. By these properties the devils whealpes be known. For he is a
murderer, a calumniatour, John. 7.
an accuser, a pycker of quarelles, and a despiser of god and his word even
from the beginning. Therefore let this doctrine be a defense unto you against
this most abominable sin, that ye also do not despise the word of God, but
gladly hear it, and diligently exercise your self in the meditation and
study thereof both night and day, Psalm. ^.
and learn to frame your life according to the same. Then shall you be the
sons of God: other are the children of the devil. For they have lost the
word, life, righteousness, and are the very bond slaves of the devil. Neither
can this any thing at all help them, that they are of great power and rich.
In this sin stycketh the Pope even up to the hard ears, The pope is an
enemy of gods word.
with all his accomplices. For he is ever against the word of God, and for it
persecuteth and formenteth the Christians, more cruelly then the Turk does.
And by this may ye know that the devil is in him, and that he belongs unto
the devil with all his. But they that gladly hear the word of God, are of
god. Now what is god? he is no murderer but a creator and maker, from whom
all life comes. But the devil never made man nor gave him life. Therefore as
God is a living god, so likewise is he the very life of all them, that are of
him, and hear his word. This does Christ confirm here with this his notable
saying, worthy for ever to be remembered: The word of god delivers from drath.
berely verily, I say unto you, if any man will keep my word he shall never
see death. But what other thing is it, to keep ye word of God, then never to
depart from it? and to believe, that whatsoever Christ has promised us in the
gospel concerning forgeuenes of sins and everlasting life, is true, What it
is to keep the word of God.
and to remain in the same faith and hope unto the end, he that does this,
says Christ, has everlasting life, neither needs he to fear sin, hell,
nor the last judgment. For to such one, all is grace and mercy, death in
deed shall assault the faithful, and flea the bodies of them, Death.
yet shall they not feel it, as they do, which are under the power of the
devil, and dye without the word of God. For they die unwillingly, spurn
against death, The death of the wicked.
take on as though they were mad, rore out like lions, refuse death, and would
by no means dye, and yet dye must they. Yea if it were possible, they would
leap through a thousand fyres to escape death. But so shall not they do, says
Christ, that be my disciples, that hear my word and keep it. For when they
lie upon their bed and must dye, they shall have no such trouble, The death
of the Godly.
turmoyle, and disquietnes. They shall have joy and peace in their hearts
toward God, confortyng them selves with the hope of a better life to come, and
in that hope as persons fallen on sleep, swetely depart without fear or
tremblinge. For although death shall corporally flea them, yet shall that death
be so apalled and made of no force, that it shall not be felt at all, even as
though a man should swetely fall a sleep upon a soft pillow, as we many times
see in such as for then offenses are condemned to die. when they go to
suffer, being before well instructed in the word, and faithfully beleuinge the
same, they offer them selves gladlye, willingly and with a merry and cheerful
heart to dye. They fear not, neither tremble they, as these do (...) feel no
consolation nor conforte in ye word, for he that feleth death, and is not
armed with the word of god against death and the terrors of the same: he is
mad, wode, and frantike, and fares as though he were in desperation, What
commodities we have by hearing the word of God.
yea and possessed with the devil. Consider therefore, (O dearly beloved) what
a great treasure and precious Jewel ye get, when ye diligently and gladly hear
the word of God. The first is this, ye know ye ye are of god, and have
overcome ye devil and al his infernal army, and yt neither sin nor damnation
has any power over you. Moreover what soever should be objected against you
to the hyndraunce of your salvation, it can not prevail against you, but ye
shall easily overcome it. But contrariwise, the world with the least trouble
yt comes, waxes mad, is impacie^t and falls unto utter desperation. The
Christians undoubtedly in this world have many troubles. For ye world and the
devil hate the^ most extremely. Therefore are they at al times in danger of
life, The true christians are never free from the cross.
of goods, of fame, and of al yt ever they have. Now how shall they find
means, to suffer these things patiently? verily by none otherwaye, then by
holdinge fast the word, and cleauinge hard to the same, and saying: let it
go, as it will go. I am not of the world, but of god: for if I were of y^ world,
yt world would deal otherwise with me. But I had rather a thousand times, yt
world should hate and persecute me, then love me, and so fall out of the favor
and good will of god. Where the mind is thus affected and settled, all the
troubles and adversities of yt world pass away as a cloud, or as a bird
that is swyfte of wynge. They show them selves a little while unto us, but
straight way they are gone. Let this be your great and singular consolation,
that even in this life ye feel the power of y^ word: but specially then when
death comes, which now through ye faith that ye have in the word, is eue^ as
a sweet and pleasant sleep. Death to the faithful is sweet and pleasant
sleep.
And as he y^ walks i^ darkness, and perceaueth not ye theaues, is y^ sooner
oppressed and overthrown, yea and yt before he be ware, eue^ so goes it with the
faithful: the devil is the theife and mur? therer, and has sworn our bodily
death, so yt we ca^ not escape it, notwithstanding when we are enarmed with the
word, and hold fast yt, we shall scasely feel death, The word of god is a
strong bucklar ag^i^st adversity.
or any pain thereof. For the word sets men in a ioyeful and quiet state,
and makes their consciences chereful, merry and glad, so that they despair
not, when adversity come, neither make they any business, when they loose
their promotio^s and lyuinges, but keep patience in all kind of adversity:
yea when death come, they embrace it, and ioyefully receive it without any
fear at al, only this is their conforte, that for Christ's sake they have a
merciful father in heaven. For this they learn in the word, without ye word
they can learn nothing. If there were non other cause, that we should desire
the knowledge of gods word, but only to learn how we ought to take these daily
co^brances and adversities that chance unto us, it might worthily seem a cause
sufficient. But this is nothing in comparison of ye last misery, that comes
by death. For as concerning that, it is evident, Sap. 16.
that then there is no help in any physician or in any other thing. Christ
alone our Lord is he, which helps us, which also ought to be more esteemed of
us, then all the things in the world. But how goes it with us? when he
offers us this help and remedy, yea and brings it home to our own doors,
we despise it, and set naught by it. This therefore chances unto us worthily
afterward, that we be not of God, and so by little and little daily fall more
and more into more grievous sins, and become worse and worse, as it is
sufficiently before said. When such are at the point to dye, they can find
neither help nor council. And what remains there for all such, then
lamentation, fear, tremblyng, horroure, yollyng out, roaring, yea desperation
and damnation? Therefore this is the principal point of doctrine contained in
the Gospel of this present sunday, that we diligently embrace the word,
gladly hear it, and faithfully believe it. If ye do this, then shall ye
overcome sin, devil, death, hell, etc. And although death shall take you out
of this life, yet shall ye feel no pain of him, but it shall be unto you as a
most sweet and pleasant sleep. For the word of God is such a conforte and
present help, that it brings unto us a quiet life, a merry conscience, and
everlasting salvation. As for the ungodly and such as despise the word of
God, there can no more mischief be wyshed unto them, then they suffer all ready.
For seeing they hear not the word of God, they are not of God. As an unruly
child, which despyseth the commandment of God, cares not for his parents.
What can be spoken more unto his reproach, then that he is the son of the
devil, and not of God? This is not lightly to be regarded, or to be set naught
by. For it were better to be the bond slave of the Turk, or of any other most
barbarous and cruel tyrant, then to to be the captive and bondslaue of the
devil, which is an accuser, a calumniatour, a picker of quarrels, a murderer,
and seeks all means possible to cast us into utter destruction. Take heed of
this mischief, and dilygently consider with your selfs, in what great
reverence, and estimation ye ought to have the word of God. For there is none
other reskue, help, or remedy against everlasting death, devil, sin, hell.
etc. then to hold fast the word of Christ, that is to say, to believe his
promise and through faith in his word to have a sure hope of everlasting
salvation. For when Christ says: Of what word Christ speaks.
He that will keep my word, shall never see death. He means not the law
that God gave to the Jews by Moses. Which law although it be a true,
holy, and profitable doctrine, The law of Moses.
yet seeing we because of our vicious and corrupt nature can not obey that
doctrine, it is become unto us the ministry of death, and always reproves,
accuses, and condemns our sin before God. Therefore have we need of an
other word that we may be delivered from sin, and be justified before God.
And that now is the word of Christ where he says: He that believes in me,
The law of the Gospel.
shall never se death. This word must be apprehended and laid hand on with
a strong faith, so that we may by no means doubt, but that it is true, which
Christ promyseth. For he that refuses the word, and takes counsel of his
own devise, he shall find death and not life. Therefore in the agony of death,
not according to yt we fancy, but according to y^ which we hear in the word
must we judge and say. I see that I must die, but I hear the promise and word
of Christ my Lord, that through him I shall have life. For as touching sin,
for the which I must needs suffer death, it is utterly taken away by him,
Sin is the cause of death
so that God for his death and resurrection, will be merciful unto me, and
give me everlasting life. This is truly to keep the word of Christ. But it
is an hard thing to have this faith. For flesh and blood can not otherwise
be persuaded then as they feel and prove. Against this peruers and froward
reason must we strive, and ask of God his holy spirit, that he may stablishe
our hearts through the word, Faith is the gift of God.
that they may retain and keep the true Faith. What the cause is, why the
word of Christ is of so great efficacy, might, and power, Christ him self
shows in the end of this Gospel: And in this point he so greatly moves the
Jews, and stirs them unto anger, that they are ready to stone him unto
death. For this troubled the Jews, that Christ said, his word preserves
and defends from everlasting death, forasmuch as they saw, that Abraham
Moses, and other holy men, which be greatly commended in the holy scripture,
were dead. They thought that Christ was much inferior to them, and that it was
a matter worthy to be laughed at, that he should so much brag, boast, and
set out his word. But Christ answered: Abraham desired to see my day, he
saw it and rejoiced, that is to say: If Abraham had not kept my word, he had
dyed euerlastyngly, and ben damned for ever. Before Abraham was, says Christ,
I am. And that is thus much to say: I am almighty and everlasting God. Christ
God and man only sa^eth.
Now he that will be delivered from his sins, escape everlasting death, and
come unto everlasting life, he must be helped by me, and seek help at none
others hand but at mine alone. This could neither Moses nor any of the Prophets
speak truly of them selves. For they were all men. But Christ is god and man.
Therefore is he able to give life and everlasting salvation, and none but he
alone. This is a great consort and a most sure confirmation of our faith,
where we confess yt Christ is true and everlasting God, as we have the like
testimonies of this thing in many and diverse places of the Euangelical history,
yt our whole trust should be in him, and in his word, and in none other. For
this is ye word of god, and can by no means deceue us. What soever he speaks
is certain and sure, and is never void, but is as sure, as God by his word made
heaven and earth of nothing. Learn this diligently, and with thankful hearts
knowledge this inestimable benefit and pray yt God by his holy spirit may keep
you in ye truth of his word, and receive you into everlasting life through
Christ his son, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be all honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The Sunday next before Easter, commonly called Palm sunday. The Gospel.
Math. xxvi.
AND it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said
unto his Disciples: Ye know that after two days shall be Easter and the son
of man shall be delivered over to be crucified. Then assembled together the
chief Priests and the Scribes and the elders of the people, unto the Palace of
the high Priest (which was called Caiphae) and healde a Counsel, that they
might take Jesus by subtlety and kill him. But they said: not on the holy day,
lest there be an uproar among the people. When Jesus was in Bethanie in the
house of Simon the Leapor, there came unto him a woman, having an Alabaster
box of precious ointment and powered it on his head as he sat at the boorde.
But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation saying: Whereto serves this
wast? This ointment might have been well sold, and given to the poor. When
Jesus understood that, he said unto them: Why trouble ye the woman? for she
has wroughte a good work upon me. For ye have the poor always with you,
but me ye shall not have always. And in that she has cast this ointment on
my body, she did it to bury me. Ueryly I say unto you: Where so ever this
Gospel shall be preached in all the world, there shall also this be told that
she has done, for a memorial of her. Then one of the twelve (which was
called Judas Iscarioth) went unto the chief Priests, and said unto them?
What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they appointed unto
him.xxx. pieces of silver. And from that time forth he sought opportunity to
betraye him. The first day of sweet bread, the disciples came to Jesus,
saying to him: Where wylt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Passover?
And he said: Goo into the City to such a man, and say unto him: The master
says, my time is at hand, I will keep my Easter by thee with my disciples.
And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready the
Passover. When the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. And as they
did eat, he said: Ueryly I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
And they were exceadynge sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him: Lord is it I? He answered and said, he that dyppeth his hand with me in
the dyshe, the same shall betraye me. The son of man truly goes as it is
written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the son of man is betrayed it
had been good for that man if he had not been borne. Then Judas, which
betrayed him, answered and said: Master, is it I? He said unto him: thou have
said. And when they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said: Take, eat, this
is my body And he took the cup and thanked, and gave it to them saying: Drynk
ye all of this, for this is my blood (which is of the new Testament) that is
shed for many, for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not
drink hense forth of this fruit of the vine tree, until that day when I
shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. And when they had said
grace, they went out unto mount Oliuete. Then said Jesus unto them: All ye
shall be offended because of me this night. For it is writtene: I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad: but after I am
risen again, I will go before you into Galile, Peter answered and said unto
him: Though all men be offended because of thee, yet will I not be offended.
Jesus said unto him: Uerily I say unto thee, that in this same night, before
the Cock crow, thou shalt deny me thryse. Peter said unto him, yea though
I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee, likewise also said all the
disciples. Then came Jesus with them unto a farm place (which is called
Gethsemane) and said unto the Disciples: Sytte ye here while I go and pray
yonder. And he took with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebede, and began
to wax sorrowful and heavy. Then said Jesus unto them: My soul is heavy
even unto the death. Tarry ye hear, and watch with me. And he went a littell
farther, and fell flat on his face, and prayed, saying: O my father, if it
be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as
thou will. And he came unto the Disciples, and found them a sleep, and said
unto Peter: What, could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray that
ye enter not into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
He went away ones again and prayed saying: O my father, if this cup may not
pass away from me, except I drink of it, thy will be fulfilled. And he came
and found them a sleep again, for their eyes were heavy. And he left them,
and went again and prayed the third time, saying the same words. Then
commethe he to his disciples, and said unto them: Sleep on now and take your
rest. Behold the hour is at hand, and the son of man is be trayede into the
hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going, behold he is at hand that does
betray me. While he yet spoke, lo Judas one of the number of the twelve came,
and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, sent from the chief
Priests and elders of the people. But he that betrayed him, gave them a token,
saying: Who soever I kiss, the same is he, hold him fast. And forth with he
came to Jesus and said: Hayle Master, and kyssed him. And Jesus said unto
him: Friend wherefore art thou come? Then came they and laid hands on Jesus,
and took him. And behold, one of them which were with Jesus, stretchede out
his hand and drew his sword, and stroke a saruaunt of the hye Priests, and
smote of his ear. Then said Jesus unto him: Put up thy sword into the
sheathe, for all they that take the sword, shall perysh with the sword.
Think thou that I can not now pray to my father, and he shall give me euene
now more then twelve legions of Angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled? For thus must it be. In the same hour said Jesus to the
multitude: Ye be come out as it were to a thief with swords and staves for to
take me. I sat daily with you teaching in the Temple, and ye took me not. But
all this is done that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled. Then
all the Disciples forsook him and fled. And they took Jesus and led him to
Caiphas the hye priest, where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled. But
Peter followed him afar of unto the hie priests palace, and went in, and sat
with the servants to se the end. The chief priests and Elders, and all the
counsel sought false witness against Jesus) for to put him to death) but found
none, yea when many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came
two falls witnesses, and said: This fellow said, I am able to destroy the Temple
of God, and to buyld it again in three days. And the chief priest arose, and
said unto him: Answerest thou nothing? Why do these bear witness against thee?
But Jesus held his peace. And the chief Priest answe, red and said unto him: I
charge thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be Christ the
son of God? Jesus said unto him, Thou have said. Nevertheless I say unto
you, herafter shall ye se the son of man sytting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of the sky. Then the hye Priest rent his clothes,
saying: He has spoken blasphemye, what need we of any more witnesses? Behold
now ye have heard his blasphemy, what think ye? They answered and said:
He is woorthye to dye. Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him with
fistes. And other smote him on the face with the palm of their hands, saying:
Tell us thou Christ, who is he that smote thee? Peter sat without in the
Court, and a damosel came to him, saying: Thou also wast with Jesus of
Galilee. But he denied before them all, saying: I wot not what thou say.
When he was gone out into the Porche, an other wenche saw him, and said unto
the^^ that were there: This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. And again
he denied with an oath, saying: I do not know the man. After a while came unto
him they that stood by, and said unto Peter: Surely thou art even one of them,
for thy speech bewrays thee. Then began he to curse and to swear that he
knew not the man. And immediatlye the Cock crewe, and Peter remembered the
word of Jesus, which said unto him: Before the Cock crow, thou shall deny
me thryse: and he went out, and wept bytterly. When the morning was come, all
the chief Priests and Elders of the people healde a Councelle against Jesus,
to put him to death, and brought him bound, and delivered him unto Pontius
Pilate the deputy. Then Judas (which had betrayed him, seeing that he was
condemned, repented him self and brought again the.xxx. plates of silver to
the chief Priests and Elders, saying: I have sinned, betrayinge the Innocent
blood. And they said: What is that to us? See thou to that. And he cast
down the silver plates in the Temple, and departed, and went and hanged
himself. And the chief Priests took the silver plates and said: It is not
lawful for to put them into the treasure, because it is the price of blood.
And they took counsel, and bought with them a potters field to bury strangers
in. Wherefore the field is called Acheldema, that is the field of blood,
until this day. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Hieremye the
Prophet, saying: And they took.xxx. silver plates, the price of him that was
valued, whom they boughte of the children of Israel, and gave them for the
Potters field, as the Lord appointed me. Jesus stood before the Deputy, and
the deputy asked him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus said
unto him: Thou say. And when he was accused of the chief Priests and
Elders, he answered nothing. Then said Pylate unto him: Hear thou not
how many witnesses they lay against thee? and he answered him to never a
word, in somuche that the Deputy meruailed greatly. At that feast, the
Deputy was wont to deliver unto the people a prisoner, whom they would desire.
He had then a notable prisoner called Barrabas. Therefore when they were
gathered together, Pylate said: Whether will ye that I give lose unto you
Barrabas, or Jesus which is called Christ? For he knew that for envy they had
delivered him When he was set down to give judgment, his wife sent unto him,
saying: have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered this day
many things in my sleep because of him. But the chief Priests and Elders
persuaded the people that they should ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. The
deputy answered and said unto them: Whether of the twain will ye that I let
lose unto you? They said Barrabas. Pilate said unto them: what shall I do then
with Jesus, that is called Christ? They all said unto him: let him be
crucified. The deputy said: What evil has he done? But they cried more,
saying: Let him be crucified. When Pilate saw yt he could prevail nothing,
but that more busynes was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the
people, saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just person, se ye. Then
answered all the people, and said: His blood be on us, and on our children.
Then let he Barrabas loose unto the^, and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to
be crucified Then the soldiers of the deputy took Jesus into the common hal,
and gathered unto him all the company, and they stripped him, and put on him a
purple robe, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it upon his head, and a
reed in his right hand, and bowed the knee before him, and mocked him,
saying: Hail king of the Jews, And whenne they had spytte upon him, they
took the reed, and smote him on the head. And after that they had mocked
him, they took the roabe of him again, and put his own rayemente on him,
and led him away to crucify him. And as they came out, they found a man of
Cyrene (named Simon) him they compelled to bear his Cross. And they camme
unto the place, which is called Golgotha (That is to say, a place of dead
men's skulles) and gave him vinegar myngled with gaulle to drink. And whenne
he had tasted thereof, he would not drink. Whenne they had crucified him,
they parted his garments, and did cast lottes that it might be fulfilled,
which was spoken by the Prophet: They parted my garments among them. and
upon my vesture did they cast lottes. And they satte and wacched him there,
and set up over his head the cause of his death written: This is Jesus king
of the Jews. Then were the two thieves crucified with him, one on the right
hand, and an other on the left. They that passed by, reuyled him, waggynge
their heads, and saying: Thou that destroyedst the Temple of God, and dyddest
build it in three days, save thy self. If thou be the son of GOD, come
down from the Cross. Likewise also the hye Priests mocking him with the
Scrybes and Elders, said: He saved other, him self he can not save. If he be
the King of Israel, let him now comme down from the Cross, and we will
believe him. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him.
For he said: I am the son of GOD. The thieues also, which were crucified
with him, cast the same in his teethe. From the sixthe hour was there
darkness over all the land, until the nynthe hour. And about the nynthe
hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying: Ely, Ely, lamasabathany, That
is to say: My God, my God, why haste thou forsaken me? Some of them that stood
there, when they heard that, said: This manne callethe for Helias. And
streyghte way one of them run and took a sponge, and whenne he had filled
it full of vinegar, he put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. Other
said, Let be, let us see, whether Helias will come and deliver him.
Jesus whenne he had cried again with a loud voice, yealded up the ghost.
And behold, the veil of the Temple did rent in two parts, from the top
to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones rent, and graves
did open, and many bodies of Saints which slepte, arose and went out of
the graves after his Resurrection, and came into the holy City, and appeared
unto many. When the Centurion, and they that were with him watchynge Jesus,
saw the earthequake, and those things, which happened, they feared greatly,
saying: Truly this was the son of GOD. And many women were there, beholding
him a far of which followed Jesus from Galilee, mynistryng unto him: among
which, was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses, and the
mother of Zebedes children.

THE EXPOSITION.
THIS day is read in the Church, as ye have heard, the storye of the
paynefull Passion and dreadefulle death of our most loving Lord and sweet
Savior Jesus Christ. And although the passion of Christ ought at all times
and every day, By the passion and death of Christ we are delivered from the
power of Satan.
dylygentely to be remembered of us, and of every Christian, seeing it is that
only and alone precious treasure, whereby we are delivered and set at
liberty from all the power of hell, from Satan, sin, death, damnation.
etc. yet the aunciente Fathers of Christ's church in times paste have well
provided, that we should have every year a certain peculiar time appointed for
this purpose, in the which we might do and exercise this either privately or
publykely. For by this means shall the Passion of Christ be the more
dilygently inculked and beaten into the youth, and also be the more surely
engraffed in the memory of the Elder sort of people. Now, forasmuch as the
Passion of Christ has in times paste ben meruaylouslye abused by vain
meditations and cogitations of superstitious and ignorant hypocrites, we will at
this present leave all such vanity, and declare how the passion and death
of CHRIST ought trewely and profytablye to be considered, weighed, and
pondered, unto our synguler consolation and comfort, and also unto the
amendment of our life and conversation. This shall be brought to pass, if
we dilygentlye expende, weyghe, ponder, and consider these principal points
followynge. The conte^tes of this sermon.










First, the passion of Christ is none other thing, then an unmeasurable dolor,
sorrow, torment and pain, What the passion of Christ is.
which he of a singular and vnoutspekable love toward us for our sins, that
he might purge them, and utterly put them away through his satisfaction)
outwardly in his body, and inwardly in his soul sustained and suffered, till
at the last he died on the cross: which shall be opened and declared more
plainly herafter. Secondly, The causes that moved Christ to suffer.
there are five causes, that moved Christ to suffer his most dolorous and
peinful passion. The first is, our sin, which could none otherwise be cleansed
purged, and put away but only by the passion and death of Christ. The second
cause is, the great and vnoutspeakable charity, love, and favor, that Christ
and his heavenly father bore toward us men, which charity could not abyd,
that we should perish and be damned in our sins. The third cause is, the
everlasting council and providence of God, wherewith he determined by this
means to show his love, and to deliver mankind from sin. Genesis 3.
The fourth cause is the true and faithful promise which he made in times
paste. Out of the which afterward follows the blyndnes and indignation of
the Jews, which is the fyfte cause.

As touching the first cause, I mean our sin, the holy Prophet Esaie
speaks on this manner: The fyrst^ cause.
He was wounded even unto the death for our sins, and broken on pieces for
our wickednesses. Esa. 53.
In these words the Prophet declarech, wherefore Christ was so evil handled,
and so grievously punished, verily not for his own sin. For he is the only
begotten and derely beloved son of God, which never committed sin, neither
was there ever found any guyle in his mouth. 1. Pet. 2.
yea for our sin, for thyn and mine iniquity was he wounded and broken on
pieces. Therefore says the prophet: For our sin. Now that he says (Our) that
is, for the sin of all men did he suffer and die. For when he had ones taken
upon him our infirmities and diseases, then must he also die for our sins and
wickednesses, Esa. 53.
as the prophet says in the before recited chapter, the Lord has laid the
iniquity of us all upon him. And a little after the prophet speaking in the
person of God, says: For the sin of my people have I stricken and smitten
him. And in the end of this chapter he says: He bare the sins of many, and
paid for transgressors. David in like manner complains in a certain Psalm,
and speaking in the person of Christ says: The rebukes of them which rebuked
thee (he means the heavenly father) fell on me. Psalm. 69.
And a little before: I paid the things that I never took, We have grievously
offended God, dishonored his holy name, and greatly obscured his glory. All
this must Christ pay satisfy and make amends for it: 1. Pet. ^.
Therefore says Peter in his first Epistle: Christ suffered ones for our sins,
the just for the unjust. Hereof does it follow, that not only the Jews which
lived at that time, neither the soldiers, nor yet Pilate, Herod. etc. are
gilty of the passion and death of Christ, Romans 3.
but also all sort of us, which all without exception have sinned. For, for
Our sins was CHRIST slain and nailed on the Cross. Neither are we better
then they that crucified him. Although that the Jews did not know him as
the son of GOD, otherwise they would not have crucified the Lord of glory:
yet for all that, even of very malice and envy against him, ^. Cor. 3.
they laid hand on him as a gyltlesse manne, accused him, and flewe him. But
he had never come to that point, if our sins had not ben: for the which
he was stryken, Esa. 3.
wounded and slain. So likewise made we him to serve in our sins, Our syn
was the cause of Christ's death.
and through him much sorrow with our iniquities. Therefore let us no more be
angrye with that miserable caytife Judas, Pylate, Herod, Cayphas, Annas. etc.
as the manner heretofore has been: yea rather, let every man be angrye with
him self, accuse him self, and impute the fault to him self, as unto him,
which for his sins did cast Christ that innocent lamb of God into this most
horrible and intolerable pain.

Te second cause is, the exceeding great charity, The second cause.
love, and mercy of GOD, which he showed unto us miserable men and wicked
sinners without any merit or desert on our behalf, Romans 8.
wherwyth the heavenly Father being provoked, spared not only his begoteen
son, as Saint Paul says, but for us delivered him up even unto death. 1.
John. 4.
This declares Saint John in his Epistle, saying: In this thing has the love
of God appeared, that he sent his only begotten son into the world, that
we might live thorough him In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his son to make satisfaction for our sins. And Christ
him self says: John. 3.
GOD has so derely loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
son, to the end, that all that do believe in him, should not peryshe, but
have life everlasting. This Charytie and Love moved CHRIST alsoo to obey his
Father in this behalf, so that he came down into this world, and took our
sins upon him as the Prophet Esaie saeith: In his love and in his favor
has he redeemed them. Esa. 63. Romans 5.
And S. Paul says: God sets forth his love meruailously toward us in
this, that when we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. And Christ him self
says, No man has a greater love then this, John. 15.
that a man should give his life for his friends. Of these places of the
holy scripture tofore alleged, it appears evidently, that the second cause
of the death of Christ is, the love of God toward all mankind, whom our
miserable and wretched state, did so greatly move and strike with tender
compassion, that he sent his only begotten Son (which also of very love
toward man, Philip. 2.
obeyed his fathers will, even unto the death, the most ignominious and
spiteful death of ye cross) into this world, and gave him over into the
hands of sinners, that he by his death and passion might deliver us from
everlasting death and damnation. Whereof we may learn to love one an other, and
so to be minded one to an other, as Christ was minded toward us. ^. Epistle.
5.
Of this thing does S. John admonyshe and teach us in his Epistle, where he
says: In this have we known love, that he gave his life for us, and we ought
to give our lives for our brethren. Paul also in his epistle to the
Philippians, exhorts us, that after the examples of Christ we should humble
our selves, and serve one an other, even as Christ served us.

The third cause is, the everlasting councelle and providence of God, Acts. 2.
which by his vnoutspeakable wisdom, determined from everlasting to deliver
mankind by the death of his son, before the world was made, as Peter in his
sermon testifies, where he after many words of the crucifying of Christ, says
thus: Him (Christ) have ye taken by the hands of unrighteous persons, after he
was delivered by ye determinate council, and foreknowledge of god, and have
crucified and slain him. And Christ himself in the gospel tells
aforehande in many places, and gives his disciples forewarning, how that this
passion and death shall chance and comme unto him by the everlasting council
and decree of his heavenly father, John. 16.
as he said also unto Pilate: Thou should have no power at all over me,
except it were given thee from above.

The fourth cause is the faith and truth of God. The iiii cause
For when this council was determined from everlasting, then god would not have
it kept in secret, but did make open the same before, many times: and promised
that Savior in many places of scripture by his holy Prophets, as S. Paul
testifies in his epistles. This promise would god as ye everlasting truth
perform, Romans 1.
and according to his promise send the Savior, suffer him to be crucified and
slain, as witnesses. S. Peter in ye Chronicle of ye Apostles acts written by
blessed. Luke God, says he, has performed those things, Act. 3.
which he before declared by the mouth of all his Prophets. That Christ
should suffer etc. Christ also speaks thus after his resurrection with the
two Disciples, that were iourneying toward Emaus: It was necessary, that all
things should be fulfilled, Luke 24.
that are written of me in the law of Moises, in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms. What testimonies there are of the passion of Christ in the scriptures
of the old Testament, ye may easelye see in the Eua^gelicall history of the
passion and death of Christ, which I would wyshe you diligently to note for
the confirmation of your faith in this behalf.

The last cause is the induration or excecation and The.v. cause.
blyndnes of ye Jews which through their great co^tumacie and stubburnes, and
through their impenite^cie or vnrepe^tau^t heart, being forsaken of god, were
punished, and blinded yt they should hear and not understand, that they should
see with their eyes and discern nothing, Esa. 5. John. 12. Act. 28.
as it is written in the scriptures. By this means they flewe the son of
God, and so provoked the fyerce vengeance and hot wrath of God against them,
as the Apostle says: The wrath of God is comme on them, ^. These. 2.
even to the uttermost.

For although God from everlasting had determined that his son Christ
should suffer and dye, and it could none otherwise be, but as God had before
decreed, yet were not the Jews excused. For they found no cause of death in
him. Act. 13.
And although they did not know, that he was the son of God, yet they knew
this for a certentie, that he was a godly and innocent man, whom they of mere
envy and malice slew, as Pilate against him self testified this, saying: I
find no cause of death in him. Therefore they sought an other thing, John. 19.
then god did, which appointed his Son to suffer and to dye, that he by his
sufferance and death might deliver them that believe, from sin, death, devil
and hell, and that he by his resurrection might be glorified, and become of
most worthy renoume. But Satan with his members, the Scribes and Phariseyes
sought an other thing, even to slay Christ, to bring Christ to shame, and
utterly to root him out of remembrance, both him and his doctrine, that there
might be no more mention made of him. And so the wicked Jews through their
envy, their blinded heart, and their ungracious counsel executed contrary to
their will and device, the decree and determination of the heavenly father,
whereby through the mercy of (Christ dying for them) health and salvation
chanced to so many as believe. Yea the vugodlye Jews worthelye blinded, were
deceived of their purpose, and advanced Christ (whom they determined utterly
to destroy) unto glory, as it is written: The Lord brings the council of
the heathen to naught, Psalm. 33.
and makes the devices of the people to be of none effect. But the council of
the Lord shall endure for ever, and the thoughts of his heart from
generation to generation.

When we earnestlye consider these causes, then shall we see, how miserable and
damnable sinners we are, verily even such, as could none otherwise be saved,
but only by Christ, so that for us and for our salvation he must neees dye,
yea and that the most ignominious and spiteful death of the cross. Again, we
shall see the most brenninge heart and incomparable fire of the love of our
heavenly father and of his son Christ, which having no regard to our sins,
nor yet that we were his enemies, died for us, that we should not perish in our
sins.

Moreover we see, how faithful and true god is, God performs what so ever he
promises.
and that all his words and promises will take place and proceed against all
the violence, force, power, strength, craft and suttiltie of the devil and
the world, and that heaven and earth shall sonner fall, perish and come to
naught, then one jot or title of gods word shall be found untrue and false.
By the first we learn of the law, Sin heinous in the sight of God.
how great and horrible a thing sin is before the eyes of Gods majesty,
for the abolishing whereof, the only and innocent son of God must be
scourged, and dye so bitter, ignominious and spiteful death, yea and that only
to take away other men's sins. By the second we learn the Gospel and the
loving, gentle, and merciful heart of GOD toward us, which for us and for
our salvation sent his only begotten son that incomparable treasure into this
world, and suffered him to be nailed on the cross. By the third we learn
assuredly to trust and believe the promise of God, and not to fear the ungodly
and wicked persecutours, forasmuch as we see, that he has so faithfully and
so abundantly performed by his son all that ever he promised. Again, he has
confounded and brought to shame the devil and all his children of this world,
and has made frustrate and void all their devices, councels and imaginations,
in so much that where as they thought with this their work utterly to kyl,
confound and extinguish Christ, they have most of all advanced Christ unto
his great honor and glory, and by this means brought to pass, that all the
faithful shall receive salvation by this crucified Christ. For how could
Satan and the stifnecked Phariseyes think, that Christ by death unto life, by
burial unto resurrection, by ignominy and contempt unto glory and honor,
should be brought, and made king and ruler over all creatures both in heaven
and in earth? But mighty is the lord our God to perform his promise, and to
confound the world with his God the devil, as he both does and shall do even
unto the very end of the world. But now follows the third thing, Of
Christ's Pains both Inwardlye and outwardly.
which we ought to consider about the passion of Christ. This is how great
pain and affliction Christ suffered inwardly and outwardly. Of ye external
passion and outward suffering we have abundantly in the Eua^gelical history,
where we read, how he was taken, be spitted, whypped, beaten, crowned with
thorns, and at the last crucified and put to death. Of the inward passion and
suffrynge, that he had in his heart and conscience, when he must strive with
death, which was before his eyes, hell and devil, Luke writes in his gospel
on this manner: Luc. 22.
he was in an agony, and prayed the longer, and his sweat was like drops of
blood, trickling down to the ground. Of the which words the excedyng
great horror and torment, which Christ suffered in his conscience, may be
esteemed and judged, and how horrible the sight of death, of sin, which he
took on him, of hell and devil was before him, seeing that his sweat contrary to
al reason of nature was bluddye, and so came from him: Again, in that the
co^fortour and creator of all the world was cast into such necessity and
fear, that his father sent an Angel unto him for to conforte him, as Luke in
the aforesaid place does also testifye. That stryffe of death is fearful
beyond all measure, and takes away all strength of nature, as we see in
condemned persons, which are suddenly taken to be put unto death. What a
marvelous torment and anger appears there in them, til nature has made her
self captive to death, so that the pain and death it self may justly seem to
be nothing in comparison of that great agony, trouble and fear? How excedyng
great and unmeasurable it was in Christ, his bloody sweat that came from him
does manifestly declare, which thing was never done nor heard of any other.
This calamity and fearefulnes was afterward wonderfully increased, when he
hanging upon the cross was forsaken of all his disciples and friends: again,
mocked, scorn and spitefully rayled on of his enemies, in somuche that he
being in such an agony, cried out unto his heavenly father, saying: O my
god, O my God, why have thou forsaken me? whereof we may read more at large in
the xxij. Psalm of David. In the which psalm the Prophet has exactly
painted and set forth the bitter complaints and the afflicted conscience of
Christ miserable and forsaken: Psalm. 22.
where also thou shall find in what angore and affliction he was for our
sins. And here let us learn (as we said before) the high hatred, great
displeasure, and extreme wrath, that God bears against sin, in so much
that because of that he would not spare his only begotten and dearly beloved
son, nor yet forgive him, saying he took upon him the cause of other men's sins,
as we may see in the Prophet Esaye. And S. Paul says: Esa. 53. Romans 8.
He spared not his only begotten son. This signified Christ also, when he
spoke to the women on this wise: If they do this in a moist tree, what shall
be done in a sear and dry tree? As though he should say: Learn of me, Luke.
22.
which bear other men's syns, and in my self am innocent, righteous and holy,
what punishments ye have deserved, and what shall chance unto you, which by
nature are sinners and wicked, and can do nothing that good is. Therefore Christ
warns the women to weep upon the^ selves, which with their sins had
deserved that pain and punishment, that he now must suffer. In consideration
whereof s. Peter says: 1. Pet. 4.
If the righteous shall scaslye be saved, where shall the sinner and the
ungodly appear? for God has here plainly and evidently set forth before our
eyes in Christ his anger, wrath and displeasure against sin, saying that he
suffered the high goodness, innocence, wisdom justice, even his only
begotten son to to come because thereof into extreme poverty, pain,
contempt, and ignominy, as though he were ye greatest enemy that god has,
and such one as is not worthy to live on the ground. yea god did so show him
self toward him, as though he had given him over for ever and ever and would
never after be reconciled unto him, as Christ miserablye complains in the
xxij. psalm. And all this came to pass for other men's sins, which Christ
took upon him. O how horribly shall god avenge sins in them, that naturally are
prone and bent unto sin, Sinners.
and cane none otherwise then sin and do wickedly seeing he declared this so
severely in his son, in who^ notwithstanding he had a singular delight and
great pleasure? O how grievously shall he punish them, Math. 3.17.
which confess not their sins, yea which will be counted holy and
righteous, and will by no means receive Christ to be their sufficient Savior
and perfect redemer to purge and put away their sins, Hippocrites.
but will rather cleave to their own righteousness, to their own works, and
to the merits an intercessio^s of other? Therefore let all true and faithful
Christians diligently consider this matter, and with all study and labor
beware of sin and of the wrath of god, seeing it cost the son of God the
price of his life, saying also that for the aduoydinge of the same he was
enforced to suffer most grievous pain, great and bitter sorrow, and at the
last the most ignominious and shameful death of the cross, that by this
means he might apeace the wrath of GOD kyndled against man for sin,
deliver man from sin, reconcile man to his heavenly father, and make him
enheritour of everlasting glory.

Fourthly let us consider the fruits and profits of the passion and death of
Christ. For this is our joy and comfort, The fruits of Christ's passion and
death.
verily as they be great, so are they infinite and innumerable, if they were
diligently and at large wayghed, pondered, and considered, for Christ is that
true wheat corn, John. 12.
whereof he himself speaks in the Gospel of John, saying: verily verily I
say unto you, except the wheat corn fall into the ground, and die, it
abides alone. But if it dye, it bring forth much fruit. Of these many fruits
we will declare some, yea and those the chief and principal. For those being
known and perfectly believed, no man shall lightly waver in his conscience, nor
yet despair through pusillanimitie and wekenes of mind, but he shall be
conforted and lyfted up with a sure hope of the merits of Christ's passion,
and always stand firm and constante in all assaults of the enemy.

The first fruit of Christ's passion, is that Christ God and man by his death
has redeemed and delivered us from the curse of the law. The first fruits of
Christ's passion.
For saying the heart of man by nature is evil, and there is no man that does
good, but all sort of us before the judgment of God are sinners and liars:
the curse of the law by this means comes upon us, and condempneth us as
despisers and transgressors of the law, Gene. 6. Psalm. 13. Romans 3. Psalm. 115.
Deuteronomy. 27.
and says: Cursed be every one, that abides not in all things, that are
written in the book of the law, that he may do them. From this curse and
judgment of the law has Christ delivered us, which has taken upon him our
cause and satiified the law, that so many as put their confidence, faith, and
trust in him, he should make free from such curse, Christ by his passion
has delivered us from the curse of the law.
sentence and judgment of the law, and so by his death has redeemed and
delivered us from the law, so that it can no more condemn us, Gala. 3.
as saint Paul testifies in his Epistle to the Galathians, saying: Christ
has delivered us from the curse of the law, while he became accursed for our
sake. Now how Christ became accursed. Deuteronomy. 27.
Paul declares more at large and says: It is written: Cursed is every one,
that hangs on the tree. This sentence of the law was general over all, that
were crucified and put to death on the cross. Among whom Christ also came,
Esa. 53.
and outwardly suffered the ignominy and curse of the law, and was reputed,
taken and judged as a malefactor and wicked person. But Christ by suffrynge
unworthily the outward curse and conde^natio^ of the law, overcame and did
utterly put away ye inward curse and co^demnatio^ of the law: so yt for ever
after it ca^ no more bynd us, nor hurt so many as believe in Christ. For
although outwardly we are cursed, evil spoken of, despised and condemned, as
it chanced unto Christ, and must needs so likewise come to pass with us
(for we must be made comfortable and like unto Christ in bearing the cross)
yet inwardly we are free and blessed, Romans ^.
and the curse of the law can not prevail against us, Galat. 4.
neither can the law it self any more accuse us and condemn us. For if God
through Christ be with us, who can be against us? So likewise read we in
saint Paul's epistle to the Galathians: when the fulness of time was comme, God
sent his son, made of a woman, made subject to the law, that he might
deliver them, that were bound to the law. Christ for our sake fell into the
law, that is to say, into the pain of the law, that we might be delivered
from the same, and obtain that portion of enheritaunce, Es^. 55*
which is due to the sons of God. Whereof the prophet Esaye also says: ye
are freely bought, ye shall freely bedeliuered. S. Peter also says: 1. Pet. 1.
we are delivered by the precious blood of Christ that innocent lamb of God.

The second fruit and profit of the passion of Christ is, that by it we are
made free from sin: The second fruit of christ's Passion.
and it is in a manner all one with the first. For when we be free from the
law, then are we also free from sin: not that we sin not, or can not
offend, but that sin is no more imputed unto us, nor brought in against us
by the law. Therefore says blessed. S John in his epistle. The blood of Christ
makes us clean from all sin. 1. John. 1.
And Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews says, that the blood of Christ
purges our conscience from dead works to serve the living God. Heb. 9.
Again to the Corinthians he says: 2. Cor. 5.
God made him that knew no sin, sin for our sake, that in him we might be
made that righteousness, which is allowed before God. Christ for our sake was
made sin, that is to say, a sacrifice and oblation for sin, Deliuera^s from
syn by the passion of Christ.
and by this means has he reconciled us unto god, and made us before god, of
unrighteous, righteous, of sinful and wicked perfect and good.

The third frut of Christ's Passion.
Now forasmuch as we be free from the curse of the law and from sin: it
follows, that we also are free and safe from death, devil, and hell: which is
the third fruit and profit of Christ's passion. For seeing death is the
stipend and reward of sin, Romans 6.
as the Apostle says: and sin is abrogated and taken away from us by the
passion and death of Christ: Deliverance from death devil and hell.
it follows that death is also taken away, so that it has no power against
us. Therefore does Christ threaten death by the Prophet, Ose^. 13.
and says: O death, I will be thy death. For saying that Christ was the true
life, John. 11.
he could not be overcome of death, but he being ye noble co^querour and
valiant victoure of death, took away the stynge from death, and flewe hell, as
Christ him self says by the aforesaid Prophet: Osee. 13.
I will deliver them from hell, and from death will I make them safe, So was Satan
also cast out, John. 12.
as Christ says in the gospel of John, so that he can not execute against us
the pain of hell and death. 1. Pet. 1.
And all this is comme to pass, because Christ has fulfilled the law for us,
and purged our sins by the sprinklyng of his blood.

The fourth fruit and profit of the passion of Christ is, The fourth fruit of
christ's passion.
that we are not only delivered from the law, sin, death, hell and devil, but we
are also through ye merits of christ's passion received into the grace and
favor of god. For he has satisfied the father for us, and has reconciled us
unto him, as Paul testifies, saying: Romans 5.
when we were yet enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his
son. Again: 2. Romans 5.
God has reconciled us unto him by Jesus Christ. ones again: God the father
has delivered us from the power of darcknes, Coll. 1.
and has translated us into the kingdom of his well-beloved son. Yea we are
not only by the death of Christ reconciled and set at one with God the Father,
We are reconciled to God the father by ye passion and death of Christ.
but also with all the Angels and heavenly spirits. For when the father
through his son favors us, and is merciful unto us, then do al creatures
the same through him, and be at concord and perfect agreement with us, as S.
Paul says: It pleased the father that all fulness should dwell in him, Coll.
1.
and by him to reconcile all things unto himself, pacifying by the blood of
his cross things both in heaven and in earth. And ye which some time were
far of, and enemies in your mind through evil works, has he now reconciled
in the body of his flesh by death, that he should make you holy, blameles,
and without fault in his sight. And in many other places it is declared, how we
are reconciled and set at one with the father, and made heirs of the kingdom
of heaven through Christ.

The fyfte fruit and profit of the passion of Christ is the new testament,
The fyfte fru^t of christ's passion.
which he promises unto us, and bequethe unto us remission of sins, sealed
and confirmed with the death and blood of Christ, as it is written: He is the
mediator of the new Testament, that through death which chanced for the
redemption of those transgressions that were in the first Testament, Heb. 9.
they which were called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.
In the new testament confirmed by the death of christ is bequethed unto us
remission of sins.
For whersoeuer a testament is, there must also be the death of him that
makes the testament. For the testament takes authority, when men are dead:
for it is of no value, as long as he that made it, is a live. Of these words
it evidently appears, that the new testament (wherein we have remission of
sins) is sealed and ratifyed by the death of Christ. Mat. 26. 1. Cor. 1.
Therefore does Christ call the cup, the cup of the new Testament in his
blood, which is shed for remission of sins.

The.vi. fruit of Christ's passion.
Last of all, Christ with his death and passion has gotten unto us this fruit
and profit, that our cross and suffrance pleases GOD, that after this it
should no more be a cursyng or pain, but an holy blessing and mortifying of
our old Adam and wicked flesh. And by this means our tribulation,
persecution, and death is an holy and acceptable sacrifice unto god. Our
sufferings please God.
And all this comme to pass through the merit of Christ and his death, as
Paul says to the Romans: Those which he knew before, Romans 8.
he also ordained before, that they should be like fashioned unto the shape of
his Son, that he might be the first begotten son among many brethren. As
the sacrifice of Christ and his death was a pure and acceptable sacrifice to
god: Psalm. 116.
so likewise the death of all the Christians shall be an holy sacrifice to god,
not for the dignity of it self, but for Christ, of whose fulness all we have
receued, eue^ grace, for grace.

Now forasmuch as we know the fruit and profit, and also the whole work,
John. 1.
that CHRIST has brought to pass by his passion and death: let us now at
the last learn also, how we may be made partakers of the same, and
fromhensforth so frame our life and compose our manners agreeable thereunto, that
we may follow Christ our Savior, and be known to be like unto him, yea and
his very disciples.

Uerely then shall we be partakers of the benefits of Christ, of the fruits
and profits of his passion, How we may be made partakers of the fruits of
Christ's Passion.
when we believe, that we all were damned sinners: again, that Christ even of
merry love and favor unto our profit and singular commodity without all our
merit and deserte, suffered all that ever he suffered: Item, that by none
other mediator nor work, but by Christ alone and by his merit we can be
saved, Romans 8.
so that the passion, death, resurrection, life, righteousness, and innocence
of Christ, with all that ever he has, is our own, and freely given unto us of
our heavenly father. Wherefore saint John says: he gave them power to be made
the sons of God, John. 1.
even so many as believe in his name. It is certain and sure, that none can be
the son of God, except he be holy, godly, and righteous. But this can we not
be of our selves, of our own strengthes and works. Therefore he says, that
Christ gives this unto us. It then follows, that by Christ we have received
that, which we had not before, neither could we deserve to have it with our
works. Whereby then did this chance unto us? verily by faith. By faith are we
made the sons of God.
For John says. That he gave them power to be made the sons of god, eue^ so
many as believe in his name. This power then have they only yt believe, not in
their own works and righteousness, but in the name of Christ, which is Jesus,
that is to say a Savior, even that they should believe, that he is the only,
alone, and true savior, without whom we can do nothing, John. 15.
and without whose merits all our works, although never so holy and good, are
damnable and cursed. Thus by faith we do all our things. By faith, Faith in
christ obtaynethe all good things at the hand of god.
yea by faith alone we obtain all that ever Christ has, and are partakers of
the same, as his innocence, holiness, righteousness, wisdom, perfection, the
kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life: not that faith is our work, and
therefore so nobly recompensed, The nature of faith.
but that it is the hand, organ, and instrument, wherewith we take and lay
hand on Christ our Savior. For all thing is prepared, given, and
purchassed for us before, and faith does no more, but take and embrace this
benefit, cleueth surely unto it, and doubts not, but that Christ has
obtained and performed al things for her. For Christ is freely given unto us to
be our savior, Romans 3.
who^ ye father has set forth unto us to be our mercistocke, so that whosoever
will have and enjoy everlasting salvation, There is no salvation but by fayethe
in Christ alone.
must have and enjoy it by Christ, and by none other. Therefore ought we all to
lay hand on him with a strong and unshaken faith. But he that will not lay
hand on him, and receive him as his one, only, alone, and omni sufficient
Savior, but stick to his own works and righteousness, he without fail shall be
damned for ever and ever. John. 1.
For to this end have we Christ given us of god the father to be our Savior,
that by him we should have power. to be made the sons of God, I mean al
such as believe in his name, deny and forsake them selfs and their works,
and only joy, rejoice, and glory in the name of Christ, wyshing and
desieringe only by that name to be made holy and acceptable before the presence
of gods majesty.

When we have thus through faith and confidence in Christ Challenged unto us
Christ and all his merits, The life and manners of Christ are to be followed of
all true Christians.
with all the fruits* commodities and profits, that he gat either by his life
or by his death, as our own and proper goods: then let us also endeavor our
selfs to set CHRIST before us as an example, whose life and conversation, whose
acts and deeds, we in our life and conversation, in all our acts and deeds,
ought to follow. For although (as we heard before) we deserve nothing by our
works, yet may we not be without good works in this life. Christ a savior
and an Example.
Therefore let us frame all our life and all that ever we do after the example
of CHRSIT, whom the scripture sets forth unto us two manner of ways.
First, as a Savior. And this is the principal part of our righteousness.
Secondlye as an example, Romans 6.
that with him we should mortifye and slay old Adam, as saint Paul says:
So many of us as are baptized in Christ, are baptized into his death: that is
to say: that we should crucifye with him our flesh and wicked lusts,
suppress them, and give no place to the lewd appetite of the flesh. So do we
declare our selves to be true Christians, as the Apostle sayethe: Galat. 5.
They that belong unto Christ, have crucified the flesh with the affectes and
lusts thereof. For he that truly knows sin, and the wrath of God against
sin, and how dearly Christ boughte us therefore, The property of a true
Christian.
and paid our ransom that we might be delivered from it: will undoubtedly
hate sin from the very botome of his heart. And when he shall not be able
to resist it, it will maruellously trouble him. Yea he will be inwardly sorry,
and study all means possible, how he may repress that sin, and be able to
tame and restrain that wicked flesh. Again, if he truly believe, how louinge,
merciful and gentle god has showed himself toward him through Christ our
Savior, and how god has pleasured him freely and without deserving: he shall
greatly be provoked and styrred up to labor and to study, Math. 5.
how he may serve and please god again, and for his sake love his neighbor,
whom god has commended unto him, not only if he be his friend, but also
though he be his utter ennemie. Romans 5.
For Christ received him, and by his passion and death saved him, even then
when he was his enemy.

Galat. 5.
Thus does the true, diligent, and earnest consideration of the passion of
Christ work in us true fruits and good works, that is to say, the
mortifying and crucifying of old Adam, as Paul says. They that have put on
Christ (he means by faith) or, 2. Cor.
they that be of Christ have crucified their flesh withal her concupiscences:
yea if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: so that we in the passion,
cross, and death of the old man, Romans 8.
should be made like to Christ, to his passion and death. For so has god
ordained. Thus briefly have we declared, how we ought truly to consider the
passion of Christ with the fruits and causes thereof: By the which passion and
death we are delivered from Satan, from sin, The benefits that we have gotten
by the passion and death of Christ.
from the curse of the law, from desperation, from death, from hell, from the
wrath of God, and from everlasting damnation, and are translated and removed
unto the heavenly country, that glorious kingdom of the most glorious God.
Last of all, we opened unto you, how we ought by faith to take and challenge
unto us those most singular and inestimable benefits, and so form and frame
our conversation and life after the example of Christ, that it may outwardly
appear, that we be the thankful disciples of Christ, and the faithful and
loving children of the heavenly Father. And for as much as we can not do this
of our own strength and power, let us most humbly pray unto God, that he for
Christ Jesus sake, may give us his strength and spirit, that we may live
before him in pure faith and unfeigned love, and in the great day of the Lord
appear fautlesse among the dear and well-beloved children of God, and so hear
out of his mouth which suffered and dyed for us, this most sweet and
comfortable saying: 1. Cor. 1^.
Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom which was prepared for you
from the beginning of the world. To this lord CHRIST our alone Savior and
most perfect redemer, with God the father, and the holy ghost, our most sweet
conforter, be all honor, glory and praise for ever. Amen.

The Gospel on Easter day. John. xx.
THe first day of the Sabbothes came Mary Magdalen early (when it was yet
dark) unto the Sepulcher, and saw the stone taken away from the grave Then
she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved,
and says unto them: They have taken away the Lord out of the grave, and we
can not tell where they have laid him. Peter therefore went forth, and that
other disciple, and came unto the Sepulcher. They ran both together, and that
other disciple did outrunne Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher. And when
he had stowped down, he saw the lynnen clothes lyinge, yet went he not in.
Then came Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulcher, and saw the
lynnen clothes lie, and ye napkyn that was about his head, not lying with the
lynnen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also
that other disciple which came first to the Sepulcher, and he saw and
believed. For as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he should rise again
from death. Then the Disciples went away again to their own home

THE EXPOSITION.
IN as much as this day according to the ancient and commendable custom of
Christ's church we celebrate the laudable feast and worthy memory of the most
noble and victorious resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ: The true
keeping of holy days.
it is mete and convenient, that we speak and entreat of the same at this
present. For the true sanctifying and halowing of feastfull days consists in
the true worshippyng of God, which is none other thing, (prayers and thanks
giving ones done) then to exercise the word both in preaching and readyng. We
therefore at this time will make our conference according to the time, of the
glorious resurrection of our most loving Lord and sweet Savior Christ Jesus.
And in this our conference we will first of all consider, what manner of
Resurrection, the risyng again of Christ from death unto life was. After that,
we will declare, what utility and profit, what fruicte and goodness, the
most victorious and triumphant Resurrection of Christ has brought unto us,
as we have to fore showed of his Passion and death.

As touching the first, The resurrection of Christ
let us not think that the resurrection of Christ was a common resurrection
from death, as was the Resurrection of Lazarus, but besides this, John. 11.
that Christ rose again in the flesh, and corporallye: he also spiritually
became the Lord of death, and overcame it, and brought with him everlasting
life, so that all that believe, are risen again with him, and have overcome
death. And by this his resurrection he has not only obtained a temporal
life, but also a spiritual life. For as he before by the temporal death of
the Cross, did slay and utterly abolyshe the spiritual death of sin and
hell: So he likewise by his resurrection has not only recovered and brought
again the temporal life and quietness, Christ is risen again two manner of
ways.
but also everlasting life and perpetual joy. Whereof we may learn, that
Christ is risen again two manner of ways. First, after the flesh, by the
which Resurrection he made his dead body, quick: his despised body,
glorious: His weak and feeble body, mighty and strong: his natural body,
supernatural, and spiritual. Of this resurrection we read in many places of
the scripture. Math. 2^. Marc. 16. Luc. 24. John 20.21. Acts. 1.2.^^.
Among all Paul has these words in the chronicle of the Apostles Acts,
where he speaks on this manner: And we show unto you, that ye promise, which
was made unto ye fathers, God has fulfilled to their children, even unto us,
in that he raised up Jesus, as it is written in the first Psalm: Thou art my
son, this day have I begotten the. And in his first epistle to the
Corinthia^s, he says, that Christ after his resurrection was seen of more then
of five hundred brethren. 1. Cor^ 15.
And moreover that he showed himself before to the.xii. and to many other
brethren, as we may see plainly written in the Evangelists.

Secondly, there was in Christ also an inward and spiritual resurrection, in
that he escaped from the horror of death, hell, syn, and the wrath of God, and
came unto everlasting joy, life, health, peace, and gladness. Of this he
glories and speaks by ye mouth of that prince like Prophet, saying: Thou
haste made the ways of life known to me. Thou shall fill me full of gladness
with thy countenance. Psalm. 6.
Again: Thou have turned my heuines into joy: thou have put of my sackclothe,
and girded me with gladness. Psalm 30.
All these ar gratulations, reioycinges and thanks geuynges, that God the
heavenly Father has delivered his son Christ from ye horror of hell and
death, and not him only, but also with him and through him all faithful
christians. Whereof we shall speak more largely hereafter.

How the resurrection of Christ was don according to the history: how he rose
again on Easter day betymes in the morning, before the son was up: and how
the women found the sepulcher empty: Again, how they were conforted of the
Angel, and admonished of his resurrection. This with diverse other things
appertaining unto the resurrection of Christ, ar diligently written of the
four Evangelists: and ye your selves have hertofore both heard and red them.
Therefore at this time we will speak nothing of that matter: but we will
rather declare and set forth unto you the profits and fruits, which Christ
has gotten for us by his glorious and royal resurrection: and open unto you,
how we ought to enter into a new life with Christ.

But before we come unto this matter, let us speak somewhat of the innocence
and Godhead of Christ by the which he myghtily brake the chawes of hell,
Christ innoc^nte and free from all synn.
and braste on pieces the paunche of death, and so valiantly, victoriously and
triumphantly rose again from death. Now for as much as CHRIST was in all
points pure and innocente, and utterly without all sin: Death, and hell
could by no means overcome him: Romans 6.
For seeing that death is the reward of sin, as the Apostle says: and
Christ had no sin at all: so doothe it right well follow, that death had
no power over Christ, and that it assaulted him without cause, and therefore
death lost his right, because without cause he abused Christ being
innocente and free from all sin. The Innocencye therefore of Christ was the
cause, that death and hell (they only have power over sinners. For, Romans 5.
for sin entered death into the world) could not retain, hold, and
devour him, but that he must needs return unto life, and rise again
from death.

Besides this innocence, Christ also had this, Christ true and natural God,
that he was the true and natural son of God: and therefore could not he be
retained and holden of death, nor yet of hell, or of any other kind of
myserie, as he him self glories and rejoices of this power, saying, That
he has power to give over his life, and also to take it again. Joan. 10.
And that no man takethe his life from him, but he gives it over of him self
Which is none other thing then if he should say: I am GOD, and the Lord both
of death and of life, and I handle them, as I my self list. Therefore Saint
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans writes, that by this he was declared to
be the Son of GOD, Romans 1.
whenne he rose again from death. For no man can escape death, as David
says: What manne is he that shall live, Psalm. 89. Heb. 9.
and not see death? And Saint Paul to the Hebrews says: That all men
must needs ones dye, and after that comes the Judgment: Seeing then that
Christ was not only man, but also very GOD, the Creator and life geuer of all
creatures, Joan. 14.
yea, the life it self, as he him self testifyeth in the Gospel of Saint
John: It was not possible for death and hell to retain and overcome him, as
S. Peter records in the Chronicle of the Apostles Acts, saying: Whom (he
means Christ) God has raised up, Act. 2.
and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was impossible, that he should
be holden of it. For seeing he was the holy one of God, he could not abide in
hell, neither could his flesh see corruption: Psalm 15.
As S. Peter strongly proves out of David. By this it is an easy thing to
answer that question, how this may be, that the passion and death of
Christ, and the sight of the infernal damnation, wherein Christ was but a
short time, Qu^stion.
could be a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole world which
notwithstanding after the severe judgment of God ought to have been punyshed
with everlasting pain and endless damnation. I answer: This satisfaction is
of an incomparable force, Answer.
might, strength and power, and has a marvelous energie and perfection
because of the person of Christ. For seeing Christ was true God and true man
(the God head and the manhood joined in one person) and yet took upon him this
work of our redemption, the peyn, The sufficienc of Christ's sacrifice.
which Christ God and man suffered, ought worthily to be judged and taken to be
of such excellency and dignity: again, of so great and such inestimable
price (that it ought to be esteemed (as it is in deed) sufficiently great and
large enough to the vttermoste for the sins of the whole world. For as the
sin of man, wherewith the noble majesty of God is contemned and dishonored
ought to be punished with perpetual and everlasting pain: Note well.
so in like manner ye punishment which ye son of God took upon him, ought to
be (as it is undoubtedly) sufficient, full, and perfect, for all yt believe on
him, and seek their salvation in his most blessed and glorious name. For the
divine majesty is of so great glory, yt worthily all that offend it, suffer
everlasting pain: and again, all, for whom it came into so great ignominy and
torment, and supplied their duties should have everlasting joy and gladness, and
enjoy the same worlds without end. EPhe. 5.
Seeing then that Christ Jesus ye true son of God, of one substance and glory
with ye father, has offered himself an oblation and sweet smelling sacrifice to
god, and by his death and passion has satisfied for our sins. The sacrifice
of Christ's. death abides in full str^nght for ever.
It is reason yt for the worthynes of his person, which was both god and man,
it should be also everlasting and sufficient for evermore. For consider how
great, worthy, high, infinite, and everlasting the person was, that sustained
this pain: so great worthy, high, infinite, and everlasting is this work of
our redemption and satisfaction wrought by Christ, and must endure and remain
for ever and ever in full force and strength for so many as repent and believe
in his name. Now forasmuch as we know that Christ for his innocence and
Godheade rose again from Death unto life: we will briefly rehearse the
fruicts, profytes, and benefits, which he has purchased, gotten and deserved
for us by his victorious, triumphaunt and glorious resurrection. What soever
Christ by his death and passion has gotten and deserved for us, that did
he afterward receive by his Resurrection, and brought with him, so that the
fruits of Christ's resurrection, The Fruits of Christ's resurrection.
do not much differ from the fruits of his Passion. We will therefore
speak and entreat of them brefely at this present, for as much as we have
somewhat largely spoken of them, when we handeled the Passion of CHRIST our
Savior.

The First fruit.
The first fruicte and profit of Christ's resurrection is, that by it we have
remyssion of sins, although we feel them in us, Remission of sins.
and are not utterly free from them. For when Christ dyed for us, and yet
remained not in death, which must needs have comme to pass, if he could
not have satisfied for sins.) It followethe, that he by his Resurrection
brought with him Remyssion of sins, and gave the same unto us, as blessed
Paul proves in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.
saying: If Christ be not risen again from the dead, then is your faith
vain, and you are stylle in your sins. And again: But now is Christ
risen again from the dead, being the first fruits of them that were fallen a
sleep. For by manne came death, and by man comes the Resurrection of the
dead. As by Adam all dye: so likewise by Christ, all shall receive life. 1.
Cor. 13. Osee. 1^. Heb. 2.
Afterward, the Apostle mocketh death and says: O death where is thy
stynge? The stynge of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But
thanks be to GOD, which has given us the victory thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ. Hereof it is evident, that Christ by his death has slain sin, as we
heard in the Sermon of the Passion) and by his Resurrection he has brought
with him remission of sins, because all the faithful are with him risen
again from sin, so that from hensefoorth sin can not hurt them,
although while they are in this wicked mortal body, they can not be free
from it. For Christ brought with him out of his grave, remission of sins.

The second fruicte follows of the first, and it is this, The second Fruit.
That Christ by his Resurrection has abrogated the Law, that is to say,
has delivered and set at liberty our conscience from it, Abrogacion of the
law.
and has given our hearts peace, tranquillity, and quietness. For seeing
that Christ by his Resurrection has slain death, which is the stypende of
sin, Romans 6.
and has brought with him unto us, remission of sins: it necessarily
follows, yt he has also abolished the strength of sin, which is the law,
that it can no more accuse us. Therefore says Paul, 1. Cor 15.
The law of the spirit, that is to say, the Gospelle, which quickens,
has delivered me from the power of sin and of death. The quickenyng of the
Gospel, Romans 8.
or in that the Gospelle quickens and makethe alive, it has his strength,
power, and efficacy of the Resurrection of Christ. For if Christ had not
risen again, 1. Cor 15.
then all our preaching, and all our Faith had been vain.

The third fruict of Christ's resurrection is, The third fruit.
that we by his Resurrection are delivered from death. In consideration
whereof, Paul glories with the Prophet Osee, saying: Death is swalowed up
into victory. 1. Cor. 15. Osee. 13.
As though he should say: The glorious and victorious resurrection of Christ
has swalowed up, Deliverance From death.
devoured and abolyshed death, so that death from hensforth can do nothing at
all against us. And his cruel and terrible sight is none other thing then an
hornet with out a stynge, which looks terribly, and with her wings makes a
great and dreadful noise, but yet has she lost her styng and prick, so that
she can hurt or wound no man. Our Savior Christ says: I am the resurrection
and the life: He that believes in me, although he were dead, Joan. 11.
yet shall he live. And all that lives and believes in me, shall never dye. By
the which words, Death to the Faythefull is no thin geelles then a sleep.
Christ signifies, that death to the Faithful is nothing else then a sleep.
For as he that sleapeth, lives, and may rise again: so likewise he that
believes, although he dye corporally, yet abides he not in death, but
returns unto life. yea death is unto him a very gate, Note well.
whereby he passes out of this miserable and sorrowful life, unto a true and
an everlasting life, and is raised up from this sleep, so that for ever after
he waketh, 3. Reg. 2. 4. Reg. 20. Act. 7.
and abides alive worlds without end. Therefore the holy Scripture callethe
the corporal death of the Faithful, a sleep, as we read in many places of the
old and new Testament of David, Ezechias, Stephen, and other holy Saints.

The fourth fruit,
The fourth fruict of Christ's Resurrection is the deuastation or destruction
of hell, so that now we are free and safe from everlasting pestilence and
curse. 1. Cor. 15.
For if CHRIST (says Saint Paul) be not risen again, then they, which are
fallen a sleep in Christ, The destruction of hell.
are utterly lost. Of the which words it follows, that all they are
blessed, which sleep in Christ, for as much as he is risen again from
death. And therefore does both the Prophet Osee, and the blessed Apostle
saint Paul mock hell, Osee. 13. ^. Cor. 15.
and say: O hell, where is thy victory? And the Apostle streyghte way
adds: Thanks be unto GOD, which has given us the victory through Jesus
Christ. If Christ had remained in death, then had all we perished, as the
Apostle says. But for as much as he remained not in death, therefore are we
not lost, but with him we are escaped out of hell, and made joyful and
blessed.

The fyfth fruicte and profit of Christ's Resurrection is, The fyfte-fruite.
that CHRIST risynge again from the dead, has gotten for us the victory
over Satan, and all his kingdom with all his members also, as it is written:
Heb. 2.
Christ by his death has expelled him which had lordshyppe over death,
that is to say, Uictori over Satan and his kingdom.
the devil, that he might deliver them, which through fear of death
were all their life time subdued unto bondage. Christ by his Resurrection has
taken away all power from Satan: so that now he can no more exercise his
tyranny against the elect and chosen people of GOD. For Christ has taken
him prisoner, Luc. 11.
and taken his weapons away from him, bound him, and so utterly weakened him
that he has no power at all. And this his victory did he in his
Resurrection myghtylye declare, when he led away captyue all the rulers of
hell, as Saynct Paul says: Coloss. 2.
He has spoiled rule and power, and has made a show of them openly, and
has triumphed over them in his own person. And of this victory against
Satan, it is recorded in a certain psalm of David, where it is comanded, Psalm 24.
yt ye gates and doors should be set open, that the King of glory may
come in. And the rulers and Princes of hell demand and say: Who is this king
of Glory? The Prophet answers them, saying: It is the Lord of Hosts. He
is the king of glory. And of this victory Christ also speakethe in a
certain Parable, saying: When a strong manne armed watches his house, the
things that he possesses are in peace. But when a stronger then he comes
upon him, and overcomes him: Luc. 11.
He takes from him all his harneys, wherein he trusted, and deuydeth his
goods. So likewise the devil possessed the world, and showed his power, A
declaracion of ye parable.
in mainteynynge false worshyppynge of GOD, and diverse kinds of Idolatrye, and
by this he stablyshed his kyngedome, and greatly increased the swarm of
wicked and damned persons, until CHRIST, which was stronger then he,
invaded his kyngedome, and took from him his harneisse, armor, and weapon,
that is to say, sin and death, wherewith he ouercamme the whole world, and
made spoil of them, and by this means delivered all the faithful and elect
people of GOD out of his kingdom and set them free from his tirannie and
power.

The sixth fruict of Christ's resurrection is, the preaching of the Gospel.
The Syxte fruit.
For although he did preach the Gospel to his Disciples, and to his
countreymenne the Jews before his death: Preaching of the Gospel.
yet gave he out no Commyssion, that it should be generally and
universally preached to all Nations, till after his Resurrection. Therefore
(says he in the Gospel of Mathewe: All power is given unto me, both in
Heaven and in Earth: Math. 228.
Go ye therefore throughout the whole world, and teach all nations, baptising
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy ghost. He
that shall believe, Mar. 16.
and be baptized, shall be saved, But he that shall not believe, shall be damned.
This is a most noble gift, which no man is able sufficiently to express or
to esteem. For all had been frustrate and void, if it had not ben publyshed
and set forth abroad. Romans 10.
For how could we believe on Christ, of whom we had not heard? as it is
written: But how shall they hear without a preacher? Faith comes by
hearing, hearing comes by the word of God. Therefore Christ suffered that
victory over death and hell, and also that his glorious Gospel to be
published to the whole world, and all nations through the preaching of the holy
apostles and other godly doctors and teachers to be invited bydden, and called
unto it.

The seventh fruict of Christ's Resurrection, The seuenthe fruit.
is that Christ with his rysynge again from death, has justified us
through Faith. For as he by his death has abolyshed and put away sin:
Iustificacion.
even so by his Resurrection has he brought unto us ryghtousnes, as Paul
says: Romans 4.
Christ was betrayde for our sins, and rose again for our justification.
And blessed Peter says: Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1. Pet. 1.
which according to his abundant mercy begat us again unto a lively hope, by
that that Jesus Christ rose again from death to an inheritance immortal, and
undefiled, and that perysheth not, reserved in heaven for you, which are kept by
the power of God thorough Faith unto salvation. Thus has Christ by his
resurrection made us godly and ryghteous through Faith, that we should not only
by him be made free from sin, but also become holy and righteous in him, if,
as Peter says, we believe in God thorough him which raised him up from the
dead, and gave the glory unto him, that we might have faith and hope toward
God.

The eight fruicte of Christ's Resurrection is, the glorious blessedness and
eternal life of the souls, The eight* fruit.
which follows of Justification and Faith, whereof the holy Apostle S. Paul
speaks in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Eternal life Ephe. 2.
saying: GOD which is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewyth he
loved us, even whenne we were dead in sins, quyckned us together in CHRIST
(by grace are ye saved) and raised us up together with him, and made us sytte
together with him among them that are in heaven. Osee. 6.
The Prophet Osee also says: He shall make us alive after two days, and on
the third day he shall raise us up, that we may live in his syghte.
Hereof comes it, that S. Peter calls Christ, the Lord of life. For he
that confesses with his mouth, and believes with his heart, that GOD raised
up Christ, Act. 3.
he is saved. This life and everlasting salvation Christ by his Resurrection
has purchased and given unto us. Romans 10.
Therefore Christ said to Mary Magdalene, that she should tell his
disciples, Joan. 20.
yt he would go up unto his father, and their father. As though he should
say: Now we have a common inheritance, one father, one kyngedome, and an
everlasting life common to us all. For he that sanctifyethe, Heb. 2.
and they that are sanctified, are all one.

The nynte fruit.
The last fruit of Christ's resurrection, is the glorification and dignity of
our mortal bodies. For as Christ in his Resurrection did cast away from
him all weakness of man's body, The resrreccion and glorificacion of our
bodies.
because from hensefoorthe he should be no more mortal, weak, hungrye,
thyrstie, nor have any other infirmities, but immortal, and without all
infirmity and weakness: So shall our mortal bodies be like unto his
glorious body at the Resurrection of the dead: and shall for ever remain in
that glory and honor worlds without end. Phil. 36.
Of this speaks Saint Paul saying: Our conversation is in heaven, from
whens we look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
transfigure and change this our vile body, that he may make it like to his
own glorious body, according to the power, wherwyth he is able to make all
things subject to himself. And in an other place Paul rejoices with all
the Christians, 2. Cor. 5.
that we have an everlasting dwelling place in heaven, although this our
corruptible body destroyed and put away. For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and
rose again: 1 Thessalonians. 4.
then shall God bring them with him, that are fallen a sleep by Jesus. So
shall we be glorified with Christ, as he before was glorified by his
Resurrection, and made his mortal body immortal, and brought it unto glory.
As he also before, gave a show of this matter to his Disciples in mount
Thabor, where his face did shine as the Sun, Math. 17.
and his garments were made whiter then snow. He that desires to hear
more of this matter, let him read the.xv. Chapter of saint Paul's first
epist. to the Corinthia^s: There shall he abunda^tly find, how Christ rose
again, and how manyfold and great fruict he has purchased and gotten for us by
that his glorious resurrection.

Now forasmuch as we have heard, and do perfectly know, what great and
singular benefits we have received by the victorious and triumphant
resurrection of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ: How he has overcome sin,
^ new life.
death, devil, and hell, and has made us not only free and safe from them,
but also holy, godly, and rightous through faith, so that we shall have with
him everlasting life, and a glorified body: it becomes us as thankful
children with Christ to take upon us a new, pure, sincere, vncorrupt and
fautlesse life, as S. Paul exhorts us in his Epistle to the Romans, saying:
We are buried with Christ by baptism for to dye, Romans 6.
that likewise as Christ was raised up from death by the glory of the father,
even so we also should walk in a new life. Now what other thing is a new
life, then to eschew sin, and to do that, which is good and godly? As Paul
says in his foresaid Epistle: Gal. 1.
We ought no more from hensforth to serve sin. And in an other Epistle he
says, that Christ dyed to this end for all men, that they which live,
should from hensefoorth live, not to them selves, but to him that died for
the^, and rose again. So likewise doothe Paul rejoice, that he lives not,
but Christ in him: And he exhorts the Corinthians, ^. Cor. 5.
that forasmuch as they through faith in Christ are holy and righteous, and
yet for the remnantes of the unclean flesh are sinners and unrighteous, they
would purge out that old leauyn. Know ye not (says he) that a little leaven so
wreth the whole lump of dough? Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may
be new dough, as ye are sweet bread. For Christ our passover is offered up for
us. Therefore let us keep a joyful feast, not with old leaven, neither with
the leaven of maliciousnes and wickedness, but with the sweet bread of pureness and
truth. In the which words Paul does euidentlye express and require, that
we should leave the old vnpure life which we have of Adam, and in spirit
begin and exercise a new spiritual life, unto the which Christ has brought
us, and that we should from time to time, if any old leaven of wyckednes we
find in our selves, purge it out and utterly cast it out away from us, so
that for ever after as in profession, so likewise in conversation we may be
new doughe and sweet bread. Therefore seeing we by risen again with Christ,
Colloss. 3.
let us seek the things that are above, where Christ sytteth on the right
hand of God: that is to say, let us forsake earthye and transitorye things.
An exhortacio^ unto good life.
And aspire and labor forewarde unto heavenly and everlasting things, that
the resurrection of Christ and the benefits thereof, of the which ye have now
heard, may be fruitful and full of efficacy and power in us, that by our
new life and Christen conversation we may show our selves thankfeull unto
GOD, and proffitable to our neighbors: again, that they which are without and
enemies to the Christian truth may through our Godly and honest behavior,
be converted, and turn from their Idolatry unto the worshippynge of God, from
their superstition unto Gods pure religion, from, corrupt and wicked manners
unto holiness and pureness of life, that by this means GOD our heavenly father
may be glorified both by them and by us, which unto this end has given us
his holy Spirit, that in all points both in body and soul we being holy and
righteous, Luke 1.
may serve him even the Lord our GOD in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life: to whom with Christ our Lord and the holy ghost be all
praise, honor and glory worlds without end.

Amen.
The first Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. xx.
THe same day at night, which was the first day of the Sabboethes, when the
doors were shut (where the Disciples were assemblede together for fear of
the Jews) came Jesus and stood in the mids, and said unto them: Peace be
unto you. And when he had so said, he shewede unto them his hands and his
side. Then were the Disciples glad when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus
to them again: Peace be unto you. As my father sent me, even so send I you
also. And when he had said these words, he breathed on them, and said unto
them: Receive ye the holy ghost. Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them. And whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

THE EXPOSITION.
ALbeit in the gospel of this present Sunday many things are contained
concerning the glorious resurrection of our Savior Christ Jesus worthy to be
treated of, and called unto remembrance: yet forasmuch as we on Sunday last
spoke abonda^tly of that matter, and sufficiently enough to confirm and
stablishe our faith in this article of Christ's resurrection we have thougt it
good at this present to speak of some other matter, and specially to handle
those words, which Christ, after he had wyshed peace to his disciples, and
showed the^ his hands, and his side for the more confirmation of their faith
in his resurrection, spoke unto them, and said: As my Father sent me: so
likewise do I send you, etc. These words of our Savior Christ are very
notable and worthy to be remembered, wherewith he gave to his disciples, The
office of preaching committed to Christ's disciples and to their successors.
and committed unto them the office of teaching and preachinge, that by this
means the use and fruit of his death and resurrection with the cause thereof,
might also be known of other, and so obtain everlasting salvation. For if
this matter had only ben chronicled, and not published and set abroad by
preaching, wherefore it was done, what commodity comes thereof to the faithful
beleuers: how could it have been greatly profitable, as we see in the kingdom
of the Pope? In that as touching the history, nothing wants nothing can be
desired. The scriptures ought to be preached to the people.
But when in the preachinge of the papists these things are not handled, as
Christ commands here: the matter is unprofitable, and is in a manner none
other thing, then as a man should tell an history of king Alexander, of Julius
Caesar, of the great Turk, and such like. Therefore ye whole matter consists
in this, that ye history of ye death and resurrection of Christ be brought unto
ye right use. This comes to pass on this manner, as Christ determines, when
he says: I send you as my father sent me. But how the father sent Christ:
Esaye ye Prophet declared long before, saying: Es. 61.
The spirit of ye lord is upon me: for the lord has anointed me, and sent me
to preach glad and ioyefull tidings unto the pore, that I might bind up the
wounded hearts, yt I might preach deliverance to the captive, and open the
prison to the^ that are bound: that I might declare the acceptable year of the
Lord. Christ was sent of his father to preach the gospel so likewise are all
faithful ministers.
This is the commandment, wherewith Christ is sent. And he says here, that
after the same manner he sends his disciples, as he was sent, and gives unto
them that ministry and office, that he exercised before, that they should
teach after the same sort, as he had taught: so that this commandment is
only to be referred unto doctrine, that the disciples should declare the same
of Christ, which he had before declared of himself.

Now what manner of doctrine this is. Esaye describes and sets forth with
most goodly and evident words, that is to say, that Christ was anointed and
sent unto this end, that he should conforte the fearful the contrite and
broken in heart, the poor in spirit, etc. The doctrine, that is not agreeable
to this, is not the doctrine of Christ, neither has Christ commanded it, but
it is the doctrine of the law and of Moses for the doctrine of Moses is, The
doctrine of Moses.
yt such as be troubled and fearful, should be driven unto more trouble and
unto more fear. But the doctrine of Christ is to conforte the weak hearted,
The doctrine of Christ.
and to preach glad and joyful tidings to them that be sorrowful, and brought
unto the bryncke of desperation. For it behooved Christ to comme with a new
commandment and doctrine, as his works, which he did, were also new, as the
like were never before seen in the world, I mean, that the son of God
suffered, and rose again from death.

And as Esaye prophesied of the doctrine of Christ, even so does Christ set
forth here also. For these are the words of Christ, as they are rehearsed of
the Evangelist. And he breathed upon them, saying: Take the holy ghost: whose
sins ye shall forgive, are forgeuen them. But whose sins ye shall retain,
are retained. Here have ye the right spiritual regiment which does no less
differ from the Civil and worldly regiment, A double regiment spiritual and
corporal.
then the heaven is dista^t from the earth. They that are in this spiritual
regiment, are right kings, right princes, right lords, and have also their
regiment. But here consider, mark, and learn, The spiritual regiment has
only to do with synn^.
how far this regiment goes, and how wide it stretches forth it self.
Uerely, as the words sound eue^ so wide and broad as the world is. And yet
has it nothing to do, but with sin, as touching gold, silver, richesse,
worldly substance, temporal possessions, Lordshippes, farms, parkes,
dominions, and such like: it has nothing to do with them. For all these
things pertayne unto the worldly and civil regiment, and they are to be
handled of temporal rulers, as Emperors, Kings. Princes, Lords, etc. So to
appoint them, as shall be thought most convenient and mete for the
mayntenaunce and conservation of the public weal. But this spiritual
regiment and Ecclesiastical power is apppointed only for sin where the matter
of sin is, there has this regiment and power place: otherwise it has
nothing to do.

For of this must we greatly take head, The ministers of gods word ought not
to meddle with temporal affairs.
that we make not a confusion in these ij. regimentes, as the Pope and his
bishops have done, which have so abused the spiritual regiment, yt they
have also gotten unto them the temporal regiment and civil power, and are now
become temporal lords, yea and of such power, that they make Emperors,
Kings: Princes, Lords, etc. To be their subjects, yea their slaves, but
Christ gave this never in commandment to his disciples, neither sent he them
forth to meddle with temporal matters and with the Kingdoms of this world:
But he only appointed unto them the ministry of the word, The office of
spiritual ministers.
and with it the regiment of sin: so that their offices is nothing else, then
to preach the Gospel of Christ, and to declare remission of sins to all
such as are penitent, broken in heart, troubled in mind, disquieted in
conscience, etc. Again, to retain hold, and bynd their sins, that are
impenitent, and stubborn, and go forth to sin without repentance or
conuertion unto a better life.

This retayning of binding of sin has the Pope also miserably abused and
perverted, The power of bynding and lo^sing sins most wickedly abused by the
pope.
yea far otherwise, then is meant and appointed to ye ministry. For he has
so interpreted and handled the matter, as though he had power by virtue thereof,
to make laws, not only in ye church, but also in the civil regiment, as it
pleases him. But that is not the meaning of Christ. For I as a minister and
sent of Christ to preach ought not to prescribe unto the household precepts of
ploughinge and Carting, of maryeng, of ordring thy famely and household, etc.
For god has given the reason to know how thou should behave thy self in
all these things. If thou doubt in any worldly matters, there are Iuristes,
men of law, worldly councellers, civil wise men, and such like, which can
right well supply thy lack and give the good and profitable council in this
behalf. The commission that is committed unto me, my regiment, mine
authority and power is only concerning sin, to teach thee, that thou
shalt for ever perish in thy sins, and be damned, except thou believe in
Christ, Heb. 9. 1. John. 1.
embrace him with strong faith as thine alone Savior and redemer, which only
and alone has purged thy conscience from dead works, and cleansed thee from
all thy sins by his precious blood.

Therefore the whole sum of this doctrine is, that we perfectly know, what
sin is. Sin signifies not Lordshippes, riches, Kingdoms, what sin (...)
household matters, and such like, but sin is called a burden, which so
greueth and troubles the heart and conscience of man before God, that he
looks for nothing in the world else, then the fearful anger of GOD and
everlasting damnation. For we speak here of the true and earnest sins,
which GOD counts sins, and before his judgment seat deserve everlasting
damnation: not of feigned and forged sins brought in of the Pope and of the
Bishops, The breaking of men's traditions is no sin before God.
as when a man keep not the fast, that they in their law have commanded, or
when a man eat flesh on such days, as they have forbidden, or when a moncke
wears not his monastical cowle, but rather a lay man's garment: or when a
Prist marieth a wife contrary to his popyshe and folishe book, and such like.
These are sins before the pope, but not before God, neither ca^ they condemn
any man, forasmuch as God in his law did never forbid them. They are sins
devised by Antichrist the Pope and by his Antichristian members, the
transgression and breaking whereof ought to trouble no Christen man's
conscience.

But we speak hear of sins, which are sins in deed and not fained, which
no man has inverted, but wherein we wear borne and live: even those sins,
which are directly against the co^ma^deme^t of God, and against the which
gods precept bears witness, and not only the traditions of men with such
sins: says the lord, shall ye Apostles and ministers of ye word meddle,
either to remitte or to retain them. As for ye gouerme^t of worldly, corporal
and te^porall things, it pertayneth nothing unto them: neither ought they to
usurp any jurisdiction in this behalf, but to leave all these things holy and
fully to the te^porall rulers. In the preachers mouth in set life and death.
In the Apostles or preachers mouth lie the sins of all the world, the power
of the devil, and the very torments of hell, that when thou art impenitent,
and wilt not repent thee of thy sins but rather delight in them, and go
forth to provoke the majesty of God unto anger through thy wyckednes, they
should retain thy sins, and give thee over to the devil and to everlasting
damnation. Again on the other part, there are set also in every Apostles or
preachers mouth, the passion, death and resurrection of Christ with their
fruits: Again, salvation, Note well.
heaven, and everlasting life, not in respect of their own person, but of the
sentence and judgment, that they pronounce upon thee, which the devil
himself can not abide, at the commandment of Christ, that is, that thy
sins are remitted and forgeuen thee, if thou repent and believe in Christ.

And this is such a power, such a dignity and authority, The word^ of
Christ and of his minister is all one, and of like power.
that in comparison of it, all the power of the world is nothing: that every
Apostle and true disciple of Christ has authority and power to give judgment
of the whole world concerning the either remitting or retaynyng of sin: and
that sentence or judgment is of as great force and strength, as though Christ
himself had pronounced it, as these his words in this place do testify, As
my father sent me: so send I you.

This then is one thing, that the Ecclesiastical power and regiment is only
over sin, and that sin can not be called a corporal or worldly thing, but
the grief and disquieting of the conscience, which accuses and condemned us
before God: which thing serves to this end, that we should not be deceived
with folyshe and counterfaite sins, whereof I spoke before, but discern,
that which is sin in deed, from that which is no syn before God. For if
thou sholdest desire to be released from the folishe and doltishe sins or
transgressions of men's traditions, as though thou had offended in not
observing them: so should it also follow, that in obeying and keeping the
same, thou would seek to be justified, which is high abomination before
God: as the transgression of men's traditions and precepts condemns not: so
likewise the observation of them saves not. They worship me in vain, says
Christ, Math. 15.
with the traditions and commandments of men. Therefore must we mark well this
diffinition, that that is sin, which the law of God reueleth, and therefore
accuses and condemns. If it be no sin in the law of God, then is it a
popish sin, unknown to God, What is sin properly.
and therefore not to be regarded. For that is only sin, that the law of God
forbyddeth.

And thus may we see, that very many lie weltring in great and notorious
sins, as covetousness, whoredom, adultery, theafte, usury, anger, envy,
glotony, drunckenes, bannynge, cursyng, blasphemy, and such like, and still
remain frowardly in the same without repentance, without any conscience of
their wicked, and ungodly behavior: as for their sins they care not: only
this is their desire, that they may so sin, that it be not perceived nor
known of other. Such sins can not be forgeuen, and unto these belong
byndinge or retayninge, and the second power, whereof Christ speaks here,
that such sins are to be retained.

The diversity of sins.
Therefore here is a difference to be made, and the true sins are so to be
divided, that some are sins both before us and God: some only before God, and
not before us. For we will not knowledge them, nor be sorry for them, and desire
of god remission and forgeuenes of them. Psalm. 51.
As David says: against thee alone have I sinned, and before thee have I done
evil. Here both be joined together, forasmuch as David knowledgeth and
confesses that he has done evil, and knows that it does displease God. As
though he should say: verily I know and feel the sin, not only because I
remember it, but also because I feel what sin is able to do, yea I feale the
power and strength of sin, that it is a cruel torment and an intolerable
burden, and that it accuses me before god, and goes about to pluck me unto
death and unto the devil, Romans 7.
as Paul says to the Romans: without the law sin was dead. I lived
sometime without law. As though he should say: Sin is always in us. The
law opens sin,
But before the law comes, it is as though it were buried or a sleep. For
it disquieteth us not, it vexes us not, it tormenteth us not. And hereof it
comes, that we heap daily more and more sin upon sin, and make no
conscience thereof: otherwise would we repent, and cease to sin. But when
that thonderbolte, I mean, the law of God stryketh the conscience, and
pearceth it through then begins sin, as a man would say, to wax alive
again, so that now we begin to know, how mighty a thing sin is, which
takes god away from us, and casts us down hedlong unto the devil and hell
fire. Romans 7.
Therefore says Paul: when the law came, sin waxed alive again. But I was
dead, and the commandment, which was unto life, was found unto me to be unto
death. And this is the very sin, 2. R^g 12.
which is sin before God and me, as we may see in David, when he committed
adultery with Bethseba: the sin grieved him nothing at all: for sin was dead.
But when Natha^ the prophet ones came, and did cast this thonderbolt at him:
Thou art this man: then began syn to wax alive in David's heart, and
threatened him death. But Nathan conforteth him, and says. Thou shall not dye.

Thus sewe that the Apostlike regiment is an authority and power, not over
politic, civil and temporal matters, or over such sins alone, as yt
world accuses, condemns, judges, and punishes but over all those sins,
which thou in thy conscience, and god in his righteousness count to be sins,
so that by this means the syns of the whole world are subject to ye Apostles
and to all the ministers of the church: yea, when time requires, to all
Christians, so that thou may certainly persuade thy self, when thou hear
of thy pastor, or in his absence of any other Christian, that thy sins are
forgiven thee in the name of Christ, that that is so true, just, and certain,
and is also of no less power, as though Christ himself had spoken it, or an
Angel from heaven had declared it unto thee at the commandment of Christ. But
this commission and power is not given to the Apostles and ministers of the
church, that they should thereby auaunce themselves setforth their own
honor, wax proud, and exercise tyranny over the congregation of God. For it
is only given them to this end, that thereby they should serve thee, and that
thou may be defended against thine enemy, which is to strong for thee.
Therefore this is a wonderful and incredible power, that wretched man which is
a sinner also, should drive the devil out with his power, whom otherwise the
hole world could not expel and drive out. For so says Christ: what soever
ye losen in earth, Math. 13.
shall be losened in heaven Again, whose sins ye shall forgive, shall be
forgeuen them. And as it is rehearsed in this our gospel: as my father sent me:
so likewise do I send you. These words are so plain and evident, that no man
ought to doubt of them, but as he hears the words of remission of sins
pronounced unto him, so likewise shall he receive and enjoy it. And this is
the cause that we admonish you so often, saying Christ has given such and
so great power to his church, that ye should use the same, and by no means
despise it. For unto this end has Christ ordained this ministry, that on
this wise the sins of the world should be forgeuen and taken away, so that
they be sins in deed, and with a repentaunt faith, and faithful repentance
knowledged and confessed. For as for counterfaite and forged sins, they
pertayne nothing unto this matter. They must be sins in deed, which trouble,
vex and disquiet the heart, as Adam in the first book of Moses preached and
said to his son Cain: Genesis 4.
If, says he, thou had done well, and had ben good, thine oblation
should have been accepted. But for as much as thou art evil, thy sin lies
in the doors. Secret sin will ones com to light,
As though he should say: Thou stand now there, and art a sinner, but thou
do not yet feel it. Thy sin lies, but in a very troublesome and unrestful
place. Therefore se unto it: for it will one day awake and comme to light, and
then shall it otherwise go with thee. For thy sin lies and lurketh not unto
this end, that it should for ever rest and be kept secret, but that it
should comme to light, that it may torment, trouble vex, and byte thee so that
thou shall not know what to do, nor whether to turn thee.

They therefore that are not moved with their sins, have notwithstanding sins
in deed, but yet such as are not venial, remissible or able to be forgeuen,
and therefore are their sins retained, holden, and bound. For they have no
lust nor desire to be forgeuen, for if they had, they would repent and leave
to sin.

This was the doctrine of the Papists, that whosoever would have remission of
their sins they should first of all confess all their sins to the priest,
The doctrine of the papists concerning remission of syn.
be contrite and sorry for them, and receive penance at the priests hand,
and so afterward followed the absolution and remission of sins, and by this
means was the forgeuenes of sins afterward grounded in that contrition. And
it is possible, A godly practice of the ancient church.
that in this behalf they followed the example of the Elders, which pronounced
absolution to no man, except he first of all confessed his sins, and showed
outwardly manifest signs and tokens that he was sorry for his sins. This is
right, and ought so to be. But notwithstanding to gather hereof, that such
sorrow and contrition deserves remission of sins, that is false and
erroneous. Contrition* what it is: and that it deserves not remission of sin.
For co^tritio^ is no merit, but it is the self sin truly fealte in the
heart, and the power and kingdom of sin: neither is remission of sins and
grace grounded in this. For before there be such contrition, the sin is not
cured. For although sin be there present, yet is it only a lurckyng and dead
sin, as Adam said of Cain. But when it waxes alive again, and sleapeth no
more, but is truly fealte and perceived, that it tormenteth and fraieth the
heart, this can no man justly and truly call a meritorious work, but as S.
Paul calls it, the right living sin: Now who will say, that sin
deserves grace? Romans 7.
Therefore men in ye papacy were most miserably deceived and seduced, for
as much as they put all their hope of remission of sins in their co^trition,
as though it were such a good and meritorious work, as of it self deserved
their sins to be forgeuen. therefore the Pope in all his bulls, indulgences,
and pardons put in these words: Contritis and confessis: that is to say, to
them that are contrite and confessed. All such for their contrition and
confession sake shall have absolution and pardone of their sins. For where
true contrition is, Contrition with out faith helps nothing unto salvation.
there is none other thing, then the kingdom, power, and regiment of sin.
Now what can this deserve? There is remission of sins where faith is given to
the commandment of Christ, and the word, which is pronounced at his
commandment and in his name, is laid hand on with a sure and constant faith:
of this faith and not of contrition comes the forgeuenes of sins. Co^trition
is of it self none other thing then the very living and fearful making sin.
upon that is not grounded remission of sins, but upon the word of Christ.
For such contrition and feeling of sin does none other thing, but that it
should pluck us from faith, make us flee from Christ, and be a fearde of him.
This is to stir up sins, and to make them greater and more horrible, and in
deed to do none other thing, A sim^lytude
then sin is wont to do, that the outragiousnes of the evils may be
increased, and that syn may be heaped upon sin: none otherwise then when a
theife is conuicte of theafte and condemned unto the punishment of theafte,
has not only done the theafte, but he now adds mo sins unto his theafte:
he hates judgment, law and maiestrate, yea and God also, which is the author
both of judgment, law, and maiestrate, and wysheth that there were neither
judgment, nor law, nor maiestrate no nor yet God, that he might go forth to
sin freely and without punishment. Romans 7.
This thing does saint Paul lively express, when he says: That sin through
the law and commandment is out of measure synnefull: that is to say, when the
law ones comes and works her force, then is sin beyond all measure
known to be sin in deed. Now wheare sin does so work, and of one sin
infinity sins are made, What the papists call contrition.
so that the sinner can find no rest by the reason of his sins: That have
the papists called contrition. But where such contrition and sorrow is and
remains alone, that is to say, with out faith or hope of gods mercy (as the
like also was in Judas the traitor) there follows and flows nothing out of
that, but plain desperation. Math. 27.
Christ must also comme with his confortable word and commandment
concerning remission of sins, and as it were preach in the heart of the
sinner, saying: Thou art full of sins, and go about the longer the more to
fall away from me, shall I therefore forgive thee thy sins? Oh nay. Thou
must in deed have contrition and sorrow for thy sins. For without this thou
can never hate sin from thy heart, nor never heartelye desire remission
of sins. But now this way shall thou walk unto salvation, that thou make
haste unto my word, hear it, and believe it, so shall thou have remission and
forgeuenes of sins. Penance enjoined of the papists.
So taught, not the papists, but they enjoined their penite^tes and ghostly
children, as they call them, to go this and that pylgrimage, to say so many
orysons and prayers, etc. and so to make satisfaction for their sins. But as
concerning the word and commandment of Christ, they make no mention of it at
all. The word and commandment of Christ is this? whose sins ye forgive, In
the word of Christ is remission of sins to be sought through faith.
shall be forgeuen them: But whose sins ye do retain, shall be retained. Her
hear thou, that no man ought to seek forgeuenes of sins, but in the words
of the lord Christ. Whosoever seeks it any other where: he shall never find
it. What has this then profited or helped, yt we have tormented our selves so
greatly with fasti^g, singing, praying, watching, massinge, etc. That we might
obtain remission of sins? was not this great wickedness, and a lamentable
thing to hear, that they have taught us to look for remission of our sins
through contrition? Which notwithstanding when it is most earnest and strong,
is nothing else then plain sin? If the virtue of my work, of my contrition,
and of my confession be such and so great, what need we then the word of
Christ? And to what end serves his commandment in this place. We in this
behalf differ nothing from the Turks and Jews, which also believe that they
shall be saved, although they have not CHRIST, but the Pope is worser the^ any
Turk or Jew, for to mainteyne his wickedness and abomination, his false and
corrupt doctrine, he without all shame abuses the name of Christ. Therefore let
us diligently mark, that Christ includes forgeuenes of sins in his word,
and not in pilgrimages, in masses, in almose deeds, or in any other works, by
what soever name they be called. He therefore that desires forgeuenes of his
sins, let him go unto his Pastor, that is learned in the word of God, and
hear of him the glad and joyful tydyngs of the Gospel, The way to obtain
remission of sins is to hear ye word of god, and to believe it.
and faithfully believe the same and he may be sure to have his sins remytted
and forgeuen him. For this is certain and sure, that we can not overcome sin
with any work. But whatsoever we be able to do, though we should torment our
selves never so much, is altogether vain, and nothing to the purpose, as they
had experience in the Popes kyngedome, that had an evil conscience, and
therefore got them selves into Monasteries, and became cloysterers, Faith in
the word only quieteth the conscience.
or took upon them other works, that they might be delivered from their
sins, and have quiet consciences. But at the last, they were compelled to
grant, that neither garment, nor monastical order, nor prayers, nor
fastings, nor Masses, nor Pylgrimages, nor any other kind of paynefull
deeds, could appease and quyete the griefs and tourmentes of their
conscience. Why so? Because that sins can neither be retained nor remytted by
any other way then by the word, as we have tofore heard. Therefore who soever
embraces not this word, wherein alone is Remission of sins: he must needs be
under that word, wherein sins are retained. For there is none other way or
mean to forgive sin, but the word. Therefore whatsoever a man does, yet
shall his sins be retained, except he comes to the word. For the Lord
our GOD has set the forgeuenes of sins in no work that we do, but in this
one only work, that Christ has suffered and risen again from death. And this
work by the word has he put in the mouth of his Apostles and preachers,
yea in the mouth of all christen men, if need require, that by it they may
distribute and declare remission of sins to so many as desire it. If thou will fetch forgeuenes of thy sins from thens, thou shall not be deceived of
thy purpose. For the commandment of Christ is at hand, that sins should be
forgeuen. If thou wylt not fetch forgeuenes of thy sins from thens, I mean
from the word of God, thy sins shall still be retained and holden, do what
thou will. For as it has been many times said: Without the word there is no
Remission of sins. CHRIST has put this word in the mouth of his Apostles
and mynisters, yea in time of need, in the mouth also of all the Christians, to
declare the same unto the comfort of all troubled consciences. He that will not
fetch it there, and believe the word, he shall dye in his sins, do what he
will. For this commandment is strong and sure, that the Lord takes away from
the whole world, and from all works, the forgeuenes of sins, and repose it
only in his word: there hangs all the matter.

But this is not only to be understood of absolution, or of the preaching of
the word, but as it was said in the beginning, Christ comprehends the
whole ministry in this commandment, that remission of sins should be
declared and distributed to the faithful, both in the word and in the
sacraments. For to this end is the Gospel preached, that men may know
their sins, Why ye gospe is preached.
and afterward through faith be justified, and so for ever after lead a
godly and virtuous life. We also to this end are baptized, that our sins
should be forgeuen us thorough the death of Christ. Why we are baptized.
Again, the said Christ has ordained his holy Supper unto this end, that
we should believe, that his body was betrayde for us, Why christ ordained his
Supper.
and that his blood was shed for us, and that we should not doubt of the
remyssion of our sins. And that faith might be constant, sure, and throughely
persuaded, that our sins are forgeuen us, thee and me, and the whole world,
if the whole world would repent believe and amend, Christ has ordained, not
that one for an other should be baptized, and receive the Lords supper, but
that every one should be baptized and receive the lords Supper for him self,
and require private absolution, Every man ought to receive the sacraments for
him self.
if he can not be sufficientely confirmed and comforted by the public
preaching, so that no man ought any thing at all to doubt, but that as he
hears Remission of his sins in the name of Jesus, so likewise he does
receive it, and is utterly made free from his sins before GOD in heaven.
Therefore the word and the Sacraments are not to be separated: for Christ
has joined the word and the Sacraments together, The word and the
sacraments. ought to go together.
so that without the word the Sacraments can bring no consolation or
confort at all: yea without the word we could not know what the
Sacraments were, nor unto what end they serve. Therefore it is not only a
great blyndnes and error, but also a most grievous myserie, that the Papists
prate much of the forgyuenes of sins, and yet utterly forgette the word,
wherein all the whole matter consysteth, and tell the people a tale of a tubbe,
that they must get them Remssions of their sins by their own works, and
by their own inventions. But seeing that our Lord and and Savior Christ Jesus
has placed forgeuenes of sins in the word: And, as it has often ben said,
has committed the same to his Apostles, and to the Ministers of the word,
yea and to all Christians in time of necessity, to be pronounced and
declared: so follows it, that we must believe the forgiveness of sins: By
faith alone in Christ are we freely justified and saved.
and that this forgiveness of sins comes unto us only by Faith given to
the word and promise of Christ, as this is the foundation of our doctrine,
that we are freely justified and saved by faith alone in Christ. For this can
no man deny, that the word of Christ, which he put in the mouth of his
Disciples, can not be comprehended nor gryped with hands, nor yet with the
works of fastings, prayers, almosse deeds, pylgrimages, or what soever kind
of work it be besides. Why faith alone justifies without works.
It is Faith alone, that lays hand on this word, and receaueth it, and the
heart only, is the very true cheast, wherein the word can be included or shut
in, so that by this, it is most plain and evident, that we are justified by
Faith alone, seeing that Remyssion of sins is only comprehended in the
word, and the word can not otherwise be apprehended and laid hand on, than
by Faith alone. But this knows not the Pope, with all his sectaries, neither
do they understand this doctrine of Christ. yea they are so blockyshe and
doltyshe, so mad and so far estranged from the knowledge of Christen
doctrine, that they neither can nor will understand it, and so blind, that
they will by no means se it, yea so stubborn and so styffe necked, that in no
wise they will receive and believe it. In the Popes church faith and the word
were neglected.
Therefore both Faith and the word were neglected, and nothing regarded in
the Popes church. The people were taught and commanded to trust in the merits
of their own righteousness, and works. But GOD confound Satan, Antichriste,
Pope, and all Sectaries, which with their wicked doctrine of works, labor
to obscure, yea and utterly to extinguyshe the glory of GOD the merits of
Christ's death and Resurrection, the Justification of faith. etc.

It shall therefore at all times be most necessary and conueniente, that
we confer the Popes doctrine with ours, which is the true and sound
doctrine, and that we never forgette the abhomynations, which he has
brought into the Church of Christ, and with fire, faggotte, sweard, halter,
drownynge, and all other kind of force and tyranny, goes forth to defend
the same, that we be not led again out of the true way, nor seek
remyssion of our sins in our own works, contrary to the word of GOD. For
the Lord Christ doothe not instruct us here of our works, but of the word,
which he puts in the mouth of his Disciples, and sends them, even as he
was sent of his father. Now where forgiveness of sin is, Acts. ^^.
and the hearts, as Saint Peter says, are purifyed by Faith: There out of
that good and purifyed heart shall undoubtedly issue, and flow forth
abundance and plenty of all good and christen works. For Faith is not ydell,
and the holy Ghost, according to his nature and propretie, always mouethe and
prycketh forward the faythefull unto the obedience of Gods holy will, Gal. 5.
and unto the mortification of the flesh and sin. God through CHRIST give us
his grace, that we may believe this, and truly feel it in our hearts. Amen.

The second sunday after Easter The Gospel. John. x.
Christ said unto his Disciples: I am the good shepherd. A good shepherd
gives his life for the sheep. An hired seruaun^, and he which is not the
shephearde (neither the sheep are his own) sees the wolf coming, and
leaves y^ sheep, and flees, and the Wolf catches and scattreth the sheep.
The hired servant flees, because he is an hyrede servant, and cares not for
the sheep. I am the good shepherd and know my sheep, and am known of mine.
As my father knowethe me, even so know I also my father. And I give my life
for the sheep. And other sheep I have which are not of this fold: them also
must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and
one shepherd.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis Gospel, as likewise the other works of Christ, may be handeled two manner
of wais. First, concerning faith: Secondly, touching charity. It is the
doctrine of Faith, because it teaches, The doctrine of faith: that Christ is
the alone shepeheard.
that Christ is the alone shepherd, and none other that dies for his sheep.
For unto this work, yt Christ dies for us, no man, no saint, no, nor yet
ang^ll was mete, that he might restore man, which was slain of yt devil in
Paradise through sin: so that it should be ye very proper work of this shepherd
Christ, with whom none is able to compare, as none of all his other works,
which he did in this behalf, I mean, in making satisfaction for our sins,
can be of any creature imitated, Gene ^.3 Romans 5.
followed, and expressed. Therefore no man can speak these words of himself,
which Christ pronou^ceth in this place: John. ^
I am the good Shepherd: A good shepherd gives his life for his sheep: so
that by these his words he allureth us unto him, and teaches us, that we
should believe, that none can be like unto him in accomplishyng the work of our
redemption, which he brought to pass by his Passion and death. Moses and
the Prophets were men of great authority and of singular excellency, which
taught truly, what we ought to believe and to do, yea and they suffered many
things for this their doctrine: The saynctes of god can do nothing in the
work of our redemption.
yet as concerning this work, whereof Christ speaks here, I mean, to dye for
the sheep, they are only mercenaries and hirelynges, neither can they defend
the sheep against the wolf. For this is without all doubt, that Moses and the
Prophets, when they had taught a long time, and done all things as well as
they (...) were not yet able to recover them selves out of death: What then
could they be able to do for ye sheep against the wolf, which is the devil
and death: And verily it is even as Christ says: The hireling, The wolf is
the devil and death.
which is not ye shepherd, and to whom the sheep do not belong, sees ye wolf
coming, and forsakes the sheep, and flees, and ye wolf catches and
scatters ye sheep. But ye hireling flees, because he is an hireling, and the
sheep do not pertain unto him. Therefore he yt in this peril desires to be
without ieoperdy, and not to be rent and torn of ye wolf, must diligently take heed, yt he put not his co^fide^ce in ye law, or in good works. For there is no
help in the law, Christ only helpethe against the wol^e.
yea y^ law is rather against us, accuses and condemns us, neither can good
works help any thing in this behalf. Therefore all our trust concerning our
own righteousness and good works must we utterly cast away, Romans 7. 2. Cor.
3^ G^la. 3.
and learn with true faith to resort unto him alone, which says: I am the
good shepehearde. I give my life for my sheep. For he flees not the wolf,
neither is he afraid of him, yea he rather offers himself o the wolf, for
to be rent and torn on pieces, Joan. 17.
then that one of his sheep should perish and decay. Therefore when we are in
danger we must resort and flee unto him alone. And this is one thing that we
must steadfastly believe. We our selves can do nothing in this behalf, but
Christ that good shepherd, he alone does it, and works all good things for
us, and commands us, to embrace it with a sure faith, and steadfastly to
believe it.

The second doctrine is, that this act of our shepherd is set forth unto us for
an example, as Peter witnesses, 1. Pet. 2.
saying: Christ has borne our sins in his body upon the tree, that we being
dead to sin, might live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed.
For ye were sometime as sheep that run astray, Christ the good sheparde is
setforth unto us for an ensample.
but ye are turned unto the shepherd and curate of your souls. This is the
doctrine of faith which he afterward applies unto Charity, saying: Christ
has suffered for us, leauyng unto us an example, that ye should follow his
steps. As Christ died for us, that by his work he might redeem us without
our work from sin and everlasting death: so are we bound one to help and
confort an other, when soever any man being in danger has need of our help
and confort. This is to follow the example of Christ, that every christen man
also should be a good shepherd. For although I with my death can not redeem
other from death and sin (for that is the only work of thee alone and true
shepherd Christ Jesus, as ye have tofore heard) yet may I give my life, that
other by this example may be allured unto the word, and brought unto the
knowledge of Christ, ^. Joan. 3.
as S. John says: By this have we known the love of God, because he gave his
life for us: and we are bound also to give our life for the brethren. For this
we right well know, how great the hatred of the world and the devil is
against the word of God. And specially ye Pope laboreth with all main to
oppress the word, yea and so many as be the true pastors and preachers thereof.
Therefore we have need of faithful and good teachers, which, seeing they be
redeemed by the death of Christ, ought also they them selves to imitate and follow
the example of Christ, and also to die for the sheep, and to give their life
for the word. Salvation comethe only by the death of Christ.
This death redemeth not other (for salvation comes only by the death of
Christ: Notwithstanding this confirms other, and so is God glorified by my
blood and death, and my neighbor by this means is confirmed in the faith,
although by it he be not delivered from death. For that is done only by the
death of the true shepherd, as it has been oftentimes said.

And here also come in the mercenaries or hirelynges and the wolves.
Mercenaries or hyrelyngs.
In the former doctrine of faith are yt mercenaries, Moses, the law, the
prophets, and al men be they counted never so rightous. For no man is able to
defend him self (as I may let other things pass) against the wolf, that is
to say, the devil and sin. But in this doctrine of charity, wolves.
the wolves are false teachers and tyrants, which persecute and condemn the
doctrine of the Gospel. True shepardes.
But the true godly man is not afraid, whenne he sees the wolf, yea rather
then he would be the cause, that any man should be offended, and fall away from
the word and the true knowledge of Christ, he will ieopard his head, life, and all
that ever he has, as the exaumples of the Apostles, and of the holy martyrs do
abundantly declare. What is required of the preacher of gods word.
These were not afraid at the cruelnes of the wolf, that they should ones flee.
So ought it to be now. He that professes him self a teacher of Gods word, and
a shepherd of the Lords flock, there is so great sincerity required of him,
that he should only seek the glory of God, and the salvation of his
neighbor. If he be not only careful for these things, but hunteth after his
own commodity and profit: then will not he abide the coming of the wolf.
For he will either cowardly flee, and forsake the sheep, or else he will hold
his peace, and suffer the sheep to run astray without food, that is to say,
without the word of God. They are the very hyrelynges, which teach for their
own private lucre and advantage, and are not content with this, that God
gives them sufficient for their daily food. For we that are in the ministry,
ought to require no more then meat, drink, and cloth, as the Apostle says:
having food and raiment, 1. Tim. 6.
Ministers ought only to require meat drynk and cloth.
let us be content. For we brought not hynge into the world, neither shall
we carry any thing out of it. They that require more, are hyrelynges, and care
not for the sheep. But on the contrary part, a true teacher for the
safegarde of the sheep, puts his head, life, goods, and all that ever he
has in ieopardie. And this is the second doctrine concerning the example of
the good and true shepherd CHRIST: A general doctrine.
which pertains not only unto them that are in the ministry, but also unto
al Christians. For all men ought to confess the truth, and rather to lose
their lives, then to forsake the word, and to embrace idolatry. For this they
know, that they have a shephearde, which to this end gave his life, that
although they also be enforced to give their life, yet shall they receive it
again, and never lose it after.

Luc. 9.17^ Myth. 10.16.
Now Christ goes forth, and makes mention of his sheep, and puts a
difference between them and other sheep. And this he doothe for this purpose,
to make a diversity between his doctrine and heresy, or any other doctrine,
saying: I am the good shepherd and I know my sheep, and my sheep know me. As
the Father has known me, and I know the father, and I give my life for my
sheep. As though he should say: Thus goes the matter: If ye will be my sheep,
and knowledge that I in deed am your shephearde: so shall ye be without
peril and danger. Therefore a true teacher ought to set forth none other
thing unto men, but Christ alone, Christ only ought to be preachede to ye
people.
that he may be truly known, what he is, and what he gives that no man
turn aside from his word, but that he alone be taken for the true and good
shepherd, which gives his life for his sheep. This ought to be set forth
unto men, that they may know their shephearde.

Therefore this doctrine is to be received as an ensample, that as Christ did
and suffered all things for us: so likewise we should gladly do and suffer al
things for the words sake. Which two things are to be taught in the
Church. He that hears and understands these things, is Christ's sheep,
as he him self says: My sheep hear my voice. He that teaches trewely, is
a good shepehearde, this one thing excepted, that he can not give his life
for the sheep on such sort as our Savior Christ did. But they that hear
not this doctrine, or will not set it forth to the sheep, Falls teache^^
are to be esch^^wed as the devil.
are not the sheep of CHRIST, neither are they the true shepheardes, but
they are in deed hyrelynges, yea and ravening wolves. Such are not to be herd
but to be eschued as the devil. After this sort goes it with the doctrine of
the pope, which is full both of errors and heresies. He sets not forth the
words of Christ sincerely and purely, when he says: I am the good shepherd,
The pope is an hyrelynge and a wo^f^e.
and I give my life for my sheep. But the Pope teaches thus: He that will be
safe against the wolf, that is to say, against the devil, and death, he must
be his own shepherd, and look for help in his own works. As ye know, what
things they taught in the Popedom of the sacrifice of the Mass, of
purgatory, of pilgrimages, of vows, of the monastical life, Christ's voice is
only to be heard and followed.
of the works of supererogation. etc. If therefore we will be true christians,
we must follow the sheep which know the voice of their shephearde, and take heed unto that: As for a strangers voice they know not, neither will they
hear it. Therefore we ought to send them away from us with these words: I know
not thy voice. I hear a wolf, which goes about to pluck me away from the
flock of Christ. Away, hence with this woluysh houling: I will follow my shepherd
and hear his voice. For so says Christ here: They shall hear my voice. And a
little before he said: They follow no stranger, but flee from him, because they
know not the voice of strangers. For it is not possible, yt a sheep which has
begun to believe, and has herd yt voice of his shepherd, and received it,
should here and allow that doctrine, which is contrary to the voice of
Christ. The sheep hears the commandments of Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Maiestrates. etc. but it knows, that these things pertayn not unto
salvation. For this works not salvation, because this politic and civil
obedience is declared and showed. But when a teacher commethe forth with this
doctrine, and says: If thou wylt be saved, thou thy self must satisfy for
thy sins. Thou must cause Masses to be said for thee. Thou must give alms,
that thy sins may be forgeuen thee. Thou must put on S. Francis coule, that
thou dying and being buried in the same, may be saved. etc. In this case the
sheep hears not, but says: I know not this voice. It is the voice not of a
shepherd, but of a wolf. The property of a sheep
For thus is the report of this beast, that is to say, of a sheep. It has this
nature and propretie, that among all beasts, there is none that has so quick
an ear, and so sharp and ready sense of hearing, as the sheep has, as
experience declares. For if never so many cry and call, it regards them
not. It refuses all, except her own shephearde. His voice she knows and
hears: Unto that she goes and makes haste. In like manner young lambs even
in the greatest flocks: every one knows the bleatyng of his own damme, and
follows that so long, till at the last he has found her. Christ has respect
to this nature of the sheep, and compares his Christians with them, that they
also after the same manner should most diligently hearken to the voice of the
shephearde, that they be not deceived. And this is his meaning, that where the
voice of Christ is not, his sheep can not be allured nor moved there to give
any ear. How sheep are to be followed.
And herein he gives us a plain commandment, that if we will be his sheep,
we must have fine and picked ears, which may discern the voice of CHRIST
from all other, although those voices seem to be never so clear, pleasant and
sweet.

Therefore in this place it is to be learned, that we give diligent attendance
to hear the word of GOD yea, and that alone, and none other, that through it
we may be able to set our selves against all the subtilties, of the
ennemie, which he craftily gothe about to conueye into our hearts, and also
beware of false and corrupt doctrine. A falls teacher is never to be trusted.
For a woolfe is ever a wolf, neither can he give over his nature. If he has
not his purpose by false doctrine, then doothe he inwardly imagine disceit
through pestilent and poysonfull thoughts. Here must thou follow the sheep,
and say: I care not for this voice. It is the voice of a wolf, and not of a
shepherd. The voice of my shephearde is: I am the good shepherd, and I gave
my life for my sheep. But thou would bring me to that point, that I should
despair, have no hope of salvation in my shepherd, and flee from him. Thus
may thou have healpe and comfort against that tentation, wherewith the
devil goes about to dismaye thee, to take away thy courage, to drive thee
into error, to make thee sorrowful, and to bring thee unto desperation. The
love of christ toward us.
We must therefore above all things diligently hear, and certainly know the
voice of our shephearde: by this means shall there be between us mutual
knowledge and love. For how can he hate us, when he bestows his life for us,
takes away from us death, sin, and all euyls, and freely gives us
everlasting life. These things can come to us by none other voice. Let us
therefore so much the more diligently embrace it, and make much of it.

Moreover, this is greatly to our comfort, that Christ in this Sermon
calls him self a shepherd and terms us, which have and hear his voice,
sheep. For by this means a Christian has no cause to complain, that he is
destitute, and wantethe a shepherd. He may want money, substance, health. etc
that it may appear, that we be left confortlesse and with out a shepherd among
wolves, Math. 10.
as Christ also said to his disciples: Behold, I send you as sheep in the mids
of wolves. And we daily se none other thing then this miserable face, that the
church is ready to be devoured of Antichriste, even as a sheep of the wolf.
Psalm. 1^1.
It seems as though we had no shepherd, that cares for us: and yet he neither
sleapeth nor slombreth, that keeps Israel. But thus must it needs be, The
voice of the shepherd christ is the only comfort of the church.
that we should look for none other comfort but only at the voice of this our
shepherd, whereof Christ himself says: My sheep hear my voice. He that hears
the voice of Christ, and follows it: He may in this behalf glory, that he
truly knows his shepherd, and that his shepherd also knows him. For he
that regards the word, and follows that, the devil can not hurt him. For
what soever chances concerning his life, goods, wife children. etc. He keeps
always fresh in memory this voice of his shepherd: Thou art my sheep: for
thou hear my voice, and know me, and I know thee: so that all his
cogitation, meditation, study, and exercise is altogether in the word and
faith, and in nothing else at all, as Christ him self says: I know my
sheep, even as my father knows me, and I know my Father.

For when Christ the son of God was in the earth he showed none other power
yt he had, but as though it had been in the free choice of the devil and of
wicked men, to deal with him, even as they them selves lusted. GOD seemed
utterly to forgette him, even as though he neither cared for him, nor knew
him. But when Christ hanging on ye cross complained and said My God, my God,
why haste thou forsaken me? Math. 27^
when he dyed on the Cross, when he was buried, and the devil in a manner
persuaded, that CHRIST had no GOD,: then was it euidentely declared, that the
Father knew him. For he did deliver him from hell and death. So (says
Christ) shall the matter go with you. But let not this trouble you, when
all things shall so comme to pass, as though I did not know you. A
Christen man in this life is always subject to the crose.
For a Christen man in this world, must be assaulted and combred with
calamities, crosses, myseryes, afflictions, troubles, and with all kind of
adversities, so that there shall appear no difference at all between him and
the ungodly. For outwardly the life and death of both are in a manner all
one: yea, that more intolerable and harder is: It seems outwardly, that the
condition and state of a Christian manne before GOD is worse, then the state
of any Ethnicke and infydelle. For he is more troubled, and oppreste with many
mo tentations and afflictions. But let not this move thee, but hold fast with
toothe and nail that he says: I know my sheep.

Christ knows his in ye myddest of trobles.
But here thou hear the devil and reason making this objection: how can God
have any care of thee, seeing thou art so myserably afflicted and troubled?
Answer thou thus: I know, that he knows me: Neither does this make my
faith to faint, that I dye and suffer all this trouble. For I know his voice,
and I trust unto that, that as a shepherd unto his sheep, Constancy in the
time of trouble decl^rethe a true Christian.
he puts forth his voice unto me, which I right well know, and says: I am
thy shepherd: I dyed for thee: I gave my life for thee. This word I hear and
believe. This is the only and sure token unto me, that he knows me, and I know
him again. And although I now feel and perceive otherwise, then Christ here
speaks: yet shall not all this make me to fainte, nor to pluck my faith from
his word. All things are full of the cross in this world for a Christen
man. But those troubles are short, transitory, and of no continuance:
Against all these things the word teaches me, that here after I shall have
everlasting life. And although I feel death, Romans 8. 1. Cor. 10. 2. Cor. 1. 2.
Cor. 1.4.
and must needs dye, as other do, that believe not in Christ: what then? the
voice of my shepehearde, which makes for me, does most highly conforte me. He
that believes in me, says he, shall never dye everlastingly. Again: I give my
life for my sheep. Therefore I doubt not, but that my most faithful
shepehearde Christ Jesus knows me. John. 3.5.8.
But this knowledge is therefore thus hid and kept secret, that it may be an
exercise and trial of my faith. Otherwise if straightwayes after baptism we
should be comme clean, righteous, and immortal, we should need neither the
word nor faith. But for as much as the word remains, it necessarilye
requires faith: 1. Cor. 10. 1. John. 3.
neither shall our matters have altogether good success, before that great
day of Judgment. For then shall we se our shepehearde face to face, even as
he is: and behold all this matter without faith.

Therefore it is not to be doubted, but that so sone as a man is baptized, there
chances unto him high^ glory, so that he is utterly without sin, and
endued with perfect and everlasting righteousness. Marc. 16.
For so says Christ: He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. But
this is not perceived with our senses, neither can reason attain there unto,
and yet is it true,, if we judge after the word, and determine according to
the voice of our shephearde. Wherefore this only remains, that we hold fast
the word, and by no means cast it away, til al these things be reveled and
brought to light in that everlasting life that is to come, which we now hear
in the word, and believe. For as this life, and the life to come do differ: so
is it impossible, that the true feling and experience of those things should
chance in this life, which are to be felt and perceived in the life to comme.
Therefore it is a matter of great weight to know a Christen man, yea he can
not be perfectly known in this life. For what man can say this, that he is in
everlasting life? And notwithstanding we must confess, that this child, which
is vexed with death, sin, and all kind of miseries, where no point of
everlasting life appears, immediately after his baptism biginneth in this
world everlasting life. But how comes this thing to pass? John. 3.
There is nothing seen, neither does any thing appear besides the old and
accustomed life. But yet for all that above that accustomed and defiled life,
God has ordained everlasting life. wherein we also live according to the word
and faith, although we do not yet se and feel it. And this it is to know a
true Christian, not to judge him after the judgment of reason and man's
understanding, but by the voice and word. As a shepes life is in the voice.
For when she is destitute of her shepeheardes voice, she can not escape the
danger of wolves. For without the shepeheardes voice, she can not be kept in
order and safety. The word of god only conforteth ye true Christian.
when she hears that, she is safe and without all peril. But when that is
ones lost, she is in danger on every side. After the same manner goes it with
the Christians: if the word be lost, there remains no conforte: But the
word being safe, they behold Christ their shepherd, and what so ever makes
for their salvation through Christ, that is to say, forgeuenes of sins and
everlasting life. Therefore having this assured hope, a true Christian serves
his vocation, does his work, eats, dryncketh, yea and in the midst of his
cross and trouble he is ioyefull and merye. For he is altogether given to
hear the voice of his shepherd, and accustometh him self to judge not after
the sense and course of reason, but according to the voice and word. And this
it is that Christ says here: I know my sheep, and my sheep know me: as the
father knows me, and I know the father, and I give my life for my sheep.

This thing must we learn, and diligently consider in our hearts, that we be
not offended, nor forsake the voice of our shephearde, though the Christians be
afflicted and troubled, yea and dye, as other do. For this is the alone
knowledge of the Christians, that they ca^ say: As concerning the outward
life I do no see any difference between the godly and the ungodly. Yea many
times the state of the Christians is harder and more intolerable, and they are
incombred with mo miseries, then other are. But in the word there is great
difference, namely that the Christians and the ungodly have much diversity
between them, not as concerning outward things, but that the Christians hear
the voice of their shepeheard, which the Ethnickes and Infidelles hear not:
nor yet the Turks, Jews, and Papists, but only the sheep of Christ. As
touching all other external things, there is no difference.

Whereas Christ speaks of other sheep, which must also be brought, that there
may be one shepehearde and one flock: that began immediately to be brought to
pass after the sending of the holy Ghost, Math. 23. Marc. 16.
when the Gospel was preached through out the world: and by the Ministers of
the word it is yet practiced, and shall be unto the end of the world: not
that by this means all men without exception shall be converted unto the
Gospel. For that will the devil never suffer: and the world also most
extremely hates the word, and will not abide to be reproved. Therefore there
is no hope, that the variety of religions should be taken away. But this is
to be one shepehearde and one flock, that god does accept so many as ever
receue the Gospel, as his sons, for Christ's sake, whyther they be Jews or
Gentiles. For this is the alone true religion, to follow this shepehearde
Christ, and to hear his voice, What the true religion is.
and to be obedient to the same, which thing grant us that true and only
shepeheard and Bishop of our souls, Jesus Christ, with the father and the
holy ghost: to whom be glory honor, and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

The third Sunday after Easter, The Gospel. Ihon. xvi.
Jesus said to his Disciples: After a while ye shall not see me, and again
after a while ye shall see me, for I go to the father. Then said some of his
disciples between them selves: What is this that he sayethe unto us after
awhile ye shall not see me, and again after awhyle ye shall see me, and that I
go to the father? They said therefore, what is this that he says after
awhyle? we can not tell what he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask
him, and said unto them: Ye enquire of this between your selves, because I
said: After a while ye shall not se me, and again: after a while ye shall see
me. Uerylye, verylye I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but contrary
wise, the world shall rejoice, ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to
joy. A woman when she trauayleth has sorrow, because her hour is come: But
as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguishe,
for joy that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow,
but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall
no man take from you.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis Gospel is part of that long sermon, which Christ made unto his
disciples, for to conforte and confirm them in the way of truth, after his
last supper, before he suffered. This conforte tends specially to this end,
that for the shortness of the tentation, which should chance very vehement to
the Disciples by the reason of Christ's passion and death, they should not
despair, but be on a good conforte and courage: forasmuch as he would absente
him self from them but a little while and that he would comme again unto them
after his resurrection, and make them ioyeful and merry for ever after, so that
of this their joy there should be no end.

The Euangeliste S. John makes many words in this behalf, and oftentimes
repeateth the same, A natural man understands not spiritual things.
that the Disciples did not understand, what Christ meant by this his saying.
A little while. And although christ declared his mind i^ this behalf, yet did
not they understand it. But this is not written for the disciples only. For S.
John by this would signifye, whereof all we have daily experience, 1. Cor. 2.
that we are not able well and truly to consider this saying, and that we are
not free from that thing, which did so greatly hinder the understanding of the
disciples. For when tentation was at hand, and the most ignominious and
spiteful death of Christ troubled al their wits, they could not then
consider, what this little while meant, but their hearts were so astonyed, that
they thought Christ to be utterly undone, and that they shortly after should
also comme to that point, and for Christ's sake be in like manner most
miserably handled. But that this their sorrow and tentation should not continue
past two or three days, when the Lord Christ should rise again from death
unto an everlasting life, and help them here in this world against the
world, devil, sin, and death: and at the last give them a most ioyefull
and everlasting life in the world to comme: yt understood they not: neither
though they it possible.

Therefore S. John afterward in his Gospel declares, how the disciples hyd
them selves, and kept the^ secret for fear of the Jews, neither would they
believe, John. 20.
that Christ was risen again, although the women. Peter, and other two
disciples declared it unto them. Luke. 24.
To be short they could not believe that, which Christ spoke unto them of A
little while. For they thought, that Christ should have remained in death
still, as other men do: otherwise they would never have been so weak and
fainte hearted, but with a lustye courage and strong hope they would have
looked for his resurrection.

We marvel at the infirmity and weakness of the disciples, Trouble dismayeth
the weak christeans.
and yet for all that when we be assailed with the like tentation, and in
danger to be overwhelmed with the waves of the like adversity: we forget also
that A little while, and cast away all hope of confort and think that this
our vexation and trouble will continewe so long as we live. We can not be
persuaded by any means, that this trouble will continue but a little while, 2.
Cor. 4.
and that God in his time will give a fortunate and ioyefull end to these our
euilles and miseries. And by this means are we in tentation clean out of
courage, and utterly dismayde, falling to lamenting and wepinge, as though
there were no GOD that would help us, Romans 12. 1. Pet. 4. Math. 5.
or had any regard unto us: When not withstandinge the blessed Apostle S. Paul
commands us to joy and rejoice in trouble, not only for the assured
deliverance, which must needs chance to the faithful, Romans 8.
but also because that by the cross and trouble a most certain and sure
trial is made, whereby we know, that we are the sons of GOD, and heirs of
everlasting life, as we shall more at large declare hereafter.

This Gospel therefore contains a most noble and notable doctrine of
conforte, This saying. A little while, ought diligently in trouble to be
remembered.
not only for the Disciples of Christ, but also for all Christians, that in
tentations and afflictions they should ever have before their eyes and
remember this. A little while: and diligently consider, that although reason
and man's wytt can not see how deliverance may come, yet that we shall not
be left succourles in those our euilles, not without help and confort: but
that they shall shortly have an end, and again, that in stead of them, joy
and gladness shall comme, and continually abide with us. And that this confort,
joy and gladness may the better be perceived of us: we will at this present
speak altogether of the cross and afflictions.

How reason Judges of the cross.
Man's wit and reason thinks and Judges on this wise: If God had any regard
unto us: the godly should never be in so great miseries and troubles, as they
are. And therefore when there arise diverse troubles, which diuersely vex us:
our mind thinks straight ways, that god has either utterly forgotten us,
or that he hates us, and regard us not: otherwise, that we could never lack
his defense and help. Against these thoughts and imaginations of reason, we
must get us aid and help out of the word of God, lest we suffer this matter
to be disputed after: the judgment of reason, where as we ought to refer the
whole judgment in this behalf unto the word of god. For if we judge these
things without the word: our judgment shall be false and nothing to the
purpose.

But what says the word? First of all it says, that not somuche as an
hear of our head shall fall to the ground without the will of God. How thee
word of god Judges of ye cross.
Of this word then this follows, Math. 10. Luc. 12.
that although the kingdom of the devil and the world be a mighty and
strong kingdom, yet that it can do nothing at al against a Christian man, but
so far as God does permit and suffer it. As Christ shows also by this his
saying: One of these little sparowes shall not fall unto the ground with out the
will of the father: The price of a sparowe is but little. It is sold for half
a farthing, and yet Christ says, that God has care of it. How much more
shall he care for the godly, which are better then many sparowes? He will not
therefore suffer the devil and the world to do with them that their pleasure
is, but what his good will is, so that what soever hindraunce shall chance to
the godly through the devil and the world, it can not be without the
providence of god, The devil and the world can do no more against the people
of god the^ god appoints and suffers.
neither can they rage further, then God appoints. The surges of the Sea are
marvelous says David, but the Lord on hye is more marvelous. The Lord has
appointed and set the devil and the world their limits, beyond the which
they can not go. Psalm. 93.
And this is worthy to be noted and for ever to be remembered, that thou in
thine affliction persuade thy self, A good lesson.
yt what soever adversity chances unto thee, it comes not by fortune or by
chance, but by the singular providence, council, and determination of god,
yea and that unto thy great commodity, although it seems otherwise to thy
blind and carnal reason.

And here now rises also a greater difficulty: for if I must thus persuade
my self, Reason can not se that our affliction comes of the good will of god
toward us.
that all the adversities and troubles, which I suffer, come by the
providence of God, then by the Judgment of reason it may be gathered, that
the council and determination of god concerning mine affliction, is unto my
destruction and damnation. For what health or salvation may be looked for of
pains, plagues, and punishments? in our great and grievous afflictions we can
not otherwise be persuaded, but that God even of displeasure and hatred
against us does plague and punish us. And this greatly increases our sorrow,
and in a manner brings us to desperation, because God does so punish us, If
any other thing were the cause of our plagues and troubles, it would not so
greatly grieve us: for then we would think, that there were some help and
conforte remayninge in God toward us. In this case therefore must we have
recourse unto the word of God, and not hear nor obey the judgment and
sentence of reason. For if we hear and believe that, we shall surely fall into
desperation, yea and utterly detest and abhor God.

The word, which in this behalf conforteth and opens unto us the will of
God, is this. S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 11.
If we would judge our selves, we should not have been judged. But when we are
judged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we should not be damned with the
world. By this sentence of the Apostle it is evident, that whom God will not
have condemned with the world, Affliction comes to us from god for our
proffite.
but preserved and kept unto everlasting life, he corrects and punishes
them: neither ought this to be counted a token of hatred, but rather a sign of
favor, love and good will, although they be afflicted and troubled. This
sentence in affliction is diligently to be considered and remembered. One has
this cross, an other has that, whereof they would gladly be eased. How we
should behave our selves in trouble.
But if every man would think on this manner, and say to him self: If thou
were not restrained with this byt of adversity, if thou were not thus correct
thou would surely do that, which should work thee greater displeasure, and
be ye cause of a more evil: but God does send thee this adversity, yt thou
sholdest not be damned with this world, but hereof take an occasion to amend
thy life, to call thy self unto repentance, Note well.
to fear GOD, to call on his blessed name, to thancke him for his benefits
etc. If every man in his trouble would thus think with himself, then would
they not be angry with god for laying that cross upon them, nor think that
he does it of hatred and displeasure against the^, but rather of favor and
good will toward them: yea then would they love and praise god, that he in that
affliction shows tokens of his favor and good will toward them, by this
means preseruinge them from eternal damnation unto everlasting salvation.
Heb. 12. Proverb. 3.
Unto this end also does S. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews allege this
saying of Solomon out of his proverbs: My son, despise not thou the
chasteninge of the Lord: neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom
the lord loves him he chasteneth: yea he scourges every son that he
receaueth. If ye endure chastening, god offers himself unto you, as unto
sons, For what son is he, who^ ye father chasteneth not? If ye be not under
correction (whereof all are partakers) then are ye bastardes, and not sons.
Therefore seeing we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we
gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the father
of spirits and life? And they verily for a few days nurtered us after their
own pleasure: but he nurtereth us for our profit, to the intent that he may
minister of his holiness unto us. The end of Christen men's trouble is
everlasting joy.
No manner chastising for the present time seems to be joyous but grievous:
nevertheless afterward it brings ye quiet fruit of righteousness unto the^
which are exercised thereby. This sentence of the holy Apostle does testify,
Affliction is a token of god^s favor ^owarde us.
not only that the discipline and correction, which god lays upon us, is no
token of his anger, and displeasure against us but also that it is a most
manifest sign and evident argument of his fatherly and friendly good will
toward us. Let us not therefore think, when we are corrected and punished, that
GOD is angry with us, or that he set naught by us. For the cause, why he
corrected us, is, because we are his sons, Why god pvnisheth us.
and should not loose our enheritaunce, nor at any time be put from it.

And as the word does preach and declare unto us of the cross and of
afflictions: so likewise is it set forth by examples. Examples of affliccion.
who can or dare say, that god the father hated his only begotten son
Christ Jesus? And yet for all that if thou considerest his life and death, and
weighest the matter after the judgment of reason, there shall appear no great
signs of gods love toward him, yea rather signs of hatred then of love: and
that the ungodly and wicked Jews were more regarded with god, then Christ,
whom they handled at their pleasure, and entreated as they would, according to
the saying of the Prophet: Esa. 53.
He has nether beauty nor favor when we looked upon him, there was no
fayrenes, we had no lust to him. He was despised and abhorred of men. We
reckoned him so vile, that we hyd our faces from him: yea he was despised, and
therefore we regarded him not. We did judge him, as though he were plagued and
cast down of god. And Christ himself says by ye psalmographe: As for me,
Psalm. 22.
I am a worm and no man: a very scorn of men, and the outcaste of the people:
All they that see me, laughe me to scorn: they shote out their lyppes, and
shake the head etc. They gape upon me with their mouths as it were a ramping
and roaring Lion, Math. 27. Marc. 15. Luc. 20.
etc. Yea the very Jews, when he hanged on the cross, mocked him, saying. If
he be the son of God, let him comme down from the cross, etc.

Now as god did handle his own derely beloved and only begotten son Christ
Jesus here on earth: even so will he handle al Christians in this world, as
Christ has to fore said: The servant is not greater then his master. If they
have persecuted me: John^ 15.
they will persecute you likewise. And it is said both most trimly and truly
in the Epistle to the Hebreues, as we heard before: If ye be not under
correction, Heb. 12.
(whereof all are partakers) then are ye bastardes and not sons.

Thus see we by the wonderful and certain consent both of sentences and
examples, and by them are we taught, that god not of evil but of good will,
not of displeasure but of favor, corrects us: and that in the midst of
our trouble we should know the good will of god, and certainly be persuaded,
that God, although our affliction be never so great, does not hate us, nor set
naught by us, but rather that this correction is a most assured sign, that he
loves us, and takes us for his children, saying he does so lovingly correct
and chasten us.

Now must we also learn to know the cause why God does so correct and
punish his children. The cause why god corrects his children. 1. Cor. 11.
S. Paul sets it forth in these his words: we are corrected of the Lord,
says he that we should not be damned with the world. And David says: It is
highly for my profit yt thou have corrected me, that I might learn thy
righteous ordinances. Psalm. 119.
Esaias the Prophet also says: vexation gives understanding. For this is
certain, if god would serve our fancies, Esa. 18.
accomplish our desires, and never send us adversity and trouble, The
profits that come by affliction.
we should become altogether secure and careless, neither should we at any
time call our sin unto remembrance, nor care for the word, nor give our
selves unto prayer. But when now and then we and such things as appertain
unto us are assailed with aduersitis and misfortunes: the^ have we a just and
nedeful cause, not only to fall unto prayer, but also to remember our sins and
our former wicked life, and to consider, yt such plagues and punishments
chance unto us for our syns. And that therefore we ought from hensforth to live
more warely, to lay aside our sins, to fear god, to fram our life according to
his blessed will etc. that by this means god seeing our conversion may either
take away those pains from us, or else mitigate and ease them, as it seems
best to his godly wisedo^, as s. Paul says in his epistle to ye Hebrews: the
heavenly father nurtereth us for our profit to the intent, the he may minister
of his holiness unto us. Heb. 12.
We therefore may not despair because of ye cross. We should rather think on
this manner with our selves: By this sign and token I perceive right well yt God
is merciful unto me, favors and loves me, for he nurtereth me as his son,
and by these adversities and afflictions his pleasure is to put me in
remembrance of my sins, and to call me unto repentance, that by this means I
may amend that is a miss, and fromhensforth avoid sin, and no more offend
my heavenly father. He yt does this, uses the cross a right, neither does he
murmur against God in his adversity, nor yet through impaciencie is brought
unto that point that he flees unto supersticious, idolatrous and wicked arts
to be released of his trouble, but patiently and quietly he abides the help
of god, and fervently by prayer desires the same. Now ensues the fourth part
of this matter. After yt we be thoroughly persuaded, that nothing can chance
unto us without the will of god, and that it is Gods pleasure, when adversity
and trouble chance unto us, and that it is for our salvation, that we are thus
afflicted and troubled: we must also assuredly assure our selves of this thing,
that god will give a fortunate end to these our troubles, and most prosperously
deliver us from them, as S. Paul says: god is faithful, 1. Cor 10.
which shall not suffer you to be tempted above your strength, but shall in
the mids of the temptation make a way, that ye may be able to bear it. And
unto this confort do those things chiefly pertain, that Christ speaks here
of that A little while. Against this doctrine of A little while are two things.

First, when we are oppressed with the greatness and veheme^cie of affliction or
trouble, The cross semethe intolerable.
so that there appears none other thing, but yt the very cross will have ye
uppermost hand, and that nothing (so far as reason judges) can prevail
against it: as we have in the example of king Ezechias. When Rabsakes ye
captain of ye host of ye king of ye Assiria^s required yt the City of
Jerusalem should be yielded and given over unto him, Esa. 37.
Ezechias sent unto Esaye the Prophet with this embassage: This is the day of
trouble, of plague, and of blasphemy: for the children are comme to the place
of birth: but there is no power to bring them forth. And Christ here also uses
the same similitude of a woman that goes on her travail. John. 16.
There appears to be very great peril both of the mother and of the child.
For ye afflictions are not small, as it is set forth in a certain psalm, where
Christ him self cries out on this manner: Save me O God, for the waters are
come in, even unto my soul, Psalm. 69.
I stick fast in the deep mire, where no ground is: I am comme into deep
waters, so that the fluddes run over me.

Secondly, The cross seems to have no end.
when we se no way how to escape that great danger: The^ we straightwayes
fall to desperatio^ nether ca^ we believe, yt this matter is but of a little while.

And unto this end specially belonged the similitude of the woman that
trauaileth of child, John. 16.
which CHRSIT uses here. For here the peril seems to be infinity,
unmeasurable, and endless, and yet sodeinly comes there great joy, as life
springinge out of death, when a man is borne into the world, the mother also
being safe and with out danger. In consideration whereof all the sadness is
turned into gladness. These things chance daily. And where as some time the
end of such travail is not gladness, that chances but seldom. The common
trade is, as Christ says, that suddenly and unlooked for, sound, full, true,
and perfect joy follows sorrow and sadness, as the Psalmographe says: Heuines
may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. This would Christ
have his Disciples to learn, Psalm. 30.
when they are tossed and troubled with the waves of cruel adversity, that
they may think and remember this his saying. A little while, as S. Paul
says to the Hebrews. No manner chastisynge for the present time seems to be
joyous but grievous; Heb. 12.
nevertheless afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto
them, which are exercised thereby. So that it is first called. A little while,
for ye sudden and unlooked for mutation or change, which chances sooner then
we looked for. Secondlye affliction is called A little while, because this short
trouble shall be turned into everlasting joy, and this sorrowful transitory
life into a ioyefull perpetual life, as Christ said to his Disciples: John.
16.
ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. For what is to be
thought of all that time, wherein Lazarus paraduenture ten or twenty years was
in misery and affliction in respect of that time, which is afterward in the
everlasting life? So (says Paul: Romans 8.
) I suppose that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory,
which shall be showed upon us. Again: 2. Cor. 4.
Our tribulation which is short and light, prepares an exceeding and an
eternal weight of glory unto us, while we look not on the things that are
seen, but on the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen,
are temporal, but things which are not seen, ar eterna^l. 1. Pet. 1.
Blessed Peter says also: In the which ye rejoice, though now for a season ye
are in heuines, through many fold tentations, that the trial of your faith,
being much more precious then gold that perishes, might be found unto praise,
glory, and honor at the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom ye have not seen, and
yet love him, in who^ even now, though ye see him not, yet do you believe, and
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 5.
receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls: Again:
The God of all grace, which has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, shall his own self (after that ye have suffered a little affliction)
make you perfect, settle, strength, and stablish you. Faith hellpeth greatly
in affliction.


He that could thus believe, and be thus certainly persuaded of this saying: A
little while: should find great consolation in his affliction, wherewith he
should be able to stay him self. Therefore all the matter stands in this
one point, that we surely trust the Lord CHRIST, and count his word to
be most certain and true: and that although we be troubled and afflicted,
yet it shall continue but a little while, so that we may comfort our selves in
the cross, as they comfort a woman that trauayleth of child, namely, that she
shall have good luck, be delivered of her pain, and have a fair child, to
her great joy and comfort. For it is not possible, that there should be any
great gladness, where no sorrow and sadness has been before. But through the
importunity of reason, we are kept in miserable bondage, which always
puts us in mind, that our affliction comes not from the favor, but the
anger of God, and that we shall perish in the same, and never be delivered.
Why affliccions are sent unto us of god
But the matter is far otherwise. For as sorrows and pains do therefore
chance to women trauailyng of child, that an infant may be borne: so likewise
our afflictions are therefore sent to us from God that by this means we may
obtain our true glory, and so for ever be saved.

Impaciencye and desperacion are to be eschewed in affliction.
This also is not to be passed over with silence, that Christ interprets and
makes plain to his disciples what joy shall chance unto them. I (says he)
will see you again. This came to pass in the day of his resurrection, when
they saw him in a new and everlasting life. Christ therefore sees us also,
and our heart rejoices, when we meditate and consider his resurrection, that
for our sake, he has overcome sin, death, and devil, that we thorough
him might live euerlastyngly.

And this is a true, sound, perfect, and everlasting joy, which changes all
sadness, neither shall it at any time be taken away from us. Let us
therefore beware and take heed of impaciencie and desperation, when we are in
trouble. And this comfort is diligently to be retained and kept fast, that
although we suffer and bear the Cross, yet it shall be but A little while.
For Christ is risen from the dead, and sytteth on the right hand of GOD the
Father, that he may repress and keep under the devil and all euyls, and give
us everlasting salvation. Which thing our faithful GOD might vouchsafe to
bestow upon us for his son Christ Jesus sake our Lord and alone Savior:
To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor, glory, and praise,
worlds without end. Amen.

The fourth Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. xvi.
Jesus said unto his Disciples: Now I go my way to him that sent me, and none
of you asks me whither I go: But because I have said such things unto you,
your hearts are full of sorrow. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, that comforter will not
come vntn you: But if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come,
he will rebuke the world of sin, and of ryghteousnes, and of judgment. Of
sin, because they believe not on me. Of ryghteousnes, because I go to my
father, and ye shall see me no more. Of judgment, because the Prince of this
world is judged already. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
bear them away now: How be it, when he is come (which is the sprite of
truth) he will lead you into all truth. He shall not speak of him self,
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you
things to com. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall
show unto you. All things that the father has are mine, therefore said I
unto you, that he shall take of mine, and show unto you.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis is a most noble and excellent Gospel. For it entreats specially of
that high and necessary article, for the which we are and are called
Christians. Therefore although it be read, every year among us, yet can we
not think and speak it sufficiently. If we entend truly to have the profit
and fruit that comes by it: so must we diligently exercise our selves in the
meditation thereof. It is also part of that sermon, which Christ made after his
last Supper. And this part, even as all the rest, All our salvation comethe
by the death of christ.
tends also to this end, that the Disciples may be enarmed against the
sclaunder, offendicle, or stomblyng block of Christ's Passion and death, that
they should not only not be heavy, but also judge so of the matter, that (as
the truth is) they should right well perceive, that the salvation both of
them and of all sinners, does only consyste in the death of the Lord
Christ. Wherefore even as of late he set forth unto us a consolation and
conforte, concerning the shortness and small continuance of affliction and
trouble, and the perpetuity of our joy and gladness: so likewise does he
declare the matter here, and sets forth the cause of his passion. I go
(says he) unto him, that sent me: that is to say: To morrow I shall be
crucified and slain, and yet there is none of you that asks me, whyther I
go, nor what I entend by this my departure. But because I have spoken this
unto you, your hertes are full of sorrow, But I tell you truth: it is expedient
for you yt I go away. For if I shall not go away, ye co^forter shall not come
unto you, and the prince of this world shall not be Judged. But when I shall
go away, The death of christ gets unto us the holy ghost and victory over
satan.
I will send the comforter unto you. Christ would have it well beaten in to
all men's heads, that they should not be offended with his Passion and death,
nor be taken as a matter of sadness, but that we should rather use it unto the
confirmation of our faith, and unto the consolation and comfort of our
conscience, for as much as by this means the tyranny of the devil is
destroyed, and the holy ghost is gotten and given unto us.

What the holy Ghost shall do, what he shall bring what he shall declare and
teache, The office of the holy ghost
that does Christ express in these words. When the holy Ghost (says he)
shall come, he will rebuke the world of sin, of rightousnes, and of
judgment. Christ in these his words comprehends many great things, and
says, that the holy Ghost shall not only rebuke small companies certain
kinds of men, certain nations or people, but the whole world. He had need be
well fenced and armed, that will take upon him to have too do with the whole
world. For the world is, what soever has grown up from Adam hitherto,
Monarchs, What the world is.
Emperors, Kings, Princes, no man utterly, no not of the highest degree,
excepted. All these must be rebuked of sin by the Apostles, and by the
ministers of the word, at the motion of the holy Ghost. The holy Ghost by
the preachers shall rebuke them all of sin, of righteousness, and of
Judgment, none neither high nor low excepted, not Jerusalem for her holiness,
not Rome for her wisdom. etc. All must receive this correction and rebuke of
the holy ghost, that they may be saved. For all men, with all that ever they
have are under the kingdom of the devil. Neither their righteousness, nor
their holiness, nor yet their good works can be of such force and virtue,
that they can healpe any thing at all against damnation. And this is the
office, that the holy Ghost will do in the world by the Apostles, men
beggarly and of no reputation, even to rebuke the world of sin. It is no
small thing, but a matter of weyghty and great importance, to rebuke the
world of high and great matters. For he has an office to rebuke the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Seeing that all things are full of
sin, and no righteousness and judgment is in the world, what shall then
remayn? The whole world therefore together is condemned in this sermon with all
her righteousness, and it is openly said, that it can not ones aspire and
come unto the kyngedome of God, except it be delivered from sin by the holy
Ghost, and justified, and by this means escape everlasting damnation. Such
like sentences also are there many in the holy scriptures, Romans 1. Galat. 3.
Ephesians. 2. Joan. ^.
as when Paul says: God has comprehended all things under sin. Again:
We are by nature the children of wrath. And Christ him self says: Except a
man be borne again, he can not see the kingdom of God. This is truly the
sermon of the holy Ghost thus to rebuke the world for sin.

But what is sin? Is it to rob, to kill, to commytte adultery. etc. These
are sins in deed, but not the chiefest, Sin.
which the holy Ghost rebukethe. For there are many, which are not gyltye
of these outewarde sins. But of those sins, whereof the holy Ghost
preaches, all are gyltie: otherwise he could not rebuke the world of them.
And this sin is, to be short, not to believe in CHRIST. Of this sin the
world knows nothing. In credulity is ye greateste sin and the root of
all sin.
It is the whole and alone doctrine of the holy ghost. For the world counts
those sins only, which are forbidden in the second Table of Moses. Of
Christ it knows nothing, much less knows it, that it is sin, not to
believe in him. But what should we with many words rebuke the ignorancye of
the world, seeing that even in the schools among the learned, incredulity,
infidelity, or unbelief is taken for no sin, namely for no original sin.
For it belongs to no science to teach that incredulity is sin but to the
holy Ghost. And he by this doctrine makes the whole world gyltie of sin,
where as many times the world is able to prove her external justice and
outward righteousness. This is therefore the Doctrine of the holy ghost,
that it should reprove the whole world of sin, no man excepted. The
world has not been accustomed unto such an unwonted kind of doctrine,
neither knows it any thing of that, that it is bound to believe in Christ.
Thus it thinks: If with the Phariseye it be no murderer, no adulterer, no
unrighteous person, it is enough, and the world requires no more. But the
holy ghost preaches otherwise, and says: I know well, that among men, as
concerning outward and bodyly righteousness, one is better then an other.
But this is the chief and principal sin, that all be subject unto, that
is, That they do not believe in CHRIST Jesus. Luc. 1^.
This syn no man, except he has learned it of the holy Ghost, sees,
knows, or perceaueth.

Therefore be thou bold thus to say. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, be
it monkery, prayer, fasting, almose deeds, or any thing else. If there be no
faith in Christ Jesus, then as thou hear here, will the holy Ghost rebuke
it. Romans 14. What is sin.
Neither is there any other way to be delivered from this sin, then to believe
in Christ Jesus. Nothing can be more plain, nor more euidente, then these
words are, The iuglynge of ye papists.
and yet the Pope and his accomplices, can not away with them. Notwithstanding,
when they have nothing to say against Faith, then they invent this comment and
Gloss. He speaks De fide formata per charitatem, that is to say, of Faith
formed, framed, and fashioned by charity. But confer thou this their
interpretation with the text. No man can deny this, that Christ speaks here
of syn, and he expounds that it is syn, not to believe in him, whereof it must
needs follow, that what soever they babble de forma and de bonis operibus, if
there be no Faith in Christ, man with all his good works and virtue is a
damnable sinner, and can not escape the rebuke of the Holy Ghost.

Therefore incredulity or unbelief is the principal and greatest sin,
Unbeleif is y^ greatest sin, and the fauntyne of all evil.
and the fountain out of the which all other sins and vices do issue and
spring. For where incredulity is in the heart, and men believe not in Christ,
this then immediately follows, yt the word of God is not regarded, but either
despised, or else utterly rejected and cast away for heresye and lies, as
though the devil were the author of it. And after this follow other sins, as
disobedience toward parents, maiestrates, rulers, ministers of Gods word
etc. neglectyng their vocation and calling, a wicked and sinful life, besides
other most grievous vices, which either for shame, or for fear of punishment
they dare not do. And these are the leaves, yea and the hole tree of
incredulity, which spring out of these roots, for the which the holy Ghost
rebukes the world, neither suffers he any thing to resist and withstand his
office. For he that believes not in Christ, has not the holy Ghost, neither
can he think any godly thing aright. And although he does that. The world is
the deuyles bondeslaue.
which of the own nature is not vicious and wicked, but agreeable to the
commandments of God, yet does he the same as a servant, only for fear,
and not freely to show his obedience to the will of God, so that the world is
even such one, as like a most bondslaue is led of the devil, which can
neither speak, do, or think any thing that good and godly is, as S. John
says: 1. Joan. 5.
The world is altogether set on wyckednes. The reason hereof is this: For
incredulity is the fountain and welspring of all evil. And he that exactly
and thoroughly desires to describe the world, may well say on this manner:
What the world is.
The world is a multitude of men, which believe not in Christ, and therefore,
hate, curse, and blaspheme his word: which inwardly in their hearts, and
outwardly in their deeds and works steal, rob, kylle, commytte whoredom,
and are bent to all kind of lewdnes, and wickedly abuse all the good gifts of
God. All such says Christ in this place, shall you mine Apostles and
ministers of ye word have evermore your adversaries: with such must you have
to do.

This rebukyng of the world shall not be taken away before the last day, but
it shall be continuallye taught, that whatsoever is the world, that believes
not on Christ, that pertayneth not unto the kingdom of Christ, but unto the
devil, not only for the notorious and outward syns, but also for this
principal and most grievous sin, I mean incredulity or unbelief. Where
unbelief is no: work can please god.
Neither does this profit any thing at all, that thou keep this or that
monastical rule, that thou do this or that work. For so long as
incredulity is present, thou art a damned sinner, neither canste thou avoid
damnation, so long as thou remaynest in that state. The one and alone way to
escape damnation is, to give over thine incredulity, and to believe in Christ,
and to hold fast this confort against sin, devil, and death.

As concerning Faith what it is, it is not unknown unto you, What faith is.
and ye have many times heard, that Faith is not only to know and believe,
that the history of Christ is true, but faithfully to be persuaded, that all
that ever Christ did, was done for thy sake, for thy commodity and
wealth, for thy health and everlasting salvation. ^ac. 2.
For the devil also knows, that Christ dyed, and doothe as certainly believe
it, as all the Papists of the world: but he believes not that Christ dyed
for him, and for his salvation. True faith is the gift of the holy ghost
This Faith, that we here speak of, that all, that Christ did, was done for
our sake, and for our salvation, is only the gift of the holy Ghost. He
that has not this Faith, that he can say: Christ dyed for me, Galat. 5.
that I might be delivered from sin and everlasting death, is ungodly, and
appertains not unto the kingdom of Christ: neither has he removed sin
from him, whatsoever good works he does, and takes never so much pain
otherwise. And this is the first part of the office of the holy Ghost, that
all things are wrapped in sin, and that we with all our good works are not
withstandyng judged of the holy Ghost sinners, and so damned, forasmuch as we
believe not in Christ Jesus.

Therefore let us refuse and utterly cast away coules, monkyshe orders,
foolyshe vows, superstitious fastings, unfaithful prayers, men's wicked
traditions, unfruitful ceremonies, and ydell observations of men's most
ydell inventions and carnal imaginations, Delyuerauns ro^m sin comes not by
works but by faith in christian
and moreover what soever we have taken upon us, to this end that we may
obtain Remission of our sins: and let us lay on hand and hold fast
true Faith in Christ. For these things can not agree together, that I
should say: Christ dyed for me, and yet I do and observe certain works,
that I may be justified and saved by them. He that can not abide to be
rebuked of the holy Ghost for such things: It is a manyfeste sign that he
doothe not believe, and that he is a damned sinner, and of the number of them
that do not believe in Christ Jesus.

The second part is, that the Holy Ghost will rebuke the world of
righteousness. This alsoo is an hard saying. The world has Sin, but it
has not Righteousness: neither does it know how it should be Justified
and made Ryghteous. But what is this Righteousness? Law and righteousness be
the chief things of the world. And the Philosophers have prescribed Rules
and Precepts of the Offices and duties of Righteousness, and of other
virtues, that men might live an honest and Civil life. Neither can this be
counted unrighteous, to hang up thieves, to punyshe adulterers. etc. Yea, it is
an act both right and good. But Christ speakethe not here of that
Righteousness, which the world counts righteousness: but of that
righteousness, which is of valor, and will go for payment before God. He
speaks not here of politic and humayne justice or rightousnes, but of that,
which is comprehended in this word of Christ: I go unto the Father, The
blyndnep of man's judgment concerning iustificacion.
and ye shall see me no more. This is more mystical and harder to be
understood, then the last where it is pronounced, that it is sin, not to
believe in Christ. For thus men think, that they have natural strength enough
to live godly, to prepare them selves unto grace, and to pray for it. And that
is the cause now a days also, that the Papists can not perceive nor
understand this doctrine, so far out of frame seems here the description of
righteousness, that thou art then righteous, when Christ goes unto the Father.
Rightousnes comes not by works.
and thou see him no more. This is a marvelous goodly text, and nothing can
be more evident and plain, then this description. For what will man now
glory and boaste himself of his good works? Galat. 2.
Christ's word is manifest in this place, that righteousness is not gotten by
works, but it is gotten by this means only, that Christ gothe to the
Father. This his journey and going unto the Father, is the true and
everlasting righteousness. This knowledge is utterly unknown unto the world.
For in all his monumentes and books, there is not one syllable of this
rightousnes. This is set forth in their books that he which keeps the
ten commandments does nothing against honesty, public ordinances
laws, custom. etc. is a good, honest, and righteous man. But Christ
speaks not one word here, what I ought to do, Civil righteousness.
or to leave undone, but he speakethe symply and only of his own work, that
is to say, that he goes unto the Father, Christ's goinge unto the father is
our righteousness.
and that we shall see him no more: and that this is our righteousness, and none
other thing.

Therefore when we do determyne to get us true righteousness, we may not go
about to obtain it with our own works, and with our own righteousness. It
makes nothing unto this matter, Though good works justify not, yet may they
not be left undone for the comma^dementes sake.
to become a Monk, to watch, to fast, to pray. etc. But the whole pythe and
sum of the matter consists in this, and so is delyuerance from sin
obtained, that thou know, that Christ is gone unto the Father, although good
works may not be left undone. For thou art commanded of God in the ten
commandments to do them, and diligentely to exercise thy self in all good
deeds commanded of God, and prescribed in his holy word. But thou may
not add this unto them: That thou sekest to be justified and made ryghteous
by them. For by this is righteousness only to be gotten, that CHRIST is gone
unto the Father. This is the alone way, and none other, whereby we are
delivered from our sins, and justified. what christ's goinge unto ye father
is.
Christ's iourneye or going unto the Father, is none other thing, then that
he has suffered, dyed on the Cross, and by death is gone away out of the
world unto the Father, that is, He is ascended into heaven, and there sytteth
on the right hand of GOD the Father, and governs his Kyngedome. We see not
this, but we believe it.

This is the whole matter, whereby we are justified: so that righteousness is
not to be imputed to my strength or power, but to Jesus Christ, because he
goes unto the Father. Note well.
And if we will speak it with plain words, it is thus much to say: No
man is justified or saved, or delivered from sin, but by this only, that
Jesus Christ has suffered, dyed, and risen again. This going of Christ
justifies thee, and none other thing.

But now mark how that doothe agree with this doctrine, The wicked doctrine
of the papists concerning iustificacion.
that the Papists teach. He that will be saved (say they) must bring that to
pass with his own works. In deed this is godly and truly said, that a
Christen man must live in this world godly, justly, and holyly: but that he
shall be made righteous by his holy and good works, that is most false. For
it is here plain, that the going of Christ unto the Father, works that
only. This is the assured, certain, true, and infallible righteousness, whereof
the world knows nothing. The Holy Ghost only reueleth and opens that
mystery. But the Papists obiecte this saying of Christ against us: If thou
will enter into life, Math. 16.
keep the commandments. This has an other manner of meaning. And by this
it appearethe euidentely, that the Papystes know not, what it is to keep the
commandments. For if they did, they would otherwise expound that
sentence of CHRIST. Christ alone is our ryghteousnes.
Therefore this saying abydethe sure and certain, that there is none other
Righteousness and Everlasting life for us then this, that the Lord
Christ Jesus is gone out of this world unto the Father. Hold fast this
Doctrine, and let not the devil by any means pluck it away from thee.
The devil may fear me, and trouble my conscience (for of our own
strengthes we are not able to prevail against him) but there is an other way,
In christ we over come the devil.
which not I, but Christ goes thoroughe high obedience toward his heavenly
Father. Him, that is to say, CHRIST shall the devil never be able to make
unrighteous, or a sinner, although thoroughe sin he has the higher hand
of me. Faith.
Therefore let this be our assured trust and synguler great conforte, and
stedfastely believe, that by Christ's going unto the Father we have
righteousness, even Remyssion of our sins, and Everlasting life. For
Faith is necessary to embrace this work of our Savior Christ. Christ
has perfectly wroughte the work of our redemption.
The going and work of Christ is certain. Christ has fynyshed all the
whole matter, so that now there remaynethe nothing else, but that we
embrace this work of Christ with a sure and undoubted Faith, and conforte
our selves therewyth. Do thou believe it? So haste thou it. Do thou not
believe it? without faith there is no salvation.
Then haste thou nothing. This is done, that we should utterly cast away
our own righteousness, which is altogether spotted and vnpure, as the
Prophet says: All our ryghteousnesses are as a polluted and defiled clothe:
Esai. 64.
and set all our Faith, hope, trust, and confydence only upon CHRIST
alone, and upon his work, or going unto his Father, that we may be at all
times certain and sure, where to rest, and of whom to seek our salvation.
For if our Righteousness did consyste in our own works and
satisfactions, in our own confession and contrition (as they preached, and
yet do, in the Popes church) so should our hearts never be quiet, neither
should we at any time be certain and sure of our salvation. For whenne should
we know and be sure, that we have been sorye enough, confessed, done
penance enough, and made satisfaction enough? Therefore has CHRIST taken
all that matter from us, Our salvation in christ is certain.
and laid it upon him self, that we should leave to him alone, most
stedfastely beleeuynge, that his going unto the Father, his death and
satisfaction is our Righteousness. For in this behalf there can be no
uncertainty. Joan. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Cor. 5. 1. Joan. 3.
For the person is such, even CHRIST Jesus the son of GOD, as in whom no
fault can be found. And he it is that does this work, which was ordained
of the Father, that by him we might have healpe against sin, devil, and
death. In consideration whereof, Joan. 7.
John Baptist calls him the lamb of God, saying: Behold that lamb of God,
that takes away the sin of the world.

This therefore is a most perfect determination in this our Gospelle, good
works
that righteousness consists not in that we either do, or leave undone,
but in this that Christ goes unto the Father. Which righteousness whenne
that thou haste ones gotten through Faith: then do thou also good works, and
apply thy self to the uttermost of thy power to show thy^e obedience which
thou owe unto GOD. For before thou haste embraced Christ with a certain and
sure Faith, Where faith is not there is no good work
thou canste do no good work. The Christen righteousness therefore is a
most synguler and excellent righteousness, which no heart can think, no
reason or wisdom can conceive. All the matter is to be known and learned of
the Holy Ghost: Neither though we hear it can neither though we hear it,
can it otherwise be perceived, then by faith alone, as Christ says here: I go
unto the father, and yea shall se me no more. That is to say, ye must believe:
John. 16.
otherwise shall ye never co^prehe^de this my work of your justification. This
is the Christian righteousness, which the holy ghost alone teaches. Of the
righteousness of ye world. Philolosophers, Lawyers, and the expositours of the
law do teach, and parents also in their family. But a Christen man's
knowledge is an other manner of science, with out faith all things are sin.
whereof the world knows nothing, namely, that without faith all things are
sin, and yt the true and everlasting righteousness consists in this only, that
Christ goes to the father, and we se him no more. The third part is, that the
holy ghost also rebukes the world of judgment. What manner of judgment this
is, Christ shows on this wise. The prince of the world, says he, is judged.
Therefore as the holy ghost does rebuke the world, because it has sin, for
as much as it believes not in Christ: and yt it has no righteousness, because it
knows not, neither has any conforte therein, that Christ is gone to the
father: Psalm. 14.
so likewise does he rebuke it of judgment, because it knows nothing hereof,
and therefore fears, where nothing is to be feared, if it would hear him,
and receive his word. For this is an extreme misery and a lamentable plague
to have syn and no righteousness, and besides that, not to know of any
consolation and conforte against sin, death and all other euilles.

In this also, says Christ, is the office of the holy ghost, that he should
preach of judgment, The holy ghost rebukes the world of Judgment.
and procure to be pronounced and set forth by the gospel, that the prince of
the world is judged, and that therefore he can not hurt them that believe in
Christ, and put their confidence in his goinge unto the father. He may vex
them with diverse tentations, but he can never prevail against them. For
although he be the prince of the world, John. 12.16. Luc. 11. 2. Pet. 2.
yet the prince is judged: he is spoiled of his palace and armor, and with
the chains of darcknes as Peter speaks, is he bound of Christ. There is no
cause, why Christen men should fear him, or all his kingdom. For if the
prince be judged, the world also, which is his kingdom, must needs be judged
and deprived of all his power.

This the ungodly know not. Therefore although sometime they hear the word,
Math. 13.
and begin to believe, yet so sone as the world rages, and goes about to
persecute, they straightwaye are a frayde and fall away both from Christ and
his word, as Christ says in the parable of the sower, part of whose sede
fell upon the stones. But the Christians are constant, and stand steadfast like
a strong and an invincible bulwarcke. The true chritians abide constante and
steadfast in the time of persecution.
For this voice, which rebukes the prince of the world, is always in their
hearts and ears: Why sholdest thou fear? why should thou be faint
hearted, and give over to these tentations? know thou not, that the Prince
of the world is judged? He is no more a lord, The devil can not prevail
against gods elect.
or a prince. Thou have a Lord, that is mightier then he, even Christ Jesus,
which has overcome and bound this prince. Therefore let him threaten, brag
and boaste, let him be as mad as he lust, yet fear thou not. For he shall
hurt thee no more, then that cruel beast, whose violence and cruelty is
repressed and restrained with strong and mighty chains. ^ac. 4.
If thou will only beware; that thou come not nighe unto him, and so
willyngly cast thy self into danger, thou nedest not fear. Thou art without
peril. He shall do thee no harm. Wherefore this only is required, that the
Christians do not make light of the enemy, keep them selves in the fear of
God, Mark well.
diligently pray: and the enemy that is judged shall never hurt them.
Contrariwyse he that will not take heed, but be secure and careless, he shall
sone be cast hedlonge into diverse perilles of this prince although judged.

And of this confirmation and strenghtening they have most need, The world
can not abide to be rebuked.
which are the instruments of the holy ghost in the world and do rebuke it
of sin and righteousness. For there is no accusation, that the world can les
bear, then of sin, which is a thing most heinous, and of righteousness, that
it has none at all. Where this public accusation is (as it ought to be) yt
world waxes wode, makes an hurly burly, and attempteth all kind of violence
and tyranny against the ministers of the word. But the holy ghost by this
judgment sets forth co^solatio^. For if this were not, ye preachers could
never endure against ye violence of the world, but must needs fear and
tremble. And for this cause specially is the holy ghost called Paracletus, Why
the holy ghost is called a conforter.
yt is to say a co^forter, or an Advocate, which in adversity and trouble
stands by the preachers, comforts the^, and encourages the^ boldly and
stoutly to confess ye truth forasmuch as they hear, that the prince of the
world is judged.

And this is the doctrine of the office of ye holy ghost, even what mysteries
of most worthy matters he shall declare, and most specially set forth unto men
in this world. He can be no Christen man, that not only not knows these
most excellent mysteries, but also that when he knows the^, does not set
more by the^, then by all the goods in the world. For as for all other
things, they are transitory and pass away, but these things are
everlasting, The goods of the world are transitory
which shall never decay, as Paul says: The gospel is the power of God unto
salvation for so many as believe. This going away therefore, whereof Christ
here speaks, is greatly to be esteemed, and to be rejoiced in, as a most
singular benefit, Romans 1.
for the which we are bound daily to give god our heavenly father most
hearty thanckes, and to desire him with fervent prayer, that we may daily more
and more feel in our selves through faith the fruit of this his inestimable
benefit, namely remission of sins and everlasting righteousness, again, the
consolation and conforte of this judgment, that the prince of this world is
judged.

Now goes Christ forth in his sermon, and says: I have yet many things to
say unto you, The scripture abusede of the papists.
which you can not now bear. But when that spirit of truth shall come, he
shall teach you all truth. How the Papists interpret this sentence of
Christ, it is well known. All their traditions, innouations and alterations
they defend by this saying of Christ and make the holy ghost author of them
al, as though Christ had to fore spoken of them. But this is not true. The
holy ghost taught no new doctrine.
For this is the right understanding of Christ's words, that the holy ghost
shall teach the Apostles and the church, and instruct them concerning such
matters, as Christ him self had to fore taught them which by the reason of
their carnal judgments they could not understand, nor attain unto the
knowledge thereof. No new doctrine, but ye same doctrine, yt Christ tofore had
taught, shall the holy ghost teach, as Christ declares more plainly by these
his words: He shall not speak of him self: but what so ever he shall hear,
John. 16*
that shall he speak, and he will show you things to comme. He shall
glorifye me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto you. Again: The
conforter, which is the holy ghost whom my father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, John. 14
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
The holy ghost opens and lightneth the dark minds of the Apostles with the
golden and glisteryng beams of his godly influence. He makes plain unto them
and unto the whole church the true doctrine of Christ, concerning sin, The
doctrine of the holy ghost.
righteousness and Judgment: He makes them to have a right judgment of
Christ's kingdom, which they looked for to be a carnal and glorious kingdom
in this world. He instructs them as touching the conversion of the
Gentiles, and the receiving of them into the nombre of gods people, whom they
judged to be dogs and cast awayes. He teaches them, that the gospel
belongs no les to the Gentile then to the Jew: and that there is no respect
of persons before God, but that who so ever believes and works righteousness,
is welcomme unto him. He enformeth them, that they in this world should not
look for wealth, glory, riches, ease, favor of men etc. But for the cross,
trouble, affliction, persecution, loss of goods, Act. 10.
banishment, imprisonment, and at the last death, whereas the Apostles (so
blinded were they with the vain opinion of Christ's carnal and worldly
kingdom, as we may se in many places of the Evangelical history) looked for
the clean contrary. These and such like things, which Christ to fore had
taught the Apostles, the holy ghost renewed and brought unto their
remembrance, and all carnal fancies and worldly imaginations utterly secluded
and set a part, he inspired and breathed into them true judgments, and
godly persuasions concerning the high mysteries of Christ's doctrine, by this
means not only deliuerynge them from errors and false doctrine, but also
making them able to do the same through the ministry of the word. For the holy
ghost is a true interpretour of Christ's mind, Without the holy ghost we can
not but err.
and a faithful teacher of gods holy mysteries, Whosoever has him for his
guide, he may be sure to walk the way of truth, and to be led into the same.
But whosoever has not the holy ghost to be his teacher and guide, he falls
into errors and heresies, and wandereth from the way of truth, as many
examples of all ages do prove. Arrius that Arche heretic had, Arius.
or rather seemed to have, one or two sentences of the holy scripture to defend
his wicked and abominable doctrine in denyinge the godhead of Christ, whereunto
he did stick with toothe and nail, as they use to say. But in the mean
season he did not mark and consider the great multitude of both sentences and
examples of the holy scripture, Conference of scriptures is necessary.
most plain and most evident, which most plainly and most evidently do
prove and declare, that Christ is true and natural God, Math. 28.
begotten of God the father from everlasting. The Anabaptists also in these
our days are the authors of a new doctrine and custom because CHRIST says:
Anabaptists.
Go and teach all nations, In the aged doctrine is required before baptism
but not in the infantes.
baptising them etc. Now forasmuch as doctrine is set forth before baptism,
they gather that children ought not to be baptized, before they be taught: not
co^sideringe that Christ had here special respect to them that were grown in
age, and are endued with wit, reason, and understanding. These ought first to
be taught, and afterward, if they receue and believe the doctrine, to be
baptized, and so received into the nombre of Gods children. In infantes
baptism, which have not ye use of reason, doctrine presently is not required,
no more then it was in the Circu^cisio^ of ye infants of ye Jews, which were
the people of god. The errors of the papists about the Lords supper.
Likewise errors have risen up about the lords supper, many and great, as
tra^ssubstantiation, reservation, and circu^gestation of the Sacramental
bread, the adoration of the same, the private eating thereof likewise, the
taking away of the Lords cup from the laytie in the administration of the
Supper, the making of the Lords supper of a sacrifice of thanckes geuinge, a
propiciatorie, satisfactorie, and expietorie sacrifice for the quick and the
dead etc. Men easily fall into errors, when they have not the holy ghost to
be their guide and leader. He says Christ, which is the spirit of truth,
even he shall led you into all truth. He shall teach you all truth. He shall
put you in remembrance of those things, that I to fore have taught you.

Moreover Christ says: The holy ghost shall show you things to come. Act.
^^9.10.^1.16.20.2.2.27.
For that also pertains unto his office, as there be examples in the
Chronicle of the Apostles acts. Again he says: He shall glorify me: that is
to say, he shall replenishe you with the knowledge of God, that ye will not
doubt to suffer all things for my names sake, and set more by me, the^ by all
other things in the world. These and such like shall be the offices and works
of the holy ghost. These things can ye not now away with, neither do ye
understand them. Ye must tarry til the holy ghost comes, that by experience
ye may know this doctrine. Therefore I will not speak much unto you of
these things at this present. But of this one thing I will only admonish you,
that ye be not dismayde nor discouraged by the reason of my departure. For this
my departure shall be the cause, that the holy ghost shall be sent unto you
which shall have in the world this office of rebukynge, whereby they that
believe, shall be delivered from sin, endued with everlasting righteousness, and
be thoroughly confirmed against all kind of adversity, trouble, persecution,
etc.

And this is the doctrine of the Gospel read in the Church this present
sunday. God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ grant us his holy spirit,
that by him we may be enstructed of all these things, and be confirmed in the
same unto the end. Amen.

The fyfte Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. Ihon. xvi.
Verily verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask ye father in my name, he will
give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full. These things have I spoken unto you by
Proverbs. The time will come when I shall no more speak unto you by Proverbs,
but I shall show you plainly from my father. At that day shall ye ask in my
name: And I say not unto you that I will speak unto my father for you, for
the father him self loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed
that I came out from God. I went out from the father, and came into the world.
Again, I leave the world and go to the father. His Disciples said unto him:
Low, now thou talkest plainelye, and speak no Proverb. Now are we sure
that thou know all things, and nedest not that any man should ask thee
any question, therefore believe we that thou came from God. Jesus answered
them: Now ye do believe, behold, the hour draws nigh, and is already come,
that ye shall be scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone. And
yet am I not alone, for the father is with me. These words have I spoken unto
you, that in me ye might have peace, for in the world shall ye have
tribulation. But be of good chere, I have overcome the world.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe Gospel of this day (as ye have heard) is a singular and very notable
exhortation unto prayer, The comend^cion of pray^.
for after the ministry of the word, this is the highest service that
Christen men can do unto God, even to call on his glorious name by fervent
prayer.

This exhortation unto prayer Christ made after his last supper when he had
uttered that part of his sermon, which ye have to fore heard when he told
them aforehand, that they should be sad for his departure, but
notwithstanding that it should be but for a little while: for as much as he
would shortly comme again and see them, and so turn their sadness into
gladness. In trouble we must fa^l to prayer.
After this consolation follows now this exhortation unto prayer, and it
follows very aptly and in convenient place. For Christen men in their
afflictions, and troubles, in all perilles and dangers have none other help,
then to stay them self with prayer, and to cry unto God for help. This does
Christ teach his Disciples in this place, that in the time of sadness, they
should have their refuge unto prayer. And this he utters marvelous pithyly
and with great vehemency of words that they should do this work with a
stout courage, Iac. 1.
with a strong faith, and by no means be dysmayd. For says he, I say not
unto you, that I shall pray my father for you. For the father himself loves
you, because ye have loved me, and have believed, that I come out from God. This
is true, that Christ sits on the right hand of the father, Romans 8.
and makes intercession for us, as Paul says. And we know that his prayer,
which he made after his last supper for his church and for poor sinners,
John. 17. Heb. 5.
and afterward on the cross, was heard, and yet is still of such efficacy,
The virtue of christ's prayer for his church.
strength, might, and power, that it remains still of full force even unto
the worldles end. But says Christ, ye have no need of such prayer, as I make
for you, for ye are able to pray the father, neither doubt ye, but that your
prayer is heard: for my father therefore loves you, because ye have loved me.
Which is not so to be understood, as though the prayer of Christ should be
unto us neither conforte nor help, but that we should not set our own prayer
at naught, forasmuch as we love Christ. God hearethe the prayers of the true
christians.
For this is most certain, and a thing earnestly to be believed, that all that
favor and love Christ, them can not the father hate, yea their prayer can he
none otherwise then hear. Where are now the Papists, which have inculked and
set forth unto us the invocation of Saints?

What can be of greater force for the auauncement and setting forth of our
prayer, then that Christ by his death and departure out of the world unto his
father, has gotten unto us that entrance, We may pray in all places and we
shall be heard because we love christ.
that wheresoever we be, in temple, in house, in secret places, in the feilde,
in the shop, so that we be Christians, and love Christ, we may be bold to
come before God, to talk with him, to pray unto him, and to crave of him,
whatsoever we have need of. For unto such prayer we need nothing but only
such an heart, as can say: O our heavenly father I know that thou love
me, because I love thy son and my redemer Christ Jesus. With this boldness will
I now pray unto thee, not that I am so holy and righteous, but because I know
that thou gladly geuest all things for thy sons sake Jesus Christ. In his name
I now come unto thee, and pray: and I doubt not, but that thou will hear
this my prayer whatsoever I be. For every man must diligently take heed of
this, We may not differ our prayer till we be found worthy of our selves to
pray.
that he do not so long differ his prayer till he shall think him self
pure and clean ynoug, and apt to pray, as the devil will sometime put in a
man's mind, and say: Thou art not now apt and mete to pray. Thou art a
sinner: and god hears no sinners. ohn. 9.
Do this and that work first, and afterward when thou felest thy self pure
and without sin, fall to prayer.

But he that gives place to such suggestions of Satan, and suffers, Satan
seeks to hinder prayer,
himself to be troubled with such idle imaginations, he shall find lettes
plenty to withdraw and pluck him away from prayer. The devil is sutle and
crafty, and seeks all means possible to let us from prayer. We must
therefore get us certain and present helps, that we may remove his subtilties
from us. And when soever thy necessity requires prayer, think that to be
the time, when thou ought to pray, and differ the time no longer, but fall
straightwaies in hand with prayer. If thou of thy self be not apt or worthy
to pray, God will make the apt and worthy. For think this verily with thy
self, that God loves thee for Christ's sake, and not because thou art
righteous and holy: otherwise should he never love thee, nor hear thy prayer.
For who can be found righteous and holy in his sight, Job. 4.25. Psalm. 143.
before whom the child of one day old, yea the Angels in heaven be not pure?
Enter not (O lord) into judgment with thy servant, says David: for none yt
lives shall be found righteous before thee God has wrapped all things under
sin, that he might have mercy on al, says S. Paul. This requires Christ
in this place, that we diligently pray, Romans 11. Galat. 3.
and by no means neglecte prayer, as some wicked persons are wont scoffingly
to say: I said not the lords prayer not a great while, and yet I have as good
a stomach to my meat and drink, as ever I had in my life. If thou be a
Christen man, and chalengest unto thee that name, Epicures.
let never such a word come out of thy mouth. If thou say the lords prayer
no ofter, at the lest say it in the morninge when thou ryseth: We must pray
contynually.
again, both before and after meat, and also when thou go to bed at
night. For we that are Christians are bound to pray always, which with the
mouth can not at all times be done, but this is the prayer of the heart. For
the hearts of ye faithful ought to wyshe this continually, Luc. 18. 1 Thessalonians.
5. Eccle. 18.
that the name of God may be sanctified, that his kingdom may come, that he
will give us peace, seasonable weather, a sound body, good health, etc. This
does every Christen man inwardly wish at all times, and although he does not
ever think in it, yet that is his continual desire. This is a spiritual
prayer, and a prayer of the heart. And we have need of such prayer at all
times, A christen man is ever in danger therefore ought he ever to pray.
because a Christen man can not so much as a moment of an hour be safe and
without ieopardie for the devil and his own flesh, lest he should be cas^
hedlong into diverse sins and vices: But as with the heart, so likewise with
the mouth ought we to pray. Now what manner of prayer it ought to be, Christ
teaches here and says: Ask in my name. Again, ye father loves you-because
ye have loved me, and have believed, yt I have come out from God^ And when a man
is so instructed, that he believes in Christ, Every christen man is a priest.
he is the true priest with all his furniture, neither wants he any thing,
but that he may boldly open his mouth and lips, and declare the matter both
for himself and for other and say: Lord, this have I need of, that has my
neighbor need of. Give us this for Christ's sake, etc.

Our times be such now, Cause to pray
that we can never want necessary causes to pray, Calamities and public
miseries are there plenty. Perils and dangers compass us round about. The
cause of all these evils is the devil, which is a murderer and a liar. John.
8.
with lying he goes about to oppress the word of God, and with commotions,
insurrections, and murtheringe one of an other, he troubles the civil state,
and public peace. The Pope, the Turk, and the other tyrauntes, which all are
enemies to the word of god, help the devil also forward in all his matters:
yea we also privately every one of us have our private incommodities and
afflictions: so that we have causes sufficient to move us unto prayer. They
that can not aptly express in prayer these most heinous and grievous euylles,
let them take unto them the Lords prayer, A short declaration of the lords
prayer,
which contains seven petitions, wherein are comprehended abundantly, all
things that we have need to pray for. In the first petition, Hallowed be thy
name, we pray for ye ministry and for all true ministers, The first peticion.
against heretics and ungodly persons, against the Jews, Infidelles, and
Turks, and against the Pope and all Papists, (for all these blaspheme the
name of God, and dishonor it) that god will repress and confound them, send,
faithful workmen into his harvest, Math. 9.
and conserve and keep his word sincere and pure against heresies.

In the second petition, Thy kingdom come, we desire, The second pe^icion.
that the kingdom of the devil and death may decay and come to naught, which
is a very ample and large petition. For it comprehends all the devils
kingdom, that god may make an end of it, and utterly destroy it, and set
up his own kingdom in us and in all men, through his word and the holy
ghost.

The third peticion.
In the third petition, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, we pray,
that all other will, which is contrary to the merciful will of god, may be
restrained and hindered, so that it may take no place. This prayer can not the
devil and his Impes abide, yea this prayer preserves and keeps us safe from
many incommodities and combraunces, which the devil and the world would daily
attempt and bring to pass against vs-if they were not let by this
petition.

The fourth peticion.
In the fourth petition, Give us this day our daily bread, we pray for the
maiestrates, for our parents, for our wife and children, for the fruits of
the earth, for seasonable weather, for peace, and for all things necessary
for this present life, every man according to his vocation and calling, that it
will please god to prosper all these things, and to defend them against evil.

In the fyfte petition, And forgive us our trespasses, The fyfte peticion.
as we forgive them that trespass against us, we desire yt god will be
merciful unto us turn away his wrath from us that we have justly deserved and
not deal with us according to our sins, but that he will forgive us our
trespasses, give us grace that we may wax daily better and better, show
benevolence an good will one toward an other, and one of us forgive an other,
how great soever the offenses be.

In the sixte petition, And lead us not into temptation, The sixth peticion.
we ask ye god specially will help all afflicted consciences, that they
perish not in tentation, but that they may be delivered from it by the word
and by the holy ghost.

In the seventh petition. But deliver us from evil, we pray for a blessed and
a prosperous end, The seventh peticion.
that we may be delivered from al sins, and calamities of this life, and be
brought unto a glorious and an everlasting life, there to remain with god in
his kingdom for evermore. Thus see we, that in the Lords prayer are contained
abonda^tly al things necessary to be prayed for, whether we will be delivered
from those things that are evil, or helped with those things that are good.
And all these things are necessary to be daily prayed for. For there is great
plenty of necessities and perils, first publicly, and afterward privately
in every man's own busynesses. We ought to be feruentlye given to prayer.
Only this one thing is greatly to be lamented, that we are very cold and
slothful unto the Godly exercise of prayer, neither do we resort unto it
with such earnest desire and faith as we ought to do. There is a commandment
set forth, that byddeth us to pray. There is also a promise, yt we shall
undoubtedly be heard. And because we should lack nothing that might further us in
this behalf. Christ in the aforesaid prayer has prescribed and appointed
unto us a certain form or manner of praying. Math 6. Psalm. 50.


But for as much as our indignity and unworthiness by the reasone of our
sins does always trouble us, so that either we pray nothing at all, or else
when we pray, we doubt whether we shall be heard or not: We must pray in the
name of christ
we must encourage and confirm our hearts with this, that Christ commands
us with express words, that we should ask and pray in his name. And he
promises for a certeintie, yt whatsoever we ask in his name, we shall surely
receive and have it. And by these words he utterly remoueth this worshipping
of God by prayer from all creatures either in heaven or in earth, Prayer not
made in the name of christ is no prayer.
unto this only person Jesus Christ. Therefore all prayer, that is not made in
the name of Christ is no prayer, nor worshippinge of god. As when the monckes
pray, that god will have mercy on them for Fraunces sake, for Dominickes sake,
for Benet and Bernardes sake, and that he will grant their petitio^s for their
own works sake, or for the fastings, almose deeds, and prayers of other, etc.
This is no prayer. For it is not made in the name of Christ, but in the name
of Fraunces, Dominicke, Benet, etc. or in their own name such is the prayer
of the Jews, of the Turks, of the Infidelles, yea and of the Papists. For
they will not have the name of Christ only in their prayer, God hearethe only
those prayers that are made in y^ name of christ
but they add unto it also the names of Mary, of the Apostles and of other
Saints. But as concerning all such Idolatrous prayers, the end of them is
this: God hears them not, they please not, but rather displease god. They are
no honoring, but rather a dishonoring of god. And although such hipocrites do
many times obtain that which they ask, yet were it much better for them,
Note well.
never to obteyn it then after this sort, whereby they be only confirmed and
hardened in their impiety and ungodliness.

But the godly pray not so. They despair of their own name, neither will
they at any time pray in that. But forasmuch as they know, Joan. 14.16.
that GOD is merciful for Christ's sake, and they have a commandment, that
they should pray in the name of Christ: that encourages them, that
although they confess they are sinners, and so are in deed, yet they
approach unto God, and boldly speak unto him on this manner: O Father, we are
thy children, we lack and have need of diverse things. Oh, be merciful unto
us: Behold not our sins, but thy Son Christ Jesus. In his name we come
unto thee: Oh, hear us. It is truly said of Saint Augustine: The prayer
that is not made through Christ, In Psalm. 108.
that is to say, in the name of Christ, doothe not only not put away sin,
but the very prayer it self is made sin. Saint Ambrose also says: Christ
alone is our mouth, whereby we speak to the Father: Libro de. Isaac etamina.
our eye whereby we see the Father: Our right hand, whereby we offer unto the
Father: which Christ except he makes intercession for us, neither we, nor
all the saints have any thing to do with God. What it is to pray truly.
For that is to pray truly, when the prayer is made only in the name of Jesus
Christ. And thereof does it follow, that whatsoever we ask in his name
faithfully and truly, that shall we surely obtain: which thing ought to move
and provoke us gladly to pray. For we hear, that what soever we ask in the
name of Christ, it shall never cease, till it come unto the throne of God, and
obtain that is required. In consideration of such promise Christ says unto
his disciples: Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name. For they trusted
only in his healpe that he prayde for them, even as the men of the
country think, that they need not to pray, because their parish priest
does it for them all. But Christ commands, that from hensefoorth they them
selves should pray, that they may receive for themselves, and that their joy
may be perfect. Prayer only r^dressethe all our mesiries.
Such commandment ought diligently to be considered, and according thereunto
we ought earnestly to prepare our selves unto prayer. As for myseries,
troubles, afflictions, crosses. etc. we shall never want in this world: for the
redress whereof we ought continually to pray. He therefore that desires full
and perfect joy, and to be delivered from these perils and euyls, let him so
embrace prayer, as Christ does here commend it. Neither let him doubt, but
that he shall obteyn, what soever he asks in the name of Christ, if it be
unto the glory of God, and unto his own salvation.

For this is a great incommoditie unto us, that we know not, Romans 8.
as S. Paul says, how we ought to pray. Hereof it comes, that many pray
for delyuerance from certain myseries, but they do not obtain. For God
knows what is best, and most profitable for us. S. Paul himself also
prayde, that God would deliver him out of tentation. But what said Christ? 2.
Cor. 12.
My grace (says he) is sufficient for thee. For my strength is made perfect
thorough weakness. So likewise may it come to pass now a days, that thou
desire deliverance from this trouble, God does all things for ye best.
and I from that. But God knows, that it is better for us to be still in that
trouble: and therefore he takes not away that affliction and misery from us.
For if we were delivered from it, we should peradventure fall into some
wicked vice, as insolency, pride, negligence, security, wantonness, gluttony,
uncleanness. etc. Therefore before the prayer concerning daily bread, Math. 6.
there is a petition touching the will of God, wherein we pray, that not our
will but Gods will may be done. Math. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
And Christ himself when he prayed in the garden, said: Not my will, but thy
will be done. Our prayer ought so to be tempered, A good lesson.
that we should set before us the will of God in all things, and prefer that
before our own will, after the example of the leapour: and then let us not
doubt, but that God will give us all things, Math. 8.
which are unto his glory, and unto our salvation.

But there is yet an other incommoditie. God will healpe and give, We may no
appoinc god in our prayer, how and when he shall help us.
what soever we ask in the name of his son Christ Jesus. This is most
certain and true. Notwithstanding the manner and time we may not determyne how
and when he must healpe and give us. Reason ceasseth not to make importune
suite but if it have not good success out of hand, straight ways it
despaireth of help. So likewise concerning the time, Judith. 7.
if healpe comes not unto us within so many hours, days, or years. Then
cast we away all hope of help. Neither are these small tentations, wherewith
Faith is vehemently impugned and enfebled. Therefore it is necessary, that we
with a sure faith apprehende and lay hand on the word of God, Esa. 30.
Thren. ^.
and with silence, hope, and patience look for healpe of God, which is promised
us in the name of Christ, what soever be done concerning the time, way, manner.
etc. contrary to our expectation, according to ye will of god. For for this
cause is he called an helper inco^uenient time. Psalm. 9.
Now for as much as we of our own nature are very impacient, we think always,
that it is now high time to healpe, and that God deferreth the matter to long:
and thus we prescribe and appoint God how, when, and what he shall do. But we
must avoid and eschew this arrogancye and pride, that our faith may be
fyrmely and constantly fixed and set upon the promise, God will help all them
in co^ueniente tym^ that pray unto him.
that God for Christ his sons sake will healpe us in convenient time, even
when it shall make most for his glory, and for our health and salvation.

And this is the doctrine concerning prayer, whereof we have great need in
these our days: Prayer is our only stay in this world.
neither have we any other healpe in this world, as Christ declares here,
when he he says: Ask, that your joy may be perfect. Joan. 16.
For where prayer is not, there can be no true, sound, perfect, and full
joy, but in the place thereof comes care, sorrow, trouble, disquietnesse
etc. Forget not this o England
And this did we prove to be true not many years paste. For if we had
given our minds earnestly to faythefull prayer, the Pope with his tirannye had
not so greatly prevailed in this realm. But when prayer is diligently
exercised, the more that the Pope and the tyrants of this world rage and
persecute, the worse it goes with them, and with their wicked devises, as we
have also learned by experience in this our time. Therefore let us look well about
us, and diligently do that, that is appointed us. First let the mini^ters of the
word diligently teach the truth, How ye church of christ may be safly
preserved from ye devil and Antichri^ste*
and let the other fall to prayer: yea, let so many as love the glory of God,
practice the^ selves continually in this holy exercise of prayer. By this
means shall the Church of Christ be safelye preserved from the devil and
Antichrist, yea and from all the tyrants of this world. He therefore that
loves the church and faithful congregation of GOD, and is desirous to see it
prosper: let him think, that he ought to labor unto the uttermost of his
power, that it may be conserved and safely kept. This comes to pass only
by prayer, when thou prayest, that the name of the heavenly Father may be
sanctified, that his kingdom may come, and that his will may be done. On the
contrary part, that the deuyls name may be cursed and abhorred, that his
kingdom may be destroyed, and that his will with all his counsayles and
devises may come to naught, and be made utterly frustrate and void. Every
christian man, is a soldier. Ephe. 6.
When thou do this, then do thou stand in thine armoure like a good and
true soldier in the field, and valyantly defends the Church of Christ
against the devil, the Pope, and the world. For every Christen man is a
warrior, and myghtyly fights against the power of darkness for the defense
of Gods people, the preachers with doctrine, all other godly people with
Prayer: yea the preachers and the people ought together to fight against
Antichriste with Prayer. These are the two things, With preaching and prayer
the kingdom of Antichriste is overcome.
wherewyth the devil, the Pope, the Turk, and the whole power of darkness,
is overcome, I mean preaching and Prayer. And surely the devil and his
kingdom can not otherwise be overcome, 2. Corin. 10.
then by preaching and Prayer. And our heavenly Fathers will is, that we
should thus fight and strive against the enemies of his holy congregation.

And I nothing doubt, but that thoroughe our prayer, the counsayles and
devices of our ennemies those insatiable bloudsuppers and Neolike tyrants
have been disappoynted, so that they could have no success. An exhortario^
unto prayer
If we will have the church of Christ to prosper and to flourishe, yea and
to be free from the danger of the enemy, let us earnestly and heartily fall
unto fervent prayer. Let us not esteem prayer as a thing vile and of no
reputation, but rather judge of it, as a thing of high price before the majesty
of the lord our GOD. Therefore exercise prayer, and by no means neglect it,
although ye think your selves very unmeet and unworthy. For if we should
respect our dignity and worthynes, so should we never pray. Let us not cast
the burdeyn upon other men's backs to pray, but let every Christen man pray,
and think thus with himself: Forasmuch as prayer is so acceptable unto God,
and profitable to me, to the congregation, and to the common wealth, I will go
unto the congregation, and pray with it unto the vttermoste of my power. For I
am sure that I shall not spend my time in vain, nor lose my labor. This is a
marvelous dangerous imagination to think on this manner: Let other pray what
should thou profane person be occupied in so holy a thing? A wicked
imagenacion.
Yea rather think thou thus with thy self: I have Christ and his word, and I
had rather loose all that ever I have in the world, then deny CHRIST. Thus
then does it follow, that the Father loves me, and that he will hear my
prayer, as Christ has here promised. Therefore I will make no delay, nor
cease from prayenge, but leaving unto this promise of Christ: Uerily,
verily, I say unto you, John. ^5.
what so ever ye shall ask the Father in my name, that will he give you. I
will go unto my heavenly Father, and crave of him in the name of Christ,
such things as I have need of, either for the conservation of my body, or
for the salvation of my soul.

Now as touching this, that the Lord Christ says afterward: These
things that I have spoken unto you by Proverbs: it is not so to be
understood, Christ's kingdom is spiritu all.
as though he had spoken these obscurely and darkely, vtterynge one thing,
and meaning an other. For the words are very plain, euidente, and open.
Math. 10. Luc. 22. Act. 1.
But for as much as the Disciples as yet had no experience of this matter,
neither did they know, that Christ should have a Spiritual kyngedome,
that is to say, rule by his word and Spirit: (For they looked for a
temporal and worldly kyngedome, even as the Jews do at this day) and not by
swoorde and pollaxe, it seemed to be unto them, what soever he spoke, as an
obscure and dark saying, and as a matter uttered in a strange tongue, which
they understood not. But (says he) the matter shall be otherwise. For the
time shall comme, that I will speak no more with you by Proverbs: The holy
ghost teaches to pray.
but I will openly and plainly show unto you of my Father. For whenne the
Holy Ghost comes, and kyndleth our hearts with true Faith in the
goodness and mercy of GOD thoroughe Christ: then follows there an heartye
good will and feruente desire to pray. For without the Holy ghost it is not
possible, that any manne can have a faythefull and courageous mind for to
pray. Therefore the holy Prophet Zacharye callethe the Holy Ghost, the
Spirit of grace, Zacha. ^2.
and of prayer. For both these must be ioygned together. For Faith (which
makes us to know God, that he is our merciful Father, Faith is the gift of
God.
for as much as he has given us his son) is the gift of God, which the
Holy Ghost works in us by the Gospel. Where this spirit of grace is, there
follows the spirit of prayer also, Romans 10.
so that we in all our necessities and troubles call upon God for healpe,
with this certain persuasion and assured hope, that God will hear us, and
give us health and Salvation for his son Christ's sake.

Therefore says Christ: In that day when I shall frankly and freely show you
of the Father, and teach you by the holy Ghost, that ye may know the Father
truly, ye shall ask in my name, and your prayer shall not be frustrate nor
vain. For how can the father deny you any thing, seeing that he loves you,
because you have loved me, and believed, that I came out from GOD? Prayer
without Faith is no prayer.
Out of such a Faith must true prayer needs come, otherwise it is no
prayer, although it be made with never so fine and pyked words.

GOD our dear and loving Father, of his great mercy and synguler
goodness, moughte vouchesafe for his Son Christ's Jesus sake, to send his
holy Spirit into our hearts, that we in all our troubles and adversities
may so pray, and so perform this service to GOD, that we in this world
may be delivered from all temporal myseries, and in the world to come enjoy
those true pleasures, and those heavenly joys, which shall never have end.
Amen.

A Sermon for the feast of the Ascension of Christ, made upon the Epistle of
that day. Acts. i.
IN the former treatise (dear Theophilus we have spoken of all that Jesus
began to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, after that he
(through the holy ghost) had given commandments unto the Apostles, whom he
had chosen, to whom also he showed him self alive after his passion (and that
by many tokens) appearyng unto them.xi. days, and speaking of the kingdom of
God, and gathered them together, and commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the father, whereof
(says he) ye have herd of me. For John truly baptized with water, but ye
shall be baptized with the holy ghost, after these few days. When they
therefore were come together, they asked of him saying: Lord wylt thou at
this time restore again the kingdom of Israel? And he said unto them: It is
not for you to know the times or the seasons which the father has put in his
own power. But ye shall receive power after the holy ghost is come upon you.
And ye shall be witnesses unto me, not on lie in Jerusalem, but also in all
Iewrye, and in Samaria, and even unto the worlds end. And when he had spoken
these things, while they beheld, he was taken up on hye, and a cloud
received him up out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly up toward
heaven as he went, behold two men stood by them in white aparell, which also
said: Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gasynge up into heaven? This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come even as ye have seen him
go into heaven.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis day is celebrated and kept holy the feast of the Ascension of Christ,
that we may the better be instructed concerning this Article of the Christen
Faith: Two things specially taught in this sermon.
He ascended into heaven, and sytteth on the right hand of God the Father
almighty: from thense he shall come to judge the quycke and the dead. For the
true understanding of this article two things are necessary to be known.
One concerning the history of the Ascension of Christ. The other, as touching
the mystery of Christ's Ascension, what he has done, why he did ascend, and
what profit he has brought to his Church and faithefull congregation by that
his marvelous and glorious Ascension. As concerning the history, The
history of christ's ascension.
blessed Luke in his Chronicle of the Apostles acts does very diligently
describe it and set it forth, when he makes mention of the day, of the
place, and of the persons that were present, after this manner: That the Lord,
after that by the space of forty days he had showed himself alive to his
Disciples after his resurrection, Act. 1.
and spoken unto the^ of ye kingdom of God, gathered them together, and brought
them unto mount Oliuete, not far from Jerusalem, and gave them
commandment, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but to wait
there for the promise of the Father, even the Holy Ghost, and that afterward
they should publyshe the Gospelle, thorough out the world. And when he had
spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up on hye, and a cloud
received him up out of their syghte. And while they looked steadfastly up
toward heaven, as he went: Behold (says Luke, two men stood by them in
white apparel, which said unto them: Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye
gasing up into heaven? This same JESUS, which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven. Act. 1.
This is the history of the Ascension of Christ, as it is described and set
forth by blessed Luke.

In this hystorye first of all, is this miracle woorthye to be observed, The
state of glorified bodies
that the Lord Christ before his Disciples, is carried up into Heaven, and by a
cloud taken out of their sight: which is a manyfeste declaration unto us,
what the state of glorified bodies after the general Resurrection shall be.
For it is not the natural propretie of men's bodies to be carried up.
Notwithstanding that shall be the condition of glorified bodies, that in a moment
they may go to all places, without impediment of any thing, as the example of
Christ teaches, whom, when he rose again from death unto life, the stone of
the grave could not hinder him, nor afterward the doors shut could keep
him out. He pearceth through all things. He makes him self vysible when he
will, and again invisible, when his pleasure is. That same felicity and
blessed state shall our bodies also have after the resurrection, when the
bodies shall be immortal, and no more subject to infirmities, as they are
now in this life, wherein we are combred with many diseases and necessities.
But of these things we shall speak more at an other time, whenne we shall
treat of the Article of the Resurrection of the dead. Let us now come unto
the principal point of the whole matter, whereunto also the Angels had
special respect, when they called again into the way the Disciples, that
gased here and there, that they should rather consider, why Christ is ascended
into heaven, then how he being a littell before seen, is now seen no more. The
doctrine of the Apostles in all things moves specially to this point, that we
should consider unto what end all the acts of Christ were done: as for an
example. Romans 4.
They refer Christ's death unto our sins, and his resurrection unto our
Justification, and so likewise of the other. After this sort must we now
also see, why Christ ascended into heaven, and what commodity and profyt we
have by that his ascension

Christ by his ascension declares, ye his kingdom is not of this world.
And first of all let us behold the nature and state of his kingdom. For in
that that he is gone up into heaven, he declares, that his kingdom is not of
this world, and that his administration shall not be after the manner of
worldly kingdoms. When the Disciples demanded of Christ, at what time he
would restore the kingdom to Israel, they were of this opinyon, John. 18.
that Christ's kyngedome should be a corporal and worldly kyngedome. But by
his ascension, they are taught otherwise to think of his kingdom: that is to
say, that it is no worldely kingdom, out of the which great richesse,
dignities and promotions are to be looked for, Acts. 1.
but rather a spiritual and everlasting kyngedome, in the which he should
give Spiritual gifts unto men. Therefore let no man become one of
Christ's flock to the end that he will get temporal goods and worldely
possessions, or to come unto great honor: for these things are not to be
found in this kingdom. Baptism, the ministry of the word, and the Lords
supper were not instituted for te^porall things, neither should Christ ever
have been reveled in the world, Why Christ came down from heaven
if it had not been for a more grave and weighty cause then this. For our
everlasting salvation and rightousnes came he down from heaven. There was
therefore an higher and greater matter, why the son of God did either descend
or ascend: verily that he might provide for us everlasting goods, as are the
favor of God, remission of sins, the gift of the holy Ghost, righteousness,
and everlasting life. Such gyfts must we look for at Christ's hand, which
continued not in this life, but went into an ever stinge life, even into
heaven, and there has begun a spiritual, invisible, and everlasting kingdom.
Which thing was long before prophesied by David in a certain Psalm, Psalm 68.
Ephe. 4.
which S. Paul recites in his Epistle to the Ephesians, and interprets it
of the Ascension of Christ, and of his spiritual kingdom. The words are
these. Thou art gone up on hie, thou have led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men, yea even for thyn enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among
them. The sentence is short, but it comprehends many things, and every one
of them ought dilygently to be weighed, pondered, and considered. The first
word Paul himself handles like an Apostle, when he says: That he ascended,
what means it, but that he also descended first into the lowest parts of
the earth? He that descended, is even the same also, that ascended up above all
heavens, to fulfill all things. S. Paul in these his words does very
exquisitely handle both the descension and ascension of Christ, that by this
means we may know, from whense so many and so great gifts came, that we
have received by the ascension of Christ. Let no man think that he with his
own works, rightousnesse, holiness of life, or with any other thing has
deserved, that he should receive the noble gifts of Christ's ascension, but
Christ himself has deserved it, which gives the gifts, Phil. 2.
in that he came down, and humbled himself, and for our sake became manne,
and for us dyed on the cross.

These gifts does Paul signify by these his words, when he, as it were,
interprets the mind of the Prophet, and puts Christ's descension before
his Ascension. For as much then as the Holy Ghost by the Prophet speaks
thus of Christ: Thou wentest up on hye: It follows hereof, that he came down
before, and was made low. Which altogether was done for our sake.

Therefore Paul's interpretation agrees well with the words of Christ, Joan.
16.
which ye lately heard. It is expedient for you that I go. For except I go my
way, the comfortour shall not come. But when I go my way, I will send him
unto you. If I go my way, I will prepare you a place. Joan. 14.
This saying, Thou art gone up on hye, makes a difference between Christ and
them that ascended into heaven. Enoch was taken up unto GOD. Genesis 5.
Helias went up in a fyerye charette, but CHRIST went not so up into heaven,
but he ascended by his own power, as he also by his own power, rose again
from death unto life, without the healpe of any thing. This is a great
diversity, for we shall not raise up our selves at the last day, 4. Reg. 2.
John. 6.
but Christ shall raise us up. Christ himself rose from death unto life by
his own power, as he says in the Gospel of S. John: John. 10.
My Father loves me, because I give over my life, that I may take it again.
No man takes it away from me, but I give it over of my own self. I have
power to give it over, and I have power to take it again. And Peter in the
Chronicle of the Apostles acts says: Act. 2.
It was impossible for him to be holden of death. So in like manner is there a
difference between his Ascension and ours. We ascend up into heaven, The
differenc of christ's ascension and ours.
because Christ draws us unto him. But CHRIST him self went up into heaven
by his own power, as he says in the Gospel of John: No man goes up into
heaven, ^oan. 3.
but he that came down from heaven: that is to say, by his own power. This
diversity between Christ's Ascension and ours, did the Holy Ghost show long
before, that by this he might teach us, that Christ is the almighty and
everlasting GOD, whom we ought (as they say) with embracing arms to
receive.

Where as the Psalm says moreover: Thou wentest up on hye: It is none other
thing, then as we said before, and Christ pronounced before Pilate: My kingdom
is not of this world. Joan. 18.
Therefore although we are in the world occupied about matters of household
and Policy, yet seeing we are Christians, and the kingdom of CHRIST is not
of this world, we ought to lift up our minds unto heaven, that we may
above all things embrace this spiritual kingdom, and look unto that. But
the most part of us does the contrary. For a great number of us both in body
and mind, and in all that we are able to do, ar altogether drowned and
swallowed up with the present things of this world, The manners of this world
discribed.
and only seeks for the goods and possessions thereof, as though we should live
here for ever, and never depart. We regard little or nothing, that Christ is
gone up on hye. Though our bodies be on ye earth yet our, minds ought to be
in heaven
The Holy ghost would have this lewdness amended in us, and therefore he
diligently puts us in mind, that Christ is gone up on hye, and has left
and forsaken these earthy things so that although we be upon the earth with
our body, yet with our heart and mind, we should always have a desire
upward, and not trouble our herts with the cares of this world. For a christen
man should on this wise behave himself. Let his body be occupied about
necessary things for this present life: but let his mind have all her delight
and pleasure, all her meditation and study, all her travail and exercise about
heavenly, supernall, and everlasting things, as Paul says: Coloss. 3.
Seek after those things that are above, where Christ is sitting on the right
hand of God, and not after those things that are on the earth.

But why did Christ go up into heaven, or what business has he there? Of this
matter does the Psalm make mention, saying: Thou art gone up on hie: thou
have led captivity captive. This is a description of the great and glorious
triumph of Christ, and in a manner it appears that Christ had respect to
this psalm, Luc. 11.
when he put forth the Parable of the strong armed manne, which kept his
palaice, and had al things in quiet, Sin has made us bond slaves to the
devil and death.
till one that was stronger then he, came upon him, bound him, and took away
his weapon wherein he trusted, and made a spoil of it. For we wretched
caytiues, because of sin, are under the tyranny of the devil and death,
which does hold us captive, and we can not escape this tyranny: but the devil
to the vttermoste has dominion over us, and death kylleth us at her pleasure.
We of our selves are able to do nothing against them.

But Christ, which far excels them in strength, comes, and first through
his great humility is betrayde and crucified, Christ's humility.
and so by his death he satisfies for the sins of the whole world, as an
innocent lamb. And all these things are joined with great humility, and in
them appears nothing but most high infirmity and weakness. And therefore
he is hanged on the cross that he may dye. But after that sin was put away
by his death, Christ's glorious triumph over sin devil and hell
and weak Christ is buried in his grave, and there is now no more hop of him:
he comes forth again with marvelous great power and glory alive and quick,
as we heard in the day of Christ's resurrection, and as the holy Ghost says
here: He led captivity captive: that is to say, he has destroyed the
kingdom of the devil and of death. He has spoiled them of all their power, so
that the devil fromhensforth has no more power over the Christians, death can
no more kill them everlastingly, Romans 8.
neither can sin condemn them.

Therefore all things are now turned clean contrary. Before we were holden,
By christ are we made free from sin* devil death and damnation.
under the captivity of sin. Before we perceived that the devil by the
reason of our sin was a cruel tyrant against us. Before we could by no
means escape the most bitter pain of death. Before we looked for, yea and
that worthily, everlasting damnation, and the most cruel torments of hell
fire. But fromhensforth it shall no more be so. Why christ is ascendede into
heaven.
For Christ unto this end is ascended into heaven, that he should hold in
bonds as slaves of no power, sin, death, and devil, that they fromhensforth
should not exercise, their tyranny against us, as tofore they have done, or if
they do attempt any violence against us, it should chance for the best on our
behalf. Sin cease not to provoke us, Romans ^. Sin.
if by any means it may enforce us to do any thing against the will of God,
and so to make us to have gyltie, consciences. And our infirmity is great. We
do not resist sin, as we ought to do. David was a great man and an holy, 2.
Reg. 11.
yet was he thrown into two most grievous and heinous sins. Now that he was
delivered again from those sins, 2. Reg. 12.
and that they were forgiven him. The cause was that he believed on yt blessed
sede that was promised to come, which should destroy the power of sin, and
make it his bond prisoner. It therefore can not only not oppress David, All
things work for the best unto the^ that love god.
but it is the cause also, that he prays the more fervently, and is the more
circumspecte in all his doings for ever after. If he had not thus fallen,
Psalm. 51.
he had never made that most godly and sweet psalm. Miserere.

Death.
And so likewise is the matter concerning death. It can not refrain his
violence from us: neither can we any otherwise then tremble for fear at the
beholdinge thereof. But how comes it to pass, that death can do none of all
those things that it entendeth? Because death is taken prisoner and bound, so
yt now it can not hurt nor kyl everlastingly the faithful, 1. Cor. 5.
the styng thereof being taken away by Christ, and it self being utterly
subdued and overcome, Osee. 3.
as Christ him self says by the Prophet: O death, I will be thy death.
Therefore when death shows it self most fearce, and utters the greatest
violence that it can: yet it does no more with the true Christians, then that
it should be the cause for them to flee unto the word of God, that they may
exercise them selves in it the more diligently, and confirm them selves with
it, which otherwise they would not have done, if the terrors of death had not
been.

Even the same may be spoken concerning the devil, which is a sutle,
deceiptfull, crafty and cruel enemy. The devil.
He at all times lies in weight for the Christians, if by any means he may
make their hope frustrat and vain. 1. Pet. 5.
But Christ is Lord over him, so that he shall not only not do and bring to
pass that he entendeth, but also the more that Christians are assalted of him,
Note well.
ye more ware and circumspecte does he make them, and provoke them the more
diligently to give their minds to prayer, and to the meditation and study of
gods word, and to commit them self wholly to the tuition and defense of god,
evermore calling on him for help and succor. And where as if they were
without this sutle and crafty enemy, they would become careless and negligent,
because they should stand in no fear of such an adversary, now they watch,
now they are circumspecte and take heed that they fall not into his danger. Al
these things therefore profit the Christians, which are to other, because of
their corrupt and pernicious nature a very plague, pestilence, confusion and
destruction. And this chances to the Christians, because Christ is ascended
into heaven, and has by that means made them his prisoners, Sin death and
devil are taken prisoners of christ.
so that now they can not do against ye Christians what they would, but what it
pleases Christ to suffer or appoint them. Sin would gladly condemn us: death
would very feign kyl us: The devil is altogether desirous to cast us hedlo^g
into everlasting damnati, o^but they can not do what they would, forasmuch as
they are, although enemies, yet the captives and bond slaves of Christ, so that
although they be cruel and fearce against us, yet can they not hurt against us.
And this is the noble fruit and singular commodity of Christ's Ascentio^, that
our great enemies, sin, death and devil, The fruit of christ's ascencion.
whose captives and bond slaves we were, are now imprisoned of Christ, and
holden in bondage, so that by this means we are free from their tyranny. For,
for this purpose did he go up into heaven, and sytteth on the right hand of
God, that he might defend the church against them.

Christ has receued gifts for men.
It follows in the psalm: Thou have received gyfts for men: that is to say,
such gifts as thou will distribute unto men, and through those gifts help
and comfort them. What manner of gifts these are. God by the Prophet Joel
declares, saying: After this will I pour out my spirit upon all flesh: Joel.
2.
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy: your old men shall dream
dreams, and your young men shall se visions: yea in those days I will pour out
my spirit upon servants and maidens. I will show wonders in heaven above, and
tokens in the earth beneth. And in ye gospel of John Christ says thus: John.
16.
If I go away, I will send the confortour unto you. And when he shall come, he
will rebuke ye world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Peter also
says: Sense now that Christ by the right hand of god is exalted, Act. 2.
and has received now of the father the promise of the holy ghost: he has shed
forth this gift, which ye now see and hear.

Now there are two things principally, which the holy ghost works. The
works of the holy ghost.
First he leads us through the Gospel unto the true knowledge of CHRIST that
we may believe to have remission of our sins in his name: Again, that we may
bring forth the worthy fruits of repentance, resist sin, mortifye it, and
earnestly begin to obey god. And this newnes of life afterward takes place
in our soul, body, heart, and in all the parts of us. For although because
of our sinful body we can never be so free from sin, that we shall be
utterly without sin, Romans 4. Psalm. 32.
yet that sin that remains in us, is not imputed to us, nor laid to our
charge for Christ's sake, neither does it condemn us. And this is the first
thing that the holy ghost works in us.

Secondly, the holy ghost also makes his instruments that through the word
and the preaching thereof other may be brought unto the knowledge of this
grace. Psalm. 68. Ephe. 4.
In consideration whereof Paul interprets this psalm to this end, that
through the Ascension of Christ these gifts chance unto us, that he has made
some, Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Shepheardes and
teachers, to the edifying of the saints, to the work and ministration, even
to the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of
faith, and knowledge of the son of god, unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the full perfect age of Christ. For we se by daily experience, how cruel
an enemy the devil is to the word, and specially in these our days, Enemies
of gods word.
and how he calls unto him for help the Turk, the Pope and all the tyra^tes
of the world, that they coming to gether hurly burly with spears and
Iauelinges in their hands against the lord and his anointed, Psalm. 2.
may put out of the way the word of God, and make havoc of the Church of
Christ. But the more the Pope and the Turk show their fury and cruelty
against the church of Christ and his holy word, Pers^ecutyon makes the
word of god to florishe.
the more does it prosper and florishe, and daily more and more gets the
victory over the enemies, which with out all doubt shall shortly come to
confusion. The gates of hell* Math. 16.
says Christ, shall not prevail against my church or congregation. Again:
whosoever falls on this stone, shall be broken in pieces: Math. 21.
but on whom soever it falls, it shall al to grind him. Baptism, the Lords
supper, and the word, all the tyrants of the world can not take away, no,
nor yet destroy that congregation, which exercises them faithfully and
truly. And this is no little fruit, nor small commodity of Christ's Ascension.
For to this end went he up into heaven, that he might send the holy ghost,
and set forward the ministry of of the gospel here in the world.

God defe^deth his church.
Moreover these also are called gifts, that god governs and defends his
churce, conforteth it in adversity, preserves it in persecution, keeps it in
the truth and defends it against errors, and moves it unto prayer, and
other godly exercises, as Christ faith in ye gospel. John. 16.
In that day ye shall ask in my name. For this can no man do without the help
of the holy ghost. And to be short: whatsoever we have and receive, al are
the gifts of Christ, and all are the fruits of his Ascension. 1. Cor. 4. Iac.
1.
For, for this purpose did Christ ascend into heaven, that he should
stablishe such a kingdom, and make unto him self through the holy ghost a
Church, even such a church, as the gates of hell shall never be able to
prevail against it. Math. 16.


Luke. 24.
This does Luke very aptly signify in his Euangelical history, when he
records, that Christ being ready to ascend into heaven, Christ blessed his
disciples.
lifted up his hands, and blessed his disciples, not as the popish bishops
are wont to do by wagginge their fyngers over the people that kneleth down
before them, but he prayed and wished well to their ministry, what christ's
blessing was. Math. 28. Marc. 16.
which he then enjoined them, that they should preach the gospel to every
creature, that is to say, to all kind of men, to all nations, to all people.
For the gospel is not commanded to be preached for plants, stones, birds,
fishes etc. But for men, for reasonable creatures, as it is said: He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Marc. 16.
But stones and trees can not believe: Therefore pertains unto the^ neither
preaching nor baptism. But faith and baptism belong only unto men, therefore
does the preachinge of the gospel pertayne unto the^ alone, but Christ uses
that figure and manner of speech, saying: What it is to preach the gospel to
every creature.
Preach the gospel to every creature: that by this he may comprehend al
degrees and conditions of men, that no Emperor, no king, no prince, is so
mighty, but he must hear, believe and receive the gospel, or else think
himself, as he is in deed damned. To this commandment does Christ lift up
his hands, and blesses them, that is to say, he does not only wysh that they
may prosper and have good success in the execution of their office, but he
signifies also, yt he will help the^, defend them, be present at their
ministry, and give good increase to ye same, as he says by ye Prophet: The
word yt comes out of my mouth, Esa. 55.
shall not turn again void unto me, but shall accomplish my will, and prosper
in the thing, whereto I sent it.

Therefore wheresoever the gospel is taught, Whersoeuer y^ gospel is preached
there the blessinge of Christ is.
Christ lyfteth up his hands, and brings forth his blessinge, that it may
bring forth fruit, and not return in vain. And this is without doubt a
great conforte, that Christ at that very time, when he should ascend, lyfteth
up his hands, and blesses ye disciples. For by this he evidently declares,
What christ mente by blessing his disciples.
that his Ascentio^ brings unto us most sweet consolation and comfort, great
help against syn, devil, death and hell, and diverse noble gifts unto the
edifyinge of gods church, and finally his blessinge, good will and favor, yea
and also after this transitory life, everlasting life, with immortal glory
and vnoutspeakable joy. For to what end should Christ have given so louinge
and gentle a token of his loving and gentle good will toward us by lifting up
his hands, and by blessyng us if he had borne us no good will, nor would have
suffered us to have place with him in his kingdom? Seeing then that he lifted up
his hands, and wysheth well to them an to their new enjoined ministry, it
is a most evident argument, sure sign, and manifest token, that he bears a
singular good will toward us, and that his desire is, we should ever be
partakers of this blessing, and receive thereof great consolation and conforte
through the preachinge of the Gospel, which is the power of god unto
salvation for so many as believe it. Romans 1.


Thus have I set forth unto you this ^rticle of Christ's Ascension, whereby ye
understand, how full of swetnes and conforte it is, and what great and
singular profit comes to us by it, ye have heard, that forasmuch as our
own flesh and blood, even the son of God, sytteth on the right hand of
God, sin, death and devil are without power, and that they have not so
great liberty and strength, yt they can hurt us. For although they be our
capital and chief enemies, and seek all means possible to destroy us, yet
are they such enemies, as are but prisoners and bound slaves. Ye have heard
also, yt through the Ascension of Christ, the holy ghost is geue^n unto us, that
he may led us into all truth, defend us against errors, conforte us in our
afflictions, pray with us, move us to prayer, and finally, garnishe us with
all manner of spiritual and heavenly gifts. For this cause is Christ ascended
into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God, that, as Paul says, he
may fulfill all things, that is to say, give and grant us all things,
whatsoever we have need of unto salvation and everlasting life.

Therefore let us follow the example of the Apostles, and as Luke says, Luc. 24.
let us worship with them the Lord Christ Jesus yea and that with great joy,
and give most humble, entier, and hearty thanks to our heavenly father, and
desire him, yt he will conserve and keep us in this grace, and at ye last give
us the ioyeful enheritau^ce of his most glorious kingdom for Jesus Christ his
sons sake, our alone Savior and our alone redemer, our alone aduocat and our
alon mediator, our alon lawfulfiller and our alone peace maker: to whom with
God the father and God the holy ghost be all honor, glory, and praise both
now and worlds without end. Amen.

The Sunday after the Ascension. The Gospel. Ihon. xvi.
WHen the comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the father (euene
the spirit of truth, which proceeds of the father) he shall testify of me,
and ye shall bear witness also, because ye have been with me from the
beginning. These things have I said unto you, because ye should not be
offended. They shall excommunicate you, yea the time shall come, that whosoever
killethe you, will think that he does God service. And such things will they
do unto you, because they have not known the father, neither yet me. But these
things I have told you, that when the time is come, ye may remember then that
I told you.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel are specially to be considered two things. The holy ghost is
almighte and everlasting god
The first is concerning the holy ghost. The second is of the persecution,
which shall come to the confessors and professors of the gospel before ye
world. As touching the holy ghost, we confess that he is almighty and
everlasting god. Christ calls him by a special name, even the conforter. And
by this he declares, that true godliness can not be without the cross and
affliction. For what need should there be of a conforter, if there were no
troubles, The miseries of the true christians in this world both outwardly and
inwardly
no persecutions? But Christ describes and sets forth ye persecution to be
such, that, the godly shall not only be slain, which is a most heinous
offense, but also they shall be counted such people, as are very adversaries
and open enemies of all true religion and godliness, and therefore by no means
to be suffered, but by the judgment of all men to be taken out of the earth by
the most cruel death that can be devised, as pestiferous persons, and
intolerable heretics, hated both of god and man, so yt the punishment of the
Christians shall excede all other. And they are sometime also troubled in their
conscience, by thincking that they have been to much vehement, and have gone to
far, or that they might have done and spoken more circumspectly, and warely,
and so should less danger have chanced, and they have lived longer and done
more good. Thus are ye Christians troubled outwardlye of the tyrants of this
world, and inwardly of the weakness of their conscience. Why the holy ghost is
called a conforter.
In consideration hereof does Christ call the holy ghost a conforter, as though
he should say: I know into what great troubles, miserable afflictions, blouddy
persecutions, and other vnrestful griffes ye shall fall, and how the whole
world and all that ever is in it shall be against you. But I will provide help
for you, and se that ye shall not stick in the mire, nor be left confortles.
Yea when there appears no confort at al, no help, no succor, and ye your
selves also through the weakness of your conscience shall be troubled inwardly:
Note well.
the^ w^il I send unto you the holy ghost, which is the conforter, that he may
confirm and make strong your minds yt ye despair not, and encourage you to
abide by that, which he shall say unto you. Now are there two manner of
co^solatio^s or co^forts. The one is a worldly comfort, Two kinds of conforte.
which is but an uncertain and vain comfort. For it depends altogether on
riches, power, glory, friendship, and good will of princes and great men. but
says Christ, The conforte of the world.
none of al these shall you my disciples have, yea these things shall be
against you and not with you. Notwitsta^ding let it not dismay you, yt ye find
no comfort at ye worlds hands. For yt comfort is of no great weight, neither
is the co^tinua^ce thereof long. Some sode^ mischau^ce, displeasure of great me^,
sickness, agewe, plague, pestilence, misfortune, makes sone an end of worldly
comfort. But I, says he, will provide for you an other conforter, even the
spirit of truth, which shall then comfort, confirm, The conforte of the holy
ghost.
and strengthen you when ye shall be combred and oppressed with terrors, fears,
infirmities, miseries, calamities, outwardly before the world, and inwardly in
your mind. For, for this cause has the holy ghost this name, yt he is called
a co^forter, and not an accuser or troubler. For where sadness and perturbation
is: it is a token that the holy ghost is not there. And this conforter is also
called the spirit of truth. For he comforts not as ye world does, where
nothing is sure and constant, but his consolation or confort is perpetual and
everlasting, which no man is able to destroy.

But here again is a scrupule or doubt: for the conscience answers. An
objection.
Thou speak much of conforte, but I feel it not. I feel rather the
contrary, that the world is merry and full of pleasure. Ihon. 16.
But the Christians mourn, and are ever under the cross. John Baptiste is
beheaded. Math^ 14. Mar^. 6. Luc. 9.
But Herod and his harlotte Herodias are frolike and merry. And even so goes
it with us. The world enuieth us a bytte of bread, and every man thincketh,
that whatsoever mischief he does to a Christian, it is well done, when in the
mean while ye pope, the Cardinals, Antichrists disciples are in better case
in this world then the disciples of christ. Christ's humility.
the Bishops, and all that hate the gospel, live all in pleasure and
iolytie, in reaste and peace, in idleness and hearts ease, and without all
affliction and trouble. Is this therefore a conforte? Christ answers, that it
is a conforte, but we must make a distinction between confortes. The world
also has his comfort: for if it had not, it could never be so secure,
careless, merry and without all care, but that is not the conforte, the answer.
which comes from the spirit of truth, but it is a deceitful confort. For
it may suddenly come to pass, that in those things, wherein the world reposeth
his conforte and stay, worldly confort is uncertain.
there may be found no comfort, nor help at all. But the holy ghost, which is
the conforter of the Christians, is the spirit of truth, which inwardly
conforteth us with most certain, sound, and sure consolation. The conforte of
ye holy ghost is most certain and sure.
Therefore although John have not that conforte, that Herod with his whore,
has, but is cast of them into prison, where he lies most miserably afflicted
and withoue all consolation, till at the last he loses his head, yet the
holy ghost conforteth and confirms him, and secretly in his heart speaks
unto him on this manner: Be of good courage, O John, and let no adversity
dismaye thee, neither be thou disconforted, that you art so miserably and
unjustly cast into prison, and that the wicked world does so hate thee and
revile thee. Thou know this, that all worldly things can not continue long,
it now has the ouerhand, but the tyranny thereof shall not long endure: 1.
John. 2.
For the world with all his tyranny shall shortly vanishe away, and for ever
after be plagued in hell fire. But contrariwise thy affliction shall not endure
long, but everlasting joy shall come in place thereof, where a moment of an
hour is better, then a thousand years in this life, although the worldly joy
were not entermedled with any grief or sorrow. This consolation and
confirmation does so replenish John's heart with joy, that he does not only
not fear death, but he also gives God thanks, that by this means he is
delivered from this body of sin, and translated and removed unto everlasting
life.

But from whence has the holy ghost this comfort? John. 16.
from the father, says Christ here. For the holy Ghost proceeds from the
father. And this is a noble and notable sentence to confirm our article of the
Trinity. For if the holy ghost proceeds from the father, The holy ghost is
god.
then must it needs follow, that he is everlasting. For nothing can proceed
from the father, but that is of his own nature, essence, and substance.
Therefore as god the Son is everlasting, because he was begotten of the
everlasting father: (for god can beget nothing, but that is like to himself)
so is this also a necessary consequence, that the holy ghost which proceeds
from god, is everlasting. But this article we will leave at this present, and
when time requires, The reward of the godly in this life.
we will speak more largely of it. But where with does the holy ghost
comfort? Of me says Christ, shall he bear witness. As though he should
say: In this world look for nothing else but for persecution, emprisonment,
loss of goods, and at the last death. This is the reward of the true
Christians in this life. How the holy ghost co^forteh the faithful inwardly.
But be not dismayde. The holy ghost shall come unto thee, and conforte thee.
He shall testify of me. He shall put thee in remembrance of me. He shall so
encourage thee, and inflame thee with the love of me, that thou shall fear the
tyranny of the world nothing at all. He shall not increase the with vain
richesse, as the world does, but he shall bear witness of me, so that although
thou should loose all that ever thou have, thy wife, thy children, thy land,
thy possessions, thy household stuff etc. Yea thy head and life: This yet
should be thy confort, yt Christ Jesus remains unto thee safe, sound and
untouched, which for thy sake, for thy health and salvation, for thy commodity
and profit, came down from heaven, was made man, died, rose again, ascended
into heaven, according to the articles of ye Christen faith. If this be true,
as nothing is more true, why the^ sholdest thou fear? Thus speaks the holy
ghost daily in ye hearts of the afflicted Christians unto their great
encourageme^t and comfort. And verily he yt died for our sake, can not hate us,
nor bear any evil will against us. If he then loves us, what should we fear,
as though he loved us not? Yea what should we not be content to suffer, and to
lose, so yt we may obtain Christ and his richesse, Phil. ^.
as ye Apostle says: I thi^cke al things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. For whom I have counted all thing loss, and
do judge them but vile, that I may win Christ, and be foounde in him etc.

And this is yt, which Christ here says: He shall bear witness of me, for in
this testimony or witness consists ye whole confort. Therefore these words Of
me, are worthy to be written in letters of gold, and diligently to be observed.
The holy ghost teaches no new doctrine.
For these words are able to assure us, that the holy ghost brings no new
doctrine, neither sets he forth unto us Moises, or any other thing to
comfort the conscience, but Christ alone and his word. For nothing can
comfort the conscience, but the testimony and witness bearing of Christ, The
wytnes bearinge of christ only comforts ye troubled and weak conscience.
of his death and resurrection. All other things trouble and fraye the
conscience, by whatsoever name they be called, law good works, Pilgrimages,
worshippinge of saints etc. For god him self, when we deal with him without
Christ, Note.
is terrible neither can we find any favor or conforte at his hand but
anger, wrath, and displeasure, as Christ says I am the way, the truth, and
the life. John. 14. lib. de Isaac et anima.
No man comes unto the father, but by me. Hereto agrees the saying of S.
Ambrose. Christ alone is our mouth, whereby we speak to the father: our eye,
whereby we see the father: our right hand, whereby we offer to the father:
which Christ except he make intercession for us, neither we, nor all the
saints have any thing to do with god. The doctrine that sets forth. Christ,
that brings true consolation, and makes the hearts of men merry. All other
bring to the afflicted conscience not conforte but disconforte, not life but
death, not salvation but damnation.

Therefore all the matter consists in this one point, yt thou truly, rightly,
and certainly know this consolation and confort: so may thou be bold to
say: I believe in Jesus Christ, which died for me. And I know that the holy
ghost which is and is called a conforter, will bring none other testimony and
confort, then this alone that he shall testify and bear witness of Christ:
which alone, and non other, will I admit and receive. For if there were any
conforte better or surer then this, the holy ghost would also have brought it,
but he does nothing else then testify of Christ.

But why does Christ use the word of testifyinge or bearing of witness? Galat.
1. Epist. 2. John.
This is don to this end, that we should the more diligently attend and mark
the word. For this is certain and true, that the work of the holy ghost is
inwardly in the heart. But yet will not he administer this work otherwise,
then by the outward word, as Paul also says, that faith comes by the
hearing of the word. The holy ghost confortethe by the word.
Therefore Christ calls the holy ghost a witness, now does he bear wytnes
by the mouth and word of the Apostles and Preachers, which sincerelye and
purely set forth the gospel of Christ. Therefore he that desires conforte, may
not tarry, Romans 10.
till the holy ghost come personally and preach Christ unto him, or speak unto
him from heaven. He gives forth his witness openly in the word: there is he to
be sought and looked for, till by ye word, which thou outwardly hear, he
touch thy heart, and so inwardly through his workyng thou felest his
testimony of Christ. But this inward witness comes not, except the outward
witness of the word goes before, wherein it is declared, that Christ for our
sake became man, was crucified, died, and rose again. So that the sum of this
gospel is, that if we entende to be Christians, What Christians shall look for
this world
we may not in this life look for richesse dignities, renown, glory etc. But
rather think most certainly, that for this our profession we shall have the
world an enemy to persecute us, besides the vexatio^s of sin, devil and
death. Therefore when these torments rise up in the breaste of a Christian, he
is by and thynkethe on this manner with himself: Alas, what haste thou done?
Thou myghtest well have been a Christian, and yet never have comme to this
myserie and danger. Thou art come to this point thoroughe thine own fault.
etc. Now when such horrible examples come also to mind, as puts us in
remembrance, how grievously great and virtuous men have in times paste
fallen, and could not escape tentation: then (says Christ) is it time for
the comforter to come, vnconfortable thoughts are of the devil.
which without doubt will not long tarry away, but will spedylye come, and
teach you, that such grievous and fearful imaginations and thoughts are not
of him, but of the devil. The reason is. For such thoughts bring trouble and
disquietenesse, yea and drive unto desperation. But the holy Ghost makes not
afraid, but comfort, encourages, and so handles the matter, that he
testifies and bears witness of me, that I have overcome the world with his
prince and God, even the devil. Therefore all other thoughts, that bring with
them heauynes, sorrow, and discomfort, are not of me, but of the devil. But
the holy Ghost brings and gives confortable and ioyefull thoughts, for as
much as he bears witness of me, that I have bestowed my life for you, dyed
for your sins, and rose again for your Justification. Romans 4.
Of this testimony or witness ye may easyly gather, that I hate you not, and
that I do not entende to condemn you, but to save you.

The whole substance of this matter therefore rests in this point: He shall
bear witness Of me. This is principally to be observed and diligently noted
against the Sectaries and false teachers. For here it is surely determined,
that when the holy ghost shall bring forth comfort, he shall do it by the
testimony or witness of Christ, that he may stablish and print Christ in
their hertes. Where as contrariwise, the devil goes about to plant in the
hearts of men, fear the wrath of God, syn, death and damnation. This wicked
spirit does the holy Ghost by his testimony resist, and by the word speaks
in our hearts, A sweet conforte.
and says: Ah man, what do thou? Can thou do none otherwise, but always
think on death, sin, and damnation? Turn thine eyes from these grievous and
terrible sightes, and look upon me. Do thou not know that man, which is
called Christ Jesus? Of him it is thus written: that he was conceived of the
holy Ghost, borne of Mary the virgin: that he suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dyed, was buried: that he descended unto hell, rose again from
death the third day, ascended unto heaven. etc. Wherefore was all this done,
thynkest thou? Was it not done for this purpose, that by this means thou
should comfort thy self against death and sin? Therefore leave of, and
cease thus to fear and to trouble thy self: for thou haste no cause so to
do. If Christ were not, and if Christ had not done these things for thee:
so should thou have had a just cause to fear and to be sad. But Christ
is by thee, and round about thee, as he him self says: I am with you for ever
even unto the end of the world. Math. 2^.
Moreover, he has suffered death for thee, and sytteth on the right hand
of GOD his Father to comfort, and to defend thee against all thine enemies.

Where this doctrine sounds, there is the voice, witness and word of the
holy ghost. But what so ever sounds not on this manner, be it never so fine
and pleasant, it may be the witness of Moses, or rather of subtle Satan, of
hypocrites and heretics, which seek salvation, peace, and rest of conscience
by works, and so trouble che consciences of men, and drive them to
desperation, but the witness of Christ it is not, nor yet the voice of the
holy Ghost. God for his mercies sake keep us, and defend us against all
witnesses and voices of Satan, of the Pope, of ye Turk, of hypocrites, of
sectaries, of heretics, of scismatikes, and of all the wicked, and unto our
last end conserve us in this holy witness of the holy Ghost. Amen.

This is the first part of this our gospel concerning that comforter the holy
Ghost, Of the cross and affliction.
how he comfort the Christians. Now let us come unto the second part,
as touching the Cross and affliction. And here must we note specially the
saying of Christ to his Disciples: Luc. 24.
They shall excommunicate you out of their Synagoges. These words declare
euidentely, that they which excommunicate the Christians, and drive them out
of their synagoges, maintayn this title, and do greatly glory, that they are
the Synagoge, or true church, yea and they will also be counted such, as are
alone the true woorshyppers of God, and that in handlyng the Christians on this
wise, they do God great, true, and faithful service. For else what needed
Christ to have spoken these words? The hour comes, that who soever kylleth
you, shall think, that he doothe an acceptable sacrifice unto God, and an high
great service.

It is therefore necessary at al times, that we make a difference between the
true and false church. That is the false church, The true and false church.
which chalengeth this name, and is so called, and yet not withstanding is
not the true church. The true church is that, which is not suffered to be
called the church, and yet is the true Church in deed. The pope and his
Sect is not the true church.
But it is an hard thing to discern these two churches. For this hyndreth
greatly, that the false Church also has the office of mynisterie in it, as it
is to be seen. We frankely and freely confess, that the Pope and his sect is
not the true church, and therefore we condemn them as the Synagoge of Satan:
Notwithstanding when they baptize, ordeyne pastors, confirm maryages, we
find no fault with these things for the ministry and words sake, but we
confess their baptism to be true, and therefore do not we baptize the
children again, which were baptized of them. Which thing notwithstanding
Cyprian did not follow, Ciprians error.
who was of this mind, that he thought, that the baptism, which was ministered
of heretics, was no right and true baptism, and therefore that the children
which they had baptized, ought to be baptized again, as though they had
never ben baptized. And this was his reason. Heretics (says he) are not in
the unity of the Christen church: Therefore can they have no Christen
ministry. But this is not true. For the mynisterie and the person ar to be
discerned, and a difference is to be put between them. A notorious sinner also
is not of the unity of the Church, yet his mynisterie that he has in the
church, is not to be despised. The reason is this. For the mynisterie is not
his, but Christ's. If he would go about to alter or break the commandment
of Christ: if he would otherwise baptize preach, and minister the Lords
supper, then Christ himself has appointed and commanded: then is there here
a sufficient cause for men to depart from his baptism, preaching,
ministration of the Lords supper etc. But if he alter not, nor change the
institution and commandment of Christ, what soever he be, although never so
sinful and wicked person, yet hyndreth that nothing at all the ministry.

Therefore he that will ryghtly and truly discern these two churches, he may
not only have an eye to the ministry. For the false church also may have
the mynisterie, and yet is it not the true Church. As the false Church in
like manner vsurpethe the name of GOD, and glories of it, but we may not
therefore believe it. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
For the third commandment chargethe us, that we take not the name of GOD in
vain. And where as we ask in the first petition of the Lords Prayer, Math. 6.
that the name of God may be sanctified: This doothe also argue, that this
name of God is prophanated and dishonored of many. Therefore when the false
church under the name of God, and of the Church curses and condemns thee,
it is nothing to the purpose: The excommunicate and curse of ye false church
is not to be feared.
neither nedest thou fear any thing at all their curse and condemnation, but
straight ways make thou a difference between the true and false church, and
say: I hear well the name of god and of the Church, but the ungodly also can
and do usurp that. For except it were so, we should have no need of this
commandment, that we should not take the name of God in vain. Wherefore we
must first of all consider this, whyther they use the name of God, and of his
Church aryght, or not.

And unto this matter does the rule greatly help, which Christ prescribes
in this place, How the false church may be known.
when he in the right colors poynteth and sets forth the false church. For
the true church doothe not usurp the power of the swearde and of temporal
punyshement. But the false church chalengeth this power, and most cruelly
persecuteth the true Church, as Christ prophesied before, that it should
come to pass. By this may thou well know, which is the false church. But
yet this is a more certain argument, that Christ says: These things shall they
do to you, because they neither know me, nor my Father. Here is also the false
church painted and set forth in her right colors, with her ordinary
power. They may cloak their matters with the name of God, and of the church,
and so bleare the eyes of the unwise and simple, as their manner is to do, but
yet for all their fair show and glorious pretense, Christ says, that they
neither know him, nor his Father.

But what is it to know Christ and his Father? It is not to say Mass, What it
is to know god.
to be shaue^ in the crown, to wear a typpet and a long gown, to be cladde
with a monks coule, to vow poverty, chastity, and obedience at the
appoyntement of Antichriste, to absteyne from flesh, and to enforce the bealy
with all kind of dainty fyshe to live idelly in the cloister of other men's
labors. John. 1.
etc. But to know Christ, is to believe, that Christ is the lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world, What it is to know christ.
which for our sake became man, dyed for us on the cross, rose again from the
dead, ascended into heaven. etc. With this full persuasion and assured hope,
that God will be merciful unto us for his son Christ Jesus sake. And this is
to know the Father, What it is to know ye father
to be thoroughly persuaded, that he for his son Christ's sake will have mercy
on us, and not impute our sins unto us, but frankly and freely forgive them
for Christ's sake. Where this knowledge is, there is the true church. But
where this knowledge is not, there is not the true church, although the
ministry and the name of God be there.

Therefore we must have respect to this knowledge above all things, that the
true church may certainly be known. The scisme or dissension, that now a
days is in the Church, offends many, that they can not tell, to what
part they should join themselves. But in this they fail and do not their
duty, in that they will not consider this rule. This is our doctrine, that
before God nothing can preuail against sin and death, The doctrine of the
true church.
but the alone death and Resurrection of Christ: and that who soever does truly
believe this, is saved. But whosoever believes not this, what soever works he
does besides, he can not be saved. Now what foundation, confirmation, and
probation we have for this our doctrine, the scriptures both of the old and
new testamente do abundantly declare and it has been set forth before unto
you many times. But what has followed? The doctrine of the false church.
For this doctrine the Pope and his church most cruelly persecute us,
excommunicateth, pronounces, and kills us as heretics. For this is his
doctrine: who soever looks to be saved he himself must make satisfaction for
his own sins. Christ (says he) satisfied only for Original sin, what
soever we offend after Baptism, that must every man make amends for, and
with his good works recompense the same, and so pacifye the wrath of GOD. But
how agrees this doctrine with the knowledge of Christ? For this is a good
consequence. If Christ has satisfied for our sins: then are not we able to
make satisfaction for them. Good works are not to be left undone, but we must
do them for an other purpose, then to make satisfaction for our sins and to
deserve everlasting life by them, whi we ought to do good works.
even to show our obedience to God and to his holy comaundementes, to set
forth the glory of our heavenly Father, to stop the mouths of the
adversaries, to declare our Faith in Christ, not to be vain, idle, or dead:
to mortify old Adam, to profit our neighbor, to win other unto the truth
of the Gospel. etc.

Thus see you by this rule of Christ, which is the right and true church. But
notwithstanding we are cast out of the synagoges, and excommunicate of the
Pope and his sect, because we repose and set our righteousness and acceptance
before God in CHRIST in his death and Resurrection. Now where as the the Pope
and his church chalengeth unto them salvation by their own works, merits,
and satisfactions: it is an euidente argument, that they neither know Christ,
nor the Father. Forasmuch as we be well assured and certain, that we know
Christ aright and the Papists know not Christ: it ought not to trouble or
move us any thing at all, although such a church as neither knows Christ
nor ye father, does excommunicate us, and pronounce us Heretics, and the
church of the devil. Let this rather confort us, that we know the son and the
father, and nothing at all care, that the Pope does so greatly auance and set
forth himself against us with the name of the church, when in deed his church
is nothing else then the very synagoge of Satan. Let us in the mean season
look for an other judgment, Apoc. 2.
where not men with their lewd judgment, but God him self shall truly
judge, and make void and of no force the Popes excommunication, and shall at
the last day before God and his angels declare us to be his true church. For
it can none otherwise be in this life, then as Christ says here: that there
shall be two churches, and one shall excommunicate an other, and by no means
one abide an other to dwell together. But excommunication is never publicly
exercised of the true Church against the false church. For the false church
has evermore for the most part the sword in her hand, and is able to
defend her self at all times against such as it favors not, as we may see
by the Pope: which is a most sure argument, that he and his can not be the
true church. For as concerning the true church, it is in this our Gospel
plainly declared, that it shall be excommunicated, vngentilly entreated, and
miserably handled. They shall (says Christ) cast you out of the synagoges.
Who are those You? Are they not the disciples and Apostles of Christ? They
shall kill you, (says he.) Who? Even they, that call them selves the Church.

And thus also goes the matter even at this present day. Therefore this
excommunicatyng and murderyng which the Pope and his church, The tokens of
the true church.
uses against the saints of God, which are the true church, ought not to
make us afraid, but rather to take it joyfully and patiently, and learn, that
these things are the right tokens and manifest declarations of the true and
christen church, yet so, that there be likewise above all things the true
knowledge of Christ and of his Father. For the Anabaptists and other sects
do suffer persecution also, but they have not the knowledge of Christ and of
his father, but they bring in, and set up a new kind of monkery, and
thorough this they look to be saved, and to have God merciful unto them. But
contrary wise, the true Church knows Christ and his Father, that is to
say, it believes and trusts only in the goodness and mercy of God for
Christ's sake, and for that Faith, confidence and hope, it gladly suffers
persecution, so that whatsoever chances unto it, The true chureh takes all
troubles patiently and thankefuly.
it grudgeth not, but paently take it, because it knows, that Christ
prophesied and told before hand, that these things should so come to pass.
Therefore it is well content quietly to bear the tyranny of the Pope, being
glad of this, that it knows Christ and his Father, where as the Pope and
all his adherentes, although they brag never so much of the Church, neither
know Christ nor his Father, but rather persecute them, that have this
knowledge. Wherefore with a glad heart and willing spirit it suffers all
kind of persecution, with a sure hope, that after this life it shall reygne
with Christ, and live with him euerlastyngly in the kingdom of his Father. To
whom with the same Christ his son, and the holy Ghost that most sweet
comforter, be all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A Sermon on the Epistle on VVhitsondaye. Act. ii.
WHen the fifty days were come to an end, they were all with one accord to
gether in one place. And sodaynelye there came a sound from heaven, as it had been the coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they sat.
And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as they had been of fire, and
it sat upon each one of them, and they were all filled with the holy ghost,
and began to speak with other tongues, even as the same spirit gave them
vtteraunce. Then were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every
nation of them that are under heaven. When this was noysed about, the multitude
came together and were astonyed, because yt every man heard them speak with
his own language. They wondered all and marueyled, saying among them selves:
Behold, are not all these whtche speak, of Galile? And how hear we every
man his own tongue, wherein we were borne? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites,
and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and Iewry, and of Capad^cia, of Pontus, and
Asia, Phrigia, and Phamphilia, of Egipte, and of the parties of Libia, which
is beside Sirene and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites, Greeks, and
Arrabians, we have heard them speak in our own tongues the great works of
God.

THE EXPOSITION.
VUhitsonday, which of the Grecians is called Pentecoste, Pentecoste* what it
signifies.
doothe sygnifie fyftie days. For Whitsondaye is the fyftie day in number from
that day that Christ rose again. In the which day was celebrate and kept holy
amongst the Jews also an high feast, in remembrance that in the fiftieth day
after that they had eaten the pascall lamb, and departed out of Egypt: they
received ye law at mount Sinai. And for ye continuance of this benefit and of
this setting forth of the law, and of making a covenant with the people, was
this feast ordained of god, that they might never forget this holy obligation
and band, Exodus 20.
as the history in the second book of Moses, and the.xx. chapter doothe
declare.

And truly it doothe appear by the hystories of the old testament, as
witnesses saint Paul also in his Epist. to the Corinthians, that whatsoever
befell then amongst the people of the Jews, was but a figure of those
things, 1. Cor. 10.
that should be declared to us in the new testament. Wherefore even as in the
new testament, we have an other pascall lamb, and better then the old: Exodus
12.
(For the blood of the lamb in Egypt was to anoint y^ door posts, that the
Angel might not hurt the bodies nor kill the first borne therein: but the blood
of the lamb Christ was shed on the Cross, to the intent that we might be
delivered through him out of the true Egypt, ^. Cor. 5. Heb. 9.10.
that is, from the tyranny of the devil, sin, and death, so in the new
testamente we have a better Whitsontide and Penthecost, then it was in the old
testament. The Pe^tecost of the Jews
The Jews in the old testament did receive in the mount Synai the ten
commandments: Which doctrine was good, profitable and necessary, and may
be worthily embraced, as a great benefit, but in it have we no sure succoure
and aid against the kingdom of the devil, Romans 7.
sin, and death: but rather by the help of that law we are declared to be
more grievous sinners, and through our own conscience, are accused before God,
and proved gyltie, John. 7.
for as much as we do not that, which the law commands us to do.

Exodus 34. 2. Cor. 3.
Wherefore, even as there was a very dreadful sight in the mount, when GOD
spoke, and all things so troubled with thunder and lyghtnynge that the hill
did smoke, and seemed to be moved: So is this always the propretie of the law,
when it works effectuously in the heart, to terrify and fear, The law
accuses.
and to drive a man to desperation, so that in the heart there remains no
device to escape that danger. And surely for a man to know what God requires,
2. Cor. 3.
and to feel and perceive that he has no power to do the same, must needs be
occasion of great fear and dread inwardely. For hereof it does follow, that a
man thinks that he is condemned already of God to death, orels that he shall
forthwith suffer the pains of death. Wherefore the Pentecost of the Jews is a
remembrance of a great and necessary thing, yet the consideration thereof can
not be pleasant and acceptable. Exodus 19.
For the example of the people does declare what this mystery woorketh
inwardly. When they desire Moses to be a mean between them and God, and when
they thought it necessary in their heart to have a mean, and yet could not
find who might be this mean and mediator. But GOD him self has promised a
Mediator which is a Prophet like unto Moses etc. Deuteronomy. 8.
And by this he doothe declare, what should be the Whytsontyde of the New
Testamente, The Whytsontide or Pe^thecost of the christians.
that it is fulle of comfort, sweetness, joy and peace. For thus says the
Euangeliste, as it is rehearsed, that in the day of Pentecoste whenne the Jews
did keep holy the feast of their law, at what time that the Apostles and
Disciples were gathered together, sodeynelye there camme as it were the sound
of a vehemente wind, and filled the whole house, Acts. 2.
and there appeared upon them cloven tongues, as it had been of fire, and so
the Holy ghost was opened there, both to the syghte of the eyes. and the
hearing of the ears. For in the sound was he heard and seen in the fire,
Luc. 24. Act. 1. Math. 3.
as Christ had promised before, and John Baptist prophesied, that they should
be baptized in fire and spirit.

But all these things have their signification and meaning. What the fyrye
tongues signifye.
The tongues doothe sygnifie the office of preaching, which then shall
work with effect, when the holy ghost works therewith, yt thereby may be
enkendled a new light inwardly. And forthwith after this sound and fyry
tongues he sytteth on each of them, and so does inflame their hearts, and
with such a blast and motion perceth their understanding: that in a momente of
an hour they know both God and his son Jesus Christ, they understand the
scriptures, and waxes so bold in heart, that they dare openly profess the
true knowledge of God, so that they can speak with all languages, where as
before they knew but their own. Esa. 2.
For out of Sion it behooved, that the law should proceed, and the word of
the Lord out of Jerusalem, Math. 23. Marc. ^6.
and that afterward the Gospel should be heard in all la^guages. And forasmuch
as ye Gospel should be publyshed not only in Jury, but also in all the world:
therefore the holy ghost does instruct his apostles with languages, that it
might be universally set forth throughout all the earth.

This is our Whitsontide and Pentecost in the new Testament, Why the Apostles
speak with diverse languages.
whereby the true knowledge of God is ordained, not with fear and dread, but
with joy and peace, whereby there ryseth such a conscience at the length,
which turns not from God, but abides all things for Christ's sake, as the
apostles by their examples do show. Act. 5. Act. 20.21.
Not only Christ at his last supper, prophecieth of this Whitsontyde, but also
the Prophets, David, Esaias, Hieremias, Ioell, Zacharias, and other.

Wherefore we shall not lose our labor, Psalm. 6^. Esa. 60. Hiere. 3. Joel. 2.
Zachar. 3.
but rather bestow our time very well, if we at a certain appointed time,
enstructe men of the holy Ghost, teaching what he is, and what is his
propretie, and what is needful for us to do, that we also may obtain the
same spirit. And first of all we must not think that the holy ghost was
then first in the congregation and never before. The holy ghost has always
ben of the church.
For he is God eternal and almyghtie (as Christ says) that he comes of the
father Wherefore he is of one substance and nature with the Father, and there be
many evident testimonies, that the holy ghost has always been effectuous in
men, and has lightened them, John. 16.
and brought them into the way. For Christ himself and Peter also says,
that the Holy Ghost spoke by the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1. Luc. 12.
and the Evangelists do testifye of Anna, Zacharia, Elizabeth, John Baptist,
that they had the holy ghost.

Wherefore we must think and believe none other thing of the holy ghost then
we believe of Christ, Christ the son of god.
which has been for ever, and forthwith after the first promise made in
Paradyse exercised his office, and stood in battle against the devil, and
began to break the head of the serpent. Genesis 3.
This work was long agone began of the son of man, and ever diligently done,
and at last fully accomplyshed, at what time he became manne, and dyed on the
Cross, and the third day rose again from the dead. Therefore the workynge
of the Holy Ghost was therewyth, and the holy Ghost was always in the
world, gouernyng men's hearts, and stirryng up their faith by the word, in them
he kyndled a light, and them he confirmed and brought into all truth.

But yet he did at length perfectly and absolutely fulfylle this great
work upon this Whytsondaye, The reuelacion of the holy ghost on whitsondaye.
wherein he was not secret and privy, as he was before. But he declared
him self openly, that all that did see, might perceive and confess, that
the holy ghost was present. For where as there were some amongst them in
this place, that judged the woorkynge of the holy Ghost to be drunkenness, it
was done of an aduysed and purposed madness. For they are proved false by
their own reason, whereby they may know that diverse languages comes not of
drunkenness, why the holy ghost was opened on whitsonday.
or of new wine. It should make much with our matter to consider, why the
revelation of the holy Ghost was deferred unto this day. For even as after the
delyuerance of the old people, there followed immediately the covenant between
GOD and the people: so after our delyuerance which comes thorough Christ,
doothe this pledge of the Holy Ghost ensue, whereby we might be made certain
and confirmed as concerning the covenant between God and us. For first was it
mete that this deliverance should be made and confyrmed thoroughe CHRIST, By
christ receive we the holy ghost.
and that he should entreat the Father to send us the Holy Ghost: And by him
only are we made part takers of this great gift: Psalm. 68.
as we said in the day of the Ascension, proving it by the three score and
eight Psalm, That he ascended on hye, and received gifts for men. Act. 2.
For thus doothe Peter also expound that saying in his sermon of this day,
where as he says: Wherefore Christ being exalted on the right hand of God,
when he had received the promise of the holy ghost of his father, he did
shed forth this as you now see and hear.

And this is the first work of his, but has been always in the world with
dew administration and workynge. The holy ghost is god from everlasting.
But yet on this day at the last did he openly declare himself, where as he
showed forth himself with great virtue and strength, so that by this
revelation we may know, what a great thing CHRIST has wrought and brought
to pass for us, through his death and resurrection.

Secondarilye, this is to be noted, that as the scripture gives a peculiar
name unto CHRIST, and calls him the word of GOD: So does it also give a
proper name to the sprite calling it Spiritus Sanctus, that is the holy
Ghost, which by his grace does sanctifye the hearts, which were before
unholy and defiled with sin.

This name brings great conforte to all good Christian men. For they
perceive that they are weaker then the devil, and unable at all times to
resyste his temptations. And as they are very sorrowful that they feel the
evil spirit sore set against them, so are they put in good hope, Why the
spirit of god is called the holy ghost.
that by CHRIST they obtain the holy Ghost, which pardons their sins,
and styrreth them to obey God truly.

But how the holy Ghost does bring this to pass, it is showed in John's
Gospel. The holy Ghost shall reprove the world of sin, John. 6.
of justice, and of judgment. For so are the properties of the Trinity
discerned in the articles of our faith, Diverse propertis of the trinity.
that GOD the father gave us body and life, and made us to his Kyngedome. And
after that our parents became the first sinners and under deaths danger, and
we also as by enheritance succeeded unto their sin and forfet: The proper
office of the holy ghost.
The son of god was made man, and thorough his death, restored to us that,
that was lost, and delivered us from sin and death. This deliverance does
the holy ghost set forth by the Gospel, and so instruct the hearts of men,
to believe therein, that is, to have sure confort therein, that CHRIST died for
them, and that they may not doubt, but that they are reconciled to God the
father by that death, so that he wili no more remember their sins, but will
forgive them for Christ's sake. This does signify the sanctifiynge of the
hearts, or the purifying by faith, as Peter speaks in the Acts of the
Apostles.

Act. 15.
And where as is such remission of sins by faith, so that we do not despair,
although diverse sins remain, but take sure conforte through the death and
resurrection of CHRIST: The second sanctifying of the holy ghost
There follows at the lenght the second sanctifyinge of the holy Ghost,
wherein our bodies also are sanctified by the holy Ghost, as when we give
over our selves no more to sin, nor be delighted therewith, but abstain, Ephe.
4.
and study to do those things that please God, as Paul teaches. He that
stole, set him steal no more but rather let him labor with his own hands
that that is good, that he may have to give to the needful etc. This is the
property of the holy Ghost to begin in us a new and true obedience toward
GOD, that we may resist sin, and mortifye the flesh, and so obtain
remission of our sins by faith.

But this sanctifying is not parfect by and by with the first. For if the first
were not, the second could not much prevail. For flesh and blood are full
of infirmity, but the devil is exceeding mighty against us, and we have
received only the first fruits of the spirit. Wherefore this obedience can
not be parfect, and there is no sanctifyinge to attain unto ryghteousnes
before GOD and everlasting life, than the sanctifyinge of faith, whereof is
spoken before. For thereof depends the whole matter, whereas the second
sanctifyinge, when it has done all that it can, confesses his own
unprofitableness, and stycketh only to the sanctifyinge which comes of Gods
grace and mercy. Hereof then is it plain why the holy Ghost is so called,
because it does make holy and sanctifye, that is, by the word, it stirs up
in us faith toward CHRIST, that thereby we may obtain remission of our
sins.

Beside this office of sanctifyinge, Zach. 2.
the holy Ghost has other offices as he has other names in scripture. For
Zachary calls him the spirit of prayer, Other offices of the holy ghost.
because he encourages the hearts to trust surely in GOD, and to call upon
him in their necessities. Also CHRIST calls him the conforter, which helps
our hearts by stirringe us to take patiently all things, John. 14.
and that they should be feared by no misfortune, or combrance of the world.
Also he calls him the spirit of truth, because to withstand lies and
heresies, John. 15.
and to confirm the pure word and true faith, he is always bent. Whereas
contrariwise the devil, by our reason and false doctrine would cast us
hedlong into errors and lies.

These are the proper offices of the holy Ghost, beside that he garnisheth
the hearts of the faithful with diverse virtues and gifts, and is such a
conforter, that bydeth with us always, where as all the worldly conforte is
but for a time and at last forsakes us. How the holy ghost may be obtained.
Seeing then that the holy Ghost does work such great things in us. This
also is to be learned. Which is the way to attain to such great gifts,
and how they may begin to grow in us, Luc. 11.
and that we may receive the holy Ghost, and thereby be sanctified and
saved. As touching this thing CHRIST himself does teach us. Prayer.
Luke. xj. Whereas he says on this wise. Seeing that, you that are evil can
give good things to your sons how much more can your heavenly father
give his holy spyrite unto them that ask it of him. Yt is a sentence worthy
to be rehearsed, teaching first that GOD would that the holy Ghost should
be obtained by prayer of him, and that he gives it to them that with humble
prayers desire it of the father. Wherefore when thou haste a desire in thy
mind to obtain the holy Ghost of GOD: continewe in prayinge, and doubt not
but thou shalt obtain. This is the redye way to obtain the holy Ghost.
For CHRIST him self does teach thee so to do, The holy ghost is to be
obtaynede by prayer.
and to call upon GOD the father often for the holy Ghost, but this prayer as
all other prayers must be made also in the name of IESV, and on such wise
must we pray GOD, that he for CHRIST his Son sake will give us the holy
Ghost. We must pray in the name of christ
And to the attainement thereof, have great help, in that that Christ
ascended to the father for no other cause but to receive these gifts of the
father, and to give them unto us. Wherefore in our prayers we can not doubt, for
it is not only, commanded of God that we should pray for the holy ghost,
and also promised that we shall obtain, but also his will is ready to give it.
For as much as Christ therefore sits at the right hand of God the father,
to distribute amongst us these gifts. For he also received them of the
father, as it is writent in the.lxviij. psalm. Not for himself, but for men,
Psalm. 68.
to give them unto them. Besides prayers, there are other things, also
necessary to the obtayninge of the holy Ghost. For we must have a fervent
study to read or hear the word of God, and to use often the Sacraments, that
all these things joined to gether, may make open the way for the holy ghost.
For this is once for all decreed of the holy ghost, to work in us by the word
and sacraments. He therefore that little regard these things, to him shall the
holy ghost never come. For to this intent are we baptized, receive we the
Supper of the Lord, and hear the word of God. For we know that all these
things, are as instruments, by the which the holy ghost does accomplish
his operation in us. As examples does show. The three thousand soles, which
were converted this day of saint Peter, had never ben converted, if they had
not heard the word before. Act. 2.
After that they heard the word, and their hearts were thereby moved, they
came to baptism. For Christ so commanded. Math. 28. Marc. 16.
So the chamberlain of the Queen of Aethiops could not obtain the holy ghost
without the word, which Philippe spoke by the interpretinge of scripture.
Act. 3.


When his heart was touched by the preaching of Philippe, it behooved him also
to receive baptism, that the holy Ghost might work thereby.

Wherefore if thou be desirous to have the holy Ghost, first of all thou must
pray to the father, for it, and after that thou must give diligent head to the
word and preachinge, thou must often call to mind thy baptism, what God
promised thee there, and what manner of covenant he has made there with thee.
Thou must often come to the Lords Supper. For by the word and sacraments the
holy ghost does kendle our hearts with a new light of faith, that we may not
only hear the word, as the hard hearted Jews did hear, but that we may
understand it also, and that thereby we may become new men, and get us new
hearts. Furthermore we must beware, that we do not let the holy Ghost in his
work by fylthy and shamfull living, and that we cast him not out of us by
wanton an sinful manners. For one place can not serve both for the holy Ghost
and the devil. The life is godly to be ordered.
Therefore when the devil tempts the with covetousness, wrath, lechery, and
other sins, flee straight way to prayer, as thou would to an anchor in a
tempeste, that GOD may preserve thee against temptation, and keep the obedient
unto him. For it is necessary to abstain from sin and the works of the
flesh, either that the holy ghost may remain with thee still after thou have
received him, or that thou may obtain him, that was never in thee: or if by
infirmity thou chance to fall, thou may rise again, and return to ye
newnes of living. And then specially shall we perceive that the holy ghost must
needs take place in us, and help us against the devil, death and hell, whereas
contrary wise, they that continue in voluntary sins willinglye, by a little
and a little fall more and more into the devils power, and live with out all
repentance, and never are part takers of the holy Ghost, whose proper office
it is as I said before, first to sanctify us through faith and remission of
our sins, and then to be an help unto us against sin, The office of the
holy ghost.
that we may show obedience to God. But we said before, that we receive only
the first fruits of the holy ghost, and that flesh and blood does yet remain
in us, and shall as long as we live, and abide in this world.

And hereof it is that they, which have received the holy ghost, are
nevertheless weak, and does fall often. Let no man here be offended and
think, as the Anabaptists do. which are of this opinion, that no man can fall
which have received the holy ghost. This opinion should be true if every man
would follow the holy ghost always. For than should we never fall. But that is
not possible, because of the crafts and giles of the devil, and the offenses
of the world, and the infirmity of ye flesh. Wherefore it is always
necessary to pray, that the lord will not take his spirit from us, but that he
will of his goodness keep us in his grace, Math. 6.
and daily increase in us this gift of the holy ghost, and to forgive us our
trespasses, as we pray in the lords prayer. Psalm. 51.
For the holiest yt be, can not live without such trespasses: but yet by faith
in Christ are they pardoned that they hurt us not. Ye have heard therefore
what is your true whitsontyd and pentecost, Which is much more glorious, than
the whitsontide of the Jews. For the holy Ghost is shedforth upon all
flesh, that we by the Gospel may know God, and may be sanctified and
justified by the holy ghost both in body and spirit, if so be that we fulfill
the office of true religion by prayer, by hearing the word, and bringing
forth the true fruits of the spirit. Which thing the holy ghost grant us
all to do thoroughe Jesus Christ our Lord to whom with the father and the
holy ghost be all glory for ever. Amen.

The second Sermon on whitsonday. The Gospel. Ihon. xiiii.
Jesus said unto his Disciples: if ye love me, keep my commandments, and I
will pray the father, and he shall give you another comforter, that be may
abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth, whom the world can not
receive, because the world sees him not, neither knows him. But ye know him,
for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless,
but will come to you. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more, but
ye see me. For I live, and ye shall live. That day shall ye know that I am in
my father, and you in me, and I in you. He that has my commandments, and
keeps them, the same is he that loves me. And he that loves me, shall be loved
of my father, and I will love him, and will show mine own self unto him.
Judas saiethe unto him (not Judas Iscarioth) Lord, what is done that thou wylt
show thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto
him: If a man love me, he will keep my sayings, and my father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and dwell with him. He that loves me not, keeps
not my, sayings. And the word which ye hear is not mine, but the fathers
which sent me. These things have I spoken unto you being yet present with
you. But ye comforter which is the holy ghost, whom my father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring al things to your
remembrance, what soever I have said unto you. Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you Not as the world geuethe, give I unto you. Let not your
hearts be grieved, neither fear, ye have heard how I said unto you: I go, and
come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because I said,
I go unto the father: For the father is greater then I. And now have I showed
you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye might believe. Hereafter
will I not talk many words unto you. For the Prince of this world comes,
and has naught in me. But that the world may know that I love the father. And
as the father gave me commandment, even so do I.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis gospel is a part of Christ's Sermon, which he made to his disciples
before he suffered. And for that cause ought it greatly to be esteemed. For
Christ sets forth in it a singular doctrine and lesson, The dignity of this
gospel.
whereby he teaches that all reason is but superfluous to the attainement of
the knowledge of God, if it take not his first foundation of the love of Christ.
When this is not taught, all things are uncertain, wavering, and of no
strength, that are either taught, or imagined of god. For they can not be
comprehended or known by any means. But he that loves Christ, is so far
brought, that he loves the father also. But what is the cause of this word?
why does he make mention of love, and speaks not after his old customable
manner, saying, he that believes in me? Is love the cause of our salvation, and
not faith, where as he says, if any man loves me? But they are both of like
efficacy power and strength For thou can not love Christ, To love christ
and to believe in him are all one thing.
except thou believe in him, and do put thy trust in him with a certain and
sure faith. And the word of faith, is somewhat more evident, whereas it
declares that we must withholde our eyes from all other things that be, and
fasten the^ in Christ Jesus only. For this is the nature of love, that it
embraces yt thing only that it loves in that thing does it set al here
felicity: The nature of love.
therewith only, it is satisfied, and cares for nothing besides. Such manner of
love does Christ require of us, that we should embrace him with all our heart,
which thing can not be done but by faith. Wherefore this sentence makes
nothing against faith. But is spoken to the intent, that the nature and
condition of faith with his proper virtue and efficacy, might be the better
understood. An other cause of this word, is, that Christ did perceive, that
he that receaueth the word and purposes to keep it, can not do it without
great endeavor and industry. For diverse temptations do chance to them, which
do rebuke and embrayde such, as has entered into the profession of Godliness,
of folly and rashness where as they reason on this wise with them self: Alas
what have I done, when I tookee upon me the office of teaching? I might have
hold my peace, and thought with my self that GOD would have set forth
other. Other might have come, that should have had better success in this
matter. Now am I in doubt and do not only little profit, but put my self also
in peril of life. If we will overcome such kind of temptation, that the
word may be surely maintained, this only succor must they especially use,
It is necessari that Christ beloved.
as Christ here shows, that they love Christ, and put their hole delight in
him, so that all the professors of the gospel and all the good may thus
conforte them selves: whatsoever be comes of me, let it be at the pleasure of
God, for whose cause and glory and not for man's sake was this begone of God.
Wherefore I must endure it. And look where this love is not, there can they not
endure, says Christ. For I give not goods, nor gold, but everlasting life,
Love does all things.
whereof the possession is not taken in this life, but after this life. Wherefore
all the matter rests herein, that ye love me. If love be in you, ye will keep
my saing, and contineue constantly, although that ye should do it to the
peril of your life. But if ye love me not, ye will not keep my words. For ye
shall have so many dangers, calamities, and afflictions, that they shall make
you faint and put you in desperation. But he that knows Christ truly
believes in him, and loves him, Love proceeds of faith.
he is troubled by no adversity. For he thinks surely, Christ dyed and was
buried for us, and rose again: whereby all such gather surely that Christ does
greatly favor them. So that this love proceeds of faith, which afterward is
able to withstand all perils and dangers, neither does it fear the great
threatenings and wrath of the world. For it setteh more by Christ and his
word, then by all these threatenings and displeasures of men.

And that is it that he says: if any man love me, he will keep my word, What is
christ's wor^
my word of my death and resurrection: not the word of Moses or ten
commandments. That word is not to be cast away, another is any thing to be
done contrary thereto. For God commanded that word to be fulfilled, The law
of god is to be obeyed.
but with that word is there joined no consolation, as is with my word, the
conscience is not thereby made quiet, but the more that we thereby know our
disobedience toward GOD, so much the more we dread and fear the wrath and
indignation of God. For the word of Jesus Christ is the fondation and pillar of
all things. He that has this, says Christ, neither suffers himself to be
pluck from thence, How god is to be known.
ought not to doubt, but my father does love him. And this is the peculiar
phrase of John, which has a proper kind of speech, beside all other
Evangelists, that first he joins men to Christ, and then thorough Christ
brings them to the father. For this is the order and process in this matter:
As Christ here teaches, that first we must know Christ, and love him, and take
him for one that is most desirous of our salvation and profit. Note well.
When we have such trust and love toward Christ, there follows also a sure
confidence, that the father also loves us. And although we had none other
confort before our eyes, but only this perceauinge and understanding, that we
need not fear any cruelty, or any wroth or ire of God: yet were that
sufficient to certify us, that we need not fear sin or the devil, because
god loves us, for that, that we love Christ.

This is a great confort in all tribulation, to believe constantly that GOD is
not against us, A great comfort
but he louinglye embraces us, if so be that we love Christ and keep his
word steadfastly. But in the time of tribulation, our hearts can hardlye thus
be persuaded. But we think rather contrariwise, that God hates us, and has
no regard to us, but that he goes about rather to provide punishment for us.
But these things are false. For Christ does not lie, when he says: if we
proceed so far, that we love him, and count it abominable to hate him, that
then we must not doubt, but the father does love us and will so declare his
love toward us, Deuteronomy. 30.
that he with his son and the holy ghost will have their abiding with us. It
is a great matter, and a singular confort, Romans 10.
that a righteous man by faith does not say in his heart, who is ascended in to
heaven? etc. For in whatsoever place he be, What it is to be in heaven.
whether he be at Jerusalem, or at Rome, or in the field or in the City, he is
taken to be in heaven, for that that god the father, the sone and the holy
ghost, does come unto him and have their abydinge with him. And this thing
have we hear in this life in the word, and do feel it inwardly by faith, but
all these things shall be felt in deed in the life to come.

For, to have god dwelling in us in this life, What it is to have god dwelling
in us.
is none other thing then that all things that we do, say, think, or
suffer, are acceptable unto God, and that al things, when we eat, drink,
work, sleep, wache, pray, read, singe, learn, etc? are allowed of him. This
were the very felicity it self, Esa. 66. Act. 7. 1. Cor. 3.^. 2. Cor. 6.
if we were so wise as to consider and behold it with true eyes and with a
sure faith. For the glory of the godly does herein pass the glory of heaven.
For God says not so by heaven, that he will dwell in it: but thus he says,
that heaven is his seat, and the Earth his footestole. But the heart of the
godly is the very habitation, wherein god dwells, if so be that he can but so
much apprehende Christ, that he believe surely, that he suffered and died for us,
and for these benefits love him.

And so all things are consistinge in this, that we should love Christ, and as
for the rest there is no cause why any man should greatly fear. For this love
shall make all other things easy and tolerable, whatsoever shall chance for
him and his word sake: where as contrariwise without this love all things
shall seem intolerable and above all men's power, as Christ says in the words
following.

But if a man does not love me
Love makes all things light.
He will not keep my word,
Where as Christ is loved, this is also certain, that the father for Christ's
sake does love again; and does not only love us, but comes unto us, and he
with Christ and the holy ghost makes his dwelling with us. This thing is so
great, yt if we consider it well we could not but patiently suffer all things,
that chance unto us for Christ's sake. Where this love of Christ is not, and
whereas men receaueth the gospel to the intent, Spollers of church goods
that they may invade the Church goods, and make hauoke thereof to their own
profit and commodity, and to serve their own lusts, (as it is the fashion
of the world in all things to seek his own vantage and profit) there can not
the word of Christ be long kept. For it is very necessary to have love, if a
man will be constant in trouble profit and gains does nothing help in this
case. Wherefore if we love godliness in deed, that we would not depart from the
golspel, we must so use all things, that we may say: In the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ was this begone, and by his commandment do we this: Wherefore no
case so hard can move us, but that we take all things well in worth that God
sends. But what is the cause that we should styke unto the word so
constantly, and that we should give no place to any danger or peril? Surely
because Christ says furthermore: That Christ keth god spea speakethe.
the word that I speak is not mine, but my fathers, which sent me. And after
this manner does Christ often times speak. And this is the pyth of that that
Christ speaks: If ye do receive me and embrace me, that is, my word and
promise, then be ye sure of this, that the true GOD has received you, neither
must ye think besides of any other GOD. For ye shall find god no where else but
in me and in my word. The reason why is, that the word that I speak is not
mine, but the word of my father, If ye receive this word, ye receive my
father. If ye believe in it, ye believe in my father. Wherefore now it is easy
to judge how the world stand. Mahumet, the Turk, the Pope, the Jews do
crake much of GOD, they pray much, and affirm them selves to be the true
worshippers of GOD. But the matter is plain, that Mahumet, the Turk, the
pope, the Jews do not find the father, neither know any thing of him. For
they have not the word of Christ, which is not Christ's, but the fathers.

Wherefore Christ by these words gives a sure doctrine to beware by, as
though he should say: If ye will hear GOD, and have him joined unto you, ye
must turn away your eyes and ears in no case from him. But hear me and ye
hear God, see me, and ye see God. For this it is decreed: either must ye hear
god by me, or never hear him. Whereof this must by reason follow, that
Christ, when he utters the bountefull word, the hole godhed does allow it,
so that neither the devil nor the world can make it frustrat and false. The
reason is this. Christ's word is not his, but the fathers, as he says: the
words that ye hear are not mine, but my fathers that sent me. The words be
so simple and plain that nothing can be more simple and plain. Wherefore when
the men yt are worldly wise chances upon these words, they think that they
are but words coldlye and slenderly spoken, and that in great and wayghtie
matters he would have used more earnest and pythye words. vexacion gives
understanding.
Howbeit what great matter there is included in these words that are so basse
and slender, that does then appear, when great peril and fear is at hand.

Wherefore Christ here makes an end of his sermon, and says these things
have I spoken to you, when I was byding with you? but the holy ghost the
conforter, whom my father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, With out the in ward teaching of the holy ghost out ward doctrine
profiteh little.
and shall put you in remembrance of those things which I have spoken unto
you. For if a man should bestow never so many words yet if the holy ghost
should be lacking, the matter could not be perceived. Now whatsoever
remains in this gospel, it is the conclusion of the whole sermon, that
Christ in this chapter made to his Disciples, that they should be of good
confort, and not be troubled, nor offended for the spiteful death, that he
should suffer, and so be dismayed, forasmuch as they should thereby obtain
their salvation. Of this did we speak here tofore. Therefore now we will be
content with this doctrine that we have taught, which Christ does chiefly
entreat of in this part, that then specially shall we keep the word, and
shall not go from it for fear of any peril, With out christ no good thing
comes to us.
if so be that we love god. And that this is the only way to make God love
us, and to come so nighe unto us, that he dwell in us. But he that goes to God
by any other way, then by the love of Christ, he flees from God, and can
never come nygh unto him, and whatsoever he does or suffers, all is but lost
labor and in vain.

Wherefore seeing that our Lord says, that these words that he spoke, are not
his, but the fathers: all men ought to take diligent head, and to beware, that
they receive no other doctrine or word, but that that comes forth of this
mouth: For then surely is there a perfect way to seek out God, that can not
deceive, where as otherwise God can not be sought and found out by any means.
But it chances now a days as it chanced amongst the Jews. They had their
mercy seat, and their tabernacle, where they did pray, and trusted certainly,
that they should be heard there and no where else. But what did they? They
refused the places that God appointed them, and chose them selves certain
places as they thought good in their own eyes. So comes it to pass even
now. Christ says: If ye purpose to search out God, and be desirous to make
him to love you: first come unto me, love me, and receive my word. But what
does the Pope? what do the Anabaptists, the Jews, the Turks, and such
like? they lay aside Christ and his word, and apply their minds to men's
traditions. The Pope trusts in Masses, vows, and absteynyng from marriage.
The Anabaptists in their straight kind of living, in their homely apparel,
and vndefenced travail. The Jews and Turks have their order also. These
things must we diligentely eschew: Christ and his word is only to be
embraced For this is Gods commandment, hear him. And Christ says here: The
words that I speak, be not mine, but my fathers. Wherefore it is impossible,
Math. 17.
that he that does not love Christ, and harken to him only, should hear God,
and come unto him. Now the mercyful Father grant us his grace, that we may
love Christ, and keep his word, and that we may through the holy Ghost
constantely cleave thereto, and so come to everlasting life. Amen.

A Sermon for VVhitson Monday. The Gospel. John. iii.
SO God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not peryshe, but have everlasting life. For God sent
not his son into the world to co^dempne the world, but that the world through
him might be saved. But he that believes on him, is not condemned. But he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of
the only begotten son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light, because their
deeds were evil. For every one that evil does, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does the
truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be known, how that they are
wrought in God.

THE EXPOSITION.
THIS Gospel is one of the notablest that a man can find in the New
Testamente, and worthy to be commended with all kind of commendations, that
at the least men might set by it, and count it as a thing most necessary. And
yt they might learn also ye text by heart and rehearse it daily with them
selves, that they may come to the use and the true knowledge thereof. For the
words be such, that they can ease a mind that is troubled, and restore to
life again, the soul that is dead, if so be that they believe them steadfastly.
But forasmuch as it is not possible, that a man should sufficiently express
this sermon of Christ by words: First let us call unto GOD, that he will
expound these words more plainly in our hearts, then we can by our words
and interpretation, and that he will enkendle them, and make them so plain,
that our conscience may receive conforte and peace thereby. Amen.

The pythe of this excellent sermon is: That God so greatly loved the world,
that he delivered his only begotten son for it, that we men should not dye, but
have everlasting life. As though Christ should say: Behold, I will show the
such a thing, as thou never heardest of, and put forth before thee such an
ensample as thou never have seen or heard: Where he that gives ye gift, and he
that receaueth the gift for to give to other, and where the profit and gains
are so great, that no man by words can express them. And first let us se who
is the geuer. Here is no mention made of kings, God geueth^
of princes, and of other mighty personages in ye world, but God himself is set
forth, which is incomprehensible and almyghtie, which made all things by his
word, God is deserved.
and still does preserve them, which is above al, and in comparison of whom,
al things create, heaven, earth, and all that is therein, are but as dust. He is
the geuer, in respect of whom, all Princes and Kings, with all their gifts,
are nothing in comparison. And our hearts might worthily be lift up and
exalted with a godly pride, in that we have such a geuer, so that all that
should chance unto us by any other liberality, might be counted of no price
in comparison of this. For what thing can be set before us, that is more
magnificent and excellent then God almighty?

Here God, which is infinite and unspeakable, gives after such a sort, Gods
undeserved liberalite.
as passes also all things. For that that he gives, he gives not as wages
of desert, or for a recompense, but as the words does sound of mere love.
Wherefore this gift is wholly proceeding of Gods excedyng and divine benevolence
and goodness, as he says: God loved the world. There is no greater virtue
then Love. Love refuses no perell.
As it may hereby be well understand, that when we love any thing, we will not
stick to put our life in danger for it. Uerily great virtues are patience,
chastity, sobriety. etc. but yet they are nothing to be compared with this
virtue, which compriseth and includes in it self all other virtues. A good man
does no man wrong: Love excels all virtues.
he gives every man his own: but by love, men give their own selves to
other, and ar ready with all their heart to do all that they can for them. So
Christ says here also, that God gives to us, not by right or merit, but by
this great virtue, that is by love. This ought to encourage our hearts, and
to abolysh all sorrow, when this exceeding love of God comes in mind, that we
might trust thereto, and believe steadfastly, that God is that bou^tifull and
great geuer, and that this gift of his proceeds of the great virtue of Love.

Love increases the gift.
This sort of giving which has his spring of love, makes this gift more
excellent and precious. As the kind, loving, and sincere mind of the geuer
is most acceptable in gifts geuynge. So contrariwise when men perceive not
what is the mind of the geuer, they regard the gift so much the less. Yea
and where as gifts be sclender and faulty in the thing, as if they be
maimed, or half blind, or has any other fault: yet if they come of love and
of a fatherly mind, is not one eye in this case, or one foot more acceptable
then many eyes and fete without this condition? And ye words of Christ are
plain, that God loves us. Baptism and the lords supper.
Wherefore for this loves sake ought we greatly to esteem all things, that he
give us. And especially those gifts, which are ordained and given of him to
us for our salvation and confirmation of our faith, as Baptism, and the
Supper of the Lord is. etc. For all be it that the world does not regard these
things, yet they ought to be esteemed for our chief felicity, that by them we
might put aside all sorrow, and be joyful in heart, forasmuch as these things
are of a fatherly love and benevolence ordained for our salvation.

Wherefore Christ in this place shows not only that the father will give us
any thing, God geuethe us all things of love.
but also he describes the way, how the father will give us, that is, of a
fatherly and of a godly love. And as hitherto we have spoken of the geuer,
and of his loving mind: so is the gift it self no less to be esteemed.
Christ is the gift that god geuethe.
For God gives not riches here, nor kyngdoms, nor any creature but gives his
only begotten son, which is no less than the father. If wealth and
prosperity causes joy, how great joy ought this gift to be to them that it
is given unto? For as God the geuer is excedyng great, and his love also,
whereof the gift proceeds: So is the gift that he gives, which is his only
son. For he gives him self wholly in this gift, as Paul says to the
Romans: seeing God has given for us all, his son, how can it be, that with
him he should not give us all things also? Romans 8.
Sin, death, hell, heaven, righteousness, and life, al are ours, for that that
the son as by gift is ours also, Romans 11.
in whom are all things.

Wherefore if we believe truly, and receive this most excellent gift by faith,
it must needs be that every creature fautie or not fautie, must be ours, and
given to our commodity, as saint Paul says in an other place: Al things ar
ours, 1. Cor. 3.
whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, either ye world, or life or death.
And you ar Christ's and Christ is Gods. For if we consider this gift well, we
shall perceive, Incredulity and misbeleue
that it passes all that is either in heaven or earth, and in respect whereof,
all the goods of the world are but as it were a grain. But here does
incredulity and misbeliefe trouble us, We are more desirous of worldly then
of godly things.
as Christ himself does afterward complayn, and also incredible darkness and
ignorance, as when we hear of this so great a gift, and yet we do not believe
it, and the words of such great matter goes in at the one ear, and runs
out at the other, and never perceth to ye heart. When men conceive any hope of
purchasing possessions, or of bying lands, they can never have their heart at
rest for the fervent care and gredy desire to obtain the same. But where as it
is declared here, that God has given unto us his son of mere love, we are
slothful and sluggyshe without all desire to receive it. What is the cause
that we set so lightly by such an high gift, and do not embrace it worthily
as we ought to do? The devil truly, which casts a myste over our hearts,
that we care not for the word and promise, as touching this gift, but in the
mean time we bestow all our cares in worldly things. Why we set so lyghtlye
by gods gift.
Wherefore in the beginning I said, that these words ought daily to be
rehearsed and used, when we rise in the morning, and when we go to bed at night,
that we might print them in our hearts, and give God thanks for this so great
benefit. For all things are so great, that they can be no greater: the giver,
the love of the geuer, and the gift it self, that is given us of mere love,
not of merit, and is so given, that it remains with us not as borrowed nor
lent, nor recompensed. For the which also is nothing given again, neither is
any thing required therefore, but that thou should joyfully embrace it, and
so declare thy mind. But alas, what an unworthy thing is this, that neither
hearts, neither hands there be, to receive this gift, as it is proffered,
that this should be our Christ, and should remain with us for ever, unto
everlasting life. The vnthan^^fulnes of the world.
But herein chances a very leude and grievous thing, yt they to whom this gift
is offered, although they have great need thereof, yet they regarded it not, but
refuse to receive it. If a rich man should proffer a gift to a nedy beggar, yt
he might thereby live in more wealth, and more at ease: and yet yt rich man would
require nothing for himself, but that the poor would receive this excellent
gift gladly: Now if the beggar were such an unthrifty person yt he would not
take the gift, but would set more by his own miserable state, than by this
gift: might ye not count him worthily to deserve yet more greater wretchedness
tha^ he was in before? but here to this beggarly world ye is void of al life
and salvation, is proffered ye son of God. And god dema^deth nothing else of us
but to receive it and to take it as our own: but this is our madness, yt
although we be stark beggars, yet we think scorn to be provided for. Judge
thou therefore here of, what a grievous syn is unbelief. It is not agreeable to
man's nature, to be against our own profit and gains, and not to receive it
when it is proffred.

Hereof it appears, how mad the world is, that it has no joy and felicity
in this gift of God, The world neglectethe his own salvation.
and puts himself in such great blame, that it will not receue and take to
his use that, that is proffered. If it were never so little gold that were
proffred, we would be ready to receive it with both hands, yea and with all
the other lymmes of the body also. Where as ye son of God is proffred for a
gift, al men ar in doubt, whether they may embrace him or no, and bear
themself in hand that they have no need of him. Wherefore he has his proper
name given him, The world.
to whom the gift is proffred, and is called the world: which is worthy to be
hated, and specially if it be compared with the gift. For so littell does he
deserve this love and gift of God, that nothing can be more against God, nor
nerer unto the devil, than the world is. And yet this is the very testimonye
and witness of Christ, saying: God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begot-sonne. What the world is.
Print this thing well in thy mind. After that thou haste heard, what God is,
and what is the gift that he gives freely of mere love: learn this thing
also what is the world: truly a great multitude of men, that has no faith,
that thinks God unfaithful of his promise, yea and blasphemeth, curses, and
persecuteth his word, which are also disobedient to father and mother,
murderers, aduouterers, traitors, thieves, wicked persons. etc. as daily
examples show us plainly, that the world is full of perjury and blasphemye.
To this so odious a beast and monster, and extreme enemy of God, O love
passing all love.
gives god his son, and that of pure love. The gift of God is specially
commended hereby, that God does not let or spare to do good for our so great
wickedness and frowardness. But what soever is done and committed against him,
Romans 5.
he regards it not: No, not in that that his name and word is so
blasphemously handled, and such stubburnesse is used against his commandment.
For where as the gift is so excedyng, and the geuer so great, the geuer might
of good reason be offended for the frowardnes of him that receaueth it. But God
overcomes him self, and puts out of sight, all the sins that we work
either against the first or the second table of Moses. But because of these
sins and this myserie, wherewith we sinners are encombred, and so encombred,
that we could never escape without the help of God: does God put forth this
love, and bestows this gift freely upon us. Thanckefulnes to god for his
benefits is to be sheewed.


Is not the merciful Lord therefore worthy to be loved again? And ought we
not to put our whole confidence in him? which forgeueth us our sins, yea and
the sins of all the world, and does not reckon them, God forge^uethe the
(...) world his sins.
although they are innumerable. For seeing that the sins of one man are
infinite, who can number the syns of the whole world? And yet is this sentence
true and certain, that God forgeueth the world all their sins. For
wheresoever is the love of God, there is also remission of sins. We should
have here ready hertes, to have diligent meditation on this love, where as God
gives to the world, that is his enemy, even his own self, so that we should
look for no other thing of him but mere grace and mercy. Whatsoever chance in
this life, yet should our hope be in this love, and our faith remain constant in
the mercy of God for Christ. Such thoughts must needs be full of great joy,
as I and many other godly me^ do protest, that we have lived in all kind of
abomination and idolatry, and have been defiled with diverse syns. This
ungodliness has not God punished in us after our deseruyng, but has declared
his love, and has by the gospel opened again his son, which he had given to
the world before, that now we may hear again the holsom doctrine and
understand that God is not angry with the world, but loves it, in that he
gave his son to it. But alas, how execrable is our ingratitude? what
excedyng dulnes of understanding is this, The ingratitude of the world.
yt we can not consider this great goodness of god? For if we would truly
consider it, there should rise in us the affection of such joy: that we would not
only show high obedience unto God, but we would also gladly suffer all
things for his sake. But we may thank our unbelief for this, which regards
not this great joy, but in the mean while sets his pleasure in worldly
trifles, and seeks for vain dalia^ce

Thus far have we shortly rehearsed, these four things, What has hitherto
been taught.
who is the geuer, what is the gift, how it is given, and to whom. Which
things are all so great, that no man can express them sufficientely by
words: now follows the intent, wherefore god gave this gift. Truly, not that
we should eat, cloth our selves, get a living thereby, and much less that he
should be unto us a poison or pestilence, Why god gave his son
as we teach also of Baptism, and of the Lords supper, that al these things
might be counted wholesome unto us: But it appears plainly, that he was given
to this intent, that all that believe in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. John. 3.
Here is it declared with plain words, that in this matter there is no
respect had unto riches or worldly desires, but that we might thereby be
delivered from death and sin, and that we might not perish. This is the
only busynes that the Father of mere love has enjoined his son to do: even
to over come the devil and hell, and to deliver us from eternal death into the
which we fell headlong by sin. This is the cause and intent why this gift was
given.

Wherein we have just cause to believe and trust steadfastly. For we hear by the
mouth of Christ, yt he himself is given unto us, and that the power of the
devil is weakened and overthrown, and power to pacify the troubled
conscience is restored to us for the attainment of everlasting life and
salvation. Death shall be abolished, and al joy shall rise: for this sure faith,
wherewith we believe that God is merciful unto us, that he loves us, and of very
love gave his son unto us, that we should not perish, but have everlasting life.
The words be such yt they can not be sufficiently comprehended with thought.
Wherefore a christian must daily pray, yt god by his spirit will make these words
sweet and pleasant to our hertes and kendle and inflame them in our minds.
Such kind of teaching and discipline might easily make true doctors of
divinity, to teach us truly of Christ, and to judge al other doctrines, and to
abide all things with out murmuring, yt it shall please God to lay on us. But
where as it is so, that we hear this doctrine, and yet care not for it,
whether it take root in us or no, and whether it bring forth fruit or no,
alas, so are we never the better. And there is no doubt, but that the damned
in the latter Judgment, shall chiefly be confounded in them self for this
faultt, Damnacion comes of despysyng gods word.
that they despised this preaching, and did not regard it. But now let
us go forth and see, what is the way to come by this gift. For all things
are not of like force to obtain this gift. Christ himself does show that
plainly by his word, when he says: that all yt believe in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. This is an evident proof, that only Faith,
that is, the trust in the grace and mercy of God, Faith obtaynethe Christ at
the hond of God.

A good lesson


is the very hand, wherewith we must take unto us this gift. For even as God
gives by love and mercy: so we do take and receive by Faith, and can receue no
otherwise. As for thy merit for doing this or that, it has no place. For our
works are nothing requisite to the obteinyng of this gift, only is it
necessary to show our selves ready through Faith, and even as it is given of
God by love: so we ought to receive it by Faith in Christ. As for an example:
We hear here, that God is merciful and ready to forgive, and that he does
declare his love and charity by this toward us, when he sends his only
begotten son into the flesh, and lays our sins on him, according to this
saying of John: Behold the Lamb of GOD, John. ^.
which takes away the sins of the world, that by this gift and love, our
hearts may be confirmed against sin, and the bytyng worm of conscience:
forasmuch as God is not now angry with us, but stands sure by his promise
of grace and mercy, which he has made with us, for his son Jesus Christ's
sake. He that believes this, is sure to be saved. Why Christ is given us of God.
For this gift is given to make us safe from death and sin. For even as a
great flame is in comparison of a drop of water: so is Christ in comparison
of the sins of the world. As soon as they touch Christ, and as soon as
the gift is received by Faith, our sins are quite consumed and abolyshed,
even as a dry stalk is by an hot fire. For here thou hear by the word of
Christ, that God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son for
the world, that all that believe in hm, should not peryshe, but have
everlasting life. He says precisely here: They that believe in him: He says
not: he that takes upon him this or that work, Faith only purchase the
christ.
and thereby endeavor himself to purchase Gods favor. Only Faith it is, that
purchases this gift. Wherefore let our adversaries withstand this sentence
never so much, let them rail never so much against it, yet is this
sentence sure and invincible: that they that believe in him shall have
everlasting life, and shall not perish. And se thou put nothing hereto, nor
take nothing from it, lest thou should seem to take upon thee to correct
Christ's judgment. These are excellent words and the words of life. God
grant us his grace to print them in our hearts. For he that has these
words surely fixte in his heart, can be feared neither of the devil, nor of
sin, nor of hell, but will be of a quiet heart, and say: I am without all
fear. For I have with me the son of God, Note well.
whom God has given unto me by love and by the word of God, that is, by ye
gospel, which certifieth me thereof. And thy word O lord, and thy son Jesus, will
not deceive me, in whom alone I put my trust. Marc. 9. L^c. 17.
If I be any thing weak in Faith, grant me yt grace yt I may believe more
steadfastly. For I besides this have no other healpe in this evident gift and
love of GOD, but that we should all by a little and a little believe more and
more in this gift. For Faith is requisite, as thou hear here, of CHRIST. And
the stronger that Faith is, the greater is the joy, pleasure, and security
that is felt risyng in the mind, so that after that, the mind is most prone and
ready to do and to suffer all things, which we know that God doothe
require of us, and wylleth us to do, knowing that he is loving, and uses
nothing but love toward us.

But thou wylt say: If I were as Peter, Paul, and saint Mary were, this gift
would be confortable unto me. For they are saints, and therefore doubtless
this saying pertains but unto them. How should I that am a sinner, by any
means understand, that it pertain unto me, The temptacion of unbelief and
how it must be Overcome.
which have so often offended God by my sins, and have made him my enemy?
Such thoughts can not be avoided, when the heart after this kind of preaching
and reasonyng beholds it self, and considers his syns. And here must we be
circu^spect and ware, least we laying aside Gods word, give our selves any long
time to such thoughts, but forthwith must we return to the word, Note this
for thy conforte.
and order our Judgment according to the same. For those thoughts ar
nothing else but very incredulity and unbelief, which goes about to withdraw
us from this sweet gospel.

And trewely unbelief can be overcome by no other means, Gods word only
puttethe away unbelief if it be received.
but by the word of God. Of this preaches CHRIST, that we should not doubt
of this word, saying, that his Father, the true and eternal God in heaven,
did so love the world, that he delivered his only begotten son. And this is
sure that the world here does not signify Mary, Peter, and Paul only. But
the world signifies all mankind, Therefore if thou take thy self to be of
mankind, What the world signifiethe.
or if thou do not believe that, compare thy self with other mortal men,
that thou may understand, that thou art a man. For why should thou not
suffer thy self to be of this name? seeing that Christ with plain words
says, that GOD gave not his son only for Mary, Peter, or Paul, but for
the world, that all should receive him, that are the sons of men. Then if
thou or I, would not receive him, as though he did not appertain unto us,
truly it would consequently follow, that Christ's words are not true, where
as he says, he was given and delivered for the world. Wherefore hereof
appears, that the contarye thereto is most assuredly true, that is, that
this gift belongs as well unto thee, as to Peter and Paul, forasmuch as
thou also art a man as they are, and a portion of the world, that God may not
be judged in his word, and this thought rise in our heart, thynkyng on this
wise: Who knows whether I am also of their number, to whom the son of God
is given, and eternal life promised? For that is as much as to make God
untrue of his promise.

Wherefore whenne this thought comes upon thee, suspecte it, as thou
would suspecte the devil: least thou be therewith deceived. And say thou:
what is that to me, that I am neither Peter, nor Paul? If GOD would have
given this gift to them only, that should have been found worthy, he would have
given it to the Angels, to the Son, and unto the Moon: For they are pure and
undefiled creatures, which always obey God, and never do declyne and swerve
from his Precepts: But this is the truth of the matter, he gave him to the
world. And the world is no woorthyer thereof, then as I said before.
Wherefore although I am neither Peter, nor Paul, yet will I not suffer my
self to be putt beside this gift, but will challenge as much thereof for my
part as did Dauyd, and all the holy Apostles. For what was Dauyd? Did he
not trespass heynously and greuousely? Also, what were the Apostles? were they
not sinners, and unworthy? Wherefore let no man follow this reason: saying: I
am a sinner: I am not just and holy as Peter was. Wherefore I dare not be so
bold as to challenge this gift for mine. But rather reason on this wise: What
soever I am: yet God is not to be taken as unfaithful of his promise, I am a
portion of the world, wherefore if I would not take this gift as mine own, I
should make God untrue.

Whi god speaks generallye to all and not specially to one alone.
But thou will say: Why does he not show this to me alone? then I would believe
and thynk surely, that it apertained unto me. But it is for a great
consideration that God speaks here so generally: to the intent verily, that
no man should think that he is excluded from this promise and gift. He that
does exclude him self, must give a count why he does so. I will not judge
them (says he) but they shall be judged of their own mouth. For this gift was
given to all the world and they by their unbelief and mistrust of Gods word
will not receive it. Yet if a man consider well, he shall perceive that
Baptism and also the Communion of the body and blood of Christ were ordained
to the intent that every man should take this gift free and frank as his own.
And thus much have we spoken generally for the understanding of this sentence,
which can never be sufficiently declared and perceived. For it is the
principal doctrine (by the faith whereof, we dye, and obtain salvation) in
the which Christ doothe describe plainly to our great conforte, that he
him self is wholly given unto us from the father, of pure love, which love,
he as a merciful God, performs to the wicked and unkind world. And here it
is plainly set forth to all men, what a great tresure we Christians have.
We learn here also, what God and the world is, and how that we be made
partakers of this grace, only thorough faith, as Christ says: all that
believe in him, have everlasting life. For the doctrine of works, John. 3.
which after this faith ought to ensue by the power of the holy Ghost, is to
be placed in an other matter. What a Christian ought to do, as the obedient
Son of God, and as one showing himself kind and mindeful for so great a
gift of eternal life and love of God, The doctrine of works.
as touching that I say, Christ teaches nothing in this place. Wherefore we
will now entreat no farther of this matter, that we are saved only by the
mercy of god, and that we obtain this grace only by faith, By grace are we
saved only through faith.
with out virtue, without merits and without our works. For all the whole
matter, that is requisite and necessary to the gertinge of everlasting life
and remission of our sins, is altogether and fully comprehended in the love
and mercy of God thorough Christ. God grant us his grace, that we may believe
and trust hereunto surely, and that we may abide and suffer all things with a
glad and a ready heart, and that we may so die that we may be saved for ever.
Our God grant us this thoroughe his son, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The first Sermon on Trinity Sunday. Of the feast.
MAny things should be spoken as touching this feast. For first of all ye
Gospel is very fruitful, and preaches of great matters. And it is necessary
also to speak of the chief article of our religion for as much as we
Christian men only, and none beside us do believe in god the father, and in god
the son, and in god the holy ghost. This is the principal article in our
congregation, which was not invented by man, neither came ever to man's mind:
The article of the Trinity.
But is only opened unto us of god by the word. Wherefore even as God by other
feasts thorough ye ear, is gloriously set forth by his works which he has
don: that by the^ his good will and pleasure toward us might be known. (as the
feast of the Nativity of Christ is celebrate and kept holy at that time when
Christ became man, and the resurrection of Christ, Why the feast of the
trinity was ordained.
when this man that was god, raised himself from the dead: and Whitsontyde when
the holy ghost came down in a visible form, and began his operation: and so
forth: so that all feasts do declare with what god is (as a man would say)
appareled) So this present feast was therefore ordained, that it might be
known as nigh as it is possible out of gods word, what God is in his nature
and substance of himself, without any manner of visers or shows. And here are
all creatures, Angels, and heavens to be ouerpassed with a high contemplation,
and all inferior things, (to the which we are commonly accustomed) are also
to be set aside. And these things only are to be heard, which God pronounces
of himself and his proper substance and nature. And here does appear what is
the wisdom of the world and the folyshnes of God. For when the world
hears, that one eternal God is three distinct persons: this it can in no
case allow, but judges all mad, that either teach those things or believe so,
as they teach.

The article of the trinity is much withstanded.
Wherefore this article in the new testament in the which it is very evidently
set forth, has been sharplye withstanded and resisted. So that this was the
occasion, as witnesses the histories, that John the Evangelist wrote his
gospel. Why Io^^ wrote his go^^pell.
For by and by there sprung up the heretic Cherinthus, which had learned of
Moses that there was but one God. Whereby he gathered, that Christ could be no
God, Cherinthus.
as God himself could not be man. Wherefore he did use this sylogisme and
sophisme of reason, and thought, that even as he himself could understand,
and gather by reason the thing, that it was so in deed in heaven, and could
none otherwise be. Reason deceauethe in matters of god.
But away with this judge and false estemer of things, I mean reason. Blind
reason, where as it is not sufficiently able to know it self, yet will it not
stycke to be so bold as to judge of god. For yet is there none found yt can
know for a surety, what this is, that men see with eyes, and speak and laughe
with mouth. And yet we stand so high in our own conceit, that we will
speak and dispute of God and of his substance, yea and that of our own proper
reason without help. This is a great folishenes. I can not parfectly determine
what is seeing or laughyng, and yet I will take upon me to know and give
sentence of that, whereof I know nothing at al, and whereof god only ought to
pronounce. Yet the world sets much by this folishnes, and the Turks and
the Jews mock us christians as half mad, because we believe that Christ is
god. But if this were wisdom, Turckes and Jews deny christ to be God.
who might not pronounce and think with the Turks: There is but one god,
Christ is not god? But when scripture and the word of god is put forth, this
thinking and pronouncing is nothing worth. But we must speak or at least wise
stammer of those things, as the scripture does point us, yt is, that Christ is
very god, yt the holy ghost is very god, and yet yt there are not three gods,
neither three natures or substa^ces as we number three sons, three men, three
angels or three windows. For so is not god distinct in his substance, but
there is one only substance of god. Wherefore although there be three persons,
god the father and god the son, and god the holy Ghost: yet in substance they
can not be divided or discerned. For there is only one god consistyng of one
indivisible substance.

Colos. 1.
For so says Paul of Christ: which is the Image of the unvisible god, the
first begotten of al creatures, for by him were all things made, that are in
heaven or in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or
dominations, or principats, or potestats. All things were made by him and in
him, and he is before all things, and al things do consist in him. Thou hear
yt Paul does place al creatures beneth or under Christ If therefore he is above
all creatures, it follows, that only god is there. Christ proved god.
For exempt out of ye number of al creatures is nothing but only God. Wherefore
he calls him the image of the invisible god. For he can not be ye image of
god, except he be likewise almighty, likewise eternal, likewise, wise, just,
good, etc. for otherwise, christ could be no such image, yt should be like his
father, if he were but lacking one of these things. Wherefore both does
consequently follow: first if the son of god be the image of the father, than
must he needs be in all points in the same divine substance with the father.
Furthermore there must needs be a difference of persons, for as much as ye son
is not the father, neither the father is the son. For that that begets can
not be yt, that is begotten, and yet there is one divine essence, or else ye
son could not be the image of ye father. And here now must we r^ast. For we
can speak no plainlier, we do only stut and stammer at it. The matter is to
high for our capacity, and can not be pronounced of in this life.

If the Jews and Turks mock us, as though we divided heaven between three
brethren, which rule altogether: so might we also do, if we would lay aside
the scripture. But they do us wrong to say so by us. We make not three men, or
three Angels, but one divine substance, and plain unity, in respect of all
things, which are in earth. For the body and soul are not so like, as God
is like him self: One divine substance and three persons.
But if any man enquire further and ask us, how he is called on God? Here we
answer after scripture and say: He is named god the father, God the son, and
god the holy Ghost. For so scripture teaches, that GOD eternally without
beginning begote the son. Before all Creatures, before the constitution of
the world, Colos. ^. Heb. 1.
and before the foundations of the earth, which is also himself likewise
eternal, almighty, and just, etc. Wherefore Paul also calls him the image
of the father.

Therefore Paul says: Let us not tempte Christ, 1. Cor. 10. Numer. 4.
as some have tempted him, and perished by serpents. And we may see in this
place, how Paul and Moses do agree, as though they spoke with one mouth. Moses
says that the Lord said: this people has tempted me ten times. And in this
place only is the name ^e^ragrammaton, which is only attribute and given to
God, because the only true God has so said. But Paul pronounces precisely,
who was this god: even Christ. Him, says he, do we tempte even as certain of
them tempted him. Let him scof out this matter that will: surely I can not. For
Paul says, that it was Christ, whom they tempted. But Moses says, that it
was the only true God. But at that time was not Christ borne, nor Marie his
mother, no not so much as David was borne. And yet notwithstanding this Paul
says, yt the Jews, which were than in the desert and not yet come into the
land of Canaan: tempted Christ, and admonished us to beware that we should
not do likewise, least we fall into like punishment. These words do prove
certainlye, Moses and paul confese christ to be god.
that Christ is that man of whom Moses wrote, that he is the only, eternal,
almighty God. Therefore Moses and Paul does confess with one mouth, although
the words be diverse, that Christ is true and eternal God.

Like testimonies are in the new testament and that very man, which can not be
denied, but that a man may firmly prove by them, that Christ is God, and
therefore that he is begotten of the father, and has a certain difference from
the father, thou may call it with what name thou will, we call it a person,
although this name is not sufficient. But otherwise we can not name him. For we
have no proper vocable, so that the father and the son are not one person,
and yet are they one inseperable and indivisible substance and nature, that
whatsoever is spoken of the father, may also be spoken of the son, except
this that the father does begett the son eternally, and not the son the
father.

So Paul also says to the Ephesians at Miletum where he byddeth, Act. 20.
farewell: Take heed to you and to the flock, in the which the holy Ghost has
put you, that ye feed the congregation of god, which he has purchased by his
blood. This is also a plain sentence, that CHRIST which by his blood
purchased the congregation, is GOD. For this is of a certaynetie, that the
church belongs to none but to God. For she acknowledges no man for her God.
Wherefore if Christ has purchased it, and it be his, it must needs be, that he
is God. But truly it is certain that he has purchased it by his blood,
wherefore it must needs follow, that Christ is true God, and eternally begotten
of god the father, and borne into the world of the virgin Mary temporallye and
corporally. For so says Paul here, unto the pastors: Take heed to your
selves, it is no small charge that ye have, to feed the congregation of god,
that is to say a multitude, whom god has purchased by his blood. And this it
is to put teachers in remembrance of their hard function and duty. He speaks
of the popyshe Bishops.
For although we have not the ornaments and apparel of bishops, yet is our
ministration better and more certain, than theirs. God grant that we may
execute it better, then many of them do. There be many more like sentences in
the Gospel of John, as touching the godhed of Christ, and yet that the father
and the son are distinct persons. Which ca^ not be overcome by ye jesting of
the Jews and Turks. There is in the new testament great store of such
testimonis, whereas ye matter is plain and very certain. There be many also in
the old, but more dark then these of the new. As John in his gospel alludeth
very properly to Moses, John. 1.
where as he calls Christ for his eternal nativity, the word. For so does
Moses entreat the matter, that god before the making of all things, had ye
word with him, and that it was almighty, as he is, and that god by this word
made all things. Here must it needs be yt there is a divine substance, between
god and the word. For both be coeternal, and yet for all that, he that speak
the word, and the word it self that is spoken, be two distinct persons. So
does the Patriarch Jacob put difference between persons. God says he, that
fedeth me from my youth unto this present day: Genesis ^8.
the Angel that delivered me out of all evil, bless these children, and make
them multiply upon the earth. Here he names Christ an Angel, not because he
is an Angel by his nature and substance. For this were manifest Idolatry, if
he made invocation to an Angel, and asked blessing of him. And by invocation,
he shows that this Angel is true God, and yet that his manner is not always
as it is of the invisible God, but that he shall come into the earth, and take
our flesh on him, and be offered for our sins. Whereof Christ in the new
Testament uses a certain and sure kind of speech: the father that sent me. And
again, as the father has sent me. In the Prophets and in Esaie he says: Esa.
^3. Christ called an Angel.
the Lord has sent me, that I might heal the contrite in heart. again, The
angel of his face has saved them. So Malachias calls Christ the angel of
the Testament. Malach. 3.
So that by these two names God and an Angel two persons are represented,
Why christ is called an Angel.
yet the substance is one, and without difference. For he may be an Angel also
and an eternal and true god. He is called an Angel for his office and
administration, which he as the son, has of the father.

To the proof whereof do belong all the sentences, in the which the Prophets
do make mention of the promised seed of the woman, that he shall bring
blessyng unto us, and that he shall begin to set up the eternal kingdom, Genesis
3.15.22.2^.28. Deuteronomy. 18. 2. Reg. 7. Esa. 7.9.11. Iere. 30.31.
and make satisfaction for our sins, and give us everlasting life. For all
these works are such as are agreeable to no creature. But only it is God, that
can do such things. And whereas such works be attribute to Christ as to a
man in the prophets: it folowith thereof, that Christ is eternal and almighty
god, as Christ says unto Philippe: Joan. 14. If ye will not believe, that I am
in the father, and the father in me, believe it for the works sake which I do.
So says Esaias. A child is borne to us, and a Son is given to us* All men
perceive this plain, what it is that a child is borne, and a son given,
that that must needs be spoken of a man, Dan. 9. Esa. 9.
which has both a natural life and body. What does the Prophet speak
furthermore of such a man? And there shall be says he no end, of the peace
which he shall give: upon the throne of David and his kingdom shall he sit from
this time for ever. And he does expound this peace, that it shall be with
judgment and justice, this man shall forgive sin, and shall defend his
people in all miseries, and succoure them against all ill. And as the things
before spoken does declare that he is a true and natural man, where he is
called a son and borne a child: So do these things prove his eternal
kingdom, his justice, and his eternal defense of his, and that this man is
also almighty and eternal God. For how else could he have eternal kingdom and
justice?

And to this do belong notable sentences, Christ is called Iehoua. Psalm. 6^.
Ie^e. 23. Osee. 3.
that be every where in the Prophets, whereas they give euidentlye this name
Iehoua to Christ, Osee says. And after this shall the children of Israel
return, and seek after the lord their god, and David their king, and shall
tremble at the Lord and at his goodness. He has by name made two distinct
persons, god and the king David, that is, Christ, which was promised to
David, to sit on his seat for ever, Christ very god from everlasting.
and yet he joins after that David and God together in one, whereas he says
that the children of Israel shall seek God and David. For seeing that David is
to be sought as god is, that is, seeing he is to be honored with like trust,
with like glory; with like service and worship, either must this be manifest
Idolatry, or else God and David that is to say Christ the son of David after
the flesh is one god, as ye Prophet a little after do properly join them in
one, Psalm. 110. Math. 22.
when he says: they shall tremble at the Lord and at his goodness. So Christ him
self applies the 110. Psalm, in the 22. of Matthew whereas he affirms this
against the Phariseies, that it is proved by this psalm, that Christ is not
only the son of David, but also the son of God, that is, god eternal. These
testimonies and such other are diligently to be considered and marked, that we
may withstand the devil and all heresies. And as we have heard hitherto the
testimonials of ye son of god our savior Christ: So will we consider and see
the testimonies of the holy ghost, both that he is very God, and also a
distinct person: Three persons and one god.
that is, he is neither the father, neither the son, although he is in all
points like the father and the son, so that our religion is plain and
certain, for as much as we worship but one God almighty, and not three gods,
as the Jews and Turks do slander us. And yet because we will not despise the
difference of persons, we hold that god the father, god the son, and god the
holy ghost, is but one God.

And here again should we acknoledge our felicity before god and that with
thanks giving, yt in such hard articles, we have such notable, plain and
excellent testimonies in ye holy scriptures, The holy ghost is eternal and
almyghtye god.
whereby we may stablishe our hearts, and lean thereto strongly against the
devil and all the world. We have no need of ma^s record. But Christ himself
does testify, and teach very plainly, that ye holy spirit is eternal and
almighty god. Or else he would not have put forth his comma^deme^t as concerning
baptism on such wise, Math. 28.
ye baptism should be done in ye name of the father, of ye son and of the
holy ghost. But for as much as ye commandment is such in express words, it
must needs follow, yt the holy ghost is ye true and eternal god, of like power
and might with the father and the son eternally without beginning. Or else
Christ in this work, wherein consists remission of sin, and life everlasting,
would not have set him equal with himself and ye father. So Christ also says:
^ohn. 14.
And I will pray my father, and he shall send another co^forter unto you, to bide
with you for ever, even ye spirit of truth, who^ ye world ca^ not receive,
because he sees him not neither knows him. Mark diligently this sentence.
For here shalt thou se a very good and plain difference of ye three persons: I
says he, will ask my father, An euident^ probacion of the trinity.
here have thou two persons, Christ ye son which asks, and the father which
is asked to send an other co^forter. If this co^forter be to be sent from ye
father, it ca^ not be yt the father is ye co^forter And christ which asks ye
father for this co^forter, can not be ye co^forter himself. So yt this is a
proper distinction of the three persons, which can be scoffed out by no means,
as the father and the son are two distinct persons so the holy ghost the third
person is an other person by himself, then is the person of the father or of
the son, and yet is there but one eternal god.

But what is this third person, Christ does declare. Weras he says: when ye
conforter comes who^ I will send, the spirit of truth, y^ which proceeds
from ye father, John 15.
he shall testify of me. And Christ here does not only speak of ye office of
ye holy ghost, but also of ye substance of ye holy ghost, whereas he says, yt
he proceeds, which is as much to say as his proceeding is eternal without
beginni^g. For ye father from who^, ye holy ghost proceeds, is without
beginning, wherefore the Prophet call him by a proper name, the spirit of the
Lord, as ye heard on whitsonday, whereas Peter allegeth the saying of Iohel,
which says thus: And it shall come to pass in the latter days, says the
Lord, I will shed out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
daughters shall prophecy. Joel 2. Act. 2.
Mark this word attentively, where God says: I will shed out of my spirit.
For there can be else nothing in god, that is not eternal, almighty, holy, wife
good, and perpetual, as he is himself.

This sentence and many such other as concerning the holy ghost, were the very
same wherewith, the holy fathers did defend this article against the devil and
the world, and has maintained it unto our time, that we believe only in one
god, and do confess furthermore, that this one god is god the father, god the
son and god the holy ghost eternally. It is not, as the heretics say and
triflingly imagine, that these three names do signify but one person, which
has diversely showed forth their selves at diverse times. If they are troubled
with this article because it seem absurd, to reason what is that to me? For if
a man might reason in this matrer, surely I could do that and not all of the
worste, ye and perchance better then any Jew or Turk can. But I count this
thing as the great benefit of god, that I do not dispute of this article,
whether it be true and agreeable to reason, but whereas I see that it is so
plainly set forth in scripture and has such a sure fundation, I believe god
more, than my own reason, neither do I any thing care, how this should be
true, that there is but one substance and three persons in one substance.

For we go not about here to show whether the truth may be concluded by a
form of reason, but whether this be certain by the word of god. If ye word
of god holds with thee, care for no more. It will not deceive thee. Where as
the word then is certain and evident, as it is proved, and this article is
maintained of the holy fathers with such constancy and power, stycke thou
also surely thereto, and dispute not much, how the father, the son and the
holy ghost may be one god. Thou can not know precisely, what is the cause of
laughing in the face, neither what is the cause of the sight of the eyes, that
they see a thing so far of. And also when thou slepest, whereof it comes,
that as much as belongs to the body, thou art dead, and yet a live? We can
not know a very little thing of our own reason, and yet we presume to go up
into heaven, and to search and comprehend god in his majesty with our reason.
Why do we not first begin to search our selves after that sort, and first
learn to know where lies the operation of our senses, when we sleep? There
might we dispute without peril. But in this article there is great peril. And
here we must stycke surely and simplely to the word, which says of Christ,
Colos. 1. Heb. 1.
that he is ye image of the father, and his first begotten before al creatures,
that is, he is no creature, but eternal god, as there are many testimonies in
John. John. 4.
All things are given to me from my father, he that sees me, sees my father.
Doste thou not believe that I am in the father, and the father is in me? There
is no place for cauillations in this thing. God has spoken and said, that there
is no difference between the father and the son, then in yt ye son is
begotten of the father. But how this should be done, how this eternal
generation should be, we can not know, only know we this, that (as the scripture
says,) he is the first begotten before all creatures, and the image of the
invisible god in nature. So does scripture also teach of the third person,
even of the holy Ghost, which is called the spirit of God.

And as it is taught before, he proceeds from the father that is, Note well.
he has his substance of the father, so that there is no part of godhed wisdom,
verity, power in the father: which is not also in the holy Ghost. But how
this comes to pass, I can not express: for it can not be by reason
comprehended and it is above all angels and creatures. Wherefore we must think
and believe no further of this, than is declared in scripture, but to the words
thereof we may surely stick. But to know that perfectly is a thing not
belonging to this life, but unto the life to come. Wherefore we must differ
the understanding of these, and not dispute thereon, but believe plainelye and
simplye, whatsoever the scripture affirms of this matter. This article is
very well set forth in the articles of faith. And first of all this is evident
and agreed upon amongst all men, that we are not the first inuenters of this
article. Neither are the holy fathers the authors thereof. But they collected it
out of the writings of the Apostles and Prophets very shortly and
compendiouslye, even as bees of many flowers gather honye. Here first we say:
I believe in God the father. This is the first person in the godhed. God the
father.
And these are his proper works, in that he his omnipotent, and the creator,
which made all things and preserves all things unto this time: In this work
is the father described. After that we say: And I believe furthermore in one
person, which is also god. God the son
For we must believe in none else but in only god. What is the name of this
person? His only begotten son Jesus Christ. So has al christian men prayed and
believed, now more tha^ a thousand and v. hundred years. Yea rather from the
first beginning of the world. Although this article has not at al times so
plainlye ben forth, but has been taught at diverse times after diverse sorts.
For from the time of Ada^ unto Abraham, the son of god was called the sede of
the woman. After yt was it named the sede of Abraham, of Jacob of David, and so
forth. And all this is but that only man Jesus Christ: Yea the angels also are
called the sons of god, and so are al godli me^, and are so in deed, but
neither is there Angel nor any other godly man which may be called the only
begotten. Wherefore only this Christ is so begotten of the father, as the son,
to whom he has none like another in the angel another in creatures Wherefore it
is evident thereby, that he is also God. This do we believe and confess, and our
children also with all Christian men and women.

After this confession follows there a rehersall of his works and office, The
works and office of christ.
what the son of God has especially done: That he was conceived by the holy
Ghost, borne of the virgin Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and buried, and rose from the dead, and ascended into heaven,
and sytteth at the right hand of god the father almighty, And here does he
return again to his godhed, that he may be known and believed of all men,
that he is the Image of the father and like unto God. And this I say again
that we invented not these words, but received them of the congregation as a
man would by hand to hand.

Thirdly we say: I believe in the holy ghost. Here we give like glory to ye
holy ghost, God the holy ghost.
as we give to the father and to the son whereas we believe in him. So that
this article is plainly comprehended in the common creed, The creed of the holy
ghost
and that so well, that it can not be better, so that it may well be called the
creed of the Apostles. For it was scarsely a thing possible for any other
beside the Apostles, to comprise it so simplely and certainly. Now what be the
works of the holy Ghost, The works and office of the holy ghost
it is plainly also described, that is, that he gathers together the church
out of all languages, and joins the^ together in the unity of faith, and
does sanctify them, by the remission of sins, and does enkendle in them the
hope of remission of sins, as we say: I believe the remission of sins, The
works of the Trinity.
the resurrection of the flesh, and life everlasting.

So here be comprised very properly in the creed the three persons in one
divine substance, and yet nevertheless every person is set forth with the
orname^t of his own office and property. To the father is attribute and given
the creation, To the son, redemption, to the holy ghost, the power of
sanctification, and making holy. That is, that he does distribute pacify and
confirm, the remission of sins, and transpose us from death unto everlasting
life. These are as a man would say certain marks and differences, that the
persons may not be confusely put together, but distinctly discerned, Act. 2.
that the father is the creator, and Christ becomes man, and the holy ghost
comes with tounges like fire, and pacifieth men's hearts. All these are the
works of the only god. But according to the distinction of the offices and
properties, we must make a distinction also of persons. For god the father was
not made man, and the son did not show forth himself in fyerie tounges.
These are ye proper works of the son and of the holy ghost.

Wherefore this article was delivered unto us: we made it not. And this we know
also by histories, that GOD has defended this article with great plagues, and
has punished the heretics, that went about to overthrow it, with great
punishment. Wherefore we must needs stick constantly unto it, and not forsake
the word, neither must we reason or dispute any thing in this matter. For thus
says the history, Cherinthus the heryetike denied the godhead of christ.
that John was constreigned to write his Gospel, especially for the heretic
Cherinthus sake, which did deny Christ his godhead, and blasphemed him.

It chanced that John, and they that were with him entered into a bathing house,
in the which when he saw Cherinthus a washyng, Ecclesi. hist. lib. 4. cap. 14.
by and by he and his disciples went out with have, saying this withal: let us
flee with all have possible from this blasphemer. And they say, that not long
after, the bathe fell on him, Examples of gods anger against such as denied the
godhead of christ.
and slew Cherinthus the enemy of truth. And the end of Arrius the heretic
was not much better. He was the head and author of great disturbance and
tumult in the church, which endured in the church more then four hundred
years. In so much that not even now can the sparkles of this ungodliness be
quenched and extinct out of the minds of the common sort. He did grant,
that Christ was borne of God before all creatures, but yet that he was a
creature, and nevertheless far better and worthier then all other be. And
where as all faithful bishops in every place, did (as it was meet) resyste
this blasphemy, and many variances and discentions did rise thereof: it
pleased Constantinus the Emperor to quench this flame, which at Nicea
gathered together a council of many learned men and godly bishops, which
condemned the error of Arrius. And when yt not long after Constantinus was
dead, and his son Constantine, which was favorable to Arrius, was made
Emperor, they that were Arrians labored with all their power to restore Arrius
again from the excommunication: And when that Arrius on a certain day, was
coming to the church to be received again into the congregation, in the way
he was taken with a great griping in the bealye, And thereby was feign to go
out of the way to a common place of easement, An ^nde worthy such an heritike.
where as when he was set down, his bowels and guts gushed out into the
draught, and so he gave up the ghost. Let all blasphemers therefore beware.

This is the article of the Trinity, which is first approved by scripture, The
article of the Trinity proved many ways.
then by the disputations of the apostles and holy fathers, and at the last
also by miracles defended against the devil and the world, and shall yet be
defended and maintained by Gods grace: That is, that we believe in one God,
which is called the Father, the son, and the holy ghost. But that there
might not be a certain confused thing, as concerning the three persons, or one
person: Therefore their operations and propreties are distincted, so that the
Father is the maker, the Son the Redemer, the holy Ghost, the sanctifier: so
that the common sort of the christians may know a difference between the
persons, and yet not distinct or divide the substance of the godhed.

This thing is wont to be taught on this day, and the christen men are only
they, that believe these things, which seem contrary to reason, as Paul
says: that it has pleased God, 1. Cor. ^.
to make safe, by the foolyshnes of preaching, them that believe. For reason can
never make any form of argument, to prove that three are one, and one three,
that God is man, The blindness of reason.
that we when we are baptized, are by the blood of Christ washed from our syns,
and that in ye sacramental bread we eat the body of the Lord, and in the
mystical wine, drink his blood spiritually, and so obtain Remission of our
sins. 1. Cor. ^.
All these articles are counted for fables and folly amongst the wise of this
world. And therefore doothe Paul name it the foolyshenesse of preaching. But
yet he that can believe it, shall get everlasting salvation. The which thing
God the father grant us by the holy ghost, for his sons sake Jesus Christ,
our Lord and alone Savior, to whom be honor and glory, worlds without
end. Amen.

An other Sermon on Trinity Sunday. The Gospel. John. iii.
THere was a man of the Pharyseis named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. The
same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him: Rabbi we know that thou art
a teacher come from God, for no man could do such miracles as thou do,
except God were with him. Jesus answered and said unto him Ueryly verily, I
say unto thee, except a man be borne from above, he can not se the kingdom of
God Nichodemus said unto him: How can a man be borne when he is old? Can
he enter into his mothers womb, and be borne again? Jesus answered: Ueryly,
verily I say unto thee, except a man be borne of water, and of the spirit,
he can not enter into the kingdom of god. That which is borne of the flesh is
flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Marueyle not thou
that I said to thee, ye must be borne from above. The wind blows where it
lusts, and thou hear the sound thereof, but thou can not tell whence it
comes, nor whyther he goes: So is every one that is borne of the spirit.
Nicodemus answered and said unto him: How can these things be? Jesus
answered and said unto him: Art thou a master in Israel, and know not
these things? Ueryly verily I say unto thee, we speak that we know, and
testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have told
you earthly things and ye believe not: how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things? And no man ascendethe up to heaven, but he that came down
from heaven, even the son of man, which is in heaven. And as Moises lift up
the serpente in the wyldernes, even so must the son of man be lift up, that
whosoever believes in him peryshe not, but have everlasting life.

An other Sermon on Trinity Sunday. The Gospel. John. iii.
THis is a special good gospel, in the which is declared what is the true and
only way to everlasting life. The dignity and excellency of this gospel.
It appears, that it was appointed to ye feast of the Trinity, because it
makes so plain a distinction and difference between the persons in setting
forth ye high work of God, yt god works among us men, when he justifies and
saves us. For it is certainly pronounced as touching ye father, yt he loved ye
world, and gave unto it his only begotten son. These ar two distinct persons,
ye father and the son, and each of them has his propre work. The father loves
the world, and gives his son. The son is become a gift, and as Christ
says here, John 3.
the son gives himself to be lift upon the Cross, as the serpent was
exalted of Moses in the desert, N^mer. 2.
that all that believe in him should not perish but have everlasting life. And
to this work also comes the third person, the holy Ghost, which by the
water of baptism, does enkendle faith in our heart, and so regenerate us unto
the kingdom of heaven.

Which doctrine is full of sweet confort, and ought to fill us with a great
trust in God, when we see that all the three persons, all the godhead tends to
this end to preserve us against death and the devil, and that Justice,
everlasting life, and the kyngedome of God, might be prepared and made ready for
us. What cause should we have therefore to fear in ye presence of God for our
syn? Gods good will toward man.
How can we doubt of his good will toward us? For if he had been willing to
condemn us for our sins, as we always fear, the father would never have
given us his only begotten son: the father and the son would never have
called us to baptism the lauer of regeneration, under the governance of the
holy ghost. And this only thing do I notify here, as concerning the
testimonies of the Trinity.

For as touching this article, and the doctrine that thereunto belongs, we
have spoken in our former sermon more plentuously. Now therefore will we entreae
in order of this gospel, and all the parts thereof. Christ enters into a long
disputation with Nicodemus, the chief of the Phariseis among the Jews, and
that of a matter, that Nicodemus could not understand the doctrine thereof,
because it seemed strange unto him, for lack of custom thereto, Nicodemus a
lover of christ
and because he was accustomed to an other kind of doctrine. Nicodemus being no
evil man, declares both by word and deed, how highly he estemeth Christ,
where as he sets so much by him, whom his own companions hate so extremely:
and comes unto him (albeit by night) to testify this openly before Christ,
that he acknowledges ye power of God to be in him, and does not condemn him
against his conscience as did the other Phariseis and Scribes. Neither is it to
be counted blame worthy in this man, that he does acknowledge Christ for the man
of God, and thinks him worthy to be received of all men, for that that he is
sent from god. What is ye cause then that Christ does seem to receive this man
after an ungentle sort, which gave such an excellent praise as concerning
Christ? Uerilye, there was a very deadly error in this man, which ought not
to be over passed of Christ: least that he should seem to consent to Nicodeme
in such a great matter, whereof yet he was most blameless. For as touching the
knowledge of god he showed himself here, to be very perfect and certain, in this
that he pronounces, that he knows yt Christ was sent from God to be a
teacher, and in that he took the miracles which Christ did, for the very works
of God. But Christ does declare by his answer, wherein he reproves Nicodemus
opinion, as touching the kingdom of God, what this knowledge preuayleth.
Nicodemus therefore thinks this, that he knows what is the kingdom of God,
because he knowethe God, and understands how al things are wrought and
governed by him. It were true, that if he knew GOD well, he must needs know
his kingdom. But because the first is false, CHRIST rebukes him in the
last: that is, yt he knows not what is the kingdom of God, as he thinks
that he does. Wherefore all the disputation stands in this point, what is the
kingdom of God, and who does see it, and know it. Nicodemus never had other
opinion before this time, but that the kingdom of God had his description in
the law, that out of it might be understand the holiness and sanctity of God,
and the which ought to be performed and fulfilled of all me^, if they would
live with God most holy in his kingdom. The opinion of nicodemus as touching ye
doctrine of salvation.
He never thought, how ye sin can not be taken away by the law, and that the
law should be but a testimony to declare to us our sin, that it might be a
beginning of a higher knowledge, as concerning God and his kingdom in us. For
he that is ignorant of the kingdom of grace, is ignorant both of God, and
also of his kingdom. Wherefore we must not have respect to the justice of our
works, but unto the remission of sin, if thou would know God truly and his
kingdom And this kingdom of God does consyst in the revelation of the
promises and of the son of God. John. 1.
As John says also: The only begotten son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, has declared unto us. Christ therefore sets himself against this
error, which belongs not only to Nicodeme, but to al, which seek any other
way to the kingdom of heaven, and to salvation, then by remission of syn, which
is ordained in the son of God, with the renuyng of the old man. For it is
not sufficient to bring us to the kingdom of God to behold the law of God and
his commandments, after the reasoning of Nicodeme, and to do the works thereof
and to obey God thereby as much as lies in our power. He thinks that this is
sufficient, and that god requires no more of us.

And doubtless the Papists and mounkes are not worthy with their trifles to
be numbered with Nicodeme, The right (...) papists is not comparable with the
ryghteousnes of nicodemus
and amongst such other Iusticiaries. For he with such other goes about to
get righteousness, according to Gods law: where as the papists follow the dreams
of man's traditions, even as it were an appointed form of worshypping, set
forth by God: howbeit the law of God does nothing diffre from man's tradition,
when it is applied to forgeuing of sins before God, Luc. 18.
as in deed it was applied of ye pharisei. Luke. 18. where he glories of his
own righteousness before god as though he were of the kingdom of God for his
works sake which he did, according to the law. But Christ teaches, that God
requires an other manner of thing to the seeing of this kingdom, then that thou
should think that thou myghtest purchase it by the righteousness of the
law: And so by this occasion he opens unto him, Romans ^^.
a high mystery of the Gospel: that is, that God by the law has concluded
all under sin, that he might have mercy of all men, and that he might bring
them to the kingdom of mercy, and that he has no other kingdom for men. This
new and strange saying of Christ, as touching the kingdom of God, troubled
Nicodemus so greatly, that he could not tell whether to go. Why nicodemus came
to christ.
But there is no better way to make plain this matter then to compare the^ both
together. Nicodemus came not to Christ to be instructed with the knowledge of
the kingdom of God, but to show him, that he was not stubborn as his
companions were, and that he was not out of the kingdom of God, and he looks
for no other thing of Christ, then to be allowed for his wisdom. He
could not think, but that he should be in high reputation with Christ: but
Christ sets nothing by the frendshyp of Nicodeme, before he had instructed
him with such a doctrine. that he might perceive the error not only of the
foolyshe and ignorant phariseis, but also of the wisest, as touching the
Justice of the law, and begins his disputation (wherewith he endeavors to
confute Nicodeme, and all other, that had no true opinion of the kingdom of
God, and to enstruct them as concerning the true judgment of these things, by
a holy oath, saying: Uerily, verily, I say unto thee: except thou be borne a
new from above, thou can not see the kingdom of God.

This does Christ call into question, which Nicodemus never thought to move.
Wherefore by the sodeyn demandyng and contrarying in an unknown matter, he is
so abashed, that he could not tell what to answer, The ignoranc of nicodemus.
but that he must needs declare his own ignorance, where as he knows nothing
at all as concerning how a sinner must be regenerate and new born to the
kingdom of God. And now consider here well the pithe of Christ's saying, where
he pronounces, that no man can behold and see the kingdom of Christ, except
he be borne a new. For this is plainly determined, that what soever is borne
of flesh and blood by our parents, with all their powers, as far as man's
power goes, with all their reason, will, and doings, with their laws, studies,
disciplines, exercises, endeavors, facts, and works can not escape damnation.
And hereby does it appear, how overthwart they be, which show utterly as
though they taught of the kingdom of God, and of salvation, and yet as touching
the new birthe they speak nothing, The corrupt doctrine of the Pope
concerning salvation.
but as it is evident by the Pope, they enioyn them works to do, and
traditions to follow, that thereby they may get salvation. But this is nothing
agreyng with Christ's doctrine. which teach plainly: if thou be not born again,
thou shall not be saved. And this thing belongs not only to Nicodemus, but it
pertains to all me^, which can do great virtues and acts, as are the
examples of the Gentiles, concerning modesty and love toward parents or
country, justice, and liberality. etc. For all are not aduoutrers, nor
fornicators, thieves, and sluggish people: but there are notable works and
virtues, and surely the discipline thereof is not to be despised, for as much
as God has great respect and regard thereunto in the ten commandments. But
when they come to this especial matter to try, what is the way to the
kingdom of God, and what way brings to salvation: the saying of Christ is
plain, that all other things work death and damnation, that are without the
new birth and regeneration. Only the new birth can challenge the inheritance of
rightousnes and salvation in the kingdom of God, as Paul shows with evident
words, Galat. ^.
saying: In Christ Jesus is neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but only a
new creature.

The gathering and conclusion of reason is diligently to be marked in this,
least we be deceived. For it resoneth on this wise: Reason.
If stealing* murder and aduoutry does displease God: than must it needs follow,
that it is pleasyng to God to absteyne from such things. It is not to be
denied but it pleases God, to avoid syn, according to the law, and thereby to
do good works. And he does promise and give rewards for such works and
merits. But yet they can not se the kingdom of God, which do such works of the
law, but only they that are regenerate and new borne. Luc. 18.
God does not hate the Phariseye. Luke. 18. because he was no robber,
aduouterer, unrighteous as other were, and in that he fasteth, and pays his
tithes: but God would allow these things, if they were not done with a trust to
obteyn righteousness and salvation before god thereby

Wherefore these things are diligently to be distincted in teaching. We must
not disprove reason, will, works save not.
and virtuous sayings, nor the law, neither precepts, manners, nor honest
living for all these things are to be taken for the gifts of God. But when we
entreat of this matter, how we must come to the kingdom of God: there does none
of these things prevail, neither reason, nor will, nor law, nor good
works. But this thing only is of strength, to be borne again: and where this
is lacking, there is no hope to come to the kingdom of God. An objection
concerning good works.
All our powers with the laws and precepts are of no efficacy and strength.
But thou will say: If it be so, I had rather do no good work at all, then to
take much pain, Note this order.
if I obtain nothing therewith in the kingdom of God? But to think or say
this, is an evident token of ungodliness. Wherefore do both. First see diligently
to the law with all his works, then know thy self to be a sinner, and that
thou can not by thy works escape damnation: Then turn thy self to the
doctrine of Christ, and hearken, what he preaches of the kingdom of God,
after that he has declared, that the old man can not enter into the kingdom
of God. Nicodemus perceaueth the straighte Judgment of Christ, that without
the new Birth, there is no hope of the kingdom of GOD, and he is soon
reformed and persuaded, that the carnal birth healpethe nothing thereto. And
therefore he asks how the new birth might be. And CHRIST And does redyly
show a notable doctrine thereof, saying on this wise: Uerily, verily I say unto
the. Except a man be borne again, he can not enter into the kingdom of God.
Whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is flesh, what soever is born of the spirit,
is spirit.

This is the second sentence against the first birth showing that it is
carnal and synful, and that it can not be encouraged to obtain the kingdom
of God: As though he should say: Thou demandest, whether thou should
otherwise be borne of thy mothers womb: although thou were borne a thousand
times of thy mothers womb, yet thou should not be borne to the kingdom of
God. There is no need of father and mother to the kingdom of God: which are
also them selves flesh, but there is need to have water and the spirit: but
he that has been so borne again, is a new man, and shall come to the kingdom
of God. This doctrine had Nicodemus never learned in Moses: He had learned
there what he should do or not do by the precepts. The law brings no man
unto perfection.
But as touching this new creature, he had learned nothing at all, not as much
as by a dream. Wherefore he is so confounded that he grant that all this while
he had learned nothing at all. But the words of this sentence are not so lightly
to be passed over, the sentence is perfect, that good works must be done, and
obedience is to be given to the law. But the seeing of the kingdom of God
comes not hereby. But if we will come to the seeing thereof, not good works but
a new man is requisite thereto. And that is not done by the carnal manne,
water in this place of Baptism.
but by water, and by the spirit. They are the very parents that are mete to
bring forth this new child of God. Water is nothing else but baptism. Marc. 16.
For so says Christ in y^ last of Mark He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved. This strength of the water is not of his own nature. For water
is water, that is to say, an eleme^t and creature, which can not change the
heart, and wash away syn. But the water whereof Christ speaks here, and which we
call the water of Baptism, is not only water natural, but water in the word
and promise of God. Two things are here joined together, the water, and the
word, and are so joined together, that they can not be sundred. If thou sunder
the water from the word, it is no baptism. If thou sunder the word from the
water, neither than is it Baptism. The word and the eleme^t makes a perfect
sacrament.
But when the word and water ar joined together, this water is such with the
which the holy ghost will come unto thee, and regenerate thee to the kingdom
of God. Which is as much to say, as to forgive sins, and to bring salvation.
This sentence therefore is not lightly to be regarded, and especially because
of the Anabaptists, which hold opinion, Anabaptists* confuted.
that the Baptism of infantes is nothing worth, where as yet Christ in this
place, applies water to regeneration, and to the new birth, and joins it as
the cause thereof with the holy ghost. If children therefore have need of this
new birth, and can not see the kingdom of God without it, and seeing Baptism
is ordained of Christ as the cause of all that must be new borne: It is not
only an unmercifully thing, but also violence in the kingdom of god, and
plain tyranny, to exclude them from Baptism and from the kingdom of God, for
whom Christ dyed, and decreed, Romans 6^
that this benefit should be free to all them, that are new borne, that they
might be baptized to dye with him, and be borne again. Wherefore this new birth
is also necessary for children, that they may see the kingdom of God. Titus. 3.
And although the water does nothing profit without the holy ghost, yet the
holy ghost by the water of Regeneration must work in us, as Paul does so
ioygne them both together: According to his mercy (says he) he saved us by
the water of regeneration, and renuyng of the holy spirit, the which he shed
upon us abundantly. This lauer or washyng can not be without regeneration and
renuyng of the holy spirit. Wherefore the error is detestable that in certain
places diverse preachers do baptize children without water. For it is not only
requisite in baptism to have the word and spirit, Christ's ordinance may
not be altered.
but also to have water. For so did Christ ordein, and no man has power to
change his law and institution.

The baptism of water is seen with the eyes, but the work of Regeneration
and new birth, which is wrought by the holy ghost inwardly, is not seen.
Therefore this outward ceremony of the water of baptism may not be omitted,
because of the privy and invisible administration of the holy ghost. Christ
says furthermore unto Nicodemus: Meruail not that I said unto thee, thou must
be borne again from above: the wynd blows where he will, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but thou can not tell from whence it comes, and whether it
gothe So is every man that is born of the Spirit.

These words are very simple, as the ceremony is it self. For it is not
esteemed with reason, when an infant, or an aged man is offered to make his
confession on this wise, that follows: Behold, the yoke of sin and of the
devil is so great, that there is no help or remedy against it, but that he,
whether he be child or man, be baptized, and washed with water, in the name of
the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost. But here must we rather mark,
what Christ says, where he bids us rather to consider what is done by
privy operation, then by the open ceremony and outward sign. For the work
of the holy ghost is privy and hyd from the eyes. Wherefore we must believe it
as it is set forth in the word. Thou shalt never perceive it by the eyes. As
it chances in the wynd. The sound thereof is heard, but we can neither declare
the risynge nor the slackyng thereof. So is it in the new birth. The outward
ceremony comes by the water unto the eyes, and the word is heard, that the
work is done in the name of Jesus unto the absolution and remission of
sins. He that regards not the word and spirit, and the virtue thereof,
and seeks it not after that sort, as Christ has appointed, shall be
deceived. For nothing else is requisite to the getting of the new birth and
spirit, but that thou must be baptized with water, and take diligent head to
the word. This is the new birth to the kingdom of God, and no other way is
there. What will these sectaries say here which only crake of the spirit, The
spritish^ sectaries.
and in the mean time lay aside baptism, the sacrament and word? Wherefore
Christ here does not teach, but he shows by a plain demonstration, baptism,
and the word. And does admonyshe us, that if we will not be content to use the
water and word, that we shall have nothing of the holy ghost, neither shall we
ever atteyne to the new birth. Wherefore let us have diligent regard of our
baptism and of the word, as of the chief part of our salvation. Where we know
for a surety that if we keep that, we are newborn unto the kingdom of God.

And this doctrine, how we must be newborn, that is, how we must come to ye
kingdom of God, is strange and not heard of in the world, and yet it is only
true and infallible, where as of the contrary part, all other doctrines
deceive, seem they never so good by the judgment of the world, and of reason.
The life of the phariseis, the rules of monks, the devotion of the single
shauelings, are very fantastical. And the works of virtue and of the ten
commandments do not a little commend them yt have them. Yet there is none of
al these things that does regenerate. It is only water and the spirit that
does work these things, which spirit will no otherwise be known of us or
felt, but as the wind is known by the sound. He that hears the sound, that
is, believes, Marc. 16.
and is baptized, he is newborn, and shall be saved.

But Nicodemus is so deeply drownde up in his fantastical imaginations of
the law and good works, that he can not comprehend this doctrine: as it does
also chance in those Papists, that are most witty. For it hinders them
always, when they think thus: should all this be nothing? should not this
please God, that we fast, that we pray, that we give alms? Wherefore Christ
ha^dleth him with the more austeritie, for yt he will not believe and knowledge
ye true doctrine, and says: Art thou a master in Israel, and know not these
things?

As though he should say: How then do thou thy duty, as a master of
Israel, saying thou know not the way of true salvation? This doctrine of the
new birth and regeneration, is the doctrine of ye prophets, and necessary to
salvation. Now art thou so ignorant, yt thou do not know that vice in our
nature, which has need to be abolished by regeneration? But for what
purpose is this reproving of a master in Israel? Uerily that all preachers of
religion and of true salvation may know, that all learning, which is without
the doctrine of regeneration, is naught and false. Not because it is a fault
to teach good works, and to adhorte men thereto. For so does the law of god,
and does well thereby. But herin are they to be blamed, that beside this doctrine
they teach men nothing else, as though nothing else were requisite to
everlasting life. For it is evident in this place, that although the law and
good works be done, yet they profitte nothing to the attainement of the
kingdom of god, but that there must needs be the new birth of water and of
the holy ghost. And it is the spirit, which by the water and word does make
other new men. The law and the works do change, neither the men, neither ye
works. Wherefore he yt thinks with himself how he might bring men to
salvation, let him have respect to ye new birth, as Christ has here: and let
him not begin it by good works, How salvation is to be taught.
but let him lay the fundation by that thing, that can make a new heart, that
is, let him lead men to baptism and to the spirit, ye and to the word, by the
which the holy Ghost does work in men's hearts. For as the wind nothing is
known but the sound, so of the holy ghost nothing is perceived but the word.
That must ye keep surely, and then look for the operation of the holy ghost.
Now what manner of word this is, and how the holy Ghost does make a sound,
Christ here teaches: No man goes up into heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, even the son of man which is in heaven.

This beginning of the sermon is of that, whereof Christ says: ye believe not
me, if I speak earthlye things to you, how will ye believe, if I speak
heavenly things unto you? For this sermon can not be inverted by any man, but
the only begotten son which is in the bosom of the father, has declared it
unto us. Of this sermon or saying there are two parts. The first is somewhat
hard. John. 1.
For of this it is certainly decreed: No man ascends into heaven but he yt
came down from thence, the meaning whereof is all one with the saying before:
Except a man be newborn, he ca^ not see the kingdom of God. That is, No man
can be saved, No man by his own strength ca^ be saved.
or obtain remission of his sins and rightousnes, neither by the law,
neither by good works, reason, or free will. And he yt has no more then these
things, although they be never so good, he is damned and can have no hope of
salvation. It is a very evident and plain sentence, which if the Jews and
papists would believe, it would make them to forsake all the trust that they have
in their own works and righteousness.

For what man has his birth from heaven? None no not the first that were, Adam
and Eve. It is only the son of Mary, as Christ here says. Therefore if none
shall enter up to heaven, but he yt came down from heaven: By our first birth
we are all damned.
it is plain, yt all men, as they be borne of their parents, can not ascend
into heaven. If they can not go up into heaven, what place is there, for them?
For they can not co^tinew in earth for death. If therbe no going up to heaven,
than can no man escape damnation. This is the judgment of Christ as touching
all the world, no man excepted, whether it be Adam, Eve, Abraham, Moses, or
David, all they can not enter in to heaven. For he only asce^deth into heaven
that came down from thence. What do we then prevail by good, works, merits,
ye law, or free will? All these things are of no strenght, and they can not
bring us to heaven. But thou will say: Are al condemned, and are al without
salvation? This sentence is against al me^, neither can it be otherwise for
as much as it belongs to al me^, of whatsoever co^ditio^ or state they be.
There is but one way to heaven which we do not open and make, but the son of
god does it. And of this speaks christ now immediately, saying: As Moses
lyfted up the serpent in the desert: so much the son of man be lift up that
all that believe in him may not perish, but have everlasting life.

This is ye second part of this celestial and heavenly sermon and of ye very
sound of ye holy ghost, and now he mitigateth ye sharpnes of his first sermon
by these words. For it is an horrible and fereful sayi^g, yt no man shall go up
i^to heaven, and get salvation. But it is spoken to ye intent yt we should
learn yt our first birth is al sinful, and there can nothing be found in us,
yt may seem worthy of everlasting life, and yt not only to put down our pride
and careless living, but that we should turn, and humble our selves before
god, and ask grace And this is ye beginning of ye true gospel yt according to
my former sayi^g, By faith in christ are we saved.
eue^ as no man asce^deth i^to heaven so yt here you may know yt al yt believe
in Christ shall not perish but have everlasting life. This is a sweet voice and
sound, by yt which ye holy ghost may be felt and perceived. And both these
doctrines are necessary in ye congregation The first, of sin and of our corrupt
nature, The doctrine both of the law and of ye gospel is necessary to be
taugh and in the church of christ.
yt we might despair of our works and of al things, that we shall never go up
into heaven for their sake. And when our hearts are terrified and abashed by
such words, then must that comfortable word be put forth, that Jesus Christ
ye son of god descended from heaven, came into the world, took our flesh and
blood, and died for our sins yt we might be free from syn, and get ye
inheritance of everlasting life. He yt believes this saying, and purposes
surely to stick thereto, is now saved, and shall not be forsaken of Christ
nether in life neither in death, but shall be taken up unto hi^ into heaven.

This sermon is a heavenly thing, which can not sufficiently be set forth and
commended unto men, and especially to Nicodemes, that is, to them that think
that the law must be observed unto justification, and that it is sufficient
unto salvation. For these are they, which know not the first doctrine of
sin, that although the law be just, Romans 7.
holy, and good, yet we are so corrupt and evil, that for our natural vice we
can not obey the law, although to sight we do good works.

Furthermore they much less know, that we must ascend into heaven by this man
the son of Mary, which only came from heaven. And so it comes of such
ignorance, that they do not only think yt they shall be saved by their own
righteousness before god, but also they persecute the righteousness, The doctrine
of iustificacion by faith alone impugned of the papists.
which comes of faith in Jesus Christ, as we see by the examples of the
papists, which can suffer nothing less in our doctrine, and strive against
nothing so much, as that we teach, that we are justified only by faith and
saved thereby, and not by good works. But compare our doctrine with the
doctrine of Christ, and ye shall find no diversity.

In the fourth book of Moses, there is such an history: Numer. 21.
The people of Israel, when they were werye of such things as they had in
the wilderness: They murmured against god and Moses, and despised Manna as a
light meat. This sin and trespass did god punish after this sort: He sent
amongst them ferye serpe^tes, and by and by at their styngyng followed a
swellynge and an inflammation in their bodies, so that they fell down on heaps
and died. Then came they to Moses and said, we have trespaced, in that we have
spoken against God, and they pray him that he will take away from us these
serpe^tes. And the lord spoke unto him: Make a brazen serpent, and put him up
for a sign, he that is stong and looks upon it, shall live. Christ figured be
the brazen serpent.
Christ here makes mention of this history, and applies it to himself, that
he must be lift up also as the serpent was. And he yt looks upon him that
is, he that believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

First let us learn the cause of this dreadful judgment, which Christ has
pronounced twice before against all men: that is, yt no man can go up to
heaven, but the son of man, that came down from heaven. And again, except a
man be borne again, When^^ ou^e damnacion comethe.
he can not se the kingdom of god. Whereof came this great misery to man, that
he is thrust out of heaven, and should for his own desert perish for ever? It
came of no other thing than that the old serpent the devil did so byte and
hurt the first man, Genesis 3.
and so corrupted him and infected him by syn. That he is now in danger of
everlasting death, and can not by himself get any remedy against it: as the
type and figure in the Jews does show also: whosoever were stonge they died
al. So is it with us also, Romans 6.
the reward of sin is death. And look where sin is, there must death needs
follow. For as much then, as al men, Genesis 2.
as soon as they are borne, be sinners, this judgment is given on the^, that
they must dye: as god by name does threaten Adam and Eve: whatsoever day ye
eat of this tree, ye shall dye the death.

But here does God show his mercy, in that he casts not away men that are
in this misery, and so infected and damned to death, but even as in the figure
and tipe of the brazen serpent, he put forth a commandment, which serpent was
in all points like other serpents, saving that he had no poison, and was a
remedy against poison: so does he procure yt his son should be lift up on the
cross that all that look on him should not perish, but escape the danger of
death, and get everlasting life. Yea he himself on the cross had y^ form of
a poysonful serpent, but yet has no poison but the lykelines thereof. For
although Christ had our flesh and blood, Heb. 4. 1. Pet. 2.
yet that flesh and blood was without sin: yea and is of such strength that
it delivers us from poison and sin.

This is the very voice and sound of the holy ghost, by the which he begins
the new birth in our hearts, that faith may conceive, and that this serpent
by true faith may be in our sight, and give salvation. But this sight of Christ
is not regarded, because of folishe reason. As it is very like, that so it
chanced the^ also with ye Jews, which would not be brought in belief yt there
was so great virtue in sight of such a dead thing. They would more sooner believe
yt ye poison might sooner be expelled by medicines. What does it profit (says
reason) to save the life, if a man believe in Christ? The commandementes of the
law must be fulfilled also, and sin must be avoided, and than there is hope
of salvation. By faith in christ comethe salvation.
Therefore few men perceive this, that all the means to come to salvation does
depend hereof, that we believe in Christ. But some be made Monks, they fast,
they pray, etc. And every man seeks salvation and life by an other means,
then by the sight and faith in Christ: But in this place mark this perfect
sentence. The corruption an contagion, the which is engendered in thee by the
devil, is greater, then that thou may be delivered from everlasting death
by thy own power and might. Neiher may thou be delivered from this great
evil by any other means, then by this sight, that thou behold Christ lyfted
up on the cross, how that he died for thee, and offered his own life for thee,
Romans 4.
and by his death satisfied for thy sins, and so reconciled thee to God. If
thou beleuest this, and be baptized, then no doubt art thou new borne by the
holy ghost to the kingdom of god. For I ^^yd before that this new birth is of
this sort, that there is nothing open beside the sound: that is to say, we
must stick sure to the word and believe that most constantly.

And this is the plain doctrine of this gospel, that first we are al sinners
and damned to eternal death. The^ that by this we are delivered from eternal
death, when we behold the man Jesus Christ on the cross, that he made
satisfaction for us, and vanquished death* and brought us at one with god, and
made us partakers of everlasting life. This is the doctrine that forgeth new
men and new hearts, so that we may say in sin and death. Although I am deadly
sto^g of the old serpent and can not deem it: yet this thing makes me have
sure hope of salvation, that in the man Christ Jesus there is so great virtue,
that if I look upon him being crucified, I get thereby sure deliverance from
sin, death and the devil. Wherefore there is nothing that can fear me, be the
bytting of the devil never so great, defiles he all things never somuche with
matter and black poison. Christ on his Cross does confort me with his
righteousness. For his black wan wounds are there set for my health. And look
where this confort is in the heart against this continual poison, forthwith
will there ensue an other manner of life, that even as we obtain salvation be
Christ: A new life.
So likewise we are ready to seek the saving of other men, by giving help,
succor, council, confort, defense, etc.

And although a Christian man be hurt of other, yet he goes not about to
revenge, but more rather he has pity. For he sees the cause, that all those
things come by the bytinge and poison of the devil, in all which things we
could not but perish, if it were not for the remedy provided by Christ.
Wherefore he leaves nothing undone, but seeks always possible, to bring men
to this fellowship and company of salvation, that they may be delivered from
this poison, as he was delivered. So that this doctrine is the spring and
fountain, wherout flows al virtues, confort, joy, and tranquillity. The
almighty god and our most merciful father, preserve us thorough Jesus Christ
his son in this doctrine, and grant us therein daily to increase, that this
syghte may never fall out of our sight, and that by true faith in Christ, we
may be delivered from eternal death. Amen.

Here ends the first part of the Postille.
The second part of this Appostell, beginning at the first Sondaie after
Trinity Sondaie, upon the Gospel of Luke. xvj.
THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple, and fine white,
and fared deliciously every day. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus,
which lay at his gate full of sores, desiryng to be refreshed with the
crummes, which fell from the rich man's board, and no man gave unto him. The
dogs came also and licked his sores. And it fortuned that the beggar died,
and was carried by the Aungelles into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died
and was buried. And being in hell in torments, he lift up his eyes and saw
abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried, and said: Father
Abraham: have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dippe the tippe of
his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. But
Abraham said. Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy
pleasure, and contrariwise Lazarus received pain. But now he is comforted, and
thou art punished. Beyond all this, between us and you there is a great space
set, so that they which would go from hense to you can not: neither may come
from thense to us. Then he said: I pray thee therefore father, send him to
my fathers house (for I have five brethren) for to warn them, least they come
also into this place of tormente. Abraham said unto him. They have Moises and
the Prophets, let them hear them. And he said: Naie father Abraham: but if
one come unto them from the dead, they will repent. He said unto him: If
they hear not Moises and the Prophets, neither will they believe, though one
arose from death again.

THE EXPOSITION.
The history of the rich man
THere is in this history a singular example, the like whereof is not found in all the scripture, as touching the judgment that after this life shall come.
Neither is it necessary for us to dispute, whether it be an history or a
parable. For seeing that Christ do^th name the persons, and describes the life
of the^ both, and also what is both their ends, that the rich is tormented
in fire, and Lazarus is comforted: it seems requisite to believe, that it
chanced so in deed. Yea, and this we may be bold also to say, after the
council of Christ with a sure faith, that it shall likewise befall and
chance, to all such as are like in condicio^s to this rich man, and to this
Lazarus. As Christ declares, whereas he puts forth this example, to
terrify and to fear the covetous Phariseis.

There are put forth here generally two examples for the whole world. The
one, of him that is rich in this world, and after that poor without end.
The other, of him that is poor in this world and after that blessed and salfe
for ever, that every manne might follow that state, that he thinks best. For
poverty and other discommodities joined with godliness, are not to be refused,
so that thou may thereby come to salvation. As contrary wise, prosperity
puts not a man in such safety, as though he need not fear ungodliness:
but rather for riches and wealths sake, should a man suspecte the more the
peril of Idolatry, and of ungodliness, least couetuousnesse, which is the
worshippyng of Idolles, Ephe. v.
should crepe on a man before he beware.

But now let us entreat of the examples by the^ self. And first of all, What
is putforthe to us in Lazarus example.
the example of Lazarus teaches us, that we judge not godliness without fruit
for the painful life. For the kingdom of heaven, whereto godliness would us
to have chief respect is with this condition, that it can not be in this life
without persecution and affliction. For no christian man ought to think with
himself, when he is vexed, that God therefore cares not for him, or that he
forgets him. For this is the manner of God, that whom he loves, them he
chastineth, that they by this chastment, may less licenciouslie sin.
Whereas if it were not for the punishemente, they would live more careless,
Prouer. iii. Hebre. xii. Apoca. iii.
and have less regard to fly sin. Wherefore a godly manne ought not to
think, that affliction is an evil token. But let him rather gather thereby,
that GOD loves him, and cares for him, as says the wise man. The soonne
that the father loves, he chastineth.

Wherefore men are herein greatly deceived, which of this present fortune
will judge of the will of GOD. In deed all these gifts are the blessyng of
GOD, household stuff, riches, health, perfect senses. etc. but all these
things are not immortal. For at length we must depart from them, and they
can not be had with us from hence. And this is the greatest peril joined
thereto, when the rich of this world do not trust in the living GOD, i. Timo.
vi.
but in frail riches, so that at length they depart void of all godliness,
and have riches and other like gifts of GOD as for occasions to sin. And
there can be no other way to avoid peril in this, then either that they
judge the^ self, or else suffer GOD to judge the^ by diverse tribulacions, least
they become void of their duty dooyng in godliness, praiyng, faith, and
study of his word. The spiritual and true blessyng.
But the true and perfect blessyng of GOD, whereby gods goodness may and ought
to be perceived, is not only of present things, but also of eternal riches,
that GOD has called a man to the Gospel, wherein we learn how GOD is
merciful for his soonnes sake, and pardons sins, and will save us for
ever, and in the mean time whilst we be here, he will defend us of his
goodness against the devil, and the tyranny of the world. He that does
consider this gift truly, although he be destitute of temporal things,
although he be nedie, sick, despised, or otherwise troubled. etc. yet shall
all these things seem light unto him. For in comparison of eternal things,
they are very small. If he lacks money, yet is he sure of Gods mercy. I^
his body be sick, he knows, that he is called to everlasting life, and
that it is promised to him both in word and Baptism. And so in all other
te^ptacions, whatsoever chances, inwardly thus does he comfort himself: this
will endure but for a time, the best is to come, which can be taken from me by
no misfortune. For GOD is merciful to me for Christ's sake, which also is my
father, and will put me in an everlasting enheritaunce.

And this was the comfort of this miser Lazarus. There lacked no sense of
pains in his body, whereas he mourned often and wept. Yea his heart also had
his prickynges, by the which it was broken and discoraged, when he saw
himself oppressed with many burdens of sickness, poverty, contempt, whereas
the rich manne, had store of all things. But here also brast out the most
grievous tormente of al, where as he was constrained to hear the testimony of
Gods law against him in his most calamity and making for the wealthy rich
manne. For these thoughts troubled him sore, when he thus reasoned in his
heart: If thou had done the^ thou should now have lived therein: this
rich man has lived therein, and therefore, he has done them. The authority
of GOD is in the voice of the law. How great this temptacion is, The comfor^
of Lazarus.
none know but they that has proved it. But he had a sure comfort against
this, when he said thus in his heart: I se that this is the will of GOD,
after this means to mortify my sinful flesh, and seeing it is so, I know it
shall not long continewe, within a few years, this will come to an end, and
all things shall be in better case, when the lord shall take a way the
manifold troubles of the just, and deliver them thereof. For the promise is
sure that GOD is merciful unto me, and that for Christ his sons sake he
does pardon sins, and riddeth them from the curse, and take them to his
mercy and grace, that put their trust in him.

Wherefore although this present state be hard, yet will I patiently take it.
If men care not for me, nor can find in their heart to give me their
leauynges, which they are not wont to deny to their dogs, yet this is my
comfort, that GOD is merciful unto me, and suffers me not to lack the
eternal goods. In the mean time I will bide these hard and bitter things,
until at due time a better case shall come. And it is like that Lazarus had
such thoughts first, as a man may gather by his name. For Lazarus in Hebrew
is Eleazar, The name of Lazarus, what it signifies.
and signifies, God help, so that in no man he trusted, but in GOD only.
Then is this also a token thereof, whereas the Evangelist says, that Lazarus
was carried by the Angels, into the bosom of Abraham. For this is nothing
else, but that Lazarus embraced with a suer faith, the promise made unto Abraham,
that is, that all should be blessed in his seed, and thereof he took heart
of grace in this state, so that if he had been hold as accursed of all the
world, yet he doubted not but he should obtain this blessyng, through the
blessed seed. And this manner of says caused him at his death, to be carried
up into the bosom of Abraham.

And Christ would us to look diligently on this example. For christian men
must look for no other, but to suffer need and trouble with Lazarus. He that
is without comfort, can not have patience, and yet will despair at last. For
the nature of flesh and reason can not be changed, except there be help in
the word of GOD, and in the study thereof. For thus do men think alwaie,
that in adversity GOD forgets us, and regards us not, for else would he
help us and succor us. And there is not such wisdom in our minds, as to
comfort our selves with the hope of that, that is to come. Wherefore there
rises murmuring against GOD, and iudgyng of him, whereof at length ensues
the blasphemy of desperacion. And so at the last we fall from GOD, hate him,
and look for no salvation at his hand, joining to our present miseries,
eternal pains also. The example of Lazarus is put forth, The history of
Lazarus is diligently to be considered in ye time of the cross.
for the Godly to defend them selves thereby against this danger. He was
after the descripcio^ of Christ most wretched. But because he suffers not
the promise of Christ to be taken from his mind, but looks steadfastly for
everlasting life, and in the mean season obeieth Gods will in all poinctes: he
is gloriously recompensed for all this at his time, and instead of a little
pain, he obtains everlasting pleasure and comfort. This is the example of
Lazarus, which christian men in all their cross and trouble ought to behold,
that thereby they may be admonished, what is best for them to do.

The other example is of the rich man, The rich man.
which in this life lived in prosperity at his desire, but in the life to
come, was in all misery and pains. And here must we consider the certainty
of Christ's testimony. For he putt forth this example specially, that
careless and coueitous hypocrites, might know of their miserable end in the
life to come. Wherefore we ought to consider, the truth of this matter with
our eyes, how the rich man is horribly tormented in flames, in such wise
that it can not be written with pen, nor expressed with words. And that the
chief and special cause of these torments and pains is: The cause of the
rich man's da^nacion
because he beholds the felicity of Lazarus, whom before he despised and
disdained, neither can he have as much as a drop of water from him to cool
his burning therewith. And furdermore, he is constrained to suffer this pain
perpetually, without hope of remedy. But what is the cause, why that miser is
cast into such pain without end? Not his riches, neither for that he
apparelleth himself, and lives by his gooddes. For these are the gifts of
GOD, so that there be measure in vsyng them, and be not wasted riotously. For
if these things be used in the fear of GOD, and with thanks geuyng, GOD will
not disalowe it. But this is the cause, for that this rich manne has store of
goods, clotheth himself and lives riotouslie, and yet he has no respect of
the life to come, he hops for no longer life, when this life is come to an
end, he cares not what becomes of him in the other life. All his care and
study is, to give him self to pleasure and pastyme in this life, as though he
had need of nothing else. As Christ does admonish in the Gospel of this, that
our hearts be not ouerladen with surfeit and drounkennes, Luke. xxi.
and with the cares of this world. This is one cause of his damnacion. To have
no respect to the poor man's need.
For of this it follows, that he regard not the word of GOD, neither is he
any thing moved either at his promises, or at his threatninges, so that in this
life he may not be defrauded of his lust and desires. The second cause is,
that he saw Lazarus need before his face, but yet according to the Prophet, he
opens not his hand to the nedie, but rather after the Evangelist, the dogs
showed more humanity to this miser, then did the rich man. He thought not on
this, that the great ple^tie was given to him to thentent, that he should help
the needy. But like an insatiable gredie gutte, Esaie. lviii. Luke. xvi.
he loved great heapyng of all things together, and yet is he nothing moved
with other men's lack and need. These sins cries for vengeance before God,
that after a little pleasure of this life, he may have everlasting punishment.

This example does Christ setforthe before us, that we might beware of his
judgment, and of sin, that we might not give our selves without care to
surfeiting in this life, as though there were no other life to come, and that
we should not forget the poor. For he that has such plenty of goods, that
he may help the poor, Math. xxv. James. ii.
and yet does not, he shall in the last day suffer great pain and
tormente, at what time he shall see the poor whom he despised, before his face
in great joy and felicity, to his own great sorrow, as the rich manne did
the Lazer. Contrary wise, he that has helped many, and done them good, shall
take great pleasure thereof in the life to come. This is a more hard case,
that the rich man in all his heat and burning, is denied a drop of cold
water.

Wherefore let us not forget the poor and nedie, The poor must be regarded.
but let us help and succor them, not only after the accustomable manner, as
when we give a half-penie to beggars, or such like, as every man is able after
his degree. But an almose shall then be most acceptable, when every man after
his power in his vocation, does maintain the common fellowship, and whom he
can: That is, that every manne use and turn his craft and gains, and what
so ever he occupies, to such purpose, that no man be deceived, no man be
defrauded, and that looks not only to his own vantage, that he deceives no
man by weight and measure. For it is not unknown, what crafts and guiles be
emo^gest them that fell. A day were to little to express all the frauds that
are used in certain occupations for gains. Wherefore when it is vprightlie
done, yea in the least contractes and bargains, that be, it is in a manner a
very almose deed. And contrariwise, that that is done with fraud and deceit,
is plain theft. And they shall be judged no otherwise then for thieves of GOD
in his Judgment, whereas all these covetous and rich shall behold Lazarus,
whom they have deceived so many ways in their bargaininges, and has spoiled
them of their goods, and after the manner of this rich man, they shall be
punished with everlasting pain.

After this sort may every man make his craft and occupacio^, to be an almose
pleasyng God, and not only temporal blessings shall thereof ensue, but as
Christ says, Luke. xvi.
we shall get us friends in this life, whose testimony shall profit us in
the life to come. But the world can not be brought unto this belief. He that
has a stock will nothing diminishe thereof, but rather increase it. He that
has none, studieth all that he can to make himself an heap of substance,
caryng not how he come by it. Wherefore God can not but plague the world,
until at the last, hell makes an end of all. And yet can not the world be
amended, neither by plagues, neither by threatenings. But is not this the
greatest madness that is, to provide in perilles, that we suffer not hunger
when there is scarcity of victuals? But why then do we not take heed in that
case, whereas if we offend, there shall ensue eternal pains? This judgment
is so much the more grievous, because it can never be changed, being ones
dooen. For there remains no hope of remedy. Abraham and Lazarus, as thou
hear here, are not only unwilling to cool the heat with a little water,
but also unable.

What an ouerthwartnesse is this then, that we so little regard this great
danger of ours, and seek not rather remedy for it? The great blindness of
men.
The light trifles of this life do sore vex us, while we se to our dignity,
and to such as be ours, that we may make provision for them, with all the
commodities of this life. And when men have gotten these things, now they
labor no farther, as though they had gotten all. But when they have not that,
they endeavor with all study and care to come thereby. But in the mean season
they have no regard of this thing that is most necessary, until they fall
suddenly into this snare, even into this judgment and damnacion.

And this is the cause, why Christ puts forth the example of the rich
manne, to withdraw us from the care of things present, i. Timo. vi.
and to make us give more head to everlasting life. For if this rich man had
not given over his heart to worldly prosperity, but had rather trusted in the
living God, he had never come to this place of tormente and destruction. But
now, contrary to the precepte of God. He drowneth up himself with riches, and
forgets his state to come. He applies all things only to his desiers and
lusts, and will suffer no other thing to come into his mind. Contrary to this
teaches Christ, that we should watch, least we suffer with the rich man
everlasting death, as a recompense for this little joy.

Luke. xxi.
These two examples are such, as never ought to fall out of memory, that
first of all in time of trouble we might have a suer trust and comfort: Then
also that in the prosperity of this world, we fall not into danger of
everlasting death. And to this also does that belong* that Christ speaks
after, that the rich manne perceiuyng his own cause to be paste remedy, yet
cares for his brotherne, and desires that Lazarus might be sent to his
fathers house, least that if they continue in their old conversation, they
also should fall into like punishemente. But Abraham denies him that, and
says: They have Moises and the Prophets, let them hear them. But when the
rich man proceeded, and alleged that there should ensue much profit by this
message, if the dead should go preach to them that live: Abraham answered:
If they hear not Moises, nor the Prophets, neither will they believe if any
should come to the^, from the dead. Now this rich man understands, that he
that will escape this, has need of repentance, and perceives* that that
may chance to other, as it chanced to him, that although the word of GOD
and the Preachers thereof, abide with men in the world, yet it does not move
the^ neither to repentance, neither to amendment of life. Wherefore he
thinks it best for his brethren, if one from the dead, that could tell of
things invisible, should come unto them. Neither would this seem to us also
other wise then the matter requires, if such a Prophet should come amongst
men.

But Abraham can not be persuaded to allow this, and therefore he says. The
word of God must only be taken head unto.
He that will escape this pain, must have respect to nothing but to the
Prophettes, and that this is the only way to escape the danger of eternal
damnacion. But he that will hear neither Moses nor the Prophettes, it were in
vain if one should rise from the dead, or if an angel, or GOD himself should
preach. For such would never be brought to believe. This is an high praise of
the word of GOD, and of the ministry thereof, whereas men are necessarily
bound to it, so that they ought not to think that there is any other mean, to
avoid this pestilence and destruction. But what does Moises and the Prophets
teach? these two things specially. First, they show the promised sede of the
woman, that should break the serpents head, that is, should deprive and
strippe the devil of all his power, and make good the damage taken in
paradise. Unto this seed, that he is the son of GOD, The doctrine of Moises
and the Prophettes.
and brings divine power and righteousness to us in the earth, both Moises
and the Prophets are wholly applied, and of this they teach, and command,
that when this comes, and the Gospel is preached, that men should hear, and
give credit there to. Gene. iii.
He that after this sort hears Moises and the Prophets, first of all he
will despeire of his own works and power, and will trust only in this seed,
that it only is the blessed seed, and that it does restore to us that are
accursed, the blessyng. Gene. xxii.
So then faith in Christ Jesus is the only and true way, whereby we may be
delivered from sin and death, and get salvation.

Faith.
This savior with his comfort, was not regarded of the rich man. He took his
wealth end felicity, to be a sure token of his own righteousness. Temporal
prosperity is no sure token of Gods favor.
For as men are wont to gather by adversity that GOD is angry with them: so
like wise when they are in prosperity, they take it for a token of Gods
favor, whereas yet temporal blessyng is of no great weight. And commonly it
chances that the ungodly are more fortunate then the Godly. But if thou
can hear him, that give thee good council, beware thou trust not in thy
riches, but trust only in him, of whom Moises and the Prophettes speak, or
else thou shall have none other end then had the rich manne, which had Moises
and the Prophettes, and yet believed not.

Good works
The second thing that Moises and the Prophettes teach is this: that
forasmuch as al trust of righteousness and of salvation, consists in the
promised seed, we show obedience to GOD, and do that he bids, and flee
that he forbids. For that is as much as to fear GOD, and to keep his
commandments. But he that had rather obey his own lusts then Gods law,
he can not glory in this, that he is the soonne of GOD, and cares for GOD,
but rather he can never be without this care, wherein he fears, least GOD
should come suddenly, and judge him among the damned. So that these two
things must needs be joined together, that is, faith and obedience toward
GOD. Faith is required, to deliver us from our sins, Faith and obedience
toward God is required of every christian.
and to make us the children of GOD. Obedience or Charity and her works are
also required, that we might show such obedience, as belongs to children,
and that we provoke not GOD to wrath by our sins, and that we have a good
conscience, which they can not have, that continewe still in open sin
without repentance. And finally, fear GOD, and keep his commandments,
and yet trust not in that righteousness before GOD. But only trust in Jesus
Christ: then shalt thou be out of all peril. For such faith only is able
to prevail against sin and death. And for as much as GOD himself has
commanded obedience, he does allow it, although it be imperfect. For that is
not alone by it self, but is joined with faith, by the which we are pardoned
of that, that is lackyng in obedience.

And so Moises and the Prophettes are to be heard, that we may learn thereby
faith in Christ, and true obedience. This did not the rich manne: wherefore
he is now punished with everlasting damnacion, and so are all they, which
hear Moises and the Prophettes, and yet obey not their word. But they that
hear and believe, that is, believe in Christ, and know that GOD is merciful
unto us for his sake, and imputes not our sins unto us* and that he will
give us salvation, and after that fear GOD, and obey not the devil and the
flesh, but look to GOD and his will: they are those that belong to Lazarus in
the bosom of Abraham, and shall be saved with Lazarus for ever. The which
thing GOD grant us for his sons sake Jesus Christ, through the holy ghost.
Amen.

The.ij. Sondaie after Trinity Sondaie. The Gospel. Luke. xiiii.
A Certain man ordained a great supper, and badde many, and sent his servant
at supper time, to say to them that were bidden: Come, for all things are now
ready. And they all at ones, began to make excuse. The first said unto him: I
have boughte a Farm, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me
excused. And an other said: I have bought five yoke of ^xen, and I go to
prove them, I pray thee have me excused. And an other said: I have married a
wife, and therefore I can not come. And the servant returned, and brought
his master word again thereof. Then was the good man of the house
displeased, and said unto his servant: Go out quickly into the streates and
quarters of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and feeble, and the haulte
and blind. And the servant said: Lord, it is done as thou have commanded,
and yet there is room. And the lord said unto the servant: Go out into
the high ways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be
filled. For I say unto you, that none of these men which were bidden, shall
taste of my supper.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis Gospel or parable takes occasion, of the miracle, Luke. xiiii.
when Christ healed the man that was sick of the dropsy in the Pharisees
house. For the Euangeliste says, that they watched to trap Christ. Wherefore
Christ gives sharp sentence against them, when he rebukes them of their
ambition and pride, in that they did strive who should sit in the chief room,
until at last he begins to reprove his host, tellyng him that he should
not call to his feast the rich and wealthy, that can recompense him, but the
poor, which should recompense him in the life to come. And after these words
one of the geastes stepped forth, willing to declare his devotion, and says:
Blessed is he that eats bread in the kingdom of GOD: As though he greatly
regarded GOD and his kingdom. But Christ perceives the hypocrisy, and
puts forth a plain description thereof, she wyng what manner of devotion it
was, that this man and such other have, and that they regard neither GOD,
neither the kingdom of heaven. Thou, says he, show outwardly, that thou
haste a great desire of that, that is to come. But if a man should say as
it is: Thou art of that sort of geastes, which are bidden to a feast with
great love and gentleness, but they for their business and goods can not
come. That man is specially touched with this taunte, which stepped out of all
that sort, to declare his devotion. As though he should say: Thou say,
that he is happy that eats bread in the kingdom of heaven, but if thou
would mark what thou say, thou should perceive that thou art one of
that sort, which will not come when they are called. This saying is grievous
and heinous, if a man consider it well. Math. iii.
For Christ was now in hand with the most wicked and hurtful generacio^ of
adders, which satte down with him at the table, not to learn, but to mark
if they could take him by any means in a trippe. And here is the beginning of
the parable. That there was a certain manne that made a great supper, and
sent his servants to bid geastes, which excusing them selves, refused to
come unto the supper. The first said, that he had bought a Farm, and that he
must needs go see it. An other said, that he had bought five yoke of oxen.
An other said, that he had married a wife, so that the master of that Supper
was despised, and laughed to scorn. In so much that the master being greatly
moved for their unworthy behauior, provided that the lame, blind, and
beggars. etc. should be brought and constrained too come to the Supper. And as
concerning the other, he says on this wise: They shall not taste of my supper.
This gospel makes very grievously against the Jews and Gentiles. Now will we
prosecute the parable in order.

Who made this supper.
The manne that made this Supper, is GOD, which is a sumptuous and a rich
feast maker, and has after his riches and majesty prepared a Supper, which
is called great, not so much for the respect of the maker thereof, which is
GOD (albeit it might be worthelie called a great Supper, for that cause only)
but because the meat it self also is magnificent and great, that is, the
gospel, This supper is the Gospel
yea Christ himself, which is in the Gospel set before us to feed on,
that he for our sins through his death has made satisfaction, and has
delivered us from eternal death, from hell, from the wrath of God, and
damnacion. This doctrine as concerning Christ, is the great supper, to the
which he calls his geastes, that he may sanctify them by his Baptism, and
comfort and confirm them by the Sacrament of his body and blood, so that
nothing at all is lackyng, that is requisite and necessary to the greatness,
magnifice^ce and plentifulnes thereof, and for the gorgious and gentle
intertainemente of the geastes: so that for this cause it may well be called
great, even for the sumptuousness and the delicates, which are so dressed
and provided, that no man can sufficiently express it with tongue, nor think
it with heart. For the meat and drink thereof is eternal: after the which
there follows neither hunger nor thirste, but it so satisfies them, and
quenches their thirste, that a continual joy ensues. And this supper is not
only enough for one man, Why it is called a great supper.
but it is sufficient for all the world, if it were much bigger and larger.
For the Gospel says this: he that believes in Christ, that for our sake he
was made man, and borne of the virgin Marie, crucified for our sins, and
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of GOD the father. etc. he
that believes so, does live for ever. Where as it is far other wise with
man's meat. For when hounger is this day put away, yet to morrow, it will
return again. But this meat is everlasting, and is never consumed. And by
this does he declare to the hypocrites that were present, that this supper was
of an other sort, then that, that was set before them. And yet are they of
such malice and wickedness, that although they prate much thereof: yet they
proudely despise, GOD, and his bountifulnes, everlasting life and salvation,
and in the mean season set much more by other things. It follows in the
text.

And he called many. These many that were called are the Jews, and all the
people of Israel, Who are the geastes.
which from Abraham's time, were specially called by the Prophettes. For the
seed was promised to the patriarch Abraham, by the which this blessyng should
be gotten, and so this Supper was first showed unto him, as to the chief and
father of this thing. After that the Prophettes entreated more largely thereof,
Gene. xxii.xxvi. and xxviii.
and brought the people to this poinct, that in the will and diligence of GOD,
nothing could be lackyng, but that they were sufficiently called. Wherefore
Paul in his Epistles always puts the Jews before. Roma. i.
To the Jews first, and to the Grecians says he. And when it was time to
come to the feast, that is, when that time was come, that Christ should be
borne, dye, and rise again from the dead: Who were the servants.
the servants went forth, Ihon the Baptiste, the Apostles, and said to the
people of Israel that were bidden. Hitherto has there been calling to the
supper, but now is the supper set on the table. Your Messiah is borne and dead,
and is risen again. Wherefore come in season, that ye may receive part of
this gorgious supper, that is, that ye may receive the blessyng promised, and
be delivered from the curse and damnacion, and obtain health and salvation.
This message was specially showed to the chief of the people, which had the
spiritual and civil administracion. But how did they take this message?

And they began all to make their excuse. In this are the geastes that were
present reproved, and specially, that masterlike fellow, which before Christ
had craked of the kingdom of God, and the meat thereof: Blessed is he that
eats bread in the kingdom of GOD. Christ does interpret to this man his
saying: If thou, says he, carest for this, how happy thou art, this will I
say unto thee: the supper is now set on the table: Iho^ the Baptiste is come. I
and my Apostles do call you to supper. But ye do not only refuse to come,
but also imagine excuses, why ye come not, so that by this means your sin is
double. Ye despise the Gospel, and can show no cause why ye should so do,
fearyng least ye should lose your opinion of holiness, righteousness, and
wisdom. And herein ye sin specially, and by frowardness pass all your
other sins. It were to much not to give credence to Gods word. But when
contempt is joined thereto, yea and wickedness compted righteousness, that
truly passes all sins. And the Papists in this follow the example of the
Jews. The stubb^^nes of the Jews and Papists against the Gospel.
Yet do they still stubburnly defend their doings, as touching the one kind
of the Lords supper, and their vowed chastity, with all other abhominacions.
Yea they condemn us also, punish us, and banishe us, because we will not
consent to their abhominacions, But let them have their own will.
Peradventure they will make a rod for their own tail. This was also the
excuse of the Jews: we can not receive this doctrine, because it is against
the priesthode and law, which GOD gave us by Moises. We must see to the
preservation of our country. So the first lays for his excuse his Farm, the
second his Oxen, and both of them think their excuse lawful. The third is
more proud for his new married wife, and therefore he despises the supper.
These three things do contain the descripcio^ of that kingdom of GOD, and
of the bread, whereof that maisterlike fellow and hypocrite made mention. For
Christ take the pain to tell him and all mankind, that they seem outwardly to
have a great desire of the kingdom of God, and of this eternal bread: and
yet they think far otherwise of godliness, then they show openly. For they
know only this kingdom of GOD, which consists in corporal blessings.
But when they are called to the supper of eternal blessings, they regard not,
this kingdom of God and bread. Psalm. xviii.
The Psalm calls them strange children, which think that godliness is
only gains and vauntage. All these things might be described by them selves,
but because the parable belongs to the Jews, and to the hypocritical kind,
we will now show the meaning of the Farm, the Oxen, and of the wife.

First the Jews lay for their excuse Moises law, and all the ceremonies.
For when the Apostles did teach, that after that there should be no more need
of the temple, nor of the law, The Farm what it signifies.
because the great high priest Jesus Christ, was reveled now out of the tribe
of Judah: and that they should hope for salvation only by him and his
Sacrifice: they could not brook this doctrine, but decreed rather to forgo
Christ, then the law. And hereof it chances, that yet they look for the
coming of their Messiah, and trust that he will restore to them all again,
that is, both the priesthode, and kingdom, The error of the Jews.
as it was in Dauides time, and that he will give them store and plenty of
all things. That does Christ here reprove by the buiyng of the Farm, when
he says: I will go see the Farm that I have bought, that is, we Priests
do labor, and go to Harueste, that is, we govern the people (as Christ
call all teachers, workmen, Math. ix.
that sow the Gospel) and we must care for our priesthode. Wherefore when the
Apostles doctrine was contrary to theirs: they condemned it as false, and so
this supper could not be allowed of them, and yet they thought in their own
judgment, that they had a just excuse.

So do the second also bring their excuse (which were in the civil
governance) by the Oxen. Oxen, what they signifies
For oxen does signify the governors of the people. Many calves have
compassed me, and many oxen, has besieged me says David. Psalm. xxii
To us (say they) is the kingdom and politic order committed, and we must
not depart from it. And if we follow this doctrine, we shall put all things
in a hasarde. Wherefore these teachers must be rid out of the way.

The third say: the Gospel is a doctrine, that forbids coueteousnesse, A
wife, what it signifies.
and commands all men to cast their head, life, goods and money into
peril for Christ's sake: wherefore we will not come: we will possess our
house and family without all danger. To marry a wife, what it is.
etc. For here to marie a wife does not signify dishonestie, but to do all
things, which belong to an householder, as when means is found to increase
the goods, and when the famelie and the advancement thereof is procured,
whether it be done with honesty or dishonestie. For the Jews thought here
upon that, if they fulfilled the righteousness of the law, they should have the
blessyng that Moises promised them, that is, the blessyng of corporal things,
of cattle, of gold, of wives, Psalm. cxiiiii.
of children. Wherefore they looked only for those things, that their store
house might be full thereof, and flowyng over out of this into that. And thereby
they thought them self rightuous, and for that cause to be blessed of GOD.

Why the Papists are so loath to receive the Gospel.
So do our Papists also excuse them selves. They say, that our doctrine is
true, but yet for all that, they must not depart and swerve from the holy
church, least there should rise a sedicion and scisme. Yea they the^ selves
also do fear, that if they should receive this doctrine, that their own
church and power should decaie and perish. Whereas nevertheless only the
Gospel makes the true church of GOD, and does repress all unjust power
and sedicion. Furdermore, couetuousnes is the cause and impedimente, that they
receive not the Gospel, for because they see that the Gospel is defended with
a very simple guard, that is, with poverty and persecution. But what will be
the end of this? Such as was of the Jews. Behold, and beware.
They defended their law, priesthode, kingdom and riches, so long and so
stubburnely, until at last they were all overthrown and lost all, so that
now they live among strangers, as banished persons, and sure of nothing, and
can not come to the fellowship of this supper. For the Lord purposes now, to
bid other geastes, and because he is despised of them, he despises them also,
as it follows.

The good man of the house was displeased, and said to his servant: Go out
quickly into the streates and lanes of the city etc. As though he should
say: if ye set so much by your Farms, Oxen, wives, that ye care not for my
supper, that is, if ye hold so fast the priesthod, the kingdom, and the
richesse, that ye put a side me and my Gospel: this I tell you before, that ye
shall loose all together. And I in the mean season, will provide me other
geastes. Wherefore thou servant get thee out into the streates and lanes of
the city, and bring hither the same, the poor, the maimed and weak. And so
it chances to the Jews. For when the princes, priests, and all the chief
amongst the people, despised the Gospel for the causes above rehearsed, GOD
received the humbe fishers, which is a poor and a despised sort. As Paul
says to the Corinthians. i. Cor. i.
Look brethren on your vocacion, how GOD has not chosen many wise men after
the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many of high degree, but he has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confou^de the wise. The weak has GOD chosen
to confound the strong. The obscure of the world has GOD chosen and the
abiectes, and those that are of no reputacion, to bring to naught those
things, that are of reputacion. etc. And according to this sentence,
whatsoever thing in this people had the preeminence in holiness, wisdom,
power, or riches, it is rejected, because they despised the Gospel. Contrary
wise Christ received the simple, and obscure, as Peter, Andrewe, Simon, and
Bartholomewe. etc. which were Fishers and very poor men. Whom no man
thought worthy to execute the smallest offices for the chief Princes and
Priests. For they were the outcastes, and as Esai says, the dragges of the
most excellent wine. So that the excellentest of the people, the priests, the
rich heads, the nobles, the glorious, were cast away for their unbelief,
even as a tun of good wine, where remains only the dregs, whom Christ
here does call the poor, the weak and the blind. Those does Christ here
poinct to the kingdom of God, and not the Pharasei and his, which does feign
that they set greatly by the kingdom of GOD and the bread thereof. But Christ
does declare, what such hypocrites do mean: ye would, says he, have
Farms and Oxen. But as for this supper of the kingdom of GOD ye care not.
Wherefore this supper belongs only to the poor. As it is said, the poor
receive the joyful tidings of the Gospel. Math. xi.
For the rulers, the holy, and the wise despise this Supper, and be unworthy
thereof. He could not have spoken more geuously against the Jews, and
specially against this man, that craked of the bread of the kingdom of
heaven, and yet understood no more of this kingdom, then consists in
Farms, Oxen, and other present things of this life, that their region might
not be deprived of the priesthod and kingdom, whatsoever becomes of Christ
and his Gospel. For thus thought he, that he had no need of Christ, to attain
thereby the kingdom of GOD. But that GOD would say to him and to all the
Jews: Come ye Jews, and high priests, ye holy men, ye princes, ye excellent
citezens: for you is the bread and supper prepared. But (says he) thus goes
the matter: ye are called, but ye do not regard. Ye excuse your selves, and
affirm that your excuses be lawful. Wherefore I reject and refuse you, and
receive the vile multitude, as the lame, the weak, the blind, the halte, the
poor. etc.

And thus far this Gospel belongs to the Jews. For he speaks of the
lame and weak, that are in the streates and lanes of the city, and he calls
the people of the Jews a city, Why the Jews are resembled to a city.
because that people was well ordered and ruled. For they had the law,
ceremonies, rites, temple, priests, kings, and all things ordained of God,
and written by Moises. Now he sends his servants in to the high ways, and
commands them to bring geastes, wheresoever they may be had, yea the
beggars that sit by the hedges. etc.

And the Lord said unto his servant: Go out into the high ways, and unto
the hedges, and constrain them to come in, that my house may be full. The
calling of the Gentiles.
These that lie at the hedges are we Gentiles, which dwell in no city, which
have had no form of service, but have been Idolatours, and knew neither our
selves, neither God. Wherefore all that we have, may well be called, an open
field, where all things lie open to the devil at his own will. Go thither,
says he, and constrain them to come in. For this is always the frowardnes
of the world to resist the Gospel, and not to brook the doctrine thereof. Yet
never the less, this feast maker would have his supper often to be used. For
he bestows all this cost and charges, that he may not lack men to be
merry, and make good chere with him, although he should be feign to raise
them out of stones. And this is the very cause, that GOD made the world so
large and wide, Why God spares the world.
whereas yet now of late, he has had sufficient cause for man's sin, to
make both it and mankind more less and narowe. But he does not so, because
as yet he has not geastes sufficient to furnishe his supper. Wherefore, whereas
his servants brings the Gospel to us also, this is a token to us that are
Baptized and believe, that we pertain also to this supper. For we are those
iolie fellows liyng by the hedges that is to say, blind, poor, lame, and
Gentiles most desperate.

Of compellyng to come unto the supper.
But how does GOD constrain us, whereas there is nothing done of compulsion,
in all his service allowed? After this sort he does compel: he causes the
word to be preached unto us: he that believes and is Baptized, shall be
saved, he that believes not, shall be condemned. Whereby he sets before us,
both heaven and hell, death and life, wrath and mercy. Math. vxi. Ephe. ii.
Psalm. li.
For first of all he declares unto us our sin, and our great corruption of
nature, that we may fear, when we hear that we are borne the children of
wrath, in the kingdom of the devil. And this is in deed compulsion and
constrainyng, when there is great fear for the wrath of GOD, and thereby we
are driven to call for help. And when that is so brought to pass, by the
preaching of the Gospel, that the hearts dread, then must we proceade in
doctrine, Note well.
that yet the sinners fall not to desperation for their sin, although they
have never so just cause to despair. But let them rather follow this council
of GOD, that because they are Baptized, let them hear the Gospel, that
preaches of Jesus Christ, that he died for us, and made satisfaction for our
sins on the cross by his death. If thou believe this, thou nedest not fear
the wrath of GOD, and death everlasting, And so thou as a true geaste, have a
room in this magnificent and glorious supper, and art thereby fed, made
fat, and in good likyng.

And so to compel, Of the manner of compellyng, which the Pope uses.
is to make a man afraied for sin, and not to compel, as the Pope does,
with curssyng, by book, bell, and candell. He does not cause any true fear
in the conscience. For he teaches not truly what is sin. But he magnifieth
his own trifles, and cursseth him that will not keep his Ceremonies, and
men's traditions. But the Gospel opens sin, and the wrath of GOD from
heaven, that all we, none excepted, do live in sin, and are ungodly. This
thing does GOD command to be showed unto us by the Gospel, Roma. i.
when he says to the Apostles. Go and preach repentance. But repentance can
not be preached, but by the openyng of the wrath of GOD, Luke xxiiii.
against all men, because they are full of unbelief, contempt of GOD, and other
sins. This wrath ought to terrify them, and to make their conscience quake
for fear, that they may compel them selves and say: O Lord what must I
do, to avoid this misery (Then shall it be said to him, sit down in the
supper and eat. For there are many tables full of meat, and yet void of
geastes. Thou art christened, therefore believe in Jesus Christ, that he has
satisfied for thee. Thou have none other remedy against this destruction, then
to be Baptized and to believe. For then shall wrath be ended, and great
plenty of grace, mercy, and remission of sin sent down from heaven unto
thee, to thy great joy and sing^ler comfort.

What it is to compel.
Wherefore, to compel is nothing else, then to preach repentance, and
remission of sin: To show the wrath of GOD upon sinners, and mercy upon
them that believe. The wrath and repentance, causes a great thrist and
desire of grace. And this is the true way to this supper. And now there is one
church made, The beleuyng Jews and Gentiles are one church.
both of the Jews and Gentiles, and all are generally called poor, nedie,
lame, and weak. For after the fear of the conscience, they gladly embrace the
Gospel, and desire mercy. But they that refuse to do this, be they never so
prudent and wise, have this sentence given against them: They shall not taste
of my Supper* that is, the wrath of GOD shall remain upon them, and they
shall be damned for their unbelief. For GOD (as I said before) has no
respect, how rich, how wise, how holy they be. Wherefore be they never so
careless, be they never so sure of them selves: yet shall they prove by
experience, that this sentence is not vainly spoken, where Christ here
concludes: They shall not taste of my supper. But we that receive it, and
fear for our sins, and do not despise the grace of GOD, which is offered
unto us in the Gospel for Christ's sake, we shall obtain for wrath, grace,
for sin, eternal righteousness, and for eternal death, eternal life.

This sore Judgment is now a days (as it appears) most evident among the
Jews and Turks, which have no saueryng of the Gospel, yea, The Jews,
Turks and Papists abhor this supper.
rather they so much abhor it, that they can not find in their hearts so
much, as to see it, or hear it. It chances also likewise, with the
Papisticall high priests and bishops, which are so little filled with this
Supper that they scarslie taste it, or smell it. But we, which by the peculiar
grace of GOD, are set in the middle of the light of this Gospel, are filled,
and well fed, and are become lusty and strong, and are glad to be at this
supper. The Lord grant us to continewe therein unto the end. Amen. Amen.

Christ's intent therefore in this parable, is to exhort us, that we have the
Gospel in high estimacion, and that we join not our selves to them, which
have high stomachs, by reason of their prudence, wisdom, power, and
holiness. For this sentence is given, as touching their castyng away and
damnacio^ of them, that they shall not taste this supper. As they were cast
away in the people of the Jews, and only the vnpure dragges were reserved: so
shall it chance to us also, if we set more by Farms, Oxen, and wives, that
is, by our spiritual and civil dignities, and temporal possessions, then we
do by the Gospel. He speaks a grievous and a very terrible thing, with
plain and simple words: They shall not taste of my Supper. As though he
should say: my supper is not to be despised, for it is of an higher price then
their farms be, despise they it now never so much, and although they set more
by their Farms, Oxen, and wives, then they do by it. There shall come a time,
when they must depart from all things, from Farm, from Ox, and from wives,
so that they would feign then taste of my Supper. But then shall it be said
unto them: Math. vii.
I know ye not. Now I lack no geastes. Let your Farms, Oxen, and wives
comfort you. Grievous threatninges against the despisers of this supper.
These shall give you a better Supper, for as much as ye despised my supper,
and cared not for it. There was great provision and cost made in this supper,
but althynges seemed vile unto you. If there be more good fare and delicates in
yours, go to it a Gods name: spare not, I will not let you, only this I
say unto you, ye shall have no part of my Supper.

These things shall be dreadful in that day, when GOD shall with plain
words call his supper, life everlasting, and their Farms and Oxen, eternal
fire, and shall not change his sentence any thing, but that they shall never
taste of this supper, that is, they shall be void of all hope of salvation.
Wherefore these words are not lightly to be esteemed, which declare the
everlasting wrath of the householder. For this is the property of great men,
when they are earnestly moved, they speak not many words, but that that they
speak, is ponderous and weighty. For they think more grievously inwardly,
then they speak outwardly. And how much more do these brief words
signify, the unspeakable wrath of GOD, which no man can pacify? Yet we
esteem them as little, as though a gester or skoffer, whom we might worthily
despise, had spoken them, or as though GOD had spoken these thing in sport.
Neither do we hear or se, that, as the words be in the text, GOD is angry
with us, and that they proceade of a great anger and wrath, and that he is
neither fool nor child, but the Lord and GOD above all, before whom all
things do tremble and quake, Psalm. cxiiii.
and as the scripture says, the mountains with their foundatio^s and the
seas and floodes, fly from the face of GOD. Only man is so stiff necked,
that he can not fear, but rather despise GOD and mock him.

But we preachers are excused. For we exhort you with all diligence, that ye
regard and set more by this supper, then all riches and goods. Wherefore at
that day, all the world shall bear us record and confess, that we are
blameless. For we set forth this doctrine so earnestly and studiously, that
our very adversaries do hear it, and condemn it for heresy. And we are not
much disconte^t that they so do. For hereby do they confess that they have
heard, read and seen, that we have dooen our message.

But if we have not hold our peace, but have taught earnestly and diligently,
yea and preached so much, that our adversaries say, we are to vehement: let
this man be our judge, which commanded us so to do. And let him defend
them, and condemn us. We do not refuse to be judged, which have the true GOD,
the true Christ: and the true Church on our part. This matter shall be plain,
when all hid things shall be made open. In the mean season let us pray
to GOD, that he will preserve and keep us steadfast, in such doctrine and
faith through the holy ghost. And doubtless we shall be welcome to this
supper. The which thing our heavenly father grant us for Jesus Christ's sake,
through the holy ghost. Amen.

The.iij. Sondaie after Trinity Sondaie. The Gospel. Luke. xv.
THen resorted unto him, all the Publicanes and sinners for to hear him. And
the Phariseis, and Scribes murmured, saying: He receives sinners, and eats
with them. But he put forth this parable unto them, saying: What manne among
you, having a hundred Sheep (if he lose one of them) does not leave ninety
and nine in the wilderness, and goes after that which is lost, until he
find it? And when he has found it, he lays it on his shulders with joy.
And as soon as he comes home, he calls together his lovers and neighbors,
saying unto them: Rejoice with me, for I have found my Sheep which was lost.
I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven, over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, which need no
repentance.

Either what woman (having ten grotes i^ she lose one) does not light a
candle, and swepe the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when
she has found it, she calls her lovers and her neighbors together, saying:
Rejoice with me, for I have found the grote which I lost. Likewise I say
unto you, shall there be joy in the presence of the Aungelles of God, over one
sinner that repents.

THE EXPOSITION.
OF all the Gospelles that are read through the year, A Gospel of singular
great comfort.
this is the most comfortable: In the which Christ teaches of his office,
as of a Shepherd, how he makes inquisition for sinners, and restores them,
that they may not be plucte in pieces of the Wolffe, that is of the Devil.
And this was the occasion of this sermon of Christ. When all kind of sinners
and Publicans drew nigh unto Christ, to hear his word: the Scribes and
Phariseis seeing that, laid it to Christ's charge as a crime, that he used the
company of this kind of men, with whom GOD and they that are beloved of GOD,
could have nothing to do: and that by this, he did declare, that he was far
unlike GOD. Christ answers, and alleges a just cause of his doing, that
is, that he does nothing otherwise, then the common manner of men is, yea, and
that in inferior matters, when their chief care at all times, is to recover
that is lost or in danger, that hereby he might reprove the intolerable
frowardnes and arrogance of the Phariseis, whereas they give judgment so
vnshame-fastly of a matter that they understand not.

And that the matter may be the better perceived: the question is this,
whether there is any place for sinners in the kingdom of GOD? For if there be
not, Christ's doing was worthily reproved, that whereas he professes himself
to be the son of GOD, yet he companieth with them that are not of the
kingdom of GOD. The Phariseis and Scribes are deceived, in iudgyng Christ's
doing, because they knew not truly, what is the kingdom of GOD, and yet they
thought them selves most perfect thereof. This is the cause of their false
judgment. The judgment of the law concerning sinners.
They knew Moises and the Prophets, by continual readyng and study, but
after this understanding, that the works of the law must be done, and that
he that does them, is now allowed as rightuous before GOD, but he that does
them not, is banished as an outlawe from GOD. And after this understanding,
they judge of Christ's doing in this place, because that GOD by his law, has
put a plain determinacio^ of his kingdom, out of the which sinners are
excluded as adversaries, and that Gods kingdom ought to be taken no otherwise,
then GOD determine it himself, and that sinners are not to be admitted, nor
received among such as are of GOD.

And this is the very judgment of reason also. For as soon as there rises
any sense of sin, naturally there is had respect unto the wrath of God, The
Judgment of reason concerning sinners.
which is always dread and looked for in sin. For they judge that he can
have no hope in the merciful God, which stireth him to wroth with their
sins. As Adam and Eve may be an example: Gene. iii.
as soon as they had transgressed the precept, they could not abide their own
conscience, they seek to be hid* and dare not come in sight. And young children
also declare this to be true, when they are in any fault, they seek corners.
For this is the nature of sin, to make the heart afraied, Sin, and the
nature thereof.
because it does always fear wroth and punishemente. Contrary wise when
the conscience is pure and fautlesse, it trusts well in it self, although
other men's judgments be never so much against them. Like as all reason
therefore in sin, does naturally fly from God, and for her upright and
honest behavior, is wont to have confidence before God: So the Phariseis in in
comparison of them selves, whom they thought just, exclude sinners. They did
see, that they were direct against the law of God in their doings, and
therefore they also pronounced plainly, that they ought to have no place in the
kingdom of God. They suspect Christ also, that he does not after Gods will,
because he had to do with such.

But consider thou this with thy self, Before God and the law all men are
sinners.
to what case the matter will come, if sinners should be excluded from God and
his kingdom, as the Phariseis think? For although they suppose, that there is
a kind of men that lives without sin, yet GOD and the law knows none
such. For although every manne commits not adultery, slaughter and theft,
yet before God no man is without sin, yea, and those sins are the more
grievous, if they fall in a man that has wisdom and strength to resist
them. If then the Phariseis judgment be true, that GOD does turn away from
sinners, it makes as much against them selves, as against other. For by the
law, are not only reproved the sins of the Publica^s and of sinners, but
also their own and all others. Then will it follow, that no men have place in
the kingdom of God. So that the Phariseis are proceeded so far by ignorance,
that as they are fore against other, so give they a most grievous sentence
against them selves. But all their oversight rises here of, because they know
not why Gods law was given, neither what corruption of sin there is in all
men. And as in other things, one error brings an other, so here also of the
kingdom of God, do these hypocrites know nothing, which must needs be set
up by Gods grace and goodness.

But Christ groundyng his reason on true principles, opens the mystery of
the Gospel, unknown to natural wit, and to all that follow the
righteousness of the law: that is, that God hates not sinners, nor wills
their death, and that he declares this his will in Christ: whom he sent into
the world, to bring home again to their foldes, sheep that straye from their
flocks, and that all his intent has only respect to the fulfillyng of the
Gospel, Iere. 18.33. Esaie. lxi. Luke. iiii.
that the lost and straies may chiefly be regarded, and that all the will of
God might hereby be declared, and the Gospel opened to the poor.

This is plainly an other kind of doctrine, then the doctrine of the law and
Phariseis, which takes not here seed and root in our nature, but is brought
from heaven by the son of God: as says Ihon. No man has seen God at any
time, Ihon. i.
the only begotten soonne, which is in the bosom of the father, shows him
forth. For no man knows that will of God, that he is not angry with sinners
nor damneth them for their sins, but receives them rather to his grace and
saves them: but all know the contrary. Wherefore the fear of the wroth of
GOD is naturally joined with sin. But Christ teaches us here by his
Gospel, Luke. xv.
that GOD is otherwise minded toward sinners, and that he is not angry, but
merciful, and that the Angels in heaven rejoice, when sinners repent and
amend. This doctrine must be the better marked, because it seems contrary to
our reason, that we by it may confirm our conscience. For he that in such
temptation, follows reason and judgment, goes hedlong to the Devil, and
there is no remedy against desperation. Wherefore this goes the matter, we
must agree surely with Christ, contrary to reason and al other things, that
although we are sinners, Why God refuses not sinners.
yet that by Christ we must be revoked and called again, as sheep going a
straye, unto the place of our salvation. As Christ sets forth a plain
parable in this place, to the declaracion of his most excellent office.

In diverse other places does the Gospel declare, why God casts not away
sinners, Ihon. iii.
as in the third of Ihon, that GOD is such, that hates not the world, but
loves it, so that he gives his only begotten soonne, for the recoueryng
thereof, that the world may have confidence for these sacrifices sake, and
may not despeire for their sin. For although God might have helped us
otherwise, yet he purposed to do it by his soonne, so that we should have no
cause to doubt of his deliueryng and redemption. For this is most true, Note
well.
that God is more pacified by the death of his son, then offended by our
sins.

Furdermore, there is an other cause set forth by Christ, why God casts not
away sinners. For he shows that sinners are a portion of Gods substance,
which fell from him, and yet God has such respect to the matter, that he
regards not the greatest things that he has, until that that is lost be
recovered. And all this way of recoueryng is set up by Christ, as he
himself says in this place. Wherefore it ought to seem no marvel, if he make
a search for sinners, that straye from Gods household, to bring them home
again. For he is sent for this very cause to bring home sinners again, and if
he should do otherwise, as the Phariseis appoinct him, he could not execute
Gods commandment.

The tender affection of Christ toward sinners
But it is very comfortable to see the affection of Christ toward sinners,
which is described in the tipe and figure of this careful and studious
shepherd, whereas he follows after the straye sheep, taking no care in the
mean season of the rest, and when he finds her, he beats her not, but
handles her ge^tly, as though she were blameless. He takes her on his
shoulders, and at his return he makes joyful gratulacions with his friends.
All which declares the great bounteousnesse and love of Christ toward man,
which if it should be well commended and set forth, had need of a long
sermon. The declaracion of this love, rests chiefly in him that is lost,
weak, and in peril, as, men do testify in such things that they love.
Love.
Love is uncertain, when there is any sure trust of advantage. But when there
is danger, and yet there is more care for that that is in danger, then for
all that is safe: this is natural and true love. Yet this may not be
compared with the shadow of the great affection of Christ. He searches for
them, Of the marvelous love of Christ toward penitent sinners.
of who^ he was grievously hurt, as sheep going a stray, and as though they were
in peril without their own fault and when he finds them, he put them on his
shulders. What thing may a man invent, that is more comfortable and sweet?
Whereas he follows after the^ that are fugitives, and by their own fault
seek their own destruction, ioynyng them selves with the devil, that is Gods
adversary, and stoutly defendyng his part, and holdyng with Gods enemy the
Devil, against Gods kingdom. He pursues not after them (I say) as after
his hurtful enemies, but searches them out as miserable sheep that are in
peril, and endeavors wholly him self to recover them, before the Woulfe
oppresses them, that is, that they dye not in their sins. For this shepherd
does always cry after the sheep going a straye: I will not the death of a
sinner, Exe. xxxiii
but rather that he repent and live. Despair not of thy matters, because of
thy sin. Know that GOD is merciful in his son Jesus Christ, whom he has
sent unto thee as a shepherd, to bestow his life for thee, and to lay thee on
his shoulders, and to bring thee again to the fold of salvation.

And these things ought to be considered fully and perfectly, that we may
understand, how great love and care GOD has for the salvation of man, that
he can not abide to se him to be made a pray for the devil. He makes suit
for sinners, as for his own right. And least he should be repelled for sin,
as though he had no right, he appoint a shepherd, which has right to recover
sinners, as straye sheep. And when he sees that they are not able to return
again, he follows after them, and brings them again upon the shoulders
of his mercy. The law brings no man to salvation.
By the law of Moises, whereon the Phariseis ground their determinacio^ of
the kingdom of GOD, there could never be ordained such a recoueryng of the
lost. For the law does not only not entise unto it the strange sheep, but
also it drives her further of, with sharp and cruel words. For what can the
law prevail with a sinner by this saying: If thou be clean and without all
sin, thou may obtain a place in the kingdom of GOD, and not otherwise.
He knows truly the word of GOD, Christ only saves.
but he can not tell what to do. He is commanded, to ascend into heaven,
but he understands that there is no place for sinners in heaven. Wherefore
except there comes a shepeherd from heaven, unto these straiyng sheep, and
bears them on his shoulders again to the kingdom of GOD, there is no
doctrine beside, that shows the kingdom of GOD, neither that councelleth or
prevails any thing with them, that should come thereto, only this doctrine,
that commends and sets forth this shepherd, shows the ready way to it.
For it does not only declare that no man enters into heaven, except he
descended from thens, which is a deniyng of salvation unto sinners (for the
law is always against sinners, saying: thou desce^dedst not: therefore thou
shall not ascend) but it shows this also, that the son of man is come
down from heaven, and become the shepherd of the lost sheep, that they may
be borne into heaven upon his shoulders. They could never have come thither by
their own power. As Christ in Ihon says, Ihon. iii.
that the son of man should therefore be exalted, that all that believe in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. For this are sinners and
strange Sheep recovered, when the Shepherde is exalted on the Cross, that he
might bear them up into heaven on his shoulders, and make them partakers of
the kingdom of heaven, from whence he descended, that sinners might thither
ascend. Whereby appears what right GOD has, to challenge sinners into his
own family. The great error also of the Phariseis and Scribes, and of all
such, as measure the kingdom of GOD by the righteousness of works, is
declared. For GOD can not allow and comme^de them, that honor him only with
their lips, but he requires a true and a nigh heart, which can not be so,
except it be recovered by this shepherd. This shepherd, Esai. xxix. Math. xv.
when he brings him again on his shoulders, makes the heart full of hope,
confirmyng it with the holy ghost, so that now he may call boldly on GOD in
his kingdom, without distruste: he may earnestly embrace the hope of
salvation, and not doubt to bestow this present life, with all that he has,
for the life everlasting. Wherefore he so joins himself with his shepherd,
that he is only disioyned from him in that, that he is not yet delivered from
the body of sin. But yet while he lives in this corporal life, he
bestows himself wholly to that heavenly conversation. And in it now he
brings forth such works of the spirit, as no hypocrite, no Pharisie, no
Monk can bring. And yet always having in mind his first condition and state,
and after his recoueryng, he trusts only to the Shepherd and his shoulders
before God. He is glad to show him obedience, yet takes head that he compare
not this with Christ and his shoulders.

This is the kingdom of God described by Christ wherein is place for sinners,
and yet none can enter in thither but with true and earnest confession of their
sins. And yet so, that they be partakers of the shephearde, and of his
bringyng again to the flock. If thou should ask the Phariseis, Scribes,
Papists and Monks of the kingdom of God: they would answer: beware of the
company of sinners: do good works: fast: say the ordinary prayers: give
almose, to make satisfaction for thy sins. etc. but that a man should put
his only trust in the shoulders of this shepherd, they will confess that they
doubt thereof. Yea, they will compte it contrary to the kingdom of GOD, as the
Phariseis do in this place. And hitherto has Christ taken part against the
Phariseis and Hypocrites, In heaven also is a place for sinners, if they
repent and believe.
to defend this sentence as most true, that sinners have place in the
kingdom of GOD, and that Publicans and sinners are not to be excluded from
gods kingdom, and from his saints. For the governance and order of all his
kingdom, consists of mercy: and needs must we abide the loss of all ours,
and cast them away as things of naught, that our gains in Christ may be
co^plete and whole. Phil. iii.


But there are diverse sorts of sinners. For although Christ came to call all
sinners to repentance, yet all do not repent. They hear the word with their
ears, Diverse kinds of sinners
but they change nothing of their old conditions and manners: they give
themselves to their own sensuality and pleasure, and declare plainly by their
life and doings that they have no regard of eternal life. But what comes
thereof? Nothing else, but that although they be on Christ's shoulders, yet they
fall of again, and begin after that to stray with more peril then ever they
did before, until at the length, they are without recovering, caught in the
deuilles snare, so that they can never rid them selves out of coueteousnes,
lechery, and of ungodly opinions. What sinners shall have place in the
kingdom of God.
These sinners belong not to the kingdom of God, but they only, that after
they have heard the voice of the shepherd, do repent and mortify the works
of the flesh. For they perceive by the course of al things, that they, that
are in Christ Jesus, and trust in the shoulders of this shepherd, must not
walk after the flesh, Roma. viii. Gala. v.
but must kill and slay their concupiscences and works of the flesh. Such
sinners does Christ bear again unto the flock. He follows after the other
also, but they fly to far of, and tourneth away their ears from his
words, neither can he done them any good. Impenitent sinners.
For whilst they are so obstinate, they can not be delivered from their
straiyng, so that at the length they shall be torn and plucte in pieces of
the Wolves in wilderness.

Wherefore the comfort of the Gospel for sinners* ought not lightly to be
esteemed, because Christ their shepherd seeks them, and takes the^ up as
straye sheep. Furdermore, his doctrine also is necessary, to know what is our
duty to this shepherd, even to hear his voice, and to turn unto him, as
the history of the Publicans and sinners may be an example unto us, in that
they were converted at the word of Christ. What the word of god teaches.
This word teaches nothing else, but that GOD is merciful unto sinners, to
save them for Christ's sake, so that they do not harden their hearts, at the
voice of their shepherd, and delight with longer wanderyng and straiyng, but
that after they have heard the voice, they cast the^ selves on Christ's
shoulders, which has satisfied for their sins, and reconciled them to God
the father. And we can not without great sin (seeing that GOD has purchased
our deliverance so dearly) despise and set naught by it, but we must with
great and studious labor, worship and reverence his word, and show our
selves worthy of the company of saints. The word of God defends
against desperation.
Wherefore this word ought greatly and studiously to be regarded that we may
be defended and strongly armed against the devil and our own heart, least we
be in such an opinion of GOD, that he hates sinners. For such a sense and
felyng is in all men's minds. But the help of Gods word, is to be
preferred against this, in that that he is the shepherd, and does proclaim
his word openly in the world, to the intent, that the stray sheep may hear
it, and turn again unto him. Wherefore, if thou dooest knowledge this, that
thou art a straie sheep, which by sin art banished, far from the kingdom
of GOD, and despair not, but have respect to the word of Christ, as
touching the shepherd. For he is set forth for thy sake, and for all such as
are like thee, that thou may begin to repent, that thou may have trust
before GOD, through Christ, and walk worthy of God in his kingdom. Defer
not thy conversion to God.
Neither think, that thou haste a long respite, to take council of this
matter, when the voice of the shepherd comes unto thee, but turn thy self
forthwith unto him, and embrace him. Which thing if thou do, thou art saulfe,
and give the Angels a great cause of joy, which after that will be very
desirous of thy company, and will keep and defend thee against all peril.
Where as contrariwise, the unpenitent turn the Angels to mournyng, and
therefore are feign to be without their help and defense.

And in that that Christ is not content with one parable, but puts there
unto the second, We ought after the example of Christ to seek up the lost
sinners.
as concerning the woman that had lost a grote: he does it to the intent that
other should follow his example, and not utterly give up sinners, but hunt for
them, and bring them to repentance. For the first parable belongs only to
Christ our savior, The parable of the shepehearde belongs co christ. The
parable of the woman pertains to the congregation of christ.
which is only the true shepherde, that embraces straye sheep with true
salvation, where as he vestoweth his life for them, that they may be delivered
from destruction, and defended against the devil. The second parable of the
woman, pertains to the congregation, which is there in her ministracion and
office, that sinners might be called to repentance, and delivered from
eternal death and damnacion, and obtains everlasting salvation. She
rejoices also even as does the shepeherd, when she finds her grote: she
lights a ca^dell, even Gods word, and swepeth the house, that is, she
teaches of righteousness, and of comfort for Gods mercies sake in Christ,
before the judgment of God. And by this doctrine comes the lost grote to
light.

The virtue of gods word
And this is the true and glorious commendacion of Gods word, which only
has such virtue, that it takes a way sin, and all the infectio^ that came
thereof, as death, damnation, the devil, and hell, so that we are no more
sinners, and the enemies of GOD, but such, as of whom the Aungelles in heaven,
and the saints in earth rejoice. Wherefore we should worthily magnify this
word, and highly esteem the teachers thereof, to the end we might achiue and
get this great benefit thereby, that is, be delivered from this wanderyng and
deuilles danger, and so be saved for ever. The which thing the most
bountiful and loving shepherde of our souls, Ihon. x. i. Peter. ii.
our Lord Jesus Christ grant us, through the holy ghost. Amen.

The.iiij. Sondaie after Trinity Sondaie. The Gospel. Luke. vi.
BE ye merciful, as your father also is merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not
be judged. Condemn not and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive, and ye shall
be forgeuen. Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure, and pressed
down, and shaken together, and runnyng over shall men give into your
bosoms. For with the same measure that you mete withal, shall other men mete to
you again. And he put forth a similitude unto them. Can the blind lead the
blind? Do they not both fall into the diche? The disciple is not above his
master: every man shall be perfect, even as his master is. Why see thou a mote
in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
Either how can thou say to thy brother? Brother, let me pull out the mote
that is in thine eye, when thou see not the beam that is in thine own eye.
First thou hypocrite, cast out the beam out of thine own eye, then shall
thou se perfectly to pull out the mote that is in thy brothers eye.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel Christ teaches his disciples and us, A new life is required
o^ every true Christian.
what we should do one to an other. For after we believe and are become
christian men thereby, because we are sure that we are delivered from death,
sin, and all evil through Christ: now is it necessary to live after a new
sort, and that from henceforthe, we show our selves obedient unto him. This
new life does Christ comprise in one word, saying: Be ye merciful, as your
father is merciful. And all know this, what is mercy, What mercy is.
truly such an affection, which conceiueth a sorrow at the very heart, when
a man sees his neighbor troubled, either in body or soul, and is stirred by
his will to help him. Christ requires here such a mind of all men, not
that there should be such mercy, as is between light and lend persons. For
such mercy extends no farther, then amongst the fellows of that leudenes,
and tarieth no longer then they have power to do that leudnes. As experience
declares. A thief is not merciful to him that steals not, for if he were,
he would rob no man. But he is merciful only to him, that steals with
him, and this is the mercy of evil doers.

Math. v. Roma. xii.
But we that are christians must be merciful, even as our heavenly father is,
not only to our friends, but to all men, yea to them that hate us, to them
that offend us, and seems unworthy of our good will and benefit. This great
displeasure and anger of ours, which we declare by bitter and hateful
words, is to over come: as when we say, what shall I meddle with such a
knave? I am sore hurt of him. His slaunderyng tongue is not unknown to me.
What? Should I help him? No truly. And he were full of Magottes, I could not
find in my heart to do him good. And this is the lesson that our nature
teaches us, as touching lend mercy, which only has respect to our
companions and riotfelowes, but as for other, it abhors us utterly to show
any mercy.

But Christ seeks a remedy for this fault, when he requires us, Math. v.
to do good to our enemies, and to them that hurt us, Such mercy (says
he) is mete for a christian, as your father of heaven has. For without this ye
can not be his sons, nor my brethren, which have redeemed you, with my blood
from sin and death. Doubtless, ye have offended your heavenly father
manifold ways, you have broken his commandments in all poinctes. And God
has a just cause by your sin to say: The exceadyng great mercy of god
toward sinners.
should I give my son for such unthrifts? yea, rather let the^ die as they
have deserved. For they for swear them selves, they slander, they are given
to coueteousnes and to adultery: they leave no kind of wickedness undone, let
them go for me, and for their lewdness leudely perish as they deserve. This
may GOD (says Christ) lay against you, but he does not, yea, rather for
all the injuries ye do unto him, he has mercy upon you, and does you good,
giving you not only body and life, food, and family, wife and children, and
for all them liuelode, but also his own son, and life everlasting.

Such mercy also must we use. For what if one have hurt and offended thee,
what is that in respect that thou have offended GOD so often, and so grievously?
Wherefore, if Gods mercy be so great, that he gives his son for his
enemies, to deliver the^ from death and sin, by him, and also gives all
things beside, as life, body, soul, substance, yea, and that when he has
rather an occasion to take vengeance, to punish and to plague: Put this
before thee, for an example, that thou may say thus: Although this man has
hurt me grievously, and may seem worthy of a misfortune at my hand, yet will
I not revenge. For else my mercy should not be christian like, but like the
Gentiles. If he has done me wrong, perchance I have otherwise deserved it.
Now when he has need of my help, I will not requit evil for evil. For I se
that he has need of help, and that it is in my power to help him. For thus
deals my heavenly father with me. etc.

This is proved true in our Cornemongers.
It is evidently seen, how full of wickedness and wrong, the husband men and
the people of the country be. If they could sell the vilest thing they have,
for the most highest price, they would not fear to do it. The tounes men and
citezens also, has very corrupt manners, they scrape together substance by
right or by wrong, they care not how: They live riotuously, they deceive and
defraude as many as ever they can. This might well move other to stomach their
doing, and to deny them help, when they are in adversity. But a christian
has a precept contrary to it, which is, that he should not remember any
displeasure done unto him. What is this to me (says he) if they be wicked and
leude: A goodly similitude.
shall I give up therefore my purpose of well doing? Yea, I will do rather
after the manner of a good tree, from the which if a man pluck, beat, or
shake down fruicte, it brings out the more the next year with out pain. So
will I do. If I have done good for thee, and thou show thy self unkind,
and dooest me a shrewde turn for it, yet will I not hereby be compelled to
forsake well dooyng. If thou art a thornie bushe, and can do nothing but
prick, yet I will not become like unto thee in life, but I will rather show
my self a fruitful vine, God the father is set forth to us for an example.
to bring forth sweet grapes. For so does my heavenly father. He gives to
wicked people and unthrifts, household stuff, liuelode, clothyng, goods,
body and soul, peace, seasonable weather, and all things necessary. He
gives us the light of the Son, whereas we rather have deserved Brimstome and
fire from heaven, but yet we have it not. Math. v.
For he will not be made a churl for our unkindness sake: but he says: If you
are disposed to be naught, yet will not I forsake my natural goodness: I
will give both Son and water from heaven, to the good and evil.

And this is the example, that Christ appoints us to follow, that we also
likewise may be merciful, and not provoked to malice, by other men's malice,
after the manner of the world, that reuengeth and pursues his right. This may
not christian men do. Yea, Math. v. Roma. xii.
rather they ought to pray for their foes, that GOD will make of them
profitable and fruictfull plants, which are now wild, thornie, and baren
bushes. And this is, be you merciful, as your father of heaven is merciful,
which is also most bountefull, even to his very enemies.

But we must put in a caveat in this place, and beware that we take not this
doctrine of mercy so, although all kind of reuengyng, All reuengemente is not
forbidden.
were disanulled hereby. For there are diverse persons, in one christian man. A
christian, and the disciple of Christ does not revenge. But after this, there
be diverse descriptions of offices, as of fathers in a family, of Judges in a
shire, of Magistrates in a city, of Earls in an Erledome, of Kings in a
Kingdom. All these offices can not be without reuengyng. And they that are in
them, should offend, if they should not punish, The Magistrate bears not
the swerd in vain.
such things as are dooen against the common wealth. For by the
commandment of God, in this must those things be performed, Roma. xiii.
which are ordained of GOD, for the preservation of the commonaltie, that the
offenders be punished, Folishe pity marreth the city.
and breakers of order restrained. For if any manne would exercise ouerth warte
mercy, it would evidently appear, to what poincte it would come, when foolish
mercy showed to a few, shall be turned to the utter undoing of many. First
are they betrayed, to whom this untrue mercy is showed: then ensues the
breakyng of discipline and rule, without the which the world can not consiste
in safeguard. Wherefore GOD requires this of all governors, and overseers of
order, that according to their office, they use straight punishment, and if
they cease to do so, let them know they shall give account thereof to the
high magistrate, which is God himself.

Wherefore this commandment of Christ, consists in a certain respect to
an other order, that is, that the sons of GOD, that is to say, Christians
follow the example of the mercy of their father. But whereas GOD garnisheth
us also with other persons, A good lesson for rulers.
when he makes us fathers, Lords, magistrates, Judges, Princes, Emperors.
etc. we must not think, that this law of mercy belongs not unto us. But
this is to be performed with all diligence, that we see to our office
straightly. And yet that this, that must needs be dooen with severity and
straightnes, has his governance of mercy, and that nothing be done to
satisfy our own lust. To sight therefore is done now and then, a work of
great cruelty and sharpnes, where as in deed it may well be coumpted, an
act of mercy and clemency.

As when Joseph accuses his brethren to his Father, as his duty was, Gene.
37.
concerning their leude doings, although he was evil spoken of, as a blab
among his brethren, yet has he more regard to the truth and his own office,
whereas he understands, that all that were of that household, yea and his
brethren also be bound so to do, that they hide not the enormities of the
family, nor conceall the fautes of other. So after that neighbors, citezens.
etc. Has certain offices of severity, To punish evil doers, is a great
work of mercy.
for the behoue of the common wealth, although they seem to sightfull of
unmercifulness, yet in deed they are the very woorkers of mercy. The master
and fathers are merciful, when they punish the disobediente and stubburne.
The Magistrates are merciful, when the wicked are put to execution. And
Princes, when they resist wrongful violence, with power of arms, and when
they maintain the innocent against tyrants. Mercy is the chiefest intent, why
al these things (that are cruel to sight) are done, least all things should
lie open for the Devil to make hauoke. If al men ca^ not be helped by sharp
correction, yet must it be seen, that all men's saufegarde and wealth, be not
brought into hasarde, by leuitie and mercy* Wherefore it was necessary, to
set forth the other offices, next the precepte of mercy, least under the
pretense of untrue mercy, the devil should destroy all to gether, yea and
that under the pretense of religion and godliness. And this is a great
subtlety of the Devil, that against the most necessary offices of mercy,
he inuenteth the names of a blab, a traitor, a tyraunte, a termegante, a
spoyler. etc. But no man ought to be feared from his duty, and from true
mercy for this, but let him do rather that, that is profitable for the
saftie of man in deed, then that that seems to sight.

Wherefore youth must be diligently instructed, as touching those offices, that
they may learn to do that is good in their first years, Youth ought to be
brought up in the knowledge of Gods mysteries.
that afterward when they by ripeness of age, shall attain to more and
waightier offices, that require severity: They may know how to use always
true mercy, amongst the citezens, both in house keeping, and also in a common
office. Neither let them be withdrawn at any time by guile and desimulation,
from the true understanding of things. For they do much hurt in a
commonaltie, that either in congregations, cities or families, do suffer good
order to decay, by untimely mercy.

Thou must therefore take diligent head, to what end this precept of mercy is
given, that first of all thou regard the commandments of GOD, specially
made unto thee, to show thee thy duty, and yet that all these ought to be
mingled with mercy. Then remember, that thou take patiently al wro^ges, and be
not withdrawn thereby, from thy well dooyng. As thou haste an euidente example
of the Son, which is not grieved, that the very adulterers, and usurers, are
guided by his light. But let them take heed, which now do so abuse the mercy
of GOD in his gifts, Sin scapeth not unpunished for ever.
and the patience of the christians. For they shall have no good and joyful
end, that heapeth up from day to day, wrath upon wrath for the^ selves.
For the more they escape now unpunished, the greater shall their punishment be
hereafter, as the examples of stubburne children do declare, which when they
refuse to be ruled by their parents, they fall into the hands of hangmen. For
GOD suffers not his patience, long to be mocked and dalied withal.

But as I may return to my purpose: it appears by this precepte, what is
Christ's council* even that we should earnestly embrace godliness, and do
such works among our selves, as be true and unfeigned. Wherefore he commands
us to be merciful, not as the Heathen be, which show mercy unto them, from
whom they look for help, and so that one hand should wash an other: Mercy
is to be showed not only to friends, but also to foes.
But as the father in heaven, which sheddeth out all things plentuously, that
are necessary for us, so that there is sufficient for all men to gather, not
only for the good, whom he could dispatche in one day, but also for the
evil. For GOD does not suffer his goodness to wither away, because there be
many evil and unkind. Yea, rather in this poincte, the evil are better
provided for. This example, says Christ, put I forth to you, that profess
my name, not only to do good to your friends (for this virtue may be also
in the Gentiles) but also to your enemies, as ye se that your heavenly father,
grudged no man the light of the Son, no not as much as the thieves, robbers,
adulterers, usurers, which are not worthy to look on this most beautiful
creature, and to take any benefit of him. But yet they are not shut out,
neither does this good father, suffer his goodness to be withdrawn from his
household, for the leudnes of the wicked.

Do you, says he, likewise. Suffer not patience to be taken from you. Be
not less beneficial for other men's faults, as the world is wont, when it
craketh: All things are full of ingratitude and churlishenes. A man can
never do to little. But this is not true. It is no great thing to help your
friends. Christ's exhortacion to the christians
For the Gentiles will no longer do good, then when they look for like,
whereof if there be no hope, farewell good doing. Hereof it appears that this
benignity, comes not out of the fountain of Charity, but grows in dry
places, and will sone wither away, by a little blast of impatience. But you
Christians must do good with more perfectnes, yea, to your own enemies,
loking for no like kindness and requityng. And thus must ye think in the mean
season: what if they be unkind? Yea, GOD has so great power, that he can
punish the unkind, by diverse instruments, by water, fire, and stones. etc.
Wherefore seeing I am sure of this, that all these things shall be punished,
The love of the christians differs greatly from the love of the Gentiles.
I am purposed to keep my accustomable liberality and mercy. And this is a
very Christian mind and love, which is not in the Gentiles, which do good no
longer, then when they mete with kind men, and them that will do the like.
When these be lackyng, Charity also continues not. Contrariewise, the
Charity of Christian men, does good without ceasyng, and although many
benefits be cast away upon the unkind, yet cease not their will of well
doing. Now does Christ proceed, and deuideth mercy into diverse parts.

Judge ye not, and ye shall not be judged: Condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned. Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you. Christ would have us godly
in deed, that we should not crake of faith and the Gospel in words, as the
most part does, that boaste them selves to be Gospellers, and prate much
of Christ. But if the matter be well tried, they are but dissemblars. And a
great part deceives them selves, and perish hereby with their hypocrisy.
The heavenly father judges us not: neither ought we to judge other.
This hypocrisy would Christ gladly restrain. Wherefore he puts forth to
us, no strange or unknown example of his father, done to our profit, that as
we feel his goodness and humanity, so we should show our selves beneficial,
and not high minded toward other.

For we are in danger of Gods judgment, and damnation for our sins. What
has the heavenly father done? He would not judge and condemn thee, as he
might, but he forgave thee thy sins, took from thee hell and damnation, and
received thee to his mercy. This example is put for thee. Apply thy self
thereto. Be thou likewise unto other: then art thou a true christian, which
beleuest in Christ, neither condemnest thou thy neighbor, but forgiuest him
gladly thy hurt. But if thou will not do so, but rather do like the
leude servant. Math. xviii
Math. xviii. thou declarest that thou can receive no mercy before GOD, nor
show to other in this life, that thou art a Christian man, but rather that GOD
will exclude thee from his mercy, and appoinct thee to judgment and
damnation, and deprive thee of all his benefits, wherewith he has endued
thee, and require again all the debtes that he remitted and forgave. Thou
nedest not doubt of this. For the commandment is this: Judge ye not, and ye
shall not be Judged, but if ye will not cease iudgyng, GOD shall judge you
also.

The common practice shows how hard this inibitio^ is. As Soon as we judge
our selves hurt, forth with we use this judgment: Why should I do good to the
unkind? I have helped him often, and he does not only like for like, but
does a shrode turn for a good. I should offend, if I should help the
unkind so often. But this is an unmerciful mercy, and painful helpyng. When
they Judge, because they obtain not the like. And then appears Gregorius
saying true: True Justice has done compassion, but untrue is double iniquity.
For when a man gives me a croune, he is thought to go about to make me his
bondsman thereby. Wherefore, as soon as any thing is done or said, that pleases
not, or if I be not obsequius, forth with he embraideth me: have not I done
this for thee, and requitest me with such kindness? This is truly nothing else,
but to serve and Judge, as the Gentiles do, that there may be a
recompensation. For this is no good way. If thou do good to an other, and he
acknowledge it not, or does evil for good, thou may admonish him not so
to do, least he offend God greatly. But yet have thou no just cause to hate
him, to judge, and condemn him. Give him up to his Judge. For thou know not
what GOD will do with him, whither he will amend him. If he be not amended,
GOD has officers sufficient to be revenged of him. And so such things chance
daily, that there rise sudden tempests against the stubburne. Only beware,
that thou judge him not: but think thus: GOD has not so cruelly dealte with
me. For if he had, I should have been killed long a gone in my sin, when I
lived in filthy Idolatry and Hypocrisy.

Likewise also beware that thou dooest not condemn: for it is not thy duty.
To chide, to tell one of his faut, to dehort, to declare to them that judge and
condemn, it is lawful. But thou haste no more to do, then to be merciful:
thou may not Judge, thou may not condemn. And if thy neighbor be so
obstinatly set to do thee hurt, that he will not cease, yet thou ought to
be willing to forgive, and not to hinder his profit, or go about to revenge,
but rather to further and to help him. These things are hard to do, but
remember that thou art a Christian, and that more perfection is required of
thee, if thou earnestly embrace this name, even as the example of our heavenly
father, plainly declares before us. For if thou do good to thy neighbor,
and he be unkind, and does requit thee with evil, doubt not but that GOD
will lay it to his charge. Resign and give over thou the vengeance unto him,
and do thou thy duty. GOD does revenge all these things at his time.
Wherefore commit thou all other things to him, Deuteronomy. 32. Romo. xii.
and execute this commandment, that thou revenge not, but be merciful. It
follows in our Gospel.

Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, filled up, and shaken
together, yea, runnyng over shall men give into your bosom. For with what
measure ye meat unto other, with the same shall it be measured unto you
again. Christ has comprised these precepts very properly, and labors
specially, to cause us to fulfill the true works of Charity. Wherefore as he
has commanded, that sinners should be mercifully and gentlely handeled, as
we are gently handled of him, that we Judge and condemn them not, but
commit that unto GOD, and pray for them to GOD: So he commands to do
the^ good, by giuyng, helpyng, and counsaillyng. etc. and then not to doubt,
but GOD will requite our liberality, be it never so great: That so the mind
may abound with Charity alwaie, and never be ouergrowne with the thorns of
unkindness, to cease thereby from well doing, as the Gentiles do, which can
not abstain from iudgyng and condemnyng. For as soon as they think them selves
hurt, they forgive not, before they are humbly asked forgiveness. So they
will not give any thing, but where as they look for gains and for benefit.
Wherefore they can never escape the Judgment of GOD, neither are they Judged
worthy of Gods benefits, and of his mercy and grace.

This fault must we eschew, and so do for our neighbors, as our heavenly
father does for us. He slacketh his straight Judgment: he pardons us: he
will not be cruel and condemn us, although we be unkind: He enioyneth us to
do likewise also, or if we will not, he puts before us a dreadful end,
that we shall look so to be served of him, as we serve other. For with the same
measure, says he, shall other measure to you, as you have measured with. And
we can not deny but GOD has given us good measure. For if he would have given
us after our deserts, he might have plagued us with wrath, plague,
pestilence, and all evil, and put us to death, as soon as we were borne. I will
not rehearse how manifold ways we have offended him, through all our life
with sins. This might worthily be given to us as measure, eue^ death and
hell. But what does GOD? He puts away that that we have deserved, that is
to say, wrath, indignation, judgment, death, hell. etc. and brings to us,
heaven, grace, liberty, and a quiet mind, from the condemnation of the law,
and of an evil conscience. He riddeth us from al penury and blame and gives
us all that is good.

This is truly a large and plentiful measure, but whereas thou deniest other
the same measure after that, think not, but like measure shall be given to thee
from GOD, as thou give other. Thou were fortunate before, because he helped
thee with the measure of grace. Now shall thou have such measure, as thy
unkind and crafty behauior deserves.

This teaching is marvelous, whereby it appears, that GOD requires more
earnestly thy duty, toward thy neighbor, then toward himself. For as
touching himself, he pardons sin, How God measures to us before faith.
and will not reken, what soever we offend against him. Contrary, when we be
unmerciful to our neighbor, GOD will neither be pleased with us, neither
forgive us any thing. Wherefore, all this rate of measuring is to be appointed
and done after faith, and not before. For before thou haste faith, GOD
deals not with thee after thy desert, but was merciful unto thee, he opened
thee the way to his word. He promised thee remission of sins. This is the
first measure given to us, when we began to believe, after that this measure was
received, he gives commandment to measure to other likewise. And he that
does so, let him look to be done unto, as he does unto other. If he be
cruel, let him look for no mercy of GOD: if he judge, he shall be judged and
damned. Wherefore this measuryng has her beginning after faith, when GOD
requires so greatly thy duty toward thy neighbor, threatnyng that he will
revoke all his grace, if we will not be merciful to our neighbor.

Wherefore he that thinks earnestly, how to serve GOD, let him do good to
his neighbor, let him do as GOD does, that is, let him not judge, let him
not condemn, but forgive, and give gladly, let him show himself beneficial
and liberal, when he may. Else shall it chance no otherwise, then it chanced
to the servant. Math. xviii. He had mere mercy showed unto him, Math. xviii
when the lord let him go scotfree, and forgave all his debt. But when he
would not forgive his neighbor, an hundred pence, neither tarry the time until
he were able to pay the whole, his free quitau^ce that he had in the ten
thousand talentes that were forgiven, stood him in none effect, and he is
delivered to the Iailers, until he paieth the whole. And surely it is not
possible, that we should always follow this rule. We forget mercy oftentimes,
and whereas mercy was requisite, we are wrothfull, where we should speak
gently, we curse. Psalm. iiii. Ephe. iiii.
Although it chances thus unto us by infirmity, that in this place we do
contrary to Christ's commandment. Yet let us beware at least of the sin of
the Phariseis, that we continue not therein without remorse of conscience, as
they do, but that we might quickly amend, let us put before us this example,
to do to other, as the father of heaven has done to us: to show our selves
forgetful of wrongs, and not to slack or cease in well dooyng, by the
iniquity of the world, or unkindness of men.

And to the forgiveness of sins, Confession of the fault, is necessary unto
the forgiveness of sins
it is necessary that he confesses his fault, that must be forgiven. For it
is impossible, that I should forgive the Pope and other enemies of Gods word,
their sins. The reason is. They know not them selves for sinners, in that
they persecute our doctrine. If they would confess their folly, and profess
repentance, I would not deny them remission of sins. For there must needs
be sins, i. Reg. xiii.
if they should be forgiven. But he that denies his sin, and defends it
with his righteousness, as Saul did before Samuel, this man's sins, can not
be forgiven.

This doctrine is of a Christian man's life, which Christ puts forth by
the example of the father of heaven. This doctrine does Christ earnestly
setforthe, by the similitude of a moate and a beam. As though he should say.
I se that this is hard for you to do. For your own damage greueth you, the
grief thereof is not sone taken away. As Soon as ye se your adversary, and
remember your wrong, anger waxes raw again, and all things come to
stomach as fresh, The similitude of the moate.
as though they were now dooen, wherewith he has hurted us, with a great
desire also to revenge. Yield not over your selves (says Christ) to wroth
and indignation. For although he has diversely, hindered thy profit and
defaced thy good name, yet all this is but a Son moate in thy eye, in
comparison of that thou haste dooen to GOD. For that is as a beam in respect
of those things, which thy neighbor has done against us. Wherefore many
things are requisite to him that will Judge and condemn. In other matter thus
it is: the teacher must be better learned, then the learner, or else shall he
be able to teach him nothing. What kind of master can thou be, which
professest that thou will teach other, and art as ignoraunte and as faulty, as
thy scholars be, whom thou take on thee to teach? This ought not to be done
and suffered among men, and how much less can it be suffered in my kingdom
before GOD, where as all are to be blamed: Wherefore get thee the practice of
this parable, when thou hear, see, or suffer any thing, that is grievous
unto thee, that thou may always say: Patience. This sin is little in
comparison of mine, GOD has many more to object against me, then I have
against other. Wherefore I will gladly wink at the^m, so that GOD will wink
at mine, and not rub me on the old sores.

But the world can never be persuaded, but that it will rebuke the moate in
his brothers eye, The moate we ever behold: the beam we regard not.
and not consider the beam in his own. For where as thou have one quarrel
with thy neighbor, there has GOD infinite causes against thee, seeing thou
never keptest his precepts, but haste transgressed them manifold ways. This
thou forgettest, and therefore in the mean season, thou fallest in hatred
against thy neighbor for a little word. If thou can have such a quick
sight, in thy brothers little fault, why dooest thou not ponder thy own beam
also.

Wherefore a christian man, must use an other way, when he sees a moate in his
brothers eye, let him first return unto himself, before he begin to judge,
and there shall he find such a hugeous Beam, that he will have but little
lust to judge his neighbor, so that he may have. GOD merciful to his
sins. Wherefore first he goes about, to take away this his own beam, and
when he is in doing that, he finds so much business, that he sone forgets
his brothers moate, when he reme^breth his own disobedience toward GOD and
man, and other sins, from the which he can not be rid, by dooyng daiely
all that he can. First therefore, he conde^neth his own overthwart reckenyng,
whereas he lets escape his own Elephante, and is eager against his neighbors
Gnat.

Wherefore Christ's intent is, to put us in mind of the example of the father
in heaven, which suffers our great beams to lie hid, that we should
patiently abide a moate in our brothers eye and not Judge him therefore. Why
God co^cealeth our sins.
What man therefore would not be moved, to be merciful by this promise,
whereas GOD laiyng a side all judgment and damnation would gladly forgive
us, if we would forgive one an other, and not Judge, that after this we may
obtain his grace and goodness proffered unto us, and so escape death and hell.
Contrariwise, he that will not hereby be put in fear, to cease from iudgyng
and condemnyng, where as he finds a moate in his brothers eye, GOD will raise
up a beam in his own: I can not tell, what should be able to move him to any
of both these parts, that is either to hope well, or to fear ill. Is not
this a great stubburnes, to reprove so greatly a little thing in our neighbor,
that we should thereby hinder our own way, in escapyng damnacion by the
unspeakable promise of GOD, and to stir up the everlasting judgment of
GOD, by the foolish saucines of our own judgment.

He therefore, that had rather follow the example of the world, and of the
flesh, then of the heavenly father, where about goes he else, but to get Gods
wroth, in steed of his mercy, and to have GOD grievous and sore against him,
whereas he might have him merciful. This great peril ought to be thought
upon, that we might order our life Godly, that all men, both friends and
foes might perceive in us sure tokens, that we are christian men, and that we
have such a mind, out of the which, as out of a fountain, flows such
charity, as will never fail and decaie. The which thing, our father which
is in heaven grant us through the holy Ghost, for our Lord Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

The.v. Sondaie after Trinity Sondaie. The Gospel. Luke. v.
IT came to pass, that when the people preassed upon him, to hear the word
of God, he stood by the lake of Genazereth, and saw two Ships stand by
the lake side, but the Fishermen were gone out of them, and were washyng their
Nets. And he entered into one of their Ships (which perteined to Simon)
and prayed him, that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he satte
down, and taught the people out of the Ship. When he had left speaking, he
said unto Simon: launche out into the deep, and let slip your Nets to
make a draught. And Simon answered, and said unto him: Master, we have
labored all night, and have taken nothing. Nevertheless, at thy commandment
I will loose forth the Net. And when he had so dooen, they enclosed a
great multitude of Fishes, but their Nets brake, and they beckened to their
fellows (which were in the other Ship) that they should come and help them.
And they came and filled both Ships, that they sonke again.

When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at Jesus knees saying: Lord go
from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was astonished, and all that were with
him at the draught of Fishes, which they had taken, and so was also James and
Ihon the sons of Zebede, which were parteners with Simon. And Jesus said
unto Simon: fear not, from henceforthe thou shalt catch men. And they
brought the ships to land, and forsook all and followed him.

THE EXPOSITION.
LUke signifies by this history, how Peter and the rest, came to their
Apostleshippe. And the miracle of the Fish, and the holy ministry of the
Gospel, is well applied to the Appostleshippe. For by the taking of so many
fishes, Christ declares the power of the Gospel in the world, whereas it
shall draw up a great multitude of sinners, out of the kingdom of the devil,
into Gods kingdom. And at last Christ expounds it so himself, whereas he
pronounces that Peter, James, Andrewe and Ihon, should become fishers of men.
But before that the Evangelist begins the history, he rehearses that many
followed Christ, to hear him preach. And that to the intent, that we having
an eye to this example, may come to the word of GOD desirously. For he that
hears this word diligently, obtains two things thereby, which
otherwise he could not come by. What fruit comes of the word of God.
The first is, that we know hereby what is Gods will toward us, both in this
life, and after this life, which without the word of GOD, we could not
know at all. But we rather conceive the contrary in our mind, of the wrath
of GOD toward us, and of his punishment. But the word teaches us this, as we
shall hear hereafter, that GOD although we be sinners, is not angry with us,
but is merciful, that we might be delivered from sin, and get everlasting
life. This is one thing, that we get by the word. The second is, that out of
the word we learn to order, the trade of this external and civil life, for
that, that it is allowed and sanctified by the word of God, to be a true
worshippyng of GOD, so that he has no need to become a Monk or Friar, that
will serve GOD, but he may wait on his own vocation, and do his own office
diligently, whether it be in a Maiestrates office, or in other kind of life.
This is a true and pleasyng service to GOD, and shall never be destitute and
void of the blessyng of GOD.

This doctrine is necessary, to the true information of the conscience, that
all men may know for a surety, that their vocation is set forth by Gods
word, so that all things which they do, or do not, may be confirmed by
Gods commandments certainly. Such a conscience may withstand the Devil
in temptacion, and think surely, Whatsoever is dooen in faith pleases God.
that he has done such things, and yet does, as concerning the which, GOD
has given a sure precept. For all things otherwise are dooen with sin, and
displease GOD. As Paul says: whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Now has GOD given us his word plentuously, whereby we may try all our
deeds, and sayings, and gather certain testimonies for them all, out of Gods
word. For he that believes, Romans xiiii.
that is, he that embraces Gods grace with a true faith, which he has
bestowed on us, through Christ, what soever he does, either appartainyng to
the commonaltie, or to his household, or to the nature of man, it pleases
GOD wholly. For the person from whom these things proceed, pleases GOD for
his faith in Christ. And this should be sufficient before God, for every manne
to comfort himself with this word, that GOD has put forth, and stick unto
that faith, and serve God with all joy and mirthe, for whatsoever is dooen in
faith, be it never so little, pleases God, and are most excellent works.

All our doings in Gods word.
But after that, this also is necessary for the common life, whereof comes
the congregation of God, that is, that every man may be certain, as touching
his doings and degree. Wherefore of this also does God put forth a sure
word, and commands obedience toward parents. Wherefore whatsoever work,
office, children, servants, be in the household, all that is sanctified by
this word, so they that do these things in a family, may well boaste of a
sure commandment of God, and by this word are the officers and masters of
householdes, blessed and sanctified. For they are the ministers of this common
life, wherein God would have tranquillity and quiet, for the continuance of
his congregation. And as touching their honor, God has put forth laws, that
they might according to their honor, behave them selves in their offices, and
be sure of their doings by the law, that they are done according to Gods
word and commandment. And as their conscience may be established, which
follow Gods word in their doing: so he that has not his word, can have no
sure ground to stick unto, and is tossed hither and thither, with every little
blaste, like a moveable Read. Wherefore we ought highly to esteem Gods word,
that as the Prophet speaks, but of the old age, of youth, that it should
correct his way, in keeping Gods words: So all ages, al kinds, offices and
functions, might have whereto they might, Psalm. cxix.
uprightly order their life. Only this trade of life, has asure and quiet
conscience. Neither the Turk, Jew, nor Gentile, Monk, nor Papist, can obtain
this so great a thing. This Science belongs only to the good, that they
may know for a surety, that both their inward judgment, and outward
actions, proceed according to Gods word. Wherefore they set on their matters,
without waueryng and fear, although they be perilous. For all things
belongyng to their vocation, are set forth by Gods commandment, neither
have they any thing, wherein they ought to fear ungodliness.

This doctrine ought chiefly, to be taught unto all Christian men, that they
might know how to set on all things, and to bring them to pass in Gods
word, and so shall they the sooner beware, all the time of their life, of
supersticious and wicked persuasions. If Monks had followed this trade, they
had never fallen to so great ungodliness, by the precepts of men's
traditions. Neither do the Apostles, care for any thing more, then to propound
the plain and simple word of Gods commandment, as touching Justification
before God, and the residue of the life to be passed over with Godliness. They
that follow the obedience of this word, can not be put beside salvation,
although they either in warfare for their country, or doing some other
dangerous charge of their vocation, chance to die. The reason is, they serve
in their vocation, and obeie God, and know for a surety, that they do all
things, according to Gods commandment. And so might this life be passed
over of all men, Godly and virtuously, if they would only order it, after the
ten commandments, and the faith in Christ. But the Devil withstandeth
this, withal his might, least the word of GOD should come in mind, at any of
our doings. Neither when we rise nor when we go to bed, nor when we eat,
have we any care or thought on Gods word. And it is no maruaill, if they
before they are wares, are oppreste with the wicked world. But christian men
must have more regard, of so great and necessary a thing, that they may be
sure at all times, to be of Gods Kingdom, so that they may have Gods word
for a testimony, which sanctifies all things, in all their matters. The
things that are done be not always great, nor glorious, and the most part
are common, both to the Ethenike and Christians. A difference between the
works of the Christians and Infideles.
But in this there is great difference, only the Christians has Gods word
for their leader, whereby all their works are sanctified before God. As for an
example, when Paul says: servants obey your bodily masters, in fear and
trembling, through singlenes of heart. And again: Children, obey your
parents in the lord. This word and faith sanctifies all their works,
that they may be pleasant unto GOD, whereas amongst the unfaithful, they
can not be acceptable, for lack of the word and faith. Ephe. vi.
For there is nothing holy in the earth, besides Gods name and faith. And all
things that are sanctified, are sanctified only by the name and word of GOD.

And surely by the word of the fifte commandment, all man's life, Exodus xx.
both in the government of a commonaltie, and also of an household, is
blessed, if so be faith lacks not, but that thou do every thing
obediently, in the name of GOD. But let this be sufficient to admonish here,
that we may understand, that this example of Christ, was put forth to the
intent, that many of them that follow Christ, should be provoked and stirred,
studiously and diligently to hear the word of GOD whereas it is setforthe for
them only, Psalm. cxix.
that they may not be confounded, when they look on all his commandments.
But as for the other must needs abide confusion, because they have no light
of gods word in their doings.

Now therefore, as we intended at the beginning let us come to the history:
whereof are two parts. The first is a doctrine, as touching this corporal
life, that GOD also will provide for the necessities of the body, after that
of the Spiritual life, that he will not leave us destitute of hope, for our
sins sake, but be merciful unto us, and recover us from destruction. Both
these doctrines are very necessary and profitable, and are worthy to be learned
with all diligence of the godly.

The comfort of the corporal life rests herein, where as Christ commands
Peter to cast his Nets, and Peter obeieth, and takes a great scull of fish.
Here is a good steward, if a man could make him ouersear of his business. For
nothing could lack, where he is present. But the Euangeliste declares
sufficiently, that Christ will not do so to al men, but to them only, that
all the night labored in vain, and afterward heard Gods word: that is, he
will help the righteous and poor that felt need. For the Christians in this
life, has many troubles and temptacions. But when they are tempted, and yet
stick constantly to their vocation and to the word, Christ is ready to help
them.

And this is one comfort put forth for us in this place, that we may retain
faith, and although we are now and then in poverty, and lack things
necessary, yet that we despair not, nor impatiently murmr, but to stand in
good hope, that blessyng shall not long cease. For it chances likewise with
Peter and his fellows, to spend a whole night in vain, and to take nothing.
Afterward comes Christ. And first he puts for his word and makes them
Christians. Then he commands them to launche forth, and to cast their
Nets for a draufte, Peter obeieth, and has his purpose. This should we do
in our own matters also. GOD gives us not by and by in the beginning all
things plenteously. For if he should give it us, as soon as we were
Christianed, and received into the catholic church, we would not think it
came from him. Christ helps us after poverty comes.
Wherefore he sends us poverty for a time, that we should not be ignorant
of trouble, and that one should almost be feign to despair, in that he
lackyng all things, can not tell what to do, or which ways to take, and
also is in peril to be famished. In this case then that merciful Steward
Christ, will be at hand and say: set thy heart at rest, I know all,
lose forth thy net, cease not to labor, and look for a blessyng.

For although they be nedie, yet must they not despair, and deny Christ, and
murmr against God but trust that GOD at his time, will send things
necessary, and that he will not suffer them to be overcome, in doing their
labor and vocacion. For Christ gives not Peter fish on this wise, We must
not cease from hope and labor.
that they should leap into his boat, but he must launche forth his ship,
prepare his Nets, and do all things as Fishers are wont to do. Although
he became a Christian now first, he must commit the success thereof into Gods
hand.

So must we also walk, as every man's vocation is. If thou labor for the
maintenance of an household, or art an officer with authority: apply thy
vocation diligently. For this is not against thy religion, and thou may by
so doing, do that that is acceptable to GOD. i. Peter. v.
As for all other charge and rare, cast it on GOD, as how he should nourishe
thee, and find thee things necessary. And despair not, because thou must
strive with need and poverty. For there remains time enough, wherein thou
can not tell, what thing or blessyng shall chance, as thou see here.
Remember this only that thou must keep constauncie and continuance, least
thou be overthrown with impacience. He that can not be content to do this,
but casts away his nets as soon as he loses his purpose, and forsakes
his vocation, and fall to an other kind of life, it is no marueill if this man
has no good and prosperous chance in all his life.

This is the first doctrine, that we be not discoraged and vexed in poverty
and necessity, if we feel not Gods blessyng by and by at our need. We must
not require this of God, to fulfill our desire when we will. Be thou not loathe
a while to take labor in vain, and to be paciente. Thou must not refuse to
lose a nights labor, so that thou may thereby hope that the heavenly
father, will help thee at his time with his blessyng, according to the common
saying: Dat deus omne bonum, sed non per cornua taurum. Labor and patience is
requisite. God gives all good things, yet he gives not the Bull by the
horns.
Thou majesty look for Gods blessyng, so that thou forget not the first
poincte, that is, to lend thy ship to Christ, as Peter did, that he sittyng
therein may teach, and that we hear the word diligently, and learn it
exactly. For this is specially to be marked in Peter's example, Peter obeys
ye word.
that he suffers nothing to hinder him, but casts from him, the frowardnes
of the unbelievers, and goes wholly to Gods word. And that it may be well
understand, how greatly this is in Peter, he is not feared, by that that is
Gods common practice in all his works, and is used also of GOD in this
draught, whereas he points the matter first to be done, after a triflyng sort.
For this is commonly the way of Fishyng, not to look for any great pray out
of the water at middaie. The night is more fit for this gain. And the Fishers
are not wont to fish in the main, but nigh to the banks. Christ regards not
this common trade of fishers, but commands Peter to launche forth to the
depth, and whereas they had taken nothing in the night, in that place. Now he
bids them at middaie, to lose their Nets for a draught This seems an
absurd and foolish thing to Peter, and he sees that Christ knew not the
art of Fishers well, but yet he answers manerly: Lord (says he) we have
labored all this night, and have taken nothing. If we should follow the
precepts of our occupacio^, we should have no great hope of a pray, yet will
I prove at thy word. If that help not, all is but lost labor. If Peter
would not have showed his reverence toward Christ, he might have spoken unto
him more roughly because of his ignorance on this wise. Reason does always
correct Gods word.
How presumes this man, that he takes on him to teach a Fisher his craft,
whereof he is ignoraunte? Why should he put his ower into an other man's bote*
It is not one thing, to be a teacher, and a Fisher, Christ when he teaches,
ought to be heard. But when he teaches to fish, who should hear him? Thus
would we perchance answer Christ. For so are we always wont to do. We will
be wiser then Christ. But Peter is wiser then so, he lays aside all such
thoughts, and thinks thus: what soever my craft be, I will not despise this
word. And so he embraseth it with all his heart, and he lets pass, both
his science, and his reason, and all such like.

This is marvelous, as touching the faith of Peter, which could follow
Christ's commandment, and lay a side all his own thoughts, and stick
surely to the word. For this is evident by common experience, that men are
well pleased, when their commandments are done, although there come little
success thereby. Contrariwise, they are grieved, when the master commands,
and the servant obeys not, but think his own ways better. In our own
matters we ca^ not abide such men, yet we show our selves such always
toward GOD, setting so much by our own reason, that we obey not Gods word.
But what intolerable arrogance is this, God requires obedience to his word.
when GOD is controlled in his word? Who can abide this in his servant, if he
stand proudly against his masters commandment, and think his own reason
better? Wherefore GOD judges, that he is specially worshipped, when we show
our selves such, toward him and his word, as this Peter did. And although we
be otherwise entised, yet let us bridle our selves, that we may prefer the
word of GOD, before al reason. He that holds the word after this sort,
pleases GOD and all his Angels. And if the congregation could obtain this,
it could not be so encombred with sedicion, there would be no sects, no
heretics, but all congregacions should perfectly agree, as touching doctrine
and sound faith. Now they can not be persuaded hereto, and because every man
tries the opinions of religion, by the measure of reason, and man's wisdom:
it comes to pass that all things, are full of errors and discord. We
must not despair if it succeed not.
This is very true, that we ca^ not be without te^ptacion, when it chances to
us, as it did to Peter. To labor all the night, and to take no profit
thereby: we take it impatiently, and go about to lay all aside, and depart.
But we ought to overcome this temptacion, and stick to our vocation
steadfastly, and to cast all our care on the Lord. For I have known this
often times by experience, when the obedient children in a family, has had
misfortune: and contrariwise, the disobedient and stubburne, good fortune. But
at last the hard case of the good was more commended, and the wicked had an
evil end. Wherefore if it chance likewise to thee, that all things go not
well, be constaunt, and strengthen thy self, that thou be not overcome of
temptacion. For better is misfortune with obedience, then good fortune with
wickedness. The reason is, that GOD at the last casts away the
disobediente, with their prosperity, be it never so great, and exalts the
humble and meke, to great renoume. This example of Peter, The example of Peter.
is studiously to be followed, in that he has respect only to the word,
and follows that, and is nothing moved with these thoughts, which surely
would greatly have troubled us, and doubtless they were in his mind also. For
we are commanded as well as Peter, to labor and to serve in our vocation. He
that takes hold to his vocation, and suffers not him self to be withdrawn
from his purpose, although it does but slowly prosper, and the blessyng is
long in coming, yet must he not doubt of a prosperous end. For GOD can do no
otherwise, but at length have respect to obedience, although he differreth it
for a time, and proves us, whether we regard his commandment or not.
Wherefor no man ought to be weary, if he has labored all the night without
profit. For if Peter had gone about this draught in the night, he would have
imputed it to his cunnyng and labor, neither would he have thought any thing
else, requisite to such a success. But whereas he fisheth all night, and
takes nothing, and Christ first ministers his word, biddyng him there with
to assaie again: there has Peter a sure trial, that this good success, came
not by fishyng and labor, but of Gods word and blessyng. And let this
suffice you, as concerning the first doctrine, which is corporal, and
pertains to the bodily liuelode, that Christ will be present, with all his
that labor by his blessyng, and not suffer them to perish for hunger.

The second doctrine is spiritual. For thus does it follow in the history,
that Peter is astonished by the draught of fish, and comes to the knowledge of
Christ, that he is not only man. And whereas he acknowledges himself a
sinner, and falls down at Christ's feet, saying: depart from me Lord, for
I am a sinner: It is a spiritual matter and few understand it. For it seems
hereby, that Peter did it of a certain religion, and that he desired for a
reverence, to depart from Christ. But the meaning of it is not so. The
conscience is in this case. Mark well
When GOD comes with his grace, and promises remission of sin, and life
everlasting, freely for Christ's sake: the grace is so large, that all things
seem to great for us, neither dare we approach nigh thereto, for the greatness
thereof. It is easy to believe that GOD is good and merciful: but that he
imbraceth us with his great mercy, our heart can not be made to believe that.
All men think, if I were so pure and rightuous, as Marie the virgin saint
Peter, saint Paul: I would couple my self also to his grace, but I am a
sinner: I am not worthy of grace, but rather of wroth. Then comes the
Devil, and he inlargeth sin so much in thy heart, that thou may see
nothing but thy unworthiness, and thou can not but wonder, and be amassed at
the greatness, of that exceeding grace. This is a spiritual temptacion, whereof
the profane and rude (as we be almost all) have no perceueraunce nor
understanding. For this is learned by experience only, and no otherwise.
Wherefore the greatest sort lives on such wise, that they think not much,
either of their sin, or of the grace of GOD. But true Christian men do
always tremble and fear, that that is to much that GOD does, on his own
behalf. Who am I (say they) O Lord GOD, that thou bryngest me thus far, I
am not worthy of so great mercy of GOD.

And hereunto belongs, that Christ comfort Peter, to be without fear, for
because he goes not about now, to judge Peter's sins, but to deliver him from
sin, and to set him in such an office, that he may bring other also to
the same grace. So that all this comfort may be applied, if we should
chance to have such thoughts, and be put in like fear: to encourage us to
resist them, and not to give place unto them. Christ has mercy on sinners.
For Christ came not to drive sinners from him, but he came into the earth
for their sakes. Wherefore he comfort Peter against such thoughts, and
bids him not to fear, as (he says) also in an other place. Fear not
little flock, Math. ix. Luke. xii.
it is my fathers will, to give you the kingdom. In that place Christ talks
also with such, that think: How canste thou come to heaven, and to eternal
life? Can thou obtain to the fellowshippe of Angels? If thou were holier,
there were no cause why thou should despair. But as thou art now, all thy
hope is in vain. But Christ answers otherwise, you fear (says he) but
do not so. For it has pleased my father, to give you the kingdom, and that
of his own free will. For whereas you are unworthy being sinners, God gives
to the unworthy of his mercy.
this is his merciful will, to give it you of his grace and mercy: wherefore
fear not, but receive it joyfully, and with a glad heart. For if GOD would
not give us, until we were worthy, we should neither have meat nor drink.
But he will not have respect to our worthiness and merits, but to our need,
and to his own goodness and mercy. And this is the cause, that he gives us not
only things requisite to the body, but also everlasting life, with such
temptacion is Peter also here encombred. He perceives the great goodness of
Christ, and casts in his mind, how unworthy he is thereof, and therefore
he begins to despair, what place (says he) is there for thee with us?
Couple thy self with the rightuous, I am a sinner. But Christ comfort him,
and shows himself to be far unlike that, that Peter thought of him,
commaundyng him to be of good chere, and to take heart of grace, and that the
matter as concerning the fish, is but little in comparison of that, that, he
will make him a fisher of men. Now thou art a Fisher, but I will give thee an
other office, to enter into other waters, and to take other Fish, that is,
men, that heaven may have store of such fishes to be saved, as thy ship is
now full of fish. I will find thee an other Net for that draught, that is,
the Gospel. By this shall thou take the elect, that they may be Baptized,
believe, and have everlasting life. And that not in one place, but that in all
the world, thou may turn to the faith, in one place, a city, in an
other the whole people.

This is a spiritual comfort, which GOD puts forth to his disciples,
that he will not only satisfy their hunger, but govern their spiritual
administration, and send them into all the world, to Kings and Princes with
the Gospel. And although the devil withstandeth those Fishers, with all his
might, yet the virtue of this Fishyng, can not be restrained, but that the
word breaks through, and gets many Christians, enuieth the devil never
so much. And the Gospel, Baptism, A Net for spiritual fish.
and the Lords Supper, are our instruments for this matter, whereby the way
to everlasting life is opened unto us.

It is a great thing, that we are appoincted to everlasting life, and a thing
hard to be believed. But consider on the contrary part, what a great thing it is
to burn in hell fire, and that we might escape this punishment, GOD gives
unto us, his word and sacraments, which are Nets prepared for the draught
of such fish. Wherefore Christ comfort and says, fear not, consider not
whether ye he worthy. It is my fathers will, that ye should not perish, as
your sins have deserved. Wherefore cleave to me only: come to Baptism: use
the Lords supper: show your selves obedient to my Gospel, and there shall be
no peril. We have now entreated of these two doctrines, with the example,
that Gods word might be greatly studied. The first is, that although there be
poverty and lost labor for a time, yet that GOD will help us at the length
by his blessyng.

The second is, that he helps us against sin, that we may not be damned.
And for this cause he gives us his word, that we may be certified in our
selves, to be the soonnes of GOD. The which thing our heavenly father grant
us, through Jesus Christ his son, and our Lord. Amen.

The.vj. Sondaie after Trinity Sondaie. The Gospel. Matthew. v.
Jesus said unto his disciples: expcepte your righteousness exceade the
righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Ye have heard that it was said unto them of old time, thou shalt
not kill, whosoever kills, shall be in danger of Judgment. But I say
unto you: that whosoever is angry with his brother (unadvisedly) shall be in
danger of judgment. And whosoever say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in
danger of a counsel. But whosoever says, thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell fire. Therefore, if thou offerest thy gift at the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine
offering before the altar, and go thy way first, and be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with him,
least at any time the adversary, deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the minister, and then thou be cast into prison. Uerely I say
unto thee, thou shalt not come out thence, till thou have paid the vttermoste
farthyng.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel we understand, that it is Christ's counsel and purpose here
to teach his Christians, after they believe and are Baptized, and has obtained
this glorious name of Christians, and besides that, diverse good things and
spiritual gifts, to order their life soberly, righteously, and Godly, which
proceed of a true, True godliness.
and not of an hypocritical trade. For neither did he show unto us any fained
grace, which seems grace to sight, but even as our sins were not fained,
but very deadly and felenous, so was not his grace counterfeited, nor forged,
but true and sincere in deed. Wherefore must we also endeavor our selves, not
to do fained works toward our neighbors, but true and hearty, even as GOD
wrought the work of our salvation in very deed. And for this cause, Christ
takes on him this Gospel, to expound the first precept, and puts forth
to us an example to beware, saying: Except your righteousness exceade the
righteousness of the Phariseis and Scribes, ye can not enter into the kingdom
of heaven. The sentence is short, he must have more righteousness then the
Pharisie, that aspireth to the kingdom of GOD. What is then the righteousness
of the Phariseis? This is not to be blamed, that they lived an honest and sober
life, refrainyng them selves from sin. etc. For GOD requires that of us: as
is his commandment: Thou shalt not kill: Thou shall not commit adultery:
Thou shalt not bear false witness. And he that obeieth thereto, does well.
But this was to be blamed in the Phariseis, that they thought them selves
rightuous for these works, and that they were fautlesse, in all that the Law
requires, as though they had wholly accomplished it. And least we should have
such an opinion, Christ warns us in this place, that although we do the
works of the law, and live blameless in the sight of me^, yet that we
should not be so arrogant, as to think ourselves just before GOD therefore,
and in perfect obedience. For as Christ says here: Although a man has not
killed with the hand, yet may he be a murderer, and a breaker of the law
before GOD. The reason is. For GOD has forbidden all anger in the heart, every
wrathful word, and all angry signs in the face, by this commandment.

The righteousness of the Phariseis.
So that the Phariseis righteousness, signifies outward righteousness, as not to
kill, not to commit adultrie, and to think that all righteousness and holiness
consists therein, and that the Law has nothing against us, but that we have
fulfilled it, and have no need of Gods mercy, although the heart inwardly be
full of such sin and concupiscence. For this righteousness, says Christ,
there is no place in heaven, but rather in hell. For works fulfill not the
law, but an heart is requisite thereto, which is pure, and void of ire,
hatered, envy, lechery, and other concupiscences. He that can do so much,
is sure of righteousness. As long as sin and concupisce^ce are not mortified
in slaughter, but has still their motions, although they proceed not to effect
and work, yet beware thou think not thy self rightuous, or to be in heaven. Ye
have need of more righteousness, says Christ. For ye can not enter into the
kingdom of heaven, by the righteousness of the Phariseis and Scribes.

What is this greater or more perfect Justice? What is greatest righteousness.
Truly this: when the work and heart are both rightuous, and fulfill the
word of GOD, so that not only the hand does not kill, but the heart also
is without ire, and desire of reuengyng, and that thou be not only no
adulterer in work, but that thy heart also be pure, without the lust
thereof. And likewise in all other precepts. For the Law requires not only
to do works, but that the heart also be pure, and agreeable in all poinctes,
to Gods word and law.

But thou will say, where may such an heart be found? Uerely neither I,
neither thou have it in store. For we se how sone we fall into wroth, and how
sone also sensuality rises in our hearts, yea otherwise then we thought or
willed. Yea, and where we purposed the contrary, and hate our selves therefore.
What must be dooen then? We have not such perfect righteousness, and a clean
heart, and yet we hear the sentence, The righteousness that is required.
that the Phariseis righteousness, has no place in heaven. Truly this must we
do. We must not follow the Scribes and Phariseis, to think our selves
rightuous for our works. But for all our righteousness, what soever we do,
we must show such submission, and humbleness before GOD, that we may
say: O Lord I am a sinner, be thou merciful unto me, and enter not into
Judgment with thy servant, as touching works, but deal with me according to
thy mercy and grace, which thou haste promised and performed to us in Christ.

This doctrine tends to this end specially, that spiritual pride may
thereby be restrained, and we by that means come unto the knowledge of our
filthy heart, and most corrupt nature, and so at the last be brought to the
hope of Gods grace, favor, and mercy. And this is the very righteousness,
that obtains the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, which has her
foundation of our works, although they ought to be good and Godly, but of the
remission of sin, and of the grace of GOD. For although we prevail some what,
by that we labor to offend no body by our leudnes, and study as much as
we can, to accomplish Gods will: yet the greatest fault remains still,
whereas the heart is vnpure, and full of sensuality and wickedness. Psalm.
xxxii. Roma. iiii.
But he that obtains remission of his sins, is rightuous, not by his own
power, but by grace, forasmuch as his sins, are forgiven him for his fathers
sake in Christ. Wherefore, Peter in the Acts of the Apostles says, that our
hearts are purified by faith. Acts. xv.
But this purifiyng is not on such wise, as though no evil thoughts, or
unclean concupiscence, should after that be felt in our hearts: for that
should never come to pass, before this body of sin be laid in the
ground, and a passage made unto everlasting life: then shall the heart be
clean in deed, and pure of his own nature. But so long as this life
endures, Wherein the christian pureness consists.
all the pureness is in faith, and in the word, that GOD for Christ's sake,
will not impute our sins to us, nor punish us for them, but rather remit,
pardon, and forgive them. And this nevertheless must follow thereof, that
afterward by the help of the holy ghost we begin to lead a pure, holy, and
Godly life, and show GOD due obedience. But, as I said before, this is an
imperfect obedience. Therefore the whole righteousness before GOD, consists
only in the remission of sins.

And this is the true meaning of these words, Math. v.
where Christ says: Except your righteousness excede the righteousness of
the Scribes, and of the Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. These words are not to be understand, as though all that the Phariseis
do, is naught by nature. For where as the Pharisie in the Gospel of Luke
boasts, that he is not unrighteous, Luke. xviii.
no robber, no adulterer: again, that he fasteth twice in a week, and paieth
tithes of all that he possesses: to do these things is not evil, and we
would wish, that all men were such, even unto their lives end: then should the
Maiestrates, Judges, and parents, with such like, have less business. But
herein is the fault, that for this outward righteousness sake, the Pharisie
boasts himself to be rightuous before GOD, The error of the Phariseis.
neither thought he, that he had need of Gods mercy, and remission of sin,
for the obtainment of true and perfect righteousness. Christ resists this
leude persuasion, that we should not trust in such righteousness before GOD,
but make inquisition for better, if we determine to have any hope of the
heavenly inheritance. And he puts forth unto us the sixth commandment for
an example, that by that we may learn, what is the righteousness of the
Phariseis, and beware of it.

An exposition of the sixth commandment
The sixth commandment, as ye know, is this. Thou shall not kill. Here the
Phariseis persuaded them selves, that if they did but only abstain from gross
murder, they neded not to care for any more, and that they had fulfilled this
commandment: again, that nothing else was required of them in this behalf.
But Christ requires greater things. For the words of this commandment
are not: Thy hands shall not kill: but, Thou shall not kille. That is to say:
Thy heart, thy mouth, thy tongue, and all the powers in thy senses, and what
soever is in thy body besides, whereby murder is committed, thou shall avoid,
so that thou do not only eschew gross murder, but all other things in
heart, in mind, in word, in gesture, in countenance. etc. which are as a man would say, the way and preparation unto murder. For this saying: Thou
shall not kill: What it is to kille.
Christ does not so nakedly expound it, that it should signify slaughter
only, whereby men's bodies are slain, and deprived of their life, but what
soever is done besides, whereby murder ensues. As when thou hate any man* and
will in no condition help him, Luke. xvi.
but art so affected toward him, as the rich glotto^ was toward poor Lazarus.
Such through thy fault might perish, and so art thou by this precept guilty
of murder, as Ambrose says: If thou have not fed: thou haste slain and
committed murder. i. Ihon. iii.
And S. Ihon says: he that hates his brother, is a murderer. And ye know,
that a murderer has everlasting life dwelling in him.

Therefore, he that purposes to keep this commandment, must not only
refrain his hands, but his heart also must be void of wrath, Four manner
of ways, the sixte commandment is transgressed and broken
so that he neither show churlishe countenance, nor give cruel word
against them, that have deserved an evil turn at his hand, yea, and that by
all men's judgment. For Christ says plainly, that this commandment is
transgressed and broken, five manner of ways. First, with the heart, 1.
Heart.
when it is moved with anger and displeasure against thy neighbor. Secondly,
2. Gesture.
when the heart betraieth it self outwardly, and shows by some external
gesture that it is angry in deed, as when we pass by any man, and turn
away our faces from them that salute us, and will not ones give them an
answer, no not so much as a loving look. For this word Racha pertains
specially, Racha.
to a disdainful and angry mocion, as when the anger is Judged by the eyes,
by the countenance, or by some crooked word. Thirdly, when wrath proceeds
out of the heart, 3. Mouth*
into the mouth, as when we rail upon any man, or obscure his good name, by
our slau^derous words. Fourthly, which is most gross and wicked, 4. Hand*
when all these things come together, a wrathful heart, an angry mocion, a
leude tongue, a fearce hand. etc. and when violence is done, slaughter is
committed, or at the least, the will to do it is plainly declared. Math. v.
And albeit that among these things, some be more grievous then other (for
Christ him self declares, that by the diversities of their punishementes) yet
all, as well the little sins, as the great, are against this commandment:
and he that offends against the least, is a murderer before GOD. Now call
thy self to a rekenyng, and prove whither thou have done this commandment so
sincerely and perfectly in all thy life time, or yet can do, as it is here
required of thee. And thou shalt easily find, that neither haste thou done
it, neither is it possible for thee, at any time to do it. What then must be
done? For we know what punishment is appoincted, for the transgressors of his
word. Cursed, says Moises, is every one, that abides not in all things,
Deuteronomy. 27. Gala. 3.
that are written in the book of the law, What is to be done concerning the
fulfillyng of the sixth commau^demente.
that he may do them. Do as Christ bids them in this place. Be no
Scribe or Pharisie, that is, think not thy self rightuous, because thou haste
dooen no murder with thy hand. But look rather on thy heart, on thy mouth,
and other mocions: and when thou perceiuest, that thou art environed, besieged,
and compassed round about with ire and wrath: straight ways turn thy self
to GOD, and say: Lord, I as a sinner have offended against thy sixth precept.
I have given place to wrath. I have used angry tokens and words against my
neighbor. Forgive me this great sin, and so enstruct me, that I trespass no
more against thee. And this is one thing that thou ought to do, which the
Phariseis do not. Then must thou add this also, that thou temperate thy self,
and by no means suffer wrath to rule in thee. And although thou can not
utterly expel, and put it out of thy heart, yet confess thou this thy sin,
and ask forgiveness thereof, and ever after so stoutely fight against it,
that the residue of thy ire, get not under her danger the other members, as
the countenance, mouth, tongue, hands, eyes. etc. that by this means at the
last, thou may repress thy wrath, and so subdue it, that thou may not
only not be angry with thy neighbor, but also show unto him all gentleness,
which thing thou shalt find again at thy neighbors hand. By this means
shall thou by little and little, drive out al wrath out of thy heart, and
make it vanishe away as the smoke.

This did not the Phariseis. The Pharisaicall righteousness.
They had wrath in their heart, malicious signs in their countenance
railyng words in their mouth: and yet took they all these things for no
sin. For this is the property of this vice, to show outwardly, that it does
nothing without a just cause. Why, say they, shall I suffer this, being so
unworthily provoked? Should I by my sufferaunce, give them an occasion to do
worsse? We may not give place to the wicked, that they may thereby wax the
more licentious. And so are they that are wrathful by nature, more enkendled
and set on fire, when they are persuaded, that their cause is just, until
that by the deuilles help, the flame increases so much, that their wrath
must needs be ended with violence.

Therefore Christ admonishes us, that we be not provoked unto evil, through
the opinions of the Scribes and Phariseis. But this is required of Christian
men, The christian righteousness
that either they do good, or else confess their sin, and desire GOD to
forgive them, and to create in them new hearts. And he that after this sort
exercises himself in the precepts of GOD: is it not to be thought, that he
shall have at all times sufficient cause, Confession of our sins to God is
necessary.
to confess his sins, to desire forgiveness of the same, to exercise his
faith, and to apply him self to the study of the word, both night and
day? For confession is necessary, either then wrath, or any other
concupiscence has oppressed us, so that we can not deny, or excuse it, but
must needs confess to GOD, that we have sinned. Prayer.
After this also, must we pray unto GOD, to forgive us, and to give us his
grace from henceforthe better to do. To this prayer must faith also be
joined, Faith.
that we by no means doubt, but that GOD will forgive us both our sin, and
all other for Christ's sake.

The Papists interpret not this law a right.
This is the true practice of the Law: Neither must thou seek any other works
or rites, to worship GOD, as the Pope and his accomplices do, which are
wholly given to the righteousness of the Phariseis, as their saying touching
this precept testifies. It is necessary, say they, to put aside rancor, but
not the signs of rancor: that is, when thou art hurt, beware thou be not
angry therefore: as for not speaking unto them, and fliyng their company, it
makes no matter, it is no sin. Therefore they coumpted the commandments,
to be but a vile doctrine, which profane persons should handle. For them
selves they have found out works, and worshippynges of GOD, of a more
excellency, and greater price, as they think. But he that would keep well the
ten commandments, as I have now declared of the sixth, should have enough
and to much to do, so far is it of, that he needed to devise any other
services, or worshippynges of God.

Christ makes this doctrine a matter of great necessity, and wills, if we
will be christians, that we continually exercise our selves in these and
such his works. For as it is a sentence grave, weighty, and of great
importance, when he says first: Math. v.
Except your righteousness excede the righteousness of the Scribes and
Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven: so likewise does he
earnestly in the end conclude, and deuideth the^ into parts. For where
dissension and wrath is, there are two parts: One which has hurted and
done unjustly: the other, which was hurt, In dissension there are two parties.
and suffered wrong. As concerning him, which is the cause of anger, and has
hurt other: Christ teaches him a good lesson, What the party ought to do,
that has done hurt.
and commands him diligently to take heed, that ye meddle not with GOD, nor
with any thing that belongs unto GOD, till he be agreed with his adversary.
If, says he, thou offerest thy gift at the alter, and do there remember,
that thy brother has any thing against thee: leave there thy gift before the
altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift. For if thou do not this, all thine Oblation shall be in vain,
neither shall it please GOD, what so ever thou offerest.

In these words Christ tareth and reproves the thoughts and fancies of the
Phariseis, which imagined that they should so bleare the eyes of God that he
should not perceive and see, their envy and hatred in their heart against
their neighbor, and so they should be coumpted rightuous of all men. But
Christ says thus: Gene. iiii.
Thou deceiuest thy self. God first of all will behold the heart, how it is
affected toward the neighbor. If he spy any envy or hatred to be in the
heart, think not, that thy oblacions, Leuii. xix. Math. xxii. Mark. xii.
Luke. xx. Roma. xiii.
gifts, and Sacrifices can please GOD. For when GOD gave thee this
commandment: thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self: he requires first
of all of thee, obedience to this his commandment, which except thou do
show, he utterly rejects thee, and all that thou do. For what a leude
manner were this, that thou should offer an Ox unto GOD, and slay thy
brother? This were to offer up an halfpenie, and to steal away infinite
talentes, Thus it becomes thee not to do. But if thou will worship GOD a
right, first of all provide, that there be no hatred in thy heart against thy
neighbor, otherwise thou can by no means please GOD, what so ever thou
dooest. And hereof comes it to pass, that many through displeasure, borne to
their neighbor, abstain from the Sacrament, and by no means give them selves
to prayer. For this peticion makes them aferde, when they say: Math. vi.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. They
fear, that if they should not forgive, they should give sentence against them
selves, and desire that GOD also may not forgive them. And it is true: Eccle.
28.
neither ought they to think otherwise. For if thou will not forgive: neither
will GOD forgive thee. Therefore consider well, in what a dangerous state thou
stand, when thou receiuest anger in thy heart, against thy neighbor, and
wilt by no means put it away from thee. Neither shall this profit thee any
thing at al, that thou praiest not, nor receiuest the Sacrament: yea, thou art
so much the worse, because thou will not pray thy self, that thou may come
unto such and so Godly prayers. For as GOD finds thee: so will he Judge
thee. Therefore this is the best counsel, even out of hand to be at one
with GOD, Follow this counsel.
to be reconciled to thy neighbor, and to cast away all anger, wrath, and
displeasure. For otherwise, thou hear here, that thou may not meddle with
GOD: again, that what so ever thou dooest unto him, he regards it not. In
consideration whereof Christ says: Leave thy gift before the altar: for it
shall profit thee nothing at all. Math. v.
And this is the one part, which gives thee cause of anger. This party is
bound, not only to humble himself before GOD, and to confess that he has
done evil, Note well.
but also he ought mekely to come unto his neighbor, and to desire him to
forgive him his sin, even as he would be forgiven of GOD for Christ's sake.

The other is the party that is hurt, What ye party ought to do, that is
hurt*
which thinks, that he has a just cause to be angry. Christ also
charge this party, that he be ready unto reconciliation, and by no means
show himself hard, and untoward in this matter. For it is great ieopardy,
says Christ, that if thou differ thy good will, thy adversary will commit
his cause to the Judge, The Judge is God.
that is, to GOD in heaven, and say on this manner: Lord, I have done that I
ought to do. Thou forgiuest me, but men forgive not. I therefore commit the
whole matter to thee. If this be dooen, what sentence shalt thou receive,
think thou? The Sergeaunte is the Angel. The prison is hell.
Uerely even this: that forasmuch as thou will not forgive, he shall deliver
thee to the Sergeaunt, and so thou shall be cast into prison, out of the which
thou shall not go, till thou haste paid the vttermoste farthyng: Luke. vi.
that is to say: Thou shalt never be forgiven, as Christ says: Look with
what measure ye meat, with the same shall it be met to you again. This
therefore does Christ require of both parts, that they will suffer them
selves to be entreated, to give over all displeasure, and be co^content one to
be reconciled to an other, and freely even from the very heart, one to forgive
an other, so that ever after, there may be between them, hearty good will,
and continual amity. Otherwise we have the sixth commandment against us,
which accuses us, and proves us murderers before God, so that we shall be
sure, not to escape unpunished

This doctrine and kind of life, must the Christians maintain among them, and
diligently exercise them selves in the same. For otherwise we run into danger
before GOD, Superiors may lawfully punish of^endours.
without end, and procure unto our selves damnacion, not only of body, but
also of soul, as Christ threateneth. Notwithstanding, where men are no private
persons, but public officers, as Judges, Sheriffs, Conestables. etc. there
goes the matter otherwise. Roma. xiii. i. Peter. ii.
For he that is a civil maiestrate, or temporal ruler, has a commandment
to be angry, and to punish malefactors, for their injurious and wicked
doings. Parents likewise have a peculiare commandment, concerning their
children and family, that they should not wincke at the lascivious and wanton
behavior of their children, or at the ungracious leudnes of their family, but
reprove them, and according to their desert, punish them. GOD commands them
thus to do. And if they do it not, they obey not GOD, neither do they
satisfy their office, and the commandment of GOD.

For this is not to be suffered, that a thief should say to the Judge: Punish
me not. For it is written in the sixth commandment: Thou shalt not kill.
Thus may he say to private persons, that are not in office. But the
Maiestrate has a commandment to use the swearde, and to punish evil doers.
Neither is this tolerable, that a maid servant, when through her negligence,
she has suffered things to go to wrack, and to be spoiled in the house,
should say to her maistresse: you may not be angry with me, being a
Christian woman: For it is forbidden in the sixth commandment. Christ in
deed forbids, that any manne should be angry with his neighbor, and
says: that who so ever so does, is guilty of Judgment. But there is an
other power in this person, because of the commandment of GOD, that she may
rejoice, yea, and punish the negligence, and untowardness of her family,
Psalm. iiii. Ephe. iiii.
according to their merits. And this anger is not against Christianity, as
it is not against Gods word, to be a Father, or a Master of an household.
This were directly against the Christian profession, if they should not
regard their vocation, but neglecte domestical discipline, and suffer their
family to live after their own lusts, without all good and Godly order.

The kingdom of Christ, and of the world.
We must therefore, diligently consider this discipline. In the kingdom of
Christ, there is no place for anger, but for gentleness and love, that the very
heart may be quiet, and without bitterness toward all men, and that
neither the mouth, nor the hand offend, or hurt any manne. But in the
Kingdom of the world, in matters of policy, in things of household, neither
hand nor mouth is to be restrained. We may lawfully use these instruments
to revenge, according to every man's vocation, office, and authority.

For here there is no place for lenity and mercy, but for vengeance. So that
in this behalf would neglecte vengeance, he should give an occasion to GOD the
high judge, that he should punish the sins and offenses of men, and then
were the matter in worse case. For when GOD punishes, he punishes more
grievously, then men doe^

And this is the doctrine of the Gospel, for this present Sondaie. The Lord
our GOD, help us by his holy spirit, and give us grace for his son Jesus
Christ's sake, that in this world we may live here a Godly, rightuous, and
sober life, Titus. ii.
every manne, according to his vocation and office, and in the world to come,
enjoy the fruicion, presence, and sight of the most blessed and glorious
Trinity, GOD the father, GOD the son, and GOD the holy Ghost, three
distinct persons, and one true immortal and everlasting GOD: To whom be all
power, glory, and honor, both now and ever. Amen.

The.vij. Sondaie after Trinity Sondaie. The Gospel. Matthew. viii.
IN those days, when there was a very great company, and had nothing to
eat, Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said unto them: I have
compassion on the people, because they have been now with me three days, and
have nothing to eat, and if I send them away fasting to their own houses,
they shall fainte by the way, for diverse of them came from far. And his
disciples answered him, where should a man have bread here in the
wilderness, to satisfy these? And he asked them: how many loaves have ye?
They said, seven. And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground.
And he took the seven loaves: and when he had given thanks, he brake, and
gave to his disciples, to set before them. And they did set them before
the people, and they had a few small fishes, and when he had blessed, he
commau^nded them also, to be set before them, and they did eat and were
suffised. And they took up of the broken meat that was left, seven baskettes
full. And they that did eat, were above four thousand. And he sent them
away.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis miracle did Christ twice. For on midde Lent Sondaie, is the like
history set forth, when with five barlie loaves and two fishes, he fed
five thousand men, besides women and children, and yet there remained so
many fragmentes, as filled twelve Baskettes full. But in this Gospel ye hear,
how with seven loaves, and a few little fishes, he fed four thousand, and
there were left so many fragmentes, Why this gospel is read in the church
this time of the year.
as filled seven Baskettes. It appears, that such as appoincted this Gospel
now to be read, had a consideracion of the time, seeing that this miracle is
set forth in the fruitful time of the year, that all men may learn and
understand, that all these things, which we receive and take of the
ground, come unto us by the blessyng of God, and that God even at this
present day, works with us this miracle, which at the time he wroughte in
the wilderness, saying, that with a few nourishmentes, or slender provision, he
is able now also, through his blessyng, to minister food to many, yea, to
thousands, thousands of people, as he daily does, so that although many
times through tempests, the fruictes of the earth have no good success, yet
that we should know, that our chief help and comfort, consists in the
blessyng of God. For it is not the abundance of food, but the blessing of God,
that feeds. For such is the natural frowardnes, of the unfaithful world,
that when it sees not present store of victual, The incredulity of the
world.
yea, and also, enough the same: straight ways it begins to despair, as
though it should out of hand perish for honger. They that have great plenty
of victual, as of corn wine. etc. they will utter none of it, before they be
able to make the most of it, and to sell it so dearly as is possible. These
are very leude persons, The coueteousnes of the wicked worldlynges reproved.
and such as know nothing of Gods blessyng, neither do they believe it. Or
else they would so behave the^ selves, that they might have Christ with them:
and so should they never doubt, but that he through his blessyng, both were
able, and also would make of their little store, great abundance, and send
plenty of all things. For this miracle teaches us, What this miracle
teaches.
that there is no cause, why we should doubt of the good will of Christ, but
that he will provide abu^dauntly, both for our soul and body: for our soul,
his spirit, word, and faith: for our body, meat, drink, clothe, lodgyng.
etc. so that although sometime, he suffers such as believe in him, to be
vexed and grieved with penury, scarsenesse, poverty, and contempt (for they
are greatly hated of the world, neither does the world think them worthy to
be fed, Christ's blessyng pertains to them, that regard his word.
or to live on the earth) yet they should not doubt of this, but that Christ,
even in the greatest time of penury, and then all things be most scarce and
dear, will plentifully provide for them, all things necessary for this
present life. Notwithstanding Christ ministereth his blessyng, according to
the rule, which he prescribes in the Gospel of Matthew: Seek ye first,
says he, Math. vi.
the kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof: and al these things shall
be cast unto you. For the Eua^geliste declares, that the people tarried with
Christ three days. What was the cause, of their so long abode with Christ, it
is easy to conceive: Uerely to hear the word of GOD at his mouth. And this
is the cause, that he afterward is so carefully moved, to make provision for
them, and coumpteth it his office, to see that they lack nothing, least they
should perish for honger: that it should be a special doctrine to us, first
of all, to have a singular regard to the word of GOD, and to practice the
same, in our life and conversation: and afterward as touching things
apperteining unto our living to cast all our care upon Christ. For he has
taken upon him, to make provision for us, so that he will by no means, suffer
us to perish for honger. Stones shall sooner be made bread, then they, which
seek the kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof, Psalm. 34.
shall lack any good thing, as the Psalmographe says: O fear the Lord, ye
that be his saints: for they that fear him, lack nothing. The Lions do
lack and suffer honger: but they which seek the Lord, shall want no manner of
thing, that is good. Psalm. 37.
Again: I have been young, and now am old: and yet saw I never the rightuous
forsaken, nor his seed beggyng their bread. The rightuous is ever merciful,
and lends: and yet have his children Gods blessyng and enough.

Math. vi.
So says blessed Mark, in the sixth Chapter of his Gospel, that much people
came flockyngly together, out of diverse cities, tounes, and villages, unto
Christ: whom so sone as he beheld, he was inwardly moved with mercy toward
them: For they were as sheep without a shepherd. And he began to teach them
many things. The great misery is the lack of gods word, which is the food
of the soul.
And this is the first and chifeste misery, which Christ, as a good Doctor
and teacher considers, that the people were as scattered sheep, even as we
also were under the kingdom of the Pope. One called upon Barbara: an other
upon Catherine: the third upon George. Here was no Doctor nor teacher, to
set forth the true doctrine of inuocacion. All things were overwhelmed with
Idolatries, errors, supersticions. etc.

It appears by saint Mark, that the people of the Jews were in great
misery and blindness, forasmuch as they were as sheep without a shepeherd.
There were Priests and Levites in office, to teach the people of the coming
of Christ, and of his gracious and merciful kingdom. But what did they? They
became of Shepheardes, rauenyng Wolffes. The word of GOD they taught not, but
they set forth to the people their own dreams, unto the great danger and
peril of the miserable sheep, as it chanced also unto us in the Papacy. For
under the Pope no man knew, that GOD would be merciful unto us for Christ's
sake, and forgive us our sins, so that the doctrine of reco^ciliacion by
Christ, was utterly unknown. Although that their own works were
necessarily required unto salvation: and that this was the only way unto
eternal life. And this is the first and principal calamity and misery, that
Christ notes in the people, and therefore is moved with a fervent compassion
toward them, and preaches unto them a long sermon. As though he should say:
What do the Priests? Priests given to private lucre, more then to consider
their cure
Here is a great multitude of people, and they would gladly learn the true
religion of GOD, but there is no man to teach them. As for the Papists,
they are occupied about their own profit, and about the sacrifices.

Therefore Mark says: They were as Sheep without a Shepherd. A sheep with
out a Shepherd.
It is an extreme misery, when a sheep is without a shepherd. The reason is.
For a Sheep being but a weak and vndefensed beast, is in ieopardie of the
Wolf, or of some other noisome beast, when she is without her shepherd,
dogs, and fold, so that he can not but be in danger. Even so it is with us.
Look where the word of GOD is not taught, and where the doctrine of the
Gospel is not preached: there has the Wolffe, that is to say, the Devil
full power over the people, Pro. xxix.
as Solomon says: when the preaching of Gods word fails, the people
perish and go to havoc. For we have enough to do, to keep us fre from
Satan and his assaults, even then also when we most earnestly either hear,
Where the word of God is not taught the people are sone seduced.
read, or teach the Gospel, and give our selves most fervently to prayer,
yea, and when true teachers and shepherdes of our soulles are present. What is
then to be thought of the^, which lack all these things. Such may easily
be persuaded, one to become a Monk, an other a Friar, the third a Chanon. etc.
One to call upon this saint, an other upon that: one to trust unto his good
work, an other unto that: and so to be brought into manifold errors and
heresies, and at the last to become a pray to the Wolf.

Psalm. 34.
Uerely the eyes of our Lord Jesus Christ, must need be shinyng and bright,
Eccle. xv. Hebr. iiii.
seeing they pearse into the very breasts of men, and are moved with so
great and fervent affection toward them, because they so daungerously walk
and straye abroad, as sheep without a shepherd. In consideration whereof,
although Christ for his rest and quietness sake (as saint Mark says) went
into the deserte, Mark. vi.
yet he being as it were, waken and stirred up with the misery of these
dispersed people, first of all has consideration of the spiritual famine,
and honger that they have: Christ first regards the soul, and afterward
the body.
and therefore he falls in hand to teach the^. Even so it is in this our
Gospel, where the Evangelist shows, that the people continued with Christ
three days. This did they without doubt, for the fervent study and hearty
desire, that they had to hear the sermons of Christ. Oh, infinite treasure
were to be given for these sermons, if they might be had. But the Evangelists
mind, was only to describe and set forth, the work and miracle.

And this is the first part, that Christ above all things, is careful for the
soulles, of these miserable and dispersed people. Math. ix. Luke. x.
And therefore he praiyng unto his father, to send workmen into his Harvest:
yea, he embraces the selie simple soulles, and teaches them. The loving
affection of Christ toward the people.
Seeing that he shows such an hearty affection toward his people, with
what countenance, think ye, will he behold at the last day, those negligent
shepheardes, which regard not their office, and so are the occasion, that the
people fall into errors. How will he look upon those Princes and Rulars,
which compel their subjects unto Idolatry, and will not suffer that the
true word, The punishment of them that have not brought their people unto ye
true knowledge of christ
and sincere doctrine of GOD, should be taught unto them? What shall the
Bishops say then, which boaste and brag much of their titles, as honor,
holiness, grace. etc. And crake of their office, to the vttermoste, that GOD
has appoincted them Bishops, and Overseers of men's soulles, and yet they
do nothing else, then even of set purpose, keep the people still in Idolatry,
neither suffer they them ones to aspire, or come forward unto the true
knowledge of GOD, and unto the true worshippyng of the same, but grievously
punish and torment them, if they will not consent to their Idolatry, and
walk in the tradicions of men? Again, what shall Parents say, which labor
not, to the vttermoste of their power, to bring up their children and family,
in the true doctrine of Christ, either by their private teaching at home, or
else when it is publicly set soorthe, in the congregation of GOD* This then
without doubt, shall be the saying of GOD: Ye Fathers of housholdes, ye Kings
and Princes, ye Bishops and Spiritual Shepherdes, so many soulles were
committed to you, to se that they should be brought up, in the true knowledge
of my word, and that they should worship me, as I have commanded in my holy
law. But this have ye not dooen. Ye have suffered them to live in all kind
of wicked ignorance, to be defiled with all manner of Idolatry, to walk after
the tradicions of men, but not according to my word. Of whom should I
require this, and be revenged, but of you, which were Parents and Governors,
Princes and Rulers, Bishops and Ouersears? And yet have ye not dooen your
diligence, that your Servants, Children, Why princes are set in authority.
Subjects, and Parisheners should be truly and Godly instructed and brought
up. For Parents, Princes. etc. are not only set in authority for the
bodies sake, and for the necessity of this temporal life, but also that they
should be helpers, and, as the Prophet says, Esai. xlix. and.lx.
Nurses of the congregation of GOD, that families and subjects, may be
brought unto the true knowledge of the word, fear GOD, become rightuous and
Godly in their conversation, and so at the last, obtain everlasting salvation.

Therefore this is the highest work, The highest service that we can do to
GOD, is to bring men to the knowledge of his word,
and the most principal service, that we can do unto God in this world,
even to bring all such as be committed to our charge, unto the true knowledge
of God, and of his blessed Gospel. For who sees not, how earnestly the Devil
labor, partly by sects, and partly by tyrauntes, to stop the procedinges of
the Gospel, that no kind, no age may come unto the religion, and fear of
GOD? As I may speak nothing, how laborious and painful a thing it is, to
bring the people unto the true knowledge of God. Such service to God, and
such almose to the peoples soulles, does Christ here first of all, declare
to them that come unto him, that is to say, he first fedeth their hongrie
souls with the word of God. And this is truly to sanctify the Sabbath day:
I mean, to preach and hear the word of God, in so much that they, which
do this, please God more, then if they should offer to him, Note well*
great mountains of gold. We therefore must also follow this example. And
verily if Princes, Pare^tes, Governors of housholdes. etc. would do this,
they might deserve heaven, by this their office, that is to say, they should
do unto God, most high and acceptable sacrifice, for as much as they, to the
vtteryng of their poor labor, and do their true diligence, that the soulles,
which are committed unto them, may be brought unto the true knowledge of God,
and of his son Jesus Christ, and so be delivered from the kingdom of the
Devil, and be made inheritours of everlasting glory.

Christ fedeth the body also
After this spiritual refection, I mean the preaching of Gods word,
follows the second refection or almose, when Christ also takes care for the
body. For Christ came not into this world, to destroy either soul or body,
Mat. ix.xv. Luke. xix.
but to save both. Therefore the Carthusian or Monk of the Charterhouse went
not the right way to work, when he thought his great abstinence, and long
prayers, hindered the health of his body. The body is subject to labor, that
it should not be idle: yet must that so be dooen, The body with to much
labor, is not to be destroid
that the body loose not his health. For he that destroieth his body, as the
Monks many times enfebleth the^ selves, and weaken their strengthes, by their
loud syngyng, long fasting, and tedious praiyng, does nothing else then murder
him self. This must be avoided, as a most grievous sin, as Jesus Sirach
prescribes: The fodder, the whippe, and the burden belongs unto the Ass:
meat, correction, and work unto the servant But, says he, do not to much
unto him in any wise, and without discretion do nothing. For the body is
mortal, and therefore it has need of meat, that it may be in health. It is
also to be put unto labor, that it wax not wanton, and imagine some evil.
Moreover, it has need of correction and discipline, that thereby it may be
provoked, excited, and stirred up unto labor, that it wax not idle, and
negligently do the things that are to be done. And yet in all these things,
there must be a measure or mean. For the body can not always labor. It must
sometime have rest. And for this cause has GOD appoincted not only the day
unto labor, but also the night unto sleep and rest. And the middaie serves
us to eat. For GOD is no murderer, as the Devil is, which Devil labors
to this end, that the Monk may utterly kill him self, with the immoderate
exercises of fasting, watchyng, praiyng. etc. But GOD will none of this. He
will have measure to be kept in all things. Measure is a merry mean, as they
use to say.

This is the second comfort, Petturie is not to be feared of a christian.
that we should go the right way to work, and above all things seek after
the word of GOD: which when we fall even into the desert and wilderness, and
therefore are in danger of famine, yet let us not despair, nor be dismayed.
For eue^ here is the lord with us, which is moved with our necessity, and
also is careful for us, yea, and that much better, then we be able to care
for our selves. For we with our care, Prove. x. Psalm. 127.
can bring nothing unto good effect. But where Christ cares, there must
needs be great plenty of all things, though there were nothing else in the
world, then high penury, and most miserable lack, as we se here. The
Apostles also take care. But what is their care? For sothe this: whens shall we
get bread here in the wilderness, that we may feed this people? This their
care is such, that no goodness comes of it. But when Christ ones takes care
of the people, and appoincteth with him self, how he will feed them, although
there be present only.vii. loves, and a few little fishes, yet through his
blessyng, they be made so great and plentiful, that they suffice four
thousand men, yea, and there remain of their fragmentes, seven baskettes
full. Women and children are not nombred, whereof it is to be thought, that
there was also a great number.

Now tell me, if any man were certain and sure, that he should go as far, and
do as much with one piece of gold, as a rich manne should do with many
thousa^des, would not he wish that his one piece of gold, cast a side all
care, and be as merry and as frolike, as the rich man with all his thousands?
And if the rich man should boaste, and auaunce him self, because of his
riches, would not the poor man mock him, and say? Thou have no cause to be
proud, for all thy riches. For although thou have much, yea, and more then I,
yet art thou in no better case then I am. For my one piece of gold is as much
to me, as all thy heap of gold is to thee. Neither can thy so many
thousands, any longer endure, then this my one piece of gold. Therefore I am
in as good state with my little, as thou with all that thou have. etc.

But how come this to pass, when we be christians, or at the least, will so be
coumpted, How christian me^ ought to behave the^ selves in every kind of
fortune.
that we do not in all poinctes, so behave our selves, that neither in
wealth and ple^tie we wax proud, nor yet in penury and scarsenes we faint,
are dismayed, or despair? For if we earnestly and diligently, seek the word
of GOD: there shall be no peril of scarsenes. Christ will be careful for us,
neither shall we want any good thing at all. For this is nothing to the
purpose, whither we have much or little- This is altogether, that Christ
may bless that we have. When he puts his blessyng, unto that little thou
have, then shall thou not only, Christ's blessyng enricheth.
not lack any thing* but also for that blessings sake, thou shall have more
remainyng, then thou had at the beginning. If we would truly and earnestly
believe this doctrine, we should not only be without carefulnes, but we should
also repress couetuousnes, which makes us almost, Couetuousnesse.
as persons besides our selves, or out of our wits. For such wickedness
rules and reigns, in the hearts of coueteous people, that the more they
have, the more the couite. Yea, the couetuous man, does as well lack that he
has, as that he has not: and for the most part, couetuousnes does so
blind his eyes that he falls into al kind of mischief, fearyng neither GOD,
nor manne. But he that would consider this miracle a right, should be of an
other mind: I mean, he would neither because of plenty be to bold, or
trust to much, nor yet for his penury despair, or be utterly dismayed. For
this he knows that he, which has Christ, has such a dispensatour and
steward, as is able to make much of a little: And again contrariwise, that
where Christ is absent with his blessyng, all things out of hand must needs
come to naught, be they never so great and plentuous.

Paraduenture these seven loaves, and a few fishes, were for Christ and his
disciples. For seeing this was Christ's manner, oftentimes to go into desert and
solitary places to pray, and to fight against Satan: it is to be thought,
that the disciples prepared victual for their purpose. Therefore so sone as
Christ takes the bread into his hands, it is straight ways, increased, as
it may be perceived, so that although he distributeth thereof, yet remains
there in his hands, still more and more. This art and connyng Christ knows,
and gladly exercises the same for their sake, which love and embrace his
word: and yet not before that the lack, be perceived and felt. Math. vi.
Psalm. 34.35.37.55.104^145. i. Timo. vi. i. Peter. v.
Therefore he that desires to have this blessyng, let him not be grieved,
though he suffer penury for a little time. Embrace thou the word constantly,
and live according to thy vocation. (For this does Christ require of thee)
and as for all other care, cast it upon him, and he shall nourishe thee.

For no man has ever, either heard or seen, that a Christian man has
perished, and died for honger. They have been afflicted and cast into prison:
but after they have received the fat, almost of the word of GOD, they have
found other meat sufficient, neither have they lacked any good thing. Neither
ought this to move a christian man, Against delicate fare.
any thing at all, that he has not such, and so great deinties. as the rich
worldlynges have. For Christ did not over deintely feed his geastes. Bread and
fish was their meat, water was their drink. He sets not before the^ many
dishes, and variety of precious and pleasant wines, as the manner is of rich
men, and of men of power, that have ple^tie and superfluity of al worldly
things. He wills that mean meat and drink should be our fare, while we are
in this world and that therewith we ought to be content. For what requirest thou
more, then that thou may repress and slake honger, and preserve thy health?
Be therefore content herewith. If other fare more daintely, they have the more
cause to thank God for it, and to take heed, that they do not abuse that
their abundaunce, and large blessyng of GOD, nor make it an occasion of
wickedness. For experience teaches, Sumptuous fare and health of body, seldom
agree.
that deintie fare can not agree with all men, and that good health and
delicious food, have seldom concord between them, so that bread, salt, and
water with prosperous welfare and good health, is more to be wished, then all the deinties of the world with sickenesses, diseases, and torments of the
body. As we have examples by diverse rich men, which rather follow their
beastly pleasures, then their natural appetite of feedyng. But they receive a
reward, with their foolishenes. Epicures.
For where as if they would live soberly, temperatly, and according to the
desire of Nature, they should both have their health the better, and also be
the more able in good and semely order, to do such things, How great
euilles come of excess in eating and drinkyng.
as belong unto their vocation and calling, and so please both GOD and man: Now
oppressyng nature, by their to much ingurgilatio^ and excess, by their
surfettyng and dronkennes, they do not only make the^ selves unapt unto the
service of GOD, of their neighbor, and of them selves, but also they fill and
infect their minds and bodies, Eccle. 27.
with many sins and diseases, yea, and haste death unto them selves, before
the natural time, as the wiseman says: Excess of meats brings
sickness, and glotonie comes at the last to an unmeasurable hate. Through
surfette have many one perished: but he that dieteth himself temperatly,
prolongeth his life. Moreover, through this their to much delicate fare, and
variety of dishes, the poor people are defrauded of their portion. For the
more that the rich glotons spend thus wastfully upon them selves, the less
have they to bestow upon the poor, yea, they are moned nothing at all with
pity, and compassion toward the nedie people, as we may see by that
voluptuous Epicure, Luke. xvi.
in the Gospel of Luke, which faryng deintely every day himself, disdained
to give unto poor and beggarly Lazarus, so much as of the cromes that fell
from his table, so far was it of, that he showed any obedience to this
commandment of GOD: Esai. lviii.
Break thy bread to the hongrie. As for the nedie and waifaring men, lead
them into thy house. And when thou see a naked man, clothe him, and despise
not thine own flesh. But these cormorantlike Epicures, little regard this,
and such like commandments of GOD. Therefore in making provision for their
own bellies, they spare no cost: but unto the maintainau^ce of the poor, all
that ever they give, is not worth, God a mercy.

We ought therefore, to have a special regard to this simple fare, which is
here setforthe, and greatly garnished, with the most comfortable blessyng of
GOD, and therewith to be content, seeing as the Philosopher says, we live not
to eat, but we eat to live. And nature is content with a little.

When GOD gave to his people Manna in the wilderness, daiely for their food,
Exodus xvi.
such as were tha^kfull, and Godly minded, received it not only as a most
goodly and noble meat, but they also thought it to be sufficient, for their
corporal necessity, neither required they any other kind of meat, or
variety of dishes. But the delicate belligoddes, Nume. xi. i. Cor. x.
it could by no means suffice, which desired rather to return into Egypt,
and to sit there among the greasy flesh pottes. But what the reward of the^
was, the holy scriptures do manifestly declare.

The Patriarche Jacob departing from his country, when he prayed unto GOD,
Genesis xxviii
asked no more of him, but food and raiment. GOD gave to Helias the Prophet by
his Angel, iii. Reg. xix
a loaf of broiled bread and a vessel of water. At an other time he fed him
by a Raven, twice a day with bread and flesh, iii. Re. xvii.
and willed him to drink the water of the Brook Cherith. Here is no variety
of dishes, iii. Re. xvii.
nor delicate wines. Daniel, Ananias, Misaell, and Asarias, when they might
have eaten and dronken, Daniel. i.
of the same meat and wine, that king Nabuchodonozor did eat and drink,
refused so to do: and chosed rather, instead of that princely fare, to eat
Potage and to drink water, and yet were they better liking and fatter then
they, which did eat of the kings meat, Dani. xiiii.
The meat, which GOD sent to Daniell, being in prison at Babylon, by Abacut
the Prophet, was it any other then Potage and broken bread? GOD gives not
deinties, but necessaries to his people, which they shall never want that love
him. i. Timo. vi.
Saint Paul says: having nourishement and clothyng (he says not, having
delicious fare, and sumptuous apparel) let us be content. Math. vi. Luke. xi.
For nothing brought we into the world, neither shall we carry any thing out of
it. Therefore our savior Christ in that prayer, which he taught his
Disciples to say, commands us to pray, not for deinties and variety of
pleasant dishes, but for bread, that is to say, for necessary food, whereof
presently we have need. Give us this day our daiely bread. And that most
wise and noble king Solomon, Prou. xxx.
desired of GOD, only a necessary living. O Lord, says he, give me neither
poverty nor richesse: only grant me a necessary living: least I be to full,
I deny thee and say: Who is the Lord? And least I being constrained through
poverty, fall unto stealyng, and take the name of my GOD in vain.

This frugalitie therefore and simple fare, accompanied with the blessyng of
Christ, and practiced of all good and Godly men, from the beginning in all
ag^s, ought to move us for to eschew al kinds of voluptuous and dilicious
fare, and to content our selves, with thin and necessary diete, auoidyng all
excess and superfluity, not only as a sin displeasaunt unto GOD, but also
as a pestilent noisome and hurtful to our health and life: always having
before our eyes, Luke. xxi.
this saying of our savior Christ: Take heed that your hearts be not
overcome with surfettyng and drunkenness. And as saint Paul says: Roma.
xiii.
Make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

To end: This is not the meaning of this our Gospel, that we acknowledge and
confess, Jesus Christ our Lord, to be our nurse father, prouider, and
Steward, which gives unto us all things abundantly to enjoy them: which
notwithstanding has the most special care, for the food of the soulle, that
we may get above all things, the knowledge of Gods word, and of true
Godliness, and so obtain everlasting life. Again, Math. vi.
that so many as seek the kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof,
should not despair, concerning corporal sustenaunce, but in all their
necessities, flee unto Christ's blessyng, and faithfully believe, that Christ
will no less feed them, and take care for them, then he did for the five
thousand, of whom our Gospel makes mention, although reason se not, how this
thing may be brought to pass: so that here we are taught, that as we be made
of two parts, that is to say, of soulle and body: so likewise does Christ
make provision for the^ both: neither will he suffer such as trust in him, to
want any good thing, either for the soulle, or for the body, but give them all
things liberally, as the Psalmographe says: O fear the lord, Psalm. 34.
ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him, lack nothing. The Lions
do lack and suffer honger, but they, which seek the Lord, shall want no
manner of thing that is good. That we may obtain these two blessings of GOD
the father, through Christ according to his most sweet and comfortable
promises, that is to say, food both for soul and body, necessary living,
for the sustentacion of this mortal life in this world, and everlasting
glory in the world to come, both for soul and body: let us at all times
diligently pray, for the assistaunce of Gods most holy spirit, that he may
breath into us, such heavenly and spiritual motions, that we may above all
things, seek the Kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof, depend wholly
on his faithful providence, and alwaie be thankful to him for his benefits,
where with daiely he inricheth us, through his son Christ Jesus: To whom
both now and ever, be all glory and honor. Amen.

The.viij. Sondaie after Trinity Sondaie. The Gospel. Matthew. vii.
BEware of false Prophets, which come to you in Shepes clothyng, but inwardly
they are rauenyng Woulues, ye shall know the^ by their fruictes. Do men
gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thisties* Even so every good Tree,
brings forth good fruits: But a corrupt Tree, brings forth evil
fruits. A good tree can not bring forth badde fruits, neither can a badde
tree bring forth good fruits. Every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire: wherefore by their fruits ye
shall know them. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father, which
is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis our Gospel is part, of that long sermon, which our savior Christ made
in the mountain, described of the blessed Evangelist S. Matthewe in the.v. vi.
vii. Chapiters of his Gospel, and it is almost at the latter end of the
aforesaied sermon. And the occasion of these his words, may right well seem
to be this. The Lord Christ knew right well, that according to our English
Proverb, where so ever GOD builds a Church, there the Devil will build a
Chapel just by: That is to say, With the sede of gods word heresi alwaie
groweth^
where so ever the word of GOD is truly set forth, and sincerely
preached: there the Devil cease not through his Tares of wicked heresies,
and false doctrine to hinder and to let, yea, to obscure and deface that good
work, Math. xiii.
as we may se in the Gospel, that few or none may receive profit thereby,
least his kingdom should be diminished, and he spoiled of his pray.
Therefore in this our Gospel, Christ admonishes, warns, and charge us to
beware of false Prophets. As though he should say: I have set forth my word
unto you, and diligently taught you, what ye ought to do: how ye should
rightly and truly, understand the ten commandments, pray, fast, believe
in GOD, give almose. etc. This now remains, that ye diligently take heed,
that ye by no means, suffer your selves to be plucked away, from this my
doctrine, neither by the subtle suggestions, of most subtle Satan, nor by
the crafty conueighaunce, and fleshly persuasions of Antichrist, and his
adherentes. For I send you not forth among Angels, Math. x.
but among Wolffes, neither do I sow you among Wheat, but among Tares.
Therefore take heed diligently that ye be not deceived, nor allured from the
way of truth, unto the rocks of errors and heresies.

We ought diligently and above al things, to hold fast the word of God.
Wherefor Christ in this our Gospel, charge us above all things, that we
hold fast the sincere and pure word of God, and suffer not our selves, so
much as the breadth of our nail, to be plucked away from it, but whatsoever
is contrary to that, to coumpte it as evil as the Devil, and plain
abhominacion, who so ever be the aucthour thereof, Gala. ii. Joan. epi. ii.
King, or Kesar, Pope, or Patriarche. For, as we heard before, wheresoever the
word is sincerely preached, there are the Wolffes at hand straight ways,
with all their subtelties, deceiptes and crafty immaginacions, as we have
experience hereof, and diverse examples also, both in matters of the Church,
in affairs of the Common weal, and in household business. The Wolffe
thrusts him self into all places, that he may pluck us from the word, and
so occupy the place him self. In the Church we have the word of GOD: there
labors the devil to the vttermoste, to pluck it away from us. Sectaries
come of the Devil.
He stirs up one sectarie or other, to teach some new thing of Baptism,
of the Lords supper, yea, of Christ him self, which we never heard before.
And then such and so great is our foolishenes, inconstancy, and leudnes,
that out of hand we are desirous of news, so that immediately we cast away the
word, and have a singular respect, unto the aucthour of that new doctrine,
when notwithstanding he does nothing else, New faugled Gospellers.
then go about to deceive and destroy us. And unto this end, that is to
say, that we should not be seduced of such Wolffes, does our savior
Christ specially, direct this his admonicio^. As though he should say: ye
shall not want Wolffes, which shall come unto you with goodly visars, and
holy shows, that ye shall think, ye never in your life, heard more Godly, or
more excellent Preachers. And thus except ye take heed, ye shall be deceived,
and fall into danger, before ye beware. But who shall be in the fault? Surely
not I, which warn you to take heed, but ye your selves, which hear the
word and have it, and yet will you not keep it, nor hold it fast. etc. For
if a christian man being circumspect, and having regard to himself, The
Cathechisme necessary to be known of al degrees,
and to his own salvation, had no more but the Cathechisme, that is to say,
the ten Commandments, the Articles of the faith, the lords prayer, the
words of Christ concerning Baptism, and the Lords supper: even by these
things only, might he defend himself against all heresies and errors. But
seeing there is so great negligence of hearing the word, and so few that
delighte in the same, with their wholle hearts: it is no marvel, though the
Devil take place in them, and throw them hedlong into all kind of wicked
and ungodly doctrine.

Against this so great danger, Christ would have us well enarmed, The word
of God is a defe^se against the Devil and all his ministers.
and strongly defensed, that we be not circumuented nor beguiled, yea, deceived
and destroyed of those Wolffes: which shall be, if we cast a way this
security and negligence, and fortress our selves manly and valiauntly, with
the word of God. He sets before us, the most certain deceiptes of the
Wolffes, and how craftily they go about to beguile. We had need therefore
diligently to take heed. And therefore says Christ: he that will be in
saffegarde, and set free from the rauenyng tethe, of the most rauenyng
Wolffes, let him hold fast my word, which is the true light, whereby he
may clearly, as in a most clear glass, behold, se, Ephe. vi.
and perceive the slye subtleties of subtle Satan: which also is the armor to
defend us, against the fiery darts of the devil, although he approach unto
us never so craftily, even cladde and garnished with the simple apparel, of a
most simple sheep. For this is the greatest ieopardie of all. When the Devil
comes, he comes not in his own habit, but he takes unto him, some holy
and religious garment, and pretends much devotion and godliness. After this
sort came he unto Christ in the wilderness, Math. iiii.
when he said unto him: Fall down and worship me, and I will give thee all
these things. These words were not mete words for the Devil, but for the
most high Majesty of GOD. This a lone is to be worshipped. This alone has
the right and power, of the kingdoms of the world, and gives them unto who^
it pleases him. Therefore Christ rebukes him and says: Hens Satan As though
he should say: Thou came unto me in the apparel of GOD, but I know thee.
Thou art the Devil. Therefore the Shepes clothing ought to move no man. For so
may we sone be deceived, receive and hear the Devil in steed of GOD. In
like manner, when the Devil comes unto us with his Sectaries, Schismatikes,
and Heretics, Sectaries, Schismatikes, and Heretics. ii. Cor. xi.
he first of all puts upon him, a goodly countenance and apparelleth him
self like an Angel of light, that it may none otherwise appear, but that
those impostores, iuglars, and deceivers are most holy. most religious, most
feruente in Gods cause, and most zealous in matters of true Godliness, and yet
it is the Devil, as we have plentle of examples, in the Arrians, Anabaptists,
Dauidians, Swenckfeldians. etc.

To be short, Carnal security opens a way to the Devil, for to enter into
the hearts of me^.
where the Devil finds idle and careless hearts, there crepeth he into
them, as a Serpente, when men sleep on the grass, and feel nothing. We may
not therefore neglect, cast away, and set naught by the the faithful
admonicion, and warnyng of Christ, least through our negligence, we be
deceived of these glistering Hypocrites, and be carried about with every wind
of doctrine, but we ought rather, diligently to hear the word, have our
meditacion in that, and embrace it with high constancy, and by that expende
weigh, discern and judge al doctrines, who soever be the aucthours of them.
If we would thus do, the Devil should not have so great power to deceive us.

In the regimentes of common wealths, we may behold an example, Negligence
of Princes brings destruction of the common wealth.
and as it were a picture of Ecclesiastical matters. For when Princes are
careless and idle, and do not their office, diligently and earnestly, as they
ought: Then is as the land full of flatterers. For they believe generally al
men: what so ever they hear, they think it straight ways to be true. Note
well.
And this is the cause, why all things go to havoc in their countries, and
their subjects be most miserably polled and pilled, as I may speak nothing
of their own incommodities and losses. For it is not vndaungerous, to commit
the handlyng of so weighty matters to all men, and the Princes them selves,
nothing at al regard them. If they them selves were present, at the doing of
such matters, knew the accoumptes of their officers, and would believe no more
then they knew certainly to be true, it should go better with the common
wealth, then it does at this present.

Negligence of householders brings destruction of housholdes.
And even so is it likewise, in families or householdes. When such as should be
governors of houses, are idle and careless, and commit all things to them of
their household: losses chance sooner then they looked for. In deed, this is
true: we ought not to despair generally of all men's fidelity, and right up
behavior. For it oftentimes chances, that when a man perceives, that he
is not trusted, he shows himself the more negligent, in doing his duty. As
love with love, so faith also is bought with faith, and trust with trust.
Notwithstanding, this matter is to be handled with measure and discrecion, so
that we shall not rashly, and without good aduisement, commit all things to
all men, neither at all times, nor in all places. And men are so to be trusted,
that not withstandyng they shall think, that the Father of the household has
also himself an eye to his things, and that he will easily perceive it, if
any thing be done amysse of such as he trusts, or has in his house. For
the negligence of masters, is many times the occasion, that servants are
negligente, and give them selves to a more licencious and retchelesse life,
when notwithstanding the householde servants ought not to be careless, but
studiously to obey the will and commandment of their masters, and not to
suffer them selves by any means thorough the counsel of the wicked to be
brought unto lewdness. Disobediente servants.
For what good success of things can be there, where the masters command
one thing, and the servants neglectyng their masters commandment
thoroughe the wicked advise of certain naughty persons do the contrary: yea,
give their minds to idleness, to plays, to pastymes, to dycyng, to cardynge,
to drynkyng, to whooryng. etc. And yet many in these their lewd doings will
bear a fair face outwardly, as though nothing were amysse, but all things
well, The disobedience of servants unto their masters com^th of the devil.
yea as though they did their office, according to their bounden duty. But
yet for all that, seeing disobedience is showed to their masters, it must
needs come of the devil, whatsoever they do in this behalf. And many times
servants dwell with such masters, as by no means can abide such
neglygente, lewd, and light behauioure. But here comes in the devil with
his subtilties and craftye devices, which by sum naughtye pack, goes about
to persuade them, that such service is miserable bondage, and therefore they
ought to cast away that captivity, and seek more liberty, which they
shall easylye and with greater profyt find in some other more convenient place.
Away therefore with the old masters, and seek after new. The unwise
servants think this to be good council, and to come from a loving and
friendly heart toward them, and therefore they both obey, and disobeye. The
dyuell they obey: God they disobeye, Ephe. 6. Coloss. 3. Tit. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
which has commanded to obey their bodyly masters in all things, yea and
that with simpleness of heart. But the simple are soon deceived, specially
when frendeshyp is pretended, and those things uttered, which delight the
foolyshe fancy of men.

But why make I many words? The wolf is ready at all times both in weighty
and in slender matters. The devil can not abide gods ordinances.
For all things that with true diligence and good mind ought to be done
in the Church, in commune wealths, or in householdes, the devil by no means
can abide: but all offices that are ordained of GOD, he goes about to
hinder and let yea utterly to subvert and to destroy them, that that, which
is ordained unto the conservation both of things present, and of things to
comme, may be evil spoken of, that no goodness may ensewe thereof^ We must
therefore dilygentlye take heed and mark, what the devil at all times goes
about, least with his fair face and pleasant countenance he deceaueth us,
and brings us into error. For all such, as with whom we have to do, are
not sincere in Relygion, but many are hypocrites: They do pretend Relygion
and godliness, but they have not one point of true Relygion in them.
Wherefore, it is hard for to know the wolf thoroughly, except we be very
diligent, circumspecte, and discrete.

But this thing is most dangerous and grienous in the Church. For
scismatykes, sectaries, Scismatikes Sectaries, and Heretykes^
and heretykes comme in with such pretense, as though that earnestly and even
from the very heart, they did regard the salvation of men's souls, and
that they had a feruente zeal and greedy desire to set forth the word
of GOD, and the truth thereof. Whenne the simple sely sheep behold their
shepishe garments, they suspect no evil, no deceit, no craft, no subtlety.
They straight ways embrace them as true and godly teachers. For who would
not greatly regard such and so noble professoures of Gods word and of the
truth? But the Christians must know this, that the devil also is wont to
brag and boaste of the truth and word of God, no less then the very
godly. Therefore they ought to be so enstructed, that they might say on this
manner: The truth and word of GOD I love fulle derely. Notwithstanding, I
will regard no man's authority so much, All men's doctrine must be tryede by
the word of god.
but that I will confer this word, that he speakethe with my Catechism,
and with the doctrine, which I have hitherto heard. He that is so
circumspecte, and is not moved with every newfangled fancy, but has respect
unto the word, he is without all danger, neither can he be deceived. He that
does otherwise, it is not possible, but that he must fall into both errors
and heresies, and be seduced from the truth of the word.

Eve in Paradyse is an example for this matter. The deuyls oration unto her was
most pleasant and full of sugared eloquence. Genesis 3.
He paynteth forth god to be so gentle and meke, that he knows not what
anger means. Why (says he) has not God given all this gardeyn into your
power, that ye should do wythall what ye will, and enjoy the commodities
thereof after your own lust and pleasure? How unsitting then were it, that
he should deny you this one only tree, which can so greatly not hurt you,
that by the benefyte thereof, ye shall get wisdom comparable with the
wisdom of God? Honylyke and mete to deceive are these words, which were
able in deed easyly to seduce Eve, that she might fall away, and forgette the
commandment, which God had given to her, and to her husband. And although she
had not forgotten it, yet she began to doubt of it. And there came in her
myserie. First of all, whenne the devil assaulted her, she behaved her self
wisely, and gave the devil a repulse by the virtue of che commandment,
which GOD had given unto them. But when Satan went an other way to work,
because he had no good success in the former enterprise, and brought the
matter to this point, that if the commandment concerning the tree were
true, GOD must needs be malicious and full of envy, which would not also
grant them the like wisdom with him: then she out of hand casts away the
word, plucketh the apple, and eats. By the eating of the which apple, she
and all we were most myserably, Ephe. 2. Romans 5.
yea for our disobedience, most justly, cast into all kind of euyls. Now
for the like peril, because that we also should not be deceived on such sort,
Christ warns us, and says: Beware of false Prophets. As though he should
say: If ye be deceived hereafter, the fault shall be yours, and not mine. For I
have delivered unto you my word whole and pure. See that it be your fortress
conforte, and light. Only provide, that ye let not this light go from your
eyes, but hold fast the word. The word of god is a sufficient armor agenste
the devil and antichriste.
When any other word is brought unto you, that agrees not with this my word,
say: I am deaffe. This my light is of an other sort. And verily God has
sufficiently provided for us against the devil and Antichrist with all their
accomplices, in that he has given us his word. And he is excused, neither can
we putt any fault in him. But we are not excused, when we hold not fast the
word, but follow the word of the wolf, where as the very danger of the
damnation both of our body and soul ought to admonish us, that we should
not hear such voices. Genesis 3. Romans 5.
For it is the voice of such an enemy, as only seeks our destruction, as
he declared in Paradyse, concerning our first parents Adam and Eve, when he
threw them headlonge with all their posterity into sin, death, and wrath
of God: out of the which myserye our most merciful God and heavenly Father
has delivered us by his son, that we might be enfranchised from sin and
death. But now the second time our enemy lays wayt again for us, if he by
any mean can pluck us from this grace, and throw us again into our old myserie.
Therefore we must diligently watch, and with all mayn hold fast the word of
God. For otherwise can we by no means be free from danger.

And thus much have we spoken concerning this one sentence of the Gospel,
wherein Christ commands us to beware of false Prophets, and straighly
charge us, that we hold fast the word, and by no means suffer our selves
to be drawn from that, but whatsoever is contrary to the word, to flee from it
as from the devil and the pestilence. And that shall suffice. For as it is
tofore said: He that follows this light, and suffers it not depart from
his eyes, he may be sure to be saved. But Christ to show how careful he is for
us and for our salvation, is not content with this general commandment, but
he also prescribes to his christians two rules, which they ought to follow,
that they may the more easily eschew this peril. The first rule
The first is, that they be not deceived with the shepes clothyng, and judge
according unto that. For as wolves when they oppressed with hunger, practice
the barkynges of dogs, The nature of wolffes.
if by that means they may deceive either man or beast: so likewise do the
false prophets: Shepes clothing is not to be regarded
they bear a godly face outwardly, and pretend as they were the true
prophets and preachers of God, but no man ought to rest on that alone, least
he be deceived. This one rule is diligently to be considered. For it is a
matter of great weight.

The clothing or garment signifies this, that no false Prophet comes,
Shepes clothyng what it signifiethe.
which plainly and openly declares his sub^iltie and falls doctrine, but they
hyghly commend and set forth their good will toward the flock of CHRIST,
Flattiringe words.
and that of a very zeal toward the kingdom of GOD, they are moved and
enforced to preach: Again, that they can by no means suffer so great an
injury to be done to the pore people, in keeping them so long time in
blyndenesse, and in concealyng the truth of Gods word from them etc. The wily
sleights of such words, the simple people perceaueth not. Therefore they think
by and by, that the matter is even so, as they say and pretend. They think
that these seductours and deceauers, bear an hearty good affection toward
them, so that they commyt them selves to their tuition, being ready to believe
as they will have them, and to receive what so ever doctrine they teach. And
by this means are the miserable poor ignorant people most miserably
deceived. But a christen man must beware, as it has tofore ben said. For the
dyuel shows not himself in his own likeness, terrible, black, foul, 2.
Cor. ^1.
evil favored etc. but he pretends a certain godly majesty, and changes
him self into an angel of light. Wolves likewise com not as wolves, but they
put about the^ shepes clothyng, that they which know them not, would thynk
them in deed to be simple, innocent, and harmeles sheep. Office, voc^cion
title, etc.


Moreover, shepes clothing signifies an office or vocation, and glorious
titles: as we also have proved by experience, that the Pope and bishops herein
have done much harm, and yet do, in that they brag and boast of their
office, and therefore would, that their traditions should be of great authority.
For although their life be such, that by it they can deceive no man, yet this
has a great show and a goodly outward face, Math. 23.
yt they have the ministry of the church committed unto them: As Christ also
reports of the scribes and Phariseys, yt they sit in the chair of Moses. And
we ca^ not make them to leave this bostyng. We must needs grant, that they have
yt ministry or office, and that it is of his own nature true in the^, if they
would use it well and truly. But forasmuch as the Pope and ye bishops crake of
their office and therefore require to be herd, as such as can not err: a
Christen man must take good head to himself, and say: I knowledge the office.
It is a very shepes clothing, But Christ commands me not to be content with
that, Marcke well
when the shepes clothyng comes forth, but that I also search, boult out,
and see, whether under that garment there lurketh and lies hyd, a rauenyng
wolf, or not.

In like manner this is also a shepes clothyng, when false Prophets show
outwardly a great holiness of life: Holiness of life. Anabaptists
As we have the Anabaptists for an example. They use no vain, wicked, or
worldly talk: They swear not: They use all simplicity both in their diete and
apparel: they speak much of Gods word: they pray continually: they suffer
persecution patiently: they renenge not what soever is done to them: they
suffer no man to lack that is of their profession, but have al things common
among them, as it was in the time of the Apostles. etc. These things of their
own nature are not evil, and it were to be wyshed, that all men were such
in these things, Act. 2.4.
according to the christen profession. But that their doctrine should be judged
true because of these things: That is contrary to Christ's counsel. For
under a shepes clothyng, a wolf may hyde himself. The errores and, heresies
of anabaptists.
As when they after the manner of monks put their trust in works: when they
make God a liar, in that they be baptized twice and cast away their first and
true baptism, as unprofitable, wicked, and naught: when they teach corruptly
of the Lords Supper, as though there were in it nothing else, but bare bread
and bare wine: Again, that the receauynge thereof is an exercise for the young
lynges and for the imperfect folk of the christen Congregation, and not for
such as are perfect and ancient in Christ: when they burden Christen men
with things not necessary: when they disturb whole housholdes, and make the
husband to forsake the wife, and the wife her husband, to ioyn them selves to
their wicked and damnable religion: when they take away the propriety and
owneshyp of worldly goods and possessions, and would have all things common:
when they contemn and condemn the politic and civil power as profane and
ungodly, and profess them selves in deed ennemies to the congregation of God,
to the civil power, and to the government of families or householdes, This
fair face also was set upon the rules of monks and nonnes, so that by them
also the whole world was in a manner deceived. But this iugglyng is now uttered
by the word of God, so that now the wolf, which lurked under the sheep
clothyng is come to light, and known of all men.

Moreover, great gifts likewise ar shepes clothing, whereof Christ speaks in
the Gospel, Great gifts.
that some shall come in his name, and prophecy or tell things to come some
shall cast out devils, and work great miracles. In these things also, there
ought to be no prejudice to the Christians, as though they ought not therefore
to make inquisition of the truth of the doctrine. The word must be
considered without any respect had to the prerogative of any person: and the
wolf is always to be feared and suspected under the sheep clothing.

And this is ye first rule, which Christ prescribes to his christians, that
they diligently take heed and beware of shepes clothyng. For although their
speech be fair and courteous, their office true: their outward life fautlesse:
besides a great number of excellent virtues: yet we ought to mystrust, lest
under them craft, falshode, and deceyte, should lie lurkyng, forasmuch as
under fair and sugared speech, there may lie hyd most deadly poison: under a
true office, a corrupt vsyng thereof: under a religious life, fraud, guile and
deceit: under great gifts, great wickedness. Therefore so soon as thou see
the shepes clothyng, think, that thou must take good head and beware. For
Christ himself gives warning, that wolfes have such clothing to hyde them
selves in. Wherefore thou must diligently search them, that their crafts and
subtilties may be known. But how shall that be done? Ueryly that will the
second rule teach, The second rule.
which is: Thou shall let pass the outward face and fair show, whereof we
have hitherto spoken, and thou shall consider the fruits. The fruits are to
be considered.
By their fruicts (says he) shall ye know them. And he puts forth a
similitude. None of you (says he) is so mad, that he would gather grapes of
thorns or fygs of thistles. For such fruits grow in other trees In orchardes
also men judge by the fruictes of apple trees, of the good tree: but where
nothing is, they judge the contrary. This trade does Christ also put forth to us
for to judge of false teachers, that we be not deceived at the first blushe,
although the wolf comes clad with never so goodly and godly shepes clothyng.

But first of all, what is the fruit of a true prophet and teacher, The fruit
of a true preacher or prophet.
whereby he must be known to be no wolf, but a true sheep? Truly not the
outward life, nor the office, nor the titles, nor yet the noble gifts. For
Christ does testify this, and experience techeth the same, that men by these
are oftentimes deceived. The true fruict is, as Christ shows in the end, to
do the will of the Father, which is in heaven. And here it is to be noted,
that Christ speaks not generally of all Cristians but only of Prophets or
teachers. This is true, that all men ought to do the will of the heavenly
Father, and thereby do they also get salvation. The Fathers will is, not only
that we should do the ten co^mandementes, and by that means declare our
obedience to God: What the will of god is
(For seeing we can not do this perfectly in this life. it is impossible for us
to affirm, that we have don the will of God, or that we have any power of our
selves to obtein salvation and the kingdom of God by our works:) but also and
most specially this is proprely ye will of God, as Christ says in the gospel
of S. John, that every one that sees the son, and believes in him, John. 6.
should have everlasting life. And I will raise him up, says Cnriste, at the
last day. This is the only way which all teachers and scholars must walk,
if they, will come unto everlasting salvation.

Christ speaks here specially of techers or prophets whose propre and true
fruict is, The fruit of true prophets and teachers.
to set forth and to teach this will diligently, that God is gentill and
merciful, and wills not the death of a sinner, but that he repent and live:
and that God him self declared that mercy, when he sent his only begotten
son into this world to become man. He therefore that receaueth him, and
believes in him, that is, he that has this hope and trust in him, that God
is mercyful unto him for his son Christ's sake, and forgeueth him his sins,
and will give him everlasting life. etc. He that sets forth this doctrine
syncerely and purely, and brings me^ unto Christ, as the only and alone
mediator between God and us: this man as a true techer does the will of God.
And this is the true fruicte, whereby no man can be deceived. For if it were
possible that ye devil himself should so teach, this doctrine could not be
false, but that he, which does believe it, should surely obtein that, which it
promyseth.

After this fruict, which is true, proper, and most certain, and can by no
means deceive: other also follow, Godly life of the teachers.
that is to say. that the life be agreeable, and not contrary to that doctrine.
But this second fruicte is then to be counted true, when the first, that is to
say, the doctrine of Christ is present. For it is possible, that the doctrine
may be faultlesse, Not the life but the doctrine of the preacher is chefelye to
be considered.
when notwithstanding the life is evil and sclandrous. Therefore we must not
look specially to the life, but to the doctrine. For by that means shall we
most certainly know, whether it be a wolf or a sheep, that comes to us in
shepes clothyng. He therefore that will try the Pope with his church, let him
take his beginning of the first fruict, that is to say, of doctrine. For there
shall he find, that the Popes doctrine of Remission of sins, How the pope
and his church are to be tried.
and of salvation is not only directed unto Christ, but unto all manner of
works, unto the vows of Monks, unto the syngyng of Masses, unto pardons and
merits of saints. The doctrine and life of the pope and his church.
These are prickyng and hurtefull thorns, which come not forth in a fig
tree, or in a vine. Secondarily, let their life also be considered. Here
shall it be found, that the Pope and all his, cast aside all due obedience to
God and their princes. Again, the Pope and all his accomplices do most
extremely hate the word of God, and the true professors of the same: they
persecute them most spitefully, they punish them most cruelly, where soever
they can lay hand on them they live most filthyly and abhominably: they
labor not, but unfruitfully waste and spend away like belly gods and Epicures,
the goods of the church. To be short, there is nothing in their life worthy to
be commended. Look therefore where these two things are, that is to say,
where the life and doctrine be both naught: thynk surely that there are thorns
and thistles: and that if thou seek there for grapes and fygges, thou shalt
not only not find them, but thou shalt also depart with loss. For this
ought to offend no man, that the vine is so ill favored woodde, and the
fygge tree so weak: And contrariwise, that all, which belongs to thorns,
is more beautyfull and syghtly, yea sweet roses comme of them. For not the
fair syghte and pleasant look is to be considered, but the very matter,
and the fruict and commodity that comes thereof. Apply all things to this
point, and to none other.

Now what shall be the punyshement of such false Prophets? The reward of
false prophets.
Christ shows by the similitude of a rotten tree, even to be cut down, and
cast into the fire. This shall be the end of such teachers, and also of
their scholars, whenne they regard not true doctrine nor yet the fruits
thereof. Therefore let us highly esteem the word of GOD, diligentely hear
and mark it, and endeavor our selves to the uttermost of our power, to bring
forth good fruictes, and all false doctrine and wicked life eschew and
avoid, as the devil and the pestilence.

The Lord Jesus CHRIST, thoroughe the holy Ghost, give us all grace so to do,
and so to continue unto the end.

AMEN.
The ninthe Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xvi.
Jesus said to his Disciples. There was a certain rich man, which had a
Steward, and the same was accusede unto him, that he had wasted his goods.
And he called him, and said unto him: How is it that I hear this of thee?
Give accoumptes of thy stewardshyppe, for thou may be no longer Steward. The
Steward said within him self: What shall I do? For my master takes away
from me the Stewardshyp. I can not dygge, and to beg I am ashamed. I wot
what to do, that when I am put out of the Stewardshippe, they may receive me
into there houses. So when he had called all his masters detters together, he
said unto the first: how much owe thou unto my master? And he said, an
hundred tonnes of oil. And he said unto him, take thy byll, and sit down
quickelye, and writ fifty. Then said he to another: how much owe thou?
And he said an hundredth quarters of wheat. He said unto him, take thy byll, and
write fourscore. And the Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had
done wisely. For the children of this world, are in their nation wyser then
the children of light. And I say unto you: Make you frindes of the unrighteous
mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis gospel is a sermon of good works, and makes specially against
covetousness, yt me^ should not abuse their riches and goods, but help the nedy
and poor with them, as Christ at the end with express and plain words
says: Make ye friends of wicked Mammon, that is to say, healpe the poor,
and such as be in necessytie with your richesse. For this word Mammon
signifies richesse in english. Mammon what it signifies.
This doctrine does Christ set forth by parable, as his manner was, that the
people might ye better bear it away: and he warns us to follow the example of
the unrighteous steward. This steward perceived aforehande, that if he must
needs give up his stewardshyp, he should have need of other men's help.
Therefore in time of wealth he provides for him self. To one he forgeueth the
half of his debtes, and to an other the fourth part, that when he shall have
need, he may find kyndnes and liberality again at their hand.

Christ's meaning is not, that we should study to be unrighteous, and deceive
one an other, and so give alms: but he means that we should follow his
forsight or providence, his circumspection, prudence, and wisdom, and so
bestow our riches, that the fruict thereof may redounde to us in an other
life, and that we make us friends of our wicked Mammon, as the steward made
him friends of wicked Mammon.

And here is it first of all to be learned, why Christ calls it the Mammon of
unrighteous. Why it is called unrighteous Mammo^
For goods wrongefully gotten must be restored and paid home again, neither
ought they to be converted and turned into the use of almose, Esa. 61.
as the prophet Esai says: I am the Lord that loves judgment, and hates
robbery to do sacrifice therewith. Which is as much to say: If any man will do
sacrifice, or give alms, or do any worship to God with money: let him do it of
his own, or else leave it undone. For we ought to do no such things of other
men's goods, but to restore them home again to the true owners.

How does this then agree with that which Christ says here, yt we should make
us friends of ye Ma^mon of unrighteousness, and healpe the poor? Christ
calls it not vnryghtous or wicked Mammon, because it is unrighteously or
wyckedly gotten. Goods wrongfully gotten are to be restored.
(For as I said before, things vnryghteously gotten must be restored) but
because no man uses Mammon well, the Godly excepted, which live in the fear
of God, and according to the ten commandments. All other use their goods
unto ryottous living and delicious fare, without any regard had to the poor,
which ought to be succored by their richesse. For this cause is this filthy
name given to Mammon, that it should be called unrighteous or wicked. How
greatly this abuse of richesse displeases God, Ezech. 6.
it may easily be gathered of the Prophet Ezechiels saying: Behold (says
he) this was the iniquity of Sodoma thy sister: pride, plentifulnesse of
bread, abundance, idelnesse of her, and her systers, and because they reached
not forth their hand to the needy and poor: Again, because they were high
minded, and wrought abominations before me, says the Lord. Here are joined
together, idleness and abundance, because they do not know how to live
dissolutely enough in all kind of excess and wantonness, and yet
notwithstanding they have no regard to the poor, This corrupt order is
commonly practiced in the world: and therefore it is called the Mammon of
iniquity, hurtefull money, and robbery, yea although that it be got never
so justly: Note well.
not because it is so of his own nature (for what hurt can there be in
money, and in other things, the which be appointed for the necessary use of man?) but thoroughe the fault of such as do not well and rightely use it.

Therefore the doctrine of this gospel tends specially to this point, that
covetousness may be repressed, and the true use of worldly goods received, and
that friends may be made by that which god gives us, that when we dye, and
have nothing leafte, but leave all things behind us, we may find friends to
receive us into the everlasting tabernacles, for whatsoever benefit we bestow
here on the poor, the same in the last day shall not only bear record for
us, that we have showed Christen charity, but it shall be also abundantlye
recompensed: Then shall the poor come forth with diverse witnesses. One shall
say that he was helped with a coat: an other with money: an other with bread:
an other with house rome and harborow: yea as it is written in the Gospel,
Christ himself shall come forth and declare before his heavenly Father, the
glorious Angels, and all the blessed Saints, what good we our selves have
done, and how we have declared our faith to be true and unfeigned by doyinge
those good works. We shall have help of our friends, and they shall promote
us to the kingdom of God, when we fail here, and leave all that ever we have
behind us. He that would believe this doctrine, Christen men ought not to
spend their goods unprofitable.
would surely distribute his money and richesse liberally to the poor yt can
not get their own lyuinge: And so should they make of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, the Mammon of righteousness. For he would avoid the abuse, and
follow ye true use. For this is not agreeable with Christen manners for a man to
abuse his goods and richesse prodigally, wastefully and riotously in excess of
apparel, in gorgious buildinges, in delicate, fare, in folishe pastimes, in
wicked plays and sportes, etc. As the manner of men is now a days both in
Cities, Towns and villages. For this is their saying: Are not my goods mine
own? May I not spend them as I lust? my provision is for my self. If thou
have need of ought, get it where thou may. I have none that I can spare. All
that ever I have, is little enough for me and mine. Riches ought to be bestowed
upon the poor.
This is the Mammon of unrighteousness, because it serves in this case to
wickedness: and yet might the use thereof be both good and godly, yea and right
acceptable to God, if it were bestowed on our poor neighbor. But consider
this with thy self: if they have ye Ma^mon of unrighteousness, that will forgo
nothing thereof to the use of ye poor and nedie: How much more may their goods
be called the Ma^mon of unrighteousness, which get all that ever they have with
theft, Coue^osnes rulethe generally.
deceit, craft subtlety, extorcion, etc. As almost all crafts men
merchants, brokers, usurers and such like daily do both in byinge and sellyng,
in chopping and changyng, in bargains making. The rich oppress the poor,
and the hyrelinges through their unfaithfulness pay them home again. These
shall not only come without friends, Behold ye oppressors of the poor.
but they shall be accompanied also with many enemies, which shall accuse them
before the judgment seat of God. Such as in this world were unjustly
oppressed, and durst not so much as ones hysse against those rich and
unmerciful worldlyngs, but crouched unto them, saluted them with honorable
names, and put of their cappes unto the^, shall at the great day of Judgment
boldly say to the high Judge Christ? Lord we were in great penury, and this
man had exceeding great plenty of all things: howbeit of his so large
abundance he socoured us nothing at all: and if we bought any thing of him, we
gave him much more, then it was worth. And by his evil example other did the
like. Some did hyre out their houses at the greater price. Some uttered their
victuals the dearer: Some sold their merchandise and wares at such excessive
prices, that we could not by them for our necessary uses, so that many of us
fell into extreme necessity, some most miserably died for lack of sustenance.
These shall be in ye day the complaints not only of men, but also of Christ
against covetous men, and they shall accuse them of their wicked Mammon. Math.
25.
But how shall the matter go then? What sentence shall then be pronounced to
those unmerciful people? Ueryly even this-Get ye hence ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and for his angels. I have been hongrye, and ye gave me no meat. I have been thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink, Iac. 2.
etc. The Judgment, says saint James, shall be without mercy to him, that
has showed no mercy. For if they shall not escape unpunished, that will give
nothing to other, what shall be done to them, think ye, that have don hurt
and wrong to other, regardyng nothing but their own gain, commodity and
profit, howsoever they come be it, and yet persuade themselfes that they do no
wrong?

This sermon therefore is against covetousness, teaching that a Christen man
ought not to be so ready to take, as to give. Act. 20.
For he is bound wyllingly and liberally to help ye poor, so much as is he
able. And this service is don to God, which also will abundantlye reward it:
Whereas they that serve the devil, and do nothing but increase their own,
which also give either nothing or very little to any man, shall have their due
reward of the devil.

All the Saints, specially in that day, shall testifye against them and
say: These men did nothing all their life time, but scrape together all that
they could, and enlarge their possessions either by hook or by crook, by
right or by wrong, they cared not how we had great need of their help, but
nothing would they give us, no scarsely would they aforde us a good word, much
less would they succor us with their money.

Such a Prosopopaeian or personal action does Christ imagine in this place,
where he describes the matter as it were in doing, how the poor Saints
shall be about the Lord Christ, and put forth their cause against the
unrighteous and niggardly rich men. But the rich men that have used their
goods well, and have frendelye given to other, shall be in great honor, and
shall find many friends, and specially Christ, which shall declare, set
forth, celebrate, praise, and magnify their benefits and good deeds. All
these things does Christ set forth here to this end, Good works are witnesses
of our faith.
that we should earnestly and studiously embrace godliness, declare our faith
by good works, and thereby have witnesses of our faith before God at the last
day, that we were not given to the vice of covetousness, which is most
shameful, most filthy, and must abominable, and nothing else but idle
service, Ephe. 5.
whose nature and property is only to get, to scratte together, hourde up,
nothing regarding, Covetousness
what becomes of other men, syncke they, swim they, as Cain said to God: Am
I the keeper of my brother? Genesis 4.
Synck my brother, Swymme my brother: What have I to do with my brother? Every
man for himself, and god for us all, etc.

It is said moreover of christ in the parable, that the master of the
household did praise the unrighteous Steward. This is not so to be taken, How
the master praised the unrighteous st^eward
as though he allowed unrighteousness, but he only prayseth the providence and
wisdom of the Steward, and commands us to follow it in a good cause, that
we should use like care and diligence in that, as this Steward used in an evil
cause to his own commodity, although to the damage and loss of his master.
Even as if I should praise an harlotte for setting forth of her self even to
the uttermost for her own, gain, A similitude.
lucre, and advantage. In that behalf there is no fault in the gold, nor in
other things, because the woman does abuse them: yet this example tends to
this end, that I may admonish thee, that saying this woman for a little
advantage takes so great pain in deckinge and trymminge up of her self to
please her lovers: thou much more ought to set a work all the lymmes of
thy body for the attaynment of everlasting life, and that thou may please
Christ thy lover. This is not so understood, as though filthynes and
dishonestie seemed worthy to be followed, but this care and diligence is set
forth for an example, to induce thee unto a better thing.

But how goes the world? Christ pronounces an horrible sentence, and says:
The children of this world are more prudent, more forecastyng, more
circumspect, more wise in their generation, then the children of light. The
matter is plain. For when there is any hope of game and advantage, how does
the children this world carcke and care, swyncke and sweat, moyle and
turmoyle? They spare no labor, no diligence, no pain, no travail: with how
great combraunces, perilles and dangers are robbers and theaues afflicted and
vexed? Their care and pensiuenes ceasseth neither night nor day. Pursepickers,
stealers, whoremongers, adulterers, etc. Have their pains and labors, and
sweat not a little to gratify and pleasure the devil, and to satisfye their
wicked lusts. But contrariwise Christen men lie as it were oppressed with a
dead sleep, The sluggishnes of christeans.
secure, careless, without any thought, when they should do the works of
charity and serve god. They think al things to much, when they either do or
suffer any thing for Gods cause, or for the commodity of their neighbor. And
whereas the world bestows so great pain in purchasing, hell, and in
pleasing the devil, there must the Christians be urged and drawn, as it were
a bear to a stake, to do their duty although, god knows, they do it both
slenderly and slowly.

It is therefore a most goodly and trymme example, that Christ sets forth
here unto us. If we have any consideration of our duty, we need not fetch
examples a far of, or borowe them out of these books and those monumentes:
only let every man consider his own famely or household, and diligently
marcke, how diligent and paineful his children or servants are to do a
mischeife, and to work that which is acceptable and pleasant to the devil.
All these may be an example unto us, that we should with like diligence and
care embrace the word of God and the things yt belong unto everlasting life.
For seeing they be careful in evil and wicked things: ought we not much more to
be careful and painful about good and godly things? Let us not think this
by any means to be suffered, that the wicked lymmes of the devil should make
such haste to hell: and we that will be counted Christians to stand still like
dastardes, and to go about nothing, that may further us unto the kingdom of
heaven and unto everlasting life.

But the world does here help us notably well with an wholesome example
concerning the business, An example of acouetous man.
whereof Christ speaks in this place. For, set before thee some man yt is given
to covetousness: Thou shall see, that he can take no rest neither night nor
day. The desire and care of money does so toss him, as it were the sea, when
it is most unquiet. He inuenteth such subtle ways to get goods, as those
that be witty men can none otherwise then greatly marueille at his doings. To
be short, he will not let escape so much as a farthing, if there be any hope to
come by it. For his dry jaws are as gredy and as wide gaping for ye little as
for the great. Al is fysh yt comes to the net.

This covetous miser, this miserable Mammonisie, this wicked worldlyng, ought
to move us all by his example, Note well.
that as he has an insatiable desire unto the getting of money: so we likewise
should have as gredy a mind, as fervent a desire, as well willing an heart to
obtain and get everlasting life.

But where are these Christians, that study thus to do their duty? That are as
much delighted to help their neighbors need with a little money every man
according to his ability, as this covetous man is delighted to see his stock
of money increased either by usury or by any other unlawful mean. When
notwithstanding all that the covetous man gets (as I may speak nothing of
the shame and dishonestie) is but transitory and soon passes away and comes
to naught. But look what things we get be Christen liberality, and by doing
good to the poor members of Christ, they bring with them everlasting
fruits and commodities. For thus says Solomon: He that pitieth the poor,
Pro. 19.
lends to the Lord: and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again.
Here a man needs not to fear the loss of his stock or gaynes thereby, for
he is promised, that he shall loose nothing, but whatsoever he bestows upon
the poor, it shall be abundantly recompensed him. But this will take no place
among us, neither do we believe it. For by the devil are the senses and
judgments of the unfaithful hindered and let, that they can not perceive
this, nor have any mind to this gain and advantage, which far surmounteth
and passes all worldly lucre and profit. Wherefore we are worthily punished
for our madness, saying that we set more by things present although frail and
tran^itorie, then by ye things that are heavenly and everlasting, so that we
do not only sin by covetousness, but we also make our Mammon the author of our
destruction and damnation both of body and soul.

Therefore Christ concludes very truly, when he says, that the children of
this world are wyser in their generation, then the Sons of God. For the
devil receaueth an hundred times more of his children, then God does of his.
Yet must we not cease from teaching and admonishyng men, be they never so
sluggyshe and mad, Preachers must do their duties in preachinge whither the
people amend or not.
but we must be always spurryng and prickyng them forewarde unto the study of
good works, if that by our importune labor they may be brought unto some
goodness, even as other by the subtle suggestions of the devil and ye wicked
councelles of naughty packes are moved and brought unto all kind of lewdnes,
for although our matters proceed but slowlye in this enterpryce, yet this is
the stay we leave unto, that we are the children of light. If we do but only
keep this name diligently, Mark well.
and not go from the knowledge of this light, although all things be not the
perfectest, nor done with ye greatest providence and forecaste, as the matters
of the children of this life are, yet are we not excluded from the possession
and glory of this light, if we have but only begin to take in hand ye works
of godliness, that we may be nombred among them that are called the children of
light. For this is certain and sure, that in the provision of things, we shall
never be of like diligence with the children of this world, so long as we
live. Therefore this ought not to discourage us, though our old man go
slenderly forward unto godliness, whereas the children of this world run
spedily without any stay unto hell: We ought daily to increase in the way
of godlynes more and more.
neither let us suffer our selves by any obstacles or lettes to be drawn out
of ye way, but rather let us go forward daily somewhat in modesty, lenity,
softnes, gentleness, mercy, compassion, and in such other works of godliness.
For if thou haste but ones begu^ne, there is a good hope: half ye matter is
done, when it is ones well begun. And although thou procedest but slowly, yet
give not over, neither go thou out of the way, but still follow on after the
example of S. Paul, Phil. 3.
if by any means thou may comprehend that wherein thou art comprehended of
Christ Jesus. For that brings forth the children of light, in that we are
comprehended of Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.
and reconciled to God the Father through him, as he calls also in the
chapter that goes before, Christians great lights in the world. But as
concerning these lyghtes, thus he puts forth his example: This one thing,
says he, I do: I forget those things which are behind, and endeavor my self
unto those things which are before, and according to the marcke appointed, I
preace to the reward of the high calling of God through Christ Jesus.

This is therefore our comfort, that he will not condemn us, that are made the
children of light by the grace of god in Christ, Romans 8.
with the children of this world which run hedlong unto hell, although we
be yet weak, for as much as we always strive, and to thuttermost of our power
labor to obtain the reward of the high calling of God. For although he might
well and worthily reprove us, because we being the children of light, run so
slowly in our course: Yet he by his grace in forgeuynge us our sins does
supply that, which lacks in us: which his grace as the wide heaven, is
extended over all our life, so that it lies hid with all her imperfection
and poor state under his heaven of Gods mercy and grace continually. If we
stycke fast to this purpose, we shall at the lest find some friends there, We
ought liberally to give unto the poor.
but specially the highest friend of all, which is able to give heaven and
everlasting salvation, even our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is the doctrine,
which is to be learned out of this our gospel, even that we use justly and
truly the Mammon of iniquity, or the wicked Mammon, that is to say, our goods
and worldly possessions, and make us friends of them, namely, that we transpose
them unto the benefits of other, and unto the helpinge of such as be in
necessity, as this steward makes him friends of an other man's goods.

But here some doubt and demand, how this doctrine agrees with the doctrine
of justification by faith alone. The papists busye them selves in this place
beyond all reason, and expound it on such sort, Papists abuse the
scriptures of god.
as though everlasting life were gotten by works, and that only faith can
not do it, seeing Christ says: make ye friends of wicked Mammon, that when ye
shall depart, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles. Although the
Papists are not worthy to be answered as touching this question or any other
(for they do not, nor will not accept it whatsoever be answered, but they go
still forward to exercise their tyranny against the truth of gods word and
the faithful professors of the same) yet for their sakes, in whom there is
some good hope of amendment, I will answer somewhat to this doubt or question:
First of all the Papists them selves must needs grant, that these friends,
of whom CHRIST speaks here, are men, Note this reason.
which are conversant among us. For otherwise could we give them nothing. But
how shall they give us heaven, that as yet are not in it them selves? And yet
this is true, that they give heaven. For they are the words of Christ, which
can not be changed, nor called into question. make ye friends of wicked
Mammon, says he, yt when ye fail, they may receive you into ye everlasting
tabernacles. But how this comes to pass, Christ teaches in ye gospel of s.
Matthew where he says, Math. 25.
that he himself at the last day will come forth and testify, that whatsoever
we have done in our life time to his poor members, we did it unto him, and
that he will abundantlye recompense it with the reward of everlasting life, not
that ye have deserved the same by our works, but for his promis sake: as he
says: Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom, which was prepared
for you from the beginning of the world. But here is a difference to be made
in this question. For the right and true friend, which is both able and also will
give us heaven, is Christ This is without all paraduenture. As for the poor
beggars, whom we have helped with our goods in this world, they shall not do
it. But here ryseth an other question, whether we by our almose and other good
works are able to deserve heaven and everlasting life? This question is sone
answered. Paul says: whatsoever is not of faith, Whyther by our good works
we deserve heaven. Romans 4.
is sin. It follows therefore that God does not allow thee almose of the
unfaithful: again, that he will not give heaven and everlasting life for
that. But they that believe in Christ, and afterward declare their faith by
their works: their works please God for their faiths sake: and he will also
reward such works in the life to come. But yet for all that this does not
hereof follow, that everlasting life is given us for our works sake. For that
is annexed only unto faith, as in the gospel he does oftentimes testify: He
that believes in me, says he, shall never see death. I am the way, the truth
and the life. John. 11. John. 14.
God delivered his son, that all that believe in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. This is a true certain and sure solution. For Paul's
sentence is, John 3. Romans 14.
as we heard before: Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Therefore if any
almose shall please god, there must needs be first of all faith in Christ.
Faith.
That faith has everlasting life following it: It obtayneth remission of
sins, and causes, that God aloweth our works, although they be imperfect
and not altogether pure: again, that God of his liberality and munificence
will reward them in the life to come, as we heard before out of the gospel
of S. Mathewe. And Paul says, Romans 8.12. Cor. 12. 2. Timoth. 2. Heb. 12.
that the passions or suffringes of the Saints shall be rewarded in the life
to come.

Therefore when Christ says: make you friends of wicked Mammon, that when ye
depart or fail, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles: the
sense and meaning of these words can be none other but this If we be the
Disciples of Christ, and do good works, that god will reward those good
works in the life to come. But what says Paul? good works can not be don
but of faith. And Christ says, Romans 4.
that we obtain remission of sins and everlasting life by faith. Thou must
confer these sentences with this present text. But how can these be made to
agreee? Uerily none otherwise, Scriptures ought to be conferred.
then that through faith in Christ we have remission of sins and everlasting
life: and that god for this faithes sake does approve and allow our Almoses
and other good works, and of his own liberality for his promise sake, An
answer to the quistio^ of the justification of good works.
which we do firmly believe and stick unto, will abundantly and liberally
reward in the world to come: So that although it be laborious and painful
unto us when we do obey god and work well, yet this hope conforteth us, and
makes us chereful, and encourages us to go forward in doing good works,
forasmuch as we are most certainly assured, that they shall not be unrewarded at
gods hand in the life after this. This is the proper true and native sense, or
meaning of this sentence, and a good and substanciall answer unto the question
of good works.

God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ help us and by his holy spirit
stir up our hearts, that this exhortation unto good works, and the liberal
promise joined to the same being done in faith, may take good effect in us,
and so work in our minds, that in this world we may plentifully sow the
seed of good works and in the world to come reap the fruits of
everlasting life, Galat. 16.
through Jesus Christ our Lord and alone Savior: to whom with the father
and the holy ghost be all honor and glory both now and ever. Amen.

The tenth Sunday after Trinity sunday The Gospel. Luke xix.
AND when he was come nere to Jerusalem, he beheld the City, and wept on it,
saying: If thou had known those things which belong unto thy peace, even
in this thy day, thou wouldeste take heed: But now are they hyd from thine
eyes. For the days shall come unto the, that thy enymies shall cast a bank
about the, and compass the round and keep the in on every side, and make the
even with the ground, and thy children which are in thee. And they shall not
leave in the one stone upon another, because thou knoweste not the time of thy
visitation. And he went into the Temple, and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that boughte, saying unto them: It is written, my house is
the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieues. And he taught
daily in the Temple.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis Gospel ought diligently to be remembered, weighed and considered of al
Christians, that they also hereby may learn to fear God. For of all the
histories that be contained in the gospel of Luke, it is most terrible,
fearful, and horrible, and it ought worthily so to move us, yt we might never
forget it. For in this our gospel is mention made, how great anger and
vengeance god showed against the City of Jerusalem, and the inhabitants of the
same for their incredulity and disobedience. And it is a most certain and sure
doctrine unto us, An example of gods wrath agenst the despisers of his word.
yt all such as are obstinate, secure and careless in their sins, despysing ye
judgment of god, shall even find at the hand of god ye very same anger and
vengeance, so yt they shall never escape it. For if the most noble, goodly and
beautiful city were not spared, because having the word of god, it repented
not: let all men think this for a most certeintie, that except they repent
in time and amend, they likewise shall never escape the dreadful displeasure and
whote vengeance of god. Christ himself is marueilously troubled concerning ye
heavy destruction of so great and so noble a City, and wysheth, yt it would
call it self to remembrance, and well consider aforehande the wrath that is
to come, and address it self unto amendment, mourn, weep, and lament, and
desire god to be merciful unto it, and to forgive it, and turn away those
plagues, that it worthily has deserved. And although Christ speaks here only
of Jerusalem, yet he wills that his commination and commonition, that is to
say, that his threatening and warning should be understood to pertayne unto
so many, as have the word of god, and yet hear it without fruit, yea despise
it: that they should not be careless, nor think with themselfes, that god
will forgive them this fault This punishment shall as surely chance to all
such, as god lives. Therefore let us repent in time, and cease from all
sins, The dispysyng of gods word is a most horrible sin.
but specially from that sin, that despises the word of god or the time of
visitation, and that hear the sermons, and yet truly turn they not unto
godliness, but goes forth in all kind of wyckednes, whatsoever is preached and
taught to the contrary. For the pain is not therefore taken away, because it
is differred for a time. For here is set before us a terrible example of the
most fearce and horrible judgment of god against a City that he most dearly
loved and was counted the holiest City in the world, and against a people,
which God had chosen as peculiar to himself before all other nations under
heaven. This City was the house and dwelling place of god, and the people
thereof were his own family and household. Jerusalem.
For next unto heaven Jerusalem was the holiest place, where god and his Angels
dwelte, where all the service of god was appointed to be done, where almost all
the Patriarchs lived, and were buried: where also Christ the Son of God was,
and walked in the flesh, died, and was buried, rose again, and sent the holy
ghost: so that this City in holiness passed all Cities in the world, neither
was the like ever found on the earth, neither shall be unto the worlds end. And
yet for all that, all these things nothing at all regarded, seeing it received
not the word of god, nor obeyed the same: god did so severely punish that
offense for the honor of his word, that he would rather have that City,
ones tenderly loved, extirped and plucked up by the roots, then he would
suffer his word so to to be dishonored, and the glory thereof defaced. If God
dealt thus with his best beloved city: Let us repent betymes.
is it to be thought, that he will spare other cities, kingdoms, and nations,
where he has not dwelt, and where the people thereof are not so nygh unto him,
as the citisens of this kingdom were?

Therefore this example ought to be a monument of Gods anger, that we despise
not the word of God. Let us not use this talk, as we were wont to do:
Peace, peace: There is no ieopardie, All things are well. The anger of God
will never be so great against us. Tushe, he will never punish us, as he did
the city of Jerusalem, and the inhabitants thereof. But brethren, let us not
deceive our selves. For if he suffered this holy city, wherein he had so great
delight here on the earth, to be so destroyed and utterly subverted, that one
stone was not left upon an other, because of their wickedness, which heard his
word, Romans 11.
and yet did not repent nor amend: verily we ought not to think, that he will
spare us, if we offend, as the inhabitants of that city did. Like sin,
like punyshement. For this city was so destroyed, yt there remained not so much
as a print or token of an house. And God did than chiefly thus plague the
city, At what tym Jerusalem was destroyed, and with how great a multi^ud^.
when the people by great multitudes came thither unto the feast of the
Passover. For as histories report, there were than in the city.iii. hundred
thousand strangers besides the inhabitants thereof. For this was Gods
determination to make a general plague in this most frequent and populous
company, that all being gathered together, as into the very place of
punyshement, the Romans should punyshe them all alyke. For thus writes
Josephus, that in the whole time of the siege and occupiyng of the City, there
were slain ten hundred thousand people, and consumed with death: Again, That
there were led away Captyue, seven and nynty thousand. They were so
despised and counted things of naught, that thirty of the^ were sold for one
penny. And so were they recompensed at Christ's hand, whom they bought of Judas
the traitor for thirty pence. And this is that most noble and excellent
people, whom God with marvelous great signs and wonders delivered out of
Egypt, and brought into the land of Chanaan, yea he was as a father unto
them, reveled unto them his word, and handled them most louyngly and gentilly.
And yet for all this, when they despised his word, and would not hear him: he
made havoc of them.

And this is the cause, why Christ even with weeping tears, says: If thou
dyddest know those things which belong unto thy peace: even in this thy day,
thou would take heed. But now are they hyd from thy eyes. Thou go forth
careless, as though there were no danger. But ye matter will not alwais stand
in this case. It will break out: and the time is even at hand, Why god
differrethe his plages.
although it is yet hyd, and thou see it not.

But why, will sum manne say, doothe GOD defer the punyshement? Why doothe
he not show his anger straight ways, and fall to plaguynge of them without
delay? Ueryly GOD deferreth his plagues ta this end, even to declare and
show his longanimitie or paciente sufferynge, and to see whether we will
amend or not, Romans 2.
or as the holy Apostle says: Despysest thou the richesse of Gods goodness
and patience, and long suffryng, not knowing that the kyndenesse of GOD
leads thee to repentance? Likewise says Saynct Peter: 2. Pet. 3.
The Lord is paciente to us ward, for as much as he would have no man
lost, but will receive all men to repentance. For if God should streighte
ways punyshe us for our sins, Note well.
we should live a very little while. Therefore God deferreth his plagues,
and gives us time and space to repent and amend our lives.

And this is a work, wyche greatly sets forth the goodness of GOD, and
hyghely commendethe his exceeding great mercy toward us. But the devil being
an angry spirit doothe not this: for if he could kill any man with a fyllyp,
he would do it. But God is mercyfulle, and therefore doothe he defer his
punyshemente: but yet will he not forgive except repentance come. But wicked
men greatly abuse this lenity, and long sufferyng of God, and by that means
becomme careless, so that they do not only not amend, but they also become
daily worse and worse: as we have the adulterers, usurers, thieves, and such
like for an exaumple: which, because they are not out of hand punished, live
without fear, and persuade them selves, that they shall long so continewe.
But if that thou be wise, be ware, and eschew the danger betymes. For thou
heareste here, that GOD uses to defer the punyshement, and to conceal and
wynke at the fault for a time. But yet the pain is not auferred, because
that it is deferred: neither is the punyshemente taken away, because there is
made a delay thereof. Therefore return to the right way betymes, repent and
amend.

This is that, which Christ says here: But it is now hid from thine eyes. As
though he should say: Because the pain is hid, let not that deceive thee.
Thou shall kill me, as thou haste killed the Prophets before me. Now I
dissemble the matter: I suffer and bear all things. And this is the cause,
that thou thynkest it shall always go thus with thee. And therefore no man
earnestly goes about to repent and amend. But know thou this: thou haste
not escaped the punishment. If thou could only believe, thou would then
devise how to escape this pain. But forasmuch as thou do not believe,
thou art secure and careless, and neglectest the time of thy visitation
wherein thou art moved to repent, It is a most greu^us synn to, despise the
word of god
wherein also thou myghtest be restored unto the favor of God, and so art thou
nothing at all moved with this peril that lies hid. This is the sin why
the wrath and vengeance of God shall fall upon thee, and utterly destroy thee.
Mark how diligently therefore in this place, what syn God recou^teth the
greatest. For here Christ gathers all syns into one, yt is to say, that the
sons of perdition regard not the word of God: they let go all sermons and
admonitions as though they were deaf: and in the mean season they think:
that their matters will not fall out so evil, so that they go forth
without all repentance to sin. For Jerusalem was a city full of blood,
Repent O England and amend,
even as England also in times paste, yea, and that of late years, have been
full of blood, for the manyfold persecution of the word Besides this sin, there
were many other in Jerusalem, as fornication, adultery, vsery, covetousness,
theft, spoilyng of ye poor, oppression of widows and fatherles, gluttony,
dronkennes. etc. Now (says Christ: My mind was to reprove these things
with the word, that ye might amend and eschew the wrath of God. And for this
cause I sent before unto you my prophets, John the Baptist, and mine apostles.
Yea I my self taught among you, wrought miracles, and left nothing undone, that
was requisite and necessary for your ame^dement and salvation. All your sins
should easily be forgiven: Jerusalem should remayn, if ye would only know the time
of your visitation. I come not unto you, with swearde or armor, but meke,
gentle, and like a Savior. I teach and cry: Repent, repent: Amend, Iere. 9.
amend. Hear and be obediente unto God, before his anger wax whote, and there
be no man that can quench it. Thus I visit you, but I profit nothing. ye
heap sin upon sin, yea and that extremely, because ye have no regard to
the time of your visitation, neither can ye abide it. Therefore for as much as
ye refuse all good counsel, all good help shall forsake you. For who will be
the surgion of that wounded man, which would go about to destroy the body of
that surgion, which seeks his health? After this sort are ye Jews. God
procures, that remission of sins should be declared to you by me, and that
he will be a merciful God unto you: Again, that he pardons and forgeueth you
al things so clearly, as though ye had never offended: only this is his
desire, that now at the last ye should cease from sin, and receive his
word. But ye blaspheme me: ye say, I have a devil: ye condemn my doctrine as
heresy, Joan. 8.
and are fully determined to put me to death, yea, the most vile ignominious
and spiteful death of the cross. This is to much a beastlynesse, where God
does determine not only to forgive you your sins, but also to give you
great abundaunce of both heavenly and worldly benefits, to turn your backs,
and most churlishlye to refuse, yea to blaspheme his grace, and to set
naught by his mercy. But forasmuch as the matter is come to that point,
there now remains nothing, that may appease the wrath of God: the pain
plague, and punyshement must needs proceed, suffer it ye must. Psalm. 109.
They that refuse peace, must needs have war. ye would not have the
blessing of God: his curse therefore must needs fall upon you. For where men
can not abide remission of sins and the favor of God: there is no more hope
of salvation.

And this is the principal cause, why the anger of god is so fierce and great.
For as the Jews could not abide either to see, or to hear the word of GOD:
so likewise God afterward utterly refused their crienges, prayers, sacrifices,
and all other things, neither could his anger be pacified, till this city
was utterly destroyed and pulckt up by the roots, so that neither man, neither
beast, nor yet any the lest part of the city remained, whereby the place or
situation of the city might be discerned. For the soldiers labored to the
uttermost of their power, that nothing at all might remayn, neither of the
city, nor yet of the things appertainyng unto the City. And this is that most
horrible and terrible example, which the Evangelist sets forth in this
Gospel of this present sunday, to admonyshe and warn us, that we despise not
the word of God, nor let pass the time of our visitation.

But this is most of all worthy to be considered, that Christ says here:
But now this thing is hyd from thine eyes. For so for the most part it
comes to pass, that men do never remember the plague and punyshement that is
at hand, but because God for his long suffryng sake deferreth the pain, and
looks for amendme^t, the world thinks, that he will wink at the matter, and
regardethe not their sins. But Christ says: Although ye do not think of
the pain, because ye see it not: yet know ye, that it shall most certainly
come. God has prepared so many plagues, peines, punyshementes, snares,
fetters, manicles, locks, boltes, stocks, cheynes. etc. for the wicked, that
ye can by no means escape. For first of all, he has appointed parents, and
governors of housholdes, Pare^tes and householders.
and to them has he committed the care and charge of unruly youth and of
families. He that will not be governed and ruled by this power. he must be
delivered to the maiestrate to correct and punyshe him. After these the devil
remains, which if thou canste not yet be tamed, has so much power thorough
the sufferance of God, that he will punyshe thee with pestilence, famyne,
drownynge, burning. etc. so that no man ought to thynk, that he can preuayl
against god, or that he shall escape unpunished. If thou regardest not thine
office, nor wilt not hear and obey the word of God: thou shall have the
hangman, and the devil to be thy masters and governors, which shall
discipline thee to the vttermoste, and bring thee so low, that thou shall never
be able to rise again, or ones to lift up thy head. Therefore receive ye this
doctrine in time, that ye may discern and judge between the hid and the
open pain. For the peyn of sin is ever certain, and yet it is hid: and in
that it is hid, it does deceive men, as Solomon also says. The plage is
certain and yet hid from ye wicked.
It is not good nor profitable, that men be not punyshed out of hand, and that
god does so long wink at matters. For by this means all kind of mischief
increases in the wicked, so that they wax daiely worse and worse. The thief,
which has this day good luck in his theft, The delay of punyshement
hur^eth greatly in common wealths.
goes foreward in the same to morrow, neither thinks he then to have worse
chance then he had tofore, which notwithstanding at the last brings him
to the gallows. Which thing if he had before considered, and so given over
his stealyng in time, he might have escaped that vile and shameful death. So
likewise goes it with whoremonge^s, adulterers, usurers, and all other
sinners: the better success they have at the beginning in doing their
wyckednes, the bolder they are, and the more desirous to proceed in their evil
deed. For they consider not this sentence: Although the pain be hid for a time
and differred, A sentence ^or^hy to be remembered.
yet it is certain, and will surely at the last come, according to our
english proverb: So long goes the pot to the water, till at the last it
comes home broken. Therefore take heed diligently, and ever remember this
saying: Though the pain be hyd for a time and deferred: yet it is certain, and
will surely at the last come, as the Heathen by experience taught and said:
When God comes to punyshe, he goes in shoes of wolle, that he may be upon
the wicked with his plagues before they be aware. Learn thou this, and cease to
be careless. And although God comes not straight ways with his thunderbolte*
utterly to destroy thee for thy wickedness and sin, yet beware, and aforesee
the mischief that is to come: stand in fear of Gods vengeance, and repent
betymes. For he is guarded and waited on with so many ministers and angels: he
has in his power so many plagues, wars, famyne, pestilence, etc. that thou
can never escape unpunished. He able to send down fire from heaven, and
with the flames thereof, utterly to consume thee unto ashes. He is able with the
tempestuous showers of rain, or otherwise with water, to suffocate and smother
thee up. He is able with poison, with untimely and unsavory fruictes to kill
thee. To be short, there is no number of the plagues and punyshementes, which
God has in store for sinners and wicked persons.

This therefore is the cause, that Christ so ^carefully monysheth, weepeth,
and says: Consider now thy peril, O Jerusalem. Thynkest thou that the
plague and punyshement will not come upon thee, because it is hyd and deferred
for a time? Thou art greatly deceived. For the pain is not hyd to this end,
that thou should escape free and vnplagued, but that thou may be the more
certain and sure, that it will come upon thee, for as much as thou
consyderest not the time of thy visitation. If therefore thou wylt not abuse
this delay and long suffering of God: make ones an end of synnyng, and embrace
the word, and so shall thou provide well for thy self. If thou will not,
thou shall surely perish, and come to naught.

On this manner does Peter also preach, saying: Suppose, 2. Pet. 3.
that the long sufferyng of the Lord is salvation. That is to say: Think it
to be your salvation, and that it is done for your sake, that ye should not
be damned. For if God should always punyshe according to our deserte and sin,
none of us all should live long in this world. Notwithstanding, God does not so,
but he is long suffryng, patiently abides our conversion, and deferreth the
punyshement. Understande this so, says Peter, as a thing done for your
salvation, that ye may thus say: O Lord, I have sinned diverse ways and
often, and yet the punyshement thereof has not followed, Gods plages differrede
are the more grievous.
but is deferred. Notwithstanding, what does this signify? verily none other
thing then yt although the pain be hid, yet at the last it will surely come,
yea and that so much the more grievous, because it is differred. Therefore be
merciful to me, O Lord: Forgive me my sins, and give me grace so to repent
and amend, that I offend no more. Here Peter teaches, that we should use
the patience and long suffering of God, unto our confort and salvation. For God
desires not the destruction of men, neither deliteth he in the death of
sinners. It is therefore for our salvation, when God hides the pain, and
deferreth the punishment. But when this way can do no good with sinners, but
in the day of wrath, they heap up more wrath by going forth to syn: then
can not God any longer defer his plagues but seeing no hope of amendment, he
renders to the wicked, according to their wickedness, as daily experience
teaches. When thieves will not cease from their stealing, they at the last come
to the gallows, and are hanged. The whoremongers and adulterers also going
forward in their uncleanness at the last are taken, brought to shame, and
punyshed. Thus did Christ plainly declare to Jerusalem, that although God did
as yet hyde the pain, and defer the punyshement, yet that he would at the
last come, and most miserably plage those stiffenecked and disobedient people.
Therefore let every man fear God. Let all think this, lyttel, great old, and
young, that if they sin, and will not cease, and repent, that punyshement
will at the last come. For to this end is the exaumple of Jerusalem, Plinius
lib. 5. cap. 14.
that most holy and beautyfull City set forth unto us, of the which city,
the very Ethnike histories also report that it was the goodliest city of all
the east parts. But it is now destroyed, and utterly brought to naught. The
cause of the subversion and utter ruin thereof was, because it made no end of
synnyng, neither would it receive the word of God, but rather hate and
persecute it.

Such example does Christ set forth to us in this Gospel, that we may
repent and amend, or else that we should know, if we will not repent, we
shall surely be plagued, although the pain for a time be hyd, and that when
the time of punishment comes, al prayers and supplications unto God shall be
frustrate and vain: as God himself says by the mouth of Solomon I have called,
and ye refused it. I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded it: but
all my counsels have ye despised, and set my correction at naught. Pro. 10.
Therefore shall I also laugh in your destruction, and mock you, when that thing
that ye fear, comes upon you: even when the thing that ye be afraid of,
falls in sodeinly like a storm, and your misery like a tempest: yea when
trouble and heuines comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will
not hear. They shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: and that
because they hated knowledge, and received not the fear of the Lord, but
abhorred my counsel, and despised all my correction. Therefore shall they
eat the fruits of their own way, and be filled with their own inventions.
For the turnyng away of the unwise shall slay them, and the prosperity of
fools shall be their own destruction.

Even thus did God handle the Jews. The time of the siege was not long,
even from Easter until September, and all that time there was sacrificyng,
praying, and syngyng to the uttermost, but all in vain. For God had shut up
his ears. The reason is this. For he had hyd and deferred the punishment, that
they might hear his word, repent, amend and know the time of their
visitation. But all these things did no good with that indurate, hard herted,
and styffenecked people. Therefore where he publyshed the punyshement, he hyd
him self, that he could be found in no place, as Oseas the Prophet
thretnethe also the kingdom of Israel: Osee. 5.
They shall come with their sheep and bullockes to seek the Lord, but they
shall not find hyme for he is gone from them. This example therefore ought not
to be neglected or to be set at naught, but for as much as God has such
places in store, and will at this time bring them to light, let us fear him.
And forasmuch as he does not take vengeance of our sins out of hand, but
gives us days of respite, that we may repent and amend: let us love him as a
most merciful Father, and say: O Lord, I know that thou wylt not suffer
sin to escape unpunished: notwithstanding, O Lord, endue me with thy grace
and holy Spirit, that I may amend and escape the punyshement and pain of
thy most fierce anger. He that thus repents, easily obteyneth mercy and
forgeuenes. And without doubt Jerusalem had continued unto this day, if the
Jews would have known the time of their visitation, and mekely have said
unto God: O Lord, we have offended, we have done wickedly, our sins are
most heinous: for we have slain thy servants, the Prophets.
Notwithstanding, thou have now given us thy Gospel to be our help and
confort, for ye which we most humbly thank thee. O be thou mercyful unto us,
and give us grace to repent, and to amend that is amysse, that we may become
new creatures, and serve thee in holiness and ryghteousnes all the days of
our life. If the Jews had done this, the Romans although never so strong and
myghtie, had never been able to do any thing against them, yea they had
never moved war against them. But seeing they remained and continued in
their sin obstinatly without any repentance, and said: Tushe, there is no
ieopardie. What? should God cast away this city, where his dwelling place is?
wherein also alone his honor and worship is maintened, It will never come to
pass. Because of this vain bosting and unrepentance God so plagued that their
city, that there was not one stone left upon an other, so that it is now
utterly destroyed and brought to naught, and made an example for all them that
obstinatly sin, and will not amend, that the like peynes and plagues shall
also chance to them: but to other, that receive the word of God, and repent,
it is a comfort and doctrine, that they may lern when God hydeth the pain, it
is for their peace, and that God will forgive them their sins, if they only
cease now from their wickedness, and return unto God. For it is no marvel
though we sin. Sin.
But to defend our sins, and obstinatly to persevere and continue in them:
This by no means can GOD abide: he will rather make havoc of all together,
namely, when he comes on his gracious visitation, and would gladdely call us
unto repentance.

This City therefore was unhappy, Security destroys the city.
neither did any thing destroy that, but the glorious and noble title, in
that it was called the city of GOD, the house and dwelling place of God. This
made the Jews careless, so that they thought on this manner: Should this city
come to naught? It will never com to pass God can not cast it away. Therefore,
though all the kingdoms of the world came against it, they should never
prevail. God will not suffer his city and dwelling place to be destroyed.
This title made the^ so bold, that for the redress of their sinful life, they
regarded not the visitation by the word. And by this means was God compelled,
that forasmuch as they refused to be visited unto peace, they should be
visited unto death and destruction. We English men also are at this present
day of special grace and mere mercy visited of God by his word: but we in
every condition show our selves unworthy of this syngular goodness of God. Some
impugn the manifest truth of gods word both by words and writings.
Remember this O England and beware betyms
Some abuse Gods word unto the maintenance of their covetousness, pride,
uncleanness, excess, and other most grievous sins. It is therefore to be
feared, that except we spedily repent, some great plague will sodeinly fall
upon us,, whether it be by pestilence or by hunger, by civil war, or by the
invasion of foreyne enemies.

Therefore let us not forget this example, that Jerusalem was so miserably
destroyed, because it received not the word of God, but despised it, that we
may lern gladly to hear the word of God: and though we sin yet that we should
repent and amend And this is the first part of the Gospel. After this, the
Euangeliste makes mention, that Christ went into the Temple, and did cast out
all buyers and sellers, and said: My house is the house of prayer: The second
part of the gospellr
but ye have made it a den of thieves. This did Christ with a marvelous great
power. and it is to be reckned with his other miracles which we are not able to
follow. For except it had been so, without doubt so many myghtie marchantes or
occupiers had easily ben able to withstand Christ, that they should not give
place unto him alone, which without any weapon, only with a whip, as the
Evangelist says, took this weighty matter in hand.

In that they gave place, and made no resistance, it shows evidently, that
Christ spoke such words unto the Jews, as he did to the Jews in the gardein
when they fell backward unto the ground. But this act of Christ we Christians
shall not follow. Therefore let no man use the story to this end, as though
the Eclesiasticall ministers, had any corporal or temporal jurisdiction, as
Christ exercises here such power. For if Christ had not far excelled the
power of man, he alone against so many could not have done much. But we may
not have so great respect unto the work, as unto the cause. This expresses
Christ in these words, when he says: My house is the house of prayer, but ye
have made it a den of thieves. what cause had Christ, that he should speak
such a fierce and hard sentence to the Jews? For without doubt they did not
rob nor steal in the temple. But this was the matter. The money changers had
here their money, and did exercise bying and sellyng of sheep, oxen, doves.
etc. for ye sacrifices. For every Jew could not bring with him from home, that
he would sacrifice.

The priests devised things for their own aua^tage, as ye papists did in time
of blindness, yt there should alwais be at hand, plenty of cattall, and
peradventure money also for to offer. For ye temple also had her money as
histories show. This seems a thing more worthi of praise then of dispraise.
For seeing that God appointed and commanded this service. who durst be bold to
condemn this, The priests sought not the glory of god but their own gaynes
forasmuch as all these things made to auance and set forth this service
and worshipping of God, that it might be most glorious and goodly? But there
was an other matter. The priests in deed made this pretense, that they did all
things to set forth the service of God: but they would not so greatly have
regarded that, if they had not had so great profit by it. Therefore what so
ever they did, they did it not for Gods cause, but for their own lucre and
gain This covetousness moved them, that in all their doctrine, they commended
nothing but sacrifices, as our monks and Priests commend their sacrifice of
the Mass, Mass
that by it sins are put away, and the grace of God obtained. This made the
people to swarm in going to Mass, as though they had been flocks of sheep.
But in the mean season while they sought their own private commodity, and in
their doctrine extolled their Missall sacrifice, they utterly omitted, and left
untaught the true service and acceptable worshipping of God, which is to fear
God, to believe in God, and to keep his word: and by this means they
encouraged men to go forth in their wicked life, with great security, and
without any remorse of conscience. Eue^ so played the Iewishe priests. They
taught the people, Note.
that if they did kill and sacrifice much, al things should go well with
them, as we may gather of the Prophets, which was the cause, that they
spoke so much against sacrifices. And this is a very great sin in deed,
when such a robbery is committed, that not the bodies, but the souls are
slain for ever: which is when men are taught to put their confidence and trust
in their own works, and not in the grace and mercy of god. Thus could Christ
by no means abide, neither ought we to suffer it, but by the word of god to
resist it unto the uttermost of our power. For without this, there is no way
unto salvation. Men must be brought from their own works and merits unto the
sacrifice and merit of Christ, and unto the mercy of god, and afterward they
must be exhorted unto a godly life, that they follow not their own
imaginations, but the word of god, and frame them selves in all points
according unto that. He yt does this, uses the temple and the ministry
aright: he that does otherwise, abuses them, and is a theif and murderer of
souls, as Oseas the Prophet also calls the priests in the kingdom of
Israel. As theaues armed, says he, Osee. 6.
wait for him that passes by the way: such is the council of the priests,
which with one agreed counsel, murder cruelly such as keep the way: yea they
dare do all unspeakable mischeife. By these his words ye Prophet describes
the great slaughter, that they made among the people with their false
doctrine. For whereas their duty was to commend and set forth to the people
the sacrifice of Christ, they co^me^ded the sacrifices of beasts. The false
doctrine of the Iewishe priests.
For yt was for their advantage: that made their kitchen to smoke. For they had
always a portion of those sacrifices. But by this means men were not only
polled and pylled of their money, but they were also in danger of their souls
salvation. Christ by no means could abide this, and therefore he made havoc
in the Temple. He did cast out such as bought and sold in the temple. He threw
down and topled over the tables of the money chaungers etc. He would rather do
any thing then suffer, that such theft and murder should be maintained, yea
and that under the pretense of gods service. But as Christ did this at ye time
by miracle, so is the same example exercised diligently by the judgment of god
against Schismatikes. The ungodly Bishops, priests, and monks, which for
covetousness of worldly things defend the wicked sacrifice of the Mass and the
other ydolatrie, shall shortly feel this zele and whote indignation of god,
when they shall be worthily cast out of the temple and be had in contempt of all
men. And this much have we spoken of our gospel. God the father of mercies for
Christ's sake might vouchesafe to raise up his holy spirit in our hearts
unto his fear, faith, and love, and mercifully keep us in his word, and
defend us against all evil both bodily and ghostly to the glory of his blessed
name. Amen.

The xi Sunday after Trinity sunday. The Gospel. Luke. xviii.
Christ told this Parable unto certain which trusted in them selves that
they were perfect, and despised other. Two men went up into the Temple to
pray, the one a Phariseye, and the other a Publican. The Pharisey stood and
prayed thus with him self: God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extorcioners, unjust, adulterers or as this Publican. I fast twice in the weke,
I give tithe of all that I possess. And the Publican standing a far of,
would not lift up his eyes to heaven but smote on his breaste saying: God be
merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man departed home to his house,
justified more then the other For every man that exalts him self, shall be
brought low And he that humbles him self shall be exalted.

THE EXPOSITION.
CHrist in this gospel teaches us to be humble, and lowly, Humility.
as it becomes true Christians. For by this virtue only and by none other, is
the grace and favor of God obtained, as it is described and set forth to us in
these two men, that is to say, in the Phariseye and in the Publicane. The
Phariseyes were among the Jews, even as the Monckes and Nonnes were among us
in the time of Papistrie. Phariseys.
For they ware apparel contrary to the common fashion, they had certain days
appointed for fasting and prayinge, and they pretended such an holiness in
their life and conversation, that al other men in comparison of them were
counted very sinners. And thereof had they their name. For a Phariseye in the
Hebreue tongue is as much to say in English, as a man that is exempted and
divided from the number of other people, and such one as by no means can
abide to be counted like other. The Publicanes were, as the officers are with
us, that gather tribute, Publicanes.
toll, custom, etc. of the people. They hired the offices for a certain sum
of money, and afterward by polling and pilling, and such other crafty and
injurious ways, they made the most of them that they could devise unto the
great greuaunce of other. And therefore they were reported of all men to be
covetous persons, sinners, and naughty packes, for as much as such as were in
those offices polled and pylled all that they could get, and wrongfully vexed
the people, by taking of them more then was their duty to have. Therefore it
was not very like, that there was any of them righteous, as it was also judged,
that among the Phariseyes there was none evil.

But Christ judges here far otherwise, pronouncing the Publican righteous
and the Phariseye a sinner, Christ's judgment of the phariseye and of the
publicane.
yea and that a grievous sinner. For Luke prosecuteth the description marvelous
odiously and does so bytterly report the matter, that a man would marvel at
it. For thus begins he this parable: There were certain men, which trusted
in them selves, that they were righteous, and despised other. These are two
most foul and filthy vices, and Luke describes the Phariseyes to be such,
in that they were not content with this one sin, that they trusted in them
selves, which is a sin heinous enough, but also they despised other Now
consider thou this with thy self, what fasting and praying can profit such a
mo^ster, whom ye devil has puffed up ^^th such pride both spiritually and
corporally, that he does not only glory in himself and in his own works and
merits, but he also despyseth other. As though he should say: If I should
not testifye of mine own righteousness, I should in vain look for the equity
and sincerity of god in my cause. So great and often are my fastes, my almose
deeds, my prayers, etc. That the residue of ye Jews are not able to compare
with me. I pay faithfully and truly all my tithes. As for other if they could
defraude and deceive the priests of their duties, they would do it? such is the
unrighteousness of other, but i^ me there is no such thing.

two grievous sins in the phariseye.
In this holy man (and god will) we find, as I said, two most heinous vices: an
incomparable pride or haultines of mind, and the contempt or despysynge of
other, yea and that such and so great, that he counts all other to be
extorcioners, unrighteous persons, adulterers, etc.

But the poor Publican he specially and namelye points and sets forth,
saying: As for the Publican that stands hereby he deceaueth all men, polleth
and pylleth all men, catches and snatcheth, takes and raketh all that he can
come by, so that all is fyshe that comes to net. I am after no such sort,
god be tha^ckede my righteousness, my holiness, is most absolute, consu^mate,
and perfect in comparison of his.

This is a most vile and spiteful vice yea by the judgment of all men (for
we use comenlye to say: To despised there is a great sin.
Be what thou will be, only despise not other. For comparisons are odious.)
how much more then is this an abominable sin before god? There is no
sin, that god more detestethe and abhorrethe then pride and haultynes of mind
so that this gospel may most chiefly seem to be appointed to this end, that
Christ should as in a figure or shadow describe and set forth unto us the
true righteousness and how that may be discerned and known from the
counterfaite false, Pharisaicall, and hypocritical righteousness. As though he
should say: Peradventure thou maiste chance on a man, which outwardly
representethe the holiness of Angels fasteth, prays, gives almose, is no
fornicatour, commits none adultery, hurts no man, hears sermons
diligently, comes oftentimes unto the Lords table, etc. How can thou
otherwise, then think such one to be a good and righteous man? But for all
that this I say unto thee. If thou desire to know him thoroughly, thou must
not look upon the outward visare only, which an hipocrite also may have: but
thou must consider this, what it is to be righteous before God. For as
concerning this outward apperaunce, even this Phariseye is so righteous, that
it is to be wyshed, there were many such in the world. But this is not
sufficient: And therefore diligently take heed, that thou doste not trust unto
such righteousness before God. For here thou learnest, Pride abhorred of god.
how heinous a sin and abhorred of God pride is, namely when it lurcketh and
lies hid under so glorious and beautiful righteousness. This pride was the
cause, Job. 4. Esa. 14. 2. Pet. 2. Gene. 3.
that the devil was tombled hedlonge out of heaven, down into hell fire.
Pride also brought destruction in Paradise to our first parents. How could
then such a Phariseye and proud hypocrite be nombred among the people of God?
We must fast, we must pray, we must pay our tenthes, we must keep our selves
faithful and true to our wyffes, we may be no extorcioners, we may hurt no
man, we must do al things truly, and according to the word of god:
notwithstanding all these things are so co^taminated polluted, vain glory or
pride corruptethe all good works
and defiled through Pharisaicall pride, yt now nothing is more vile before god,
nothing more abominable. For seeing yt in worldly matters it is counted very
grievous for a man to become as a slave to other through benefits yt he has
received, according to this common proverb. There is nothing more derely
bought, then yt which is given: how can god allow yt righteousness, which
auaunceth, bosteth, and sets forth it self against him? In such case
holiness is made double wickedness. So does this hipocrite here with god. O God,
says he, doste thou not see, what a good and righteous man thou have of me?
The world is full of extorcioners, brybers, theaues unrighteous persons,
Epicures, whoremongers, adulterers, etc. But I am good, holy, virtuous,
righteous, and a very myrroure of goodness, holiness, virtue, and righteousness. I
fast, I pray, I give almose, I do whatsoever thy law requires. O Lord, how
greatly art thou indebted unto me: And what great reward is there laid up
for me in heaven? Consider these things, O God, remember that I am not like
other men.

O intolerable pride. If this proud hipocrite with such pride should do all
that ever the law of God requires to be don even to the utter most, yea
though he should give himself to be burnt for the glory of God, yet could
not all this please God, but should be before him the most grievous sin and
plain abomination. For God abhors all pride, as saint Peter says: 1.
Pet. 5.
Be lowlye and humble in your hearts. For god resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble. Likewise says Saint James humble your selves in the
sight of the Lord, Iac. 4.
and he shall lift you up. As our Savior CHRIST says: Every one that
exalts himself, Luke. 18.
shall be brought low. And who soever humbles himself, shall be exalted.

Therefore says Christ here: If ye will be counted righteous, embrace the true
righteousness, even that, which is agreeable to the word of god, and above all
things take heed of pride. Let no pride be joined with your righteousness or
holiness. For although the Saints and holy men diverse ways offend, so that
many times they fall most grievously (as we read of Noe, Lot, David, Peter,
Magdalen, etc. Yet God does not so heauely take that, as he does, when they
live most holyly, and are proud of it, brag and boaste of it, yea and both
contemn and condemn other in comparison of them selves. What the christen
humility is.
Christ therefore concludes the gospel on this manner: He that exalts
himself, shall be made low: and he that humbles himself, shall be made
high: that every man may learn humility, and despise no man. For this is
the Christian humility, for a man to esteem other more then himself, as the
Apostle says: Let no man stand hye in his own conceate, Romans 12.
more then becomes him to esteem of himself, but so judge of him self yt he
be modest and sober. Again: In giving honor go one before an other: Item. Be
not high minded, but make your selves equal to the^ of ye lower sort. Be not
wise in your own opinions. For he that magnifieth himself, and lifts up his
brystles because of his learning, beauty, richesse, holiness, righteousness, etc.
Is like to this Phariseye. He beholds his fastings, and considers the true
paying of his tenthes, and by this means he stands greatly in his own
conceat. This does Christ forbydde. The publican an example of true humility
In the poor Publican we see no such thing. All things are humble and lowly.
He bosteth of nothing. Only he lamenteth and bewayleth his former wicked life,
and with all humblenes of heart besecheth GOD to be merciful unto him, and to
forgive him his sins. Learn ye this also, says christ, yt ye may say. I can
glory of nothing. For although I would glory of knowledge, richesse, power, 1.
Cor. 4.
wisdom, righteousness holiness, etc. Yet god may answer and say: what have
thou, that thou have not received? If therefore these be my gifts, why do
thou brag and boaste of them? Why do thou rejoice in those things? The
right of rejoicing is mine, which give thee these gifts: and not thine, which
only receauest them. It were thy duty rather to know, that all these gifts
may be taken from thee in a moment, if thou be proud, brag, and boste of
them. So might thou well rejoice and triumph against the devil, and say:
why should I not confess, that I have the word of god, and that I have been
always ready and at hand to help the wretched sinners, and such as were in
danger of desperation, by confortyng, teaching, and monishing them? Why
should I also deny, that of my goods I have given large and liberal alms to
the poor and to such as were in necessity? These things, O devil, thou
can not reprehend or disalow. Thus may a Christen man justly and without any
offense against God, rejoice and triumph against the devil, for they are not
his gifts, which we use. But against god, of whom we have all things, and
from whom every good gift and every perfect gift comes down, may we by no
means rejoice, but toward him use all humility and lowlines both of heart
and body, mekely and with all reverence confessinge, that they be the gifts
of god, and that therefore we ought not to boste of them, nor to seek our own
praise and glory in the exercise of them. But always to magnifye the
liberality of so lyberall a geuer. Moreover our neighbor also is not to be
despised, but we ought rather to think on this manner: for as much as all
these gifts that I have, are properly gods, and all things proceed and come
from him, although I have more gifts then my neighbor has, yet god with one
word is able suddenly to make such a change, and so to inuerte all things, that
my neighbor for one virtue shall be more commended of God, Luke. 12.
then I for all that ever I have, as we read in the gospel of the poor
wydowe which did cast into the treasury only two mytes, where as the rich
men did put in great sommes of money: and therefore was she praised of Christ
this on this manner: Of a truth I say unto you, that this poor wydowe has
put in more then they all.

Why should I then glory and rejoice? Uerily I ought rather to fear for
these so many gifts, where with GOD endowed me, lest I should abuse them unto
the dishonor of god, the hinderaunce of my neighbor, and the damnation of my
soul. We ought always thus to think, that God gives gifts to his
creatures according to his good pleasure to one he gives much, to an other
little. And it is possible, that he which has but little, may have God more
merciful unto him, then he that has much. The reason is this: He that has
much, shall render an account of much. He that has but little, his account
shall be the slenderer. But this mad and dotyng proud Phariseye does the
contrary. He is not ashamed to say: I am not as other men: no, nor yet like
this Publicane. I give tithes: he only polleth and pylleth. I deceive noman: he
spoileth as many as he can. To be short: The opinion of the Phariseye is of
himself, that he passes al men, and that he is faulty in nothing.
Contrariwise, yt the Publicane of al naughts is the worste. And that there is
not one good quality in him. But this hipocrite should rather have said on
this manner: I pay my tithes faithfully and truly: I fast, and do what I can.
But for all that I dare not trust to any of these my works. For whatsoever I
have, it is thy gift, O Lord: and it is possible, that this Publicane does
please thee, more then I. So would he have set the Publican before him, or at
the least just by him, and would have said. The matter stands not in this
point, whether a man has received much or little, but to whom god is most
merciful. Why then should I be proud, or despise other, seeing yt al things
consiste in the mercy of god, and not in this, what gifts every man has
received? But this does not the arroga^t and proud phariseye, but he glories
and reioiceth of his own righteousness when he stands and prays before God.
The will of Christ therefore is, that we should not be proud of our
righteousness, as no man also ought to despair, though he be circumuented and
deceived of the devil, and so fall into sin. For we all have one God, which
stretches forth, as a garment, his mercy upon us, even upon the righteous and
sinners, All our glory ought to be in god alone.
upon the learned and unlearned, upon the rich and the poor, For he is the
god of all. Therefore all our glory ought to be taken away from all things
that we do, and only to be reposed in the mercy of God, that by this means
we al may humble our selves before the majesty of God, and not have respect
to this, whether we have received much or little. For god may be more
merciful to him that has but little, then to him that has much. In the world
it is necessary, yt there be differences of persons, of offices, and of
gifts. But there is no such difference of us before god. For seeing that he
accepts us only of favor, there can no man glory, boste and auaunce
himself before God. We all without exception must needs humble our selves,
that we may know, that although there be difference among us in this world,
yet before God we are all one, neither is one better then an other. He will
none otherwise look upon him that has much, then upon him that has little,
that by this means we all may learn to embrace his grace and mercy. For all
are gods, righteous, sinners, rich, poor, strong, weak etc. And whatsoever
they have: all come of God. They have nothing of themselves but sin. Sin
can be to no man cause of pride, but rather of humility and fear. Whatsoever
goodness remains, that is altogether of gods gift, so that he has a cause to
glory of his gifts, and not thou. Thy part and duty is only, to use the
gifts of god reverently and with thanckes giving. For god by no means can
abide pride and boasting.

Again, this also is his will when thou felest ye fearcenes of thy sin, that
thou doste not therefore despair, but rather trust to his mercy and say: If
I have not much, yet have I god, yea and him a merciful god. Therefore I will
take this in good part: I will look to my vocation and calling, even with as
much diligence, labor and power, as god has given me. I will despise no man.
I will not be proud of any thing that I have. And such as have more then I. I
will never envy them, nor disdain them. For this is enough for me, that we
all have one common God, and that god therefore will not be unequal, because we
in this world are unequal.

Unto this has Christ respect, when he concludes this parable and says: He
that exalts himself shall be made low: But he that humbles himself, shall be
exalted. As though he should say: when I have gotten such saints or holy
persons, that refer all things to me, how much more they humble and abase
them selfs, so much the more will I give them. But they that have, and
therefore are proud and puffed up, I will take it from them by little and little,
till at the last in my anger I cast them down hedlonge into everlasting
damnation. If the Phariseye had not ben proud, but had humbly rehearsed his
gifts unto God, and said: O Lord, thou have given me much, in that thou haste
given me strength to resist this and that sin. This is thy gift: I am glad
thereof, but yet am I not proud therefore. For thou may take it again away
from me, when thy good pleasure shall be: If the Phariseye, I say, had done this,
god would have increased his gifts daily more and more toward him. But for
as much as the gifts that he has, he abuses them unto his own pride and
glory, and therefore judges and condemns other that have not the like
gifts, he is so rejected of god, that there remains nothing in him worthy
of praise and commendation. For this is the judgment of Christ. The Publicane
went home more righteous then the Phariseye: that is to say: The Phariseye is
unrighteous, damned, and given over already to the devil and hell fire, what
profit has he now by his bosting and gloryinge? But the Publicane, which
says: O God be merciful to me a sinner, is made a Saint in the
congregation, and according to his desire, he has god merciful unto him.

Christ will have this to be the doctrine of us al, that we may know what we
are, and what we have. If thou be endued with riches, How gods gifts are to
be used.
with strength and health of body, with house, land and worldly goods, or
with any other gift appertayning unto the body or to the soul, use it with
thanckes to the geuer. Envy no man, and god shall increase his gifts in thee.
Only avoid pride, and despise no man, though his gifts be not so excellent as
thin be. But remember and thinck, when thou see any man not to have that thou
haste, that he notwithstanding may have god as merciful to him, as thou have.
Therefore despise him not neither disdain thou to have him nighe unto thee: and
so shall god be glorified in you both. Moreover hipocrites dishonor God
greatly, although they do it not with the mouth and openly. For he yt would
judge only according to ye words of the phariseye, he must needs say, yt that
was not evil spoken, yt the phariseye says here: I tha^ck thee, O god. Such
words yt true saints use in their prayers, but with an other sense, or
meaning. For when they give thanckes to god for any thing: they confess by
this, yt they have received that gift and benefit of god. But the Phariseye
thincketh not so, or else he would have said thus. That I am not an adulterer, an
extorcioner, an unrighteous person, etc. I can ascribe it to none other, O
lord but to thee alone. As co^cerninge my self, if thy grace did not assist
me, my life should be no better then other men's. For we be all like neither
can one justly rejoice against an other. But this Phariseye is not of this
mind, and clean contrary he says: I thancke thee, that I am not, as other
men are. And so he chalengeth to himself the wholle power, as though he were
the author of his righteousness, and not god. For if he had not so thought, he
would have added these words? But this is thy gift, o lord, and comes not
of my self. But this says he not, but by his words he declares evidently,
that he of himself is so copious and abundant in good works, that he is able
also to give unto God. Therefore he gives thanckes not to god in deed, although
he names him but to himself, to his own reason, freewill and strengthes,
that he has done so much.

This is true: whosoever has any thing given him of god? He must acknowledge
it, and give god thanckes for it. For what an absurdititie were this, if thou
should deny thy self to be wyser or better learned then an ass or any
other brute beast? In like manner he that has goods and riches given him of
god, ought not so to play the dolte, that he should say: he is a beggar and
has nothing, where as he ought even with most hearty thanckes to confess ye
gifts and benefits of god, and with the same to help such as be in
necessity. Again, he that has done his duty well, and served diligently in
his office and calling has helped his neighbor both with his substance and
council, given alms to the poor, etc. ought not to say: I have done no
good. This lewd and folishe humility is not to be used. For the gifts of god
are to be acknowledged, celebrated and magnified: and yet true humility is to
be showed, and we must say: These things are thine, O lord, and not mine. Thou
gave them me: or else I should have had no more then other have. Therefore for
these thy gifts I render unto ye most humble and hearty tha^ckes. This is ye
true way of humility. The good gifts of god are not to be counted as things
of nothing, or to be extenuated or abased as matters of small reputation, but
they are to be acknowledged and to be set forth to ye uttermost: yet may not we
be proud of the^, nor despise other, but as I have oftentimes said, we must
speak on this manner and say: O lord, they are thy gifts. Thou gave the^
unto me. That an other has not the same, it hurts or hinders him nothing
at all. For he has thee as merciful god unto him, as I have: oh, why the^
should I despise him? Such humility does christ require in this gospel, and yt
above al things we should eschew pride (disdainfulnes, arroga^cie, and
hautinesse of mi^de For this is ones decreed: He yt exalts himself, shall be
brought low, god did not forgive his own peculier people, but suffered them to
be destroyed for their prides sake, Many other great kingdoms also have
fallen and come to ruin for the same fault. Lucifer because of his pride was
cast down from the high heavens unto the deep dongeon of hell fire. Adam and
Eve for the same vice were cast out of Paradise. Therefore consider diligently,
that it is thy part thus to say: O Lord, whatsoever I have, it is thine.
Thou may take it again from me at whatsoever time it pleases thee. By this
means shalt thou eschew pride, cease to despise other, and lean to a sure
ancker. For who will trust unto that, which is uncertain? He that despises
this order, and like a mad man goes forth to brag and boste himself as
though whatsoever he has, were his own, and came not from GOD: he hears
here his judgment, which is, that God will take from him all such gifts as he
has and give him his portion in that lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, from the which the Lord defend us all. GOD for his mercies sake
give us grace to acknowledge his gifts. And with all humility to thancke and
praise him for them, and so in this world to walk worthy his kyndnes, that in
the world to come we may enjoy life everlasting through him, which is the
true life, even Christ Jesus our Lord: to whom with God the father and the
holy ghost be all honor, glory, and praise both now and ever. Amen.

The xij Sunday after Trinity sunday. The Gospel. Marc. vii.
Jesus departed from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, and came unto the Sea of
Galile, througe the mids of the coasts of the ten Cities. And they brought
unto him one that was deaf, and had an impedyment in his speech, and they
prayed him to put his hand upon him. And when he had taken him aside from the
people, he put his fingers into his ears, and did spitte, and touched his
tongue, and looked up to heaven, and syghed, and said unto him Ephata, that is
to say, be opened. And strayghtwaye his cares were opened, and the stryng of
his tongue was loused, and he spoke plain. And he commanded them that they
should tell no man. But the more he forbadde them, so much the more a great
deal they published, saying: He has done all things well, he has made
both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak

THE EXPOSITION.
THis Gospel is very easy and nothing hard, forasmuch as it only conteyneth
the miracle, which Christ wroughte in the dumme and deaf man. Christ alone
is the savior
For as concerning this and such like miracles, ye hear oftentimes in the
year, that Christ by this means has declared, that he is the Savior, which
helps and defends us against the violence of the devil. Therefore we ought
to give thanks unto God, which has given unto us such a savior, as of his
own mere grace and tender mercy, is alwais at hand and ready to assist us
against all such pernicious and hurtful things, as Satan imagines and
deuiseth against us. For as touching that this myser and wretched creature is
in such a miserable and wretched state, that he can not use naturally neither
his tongue nor his ears: The devil is the author of all evil.
all these are the plages and strokes of Satan, where as by the judgment of
men, they are thought to be natural vices. For men know not the devil, that
he is the author of so many calamities and miseries. He makes men lunatike and
mad. He tormenteth not only their bodies, but also their souls, that being
utterly dismayed, they may thynk that there is no confort to be looked for, and
so fall into desperation, and so in fine, unto damnation. Uerily these are
nothing else then the strokes and plagues of the devil, which is the author of
all sorrows and miseries, and hurts as many and as often as he can.

We are therefore most indebtedly bound to God, and we ought at all times to
give him humble and hearty thanks, An whole and healthefull body is the
gift of god.
that he having pity on us, has sent his son CHRIST Jesus, our Lord into
this world, to healpe not only this wretched creature, but us also, and
mercyfully to keep and defend us, that we be not afflicted with the like
euyls and diseases, thorough the violence and tyranny of the devil. For this
must we all think, that eyes, ears, hands, feet. etc. being wholle and
sound, are not so by chance, and naturally, as Reason judges: but these all
are the gifts of God. Notwithstanding, when men believe not this, and think
them to be but vile and base things, because they are common, and given to all
living creatures: Why god fulfrethe the devil to hurt us.
GOD, even of necessity, is compelled many times to give the devil liberty,
to take away from certain men, the use of their ears, eyes, hands, and
feet. etc. yea, and sometime also to kylle their bodies, that men may
learn, that that is done of the devil, through the permission and sufferaunce
of God, and by that means they may be the more earnestly moved to give God
thanks, that he of his great mercy defends and preserves us against the
fyery darts of that evil, Ephe. 6.
even the devil.

So is this likewise the work of the devil, when he blyndeth the hearts of
men through false doctrines, that they can not see, nor receive the truth. 2.
Cor. 4.
This comes not of GOD, which is good, 1. timoth. 2.
and the author of all goodness: which wysheth no man to peryshe, but all men
to come unto the knowledge of the truth: but it comes of the devil, which
is evil, and the author of all evil: which wysheth also all men to perysh,
and never to come unto the knowledge of the truth. Therefore where God gives
him liberty, he does as much myschiefe as he can devise. And this is even as
when a tree brings forth good fruict and afterward worms come and destroy
it. Note well.
The fault hereof is not in God, which made the tree good. Neither is the
fault in the tree or fruicte, but in the woormes, which hurt the things
that are good. So is it with us men. Therefore we must learn, that what so
ever adversity or myschaunce doothe happen unto us, all that commethe of the
plagues and strokes of the devil, namely, when we be Christianes, and seek
the glory of the Lord our GOD. For the devil is a greatter enemy unto the
Christians, then he is tothe infidells.

It is undoubtedly horrible, and makes every part of a man to shake for to
consider, God helpethe us against the devil by his son.
that this enemy the devil has so much power to harm and to hurt. But on the
contrary part this Gospel conforteth us. For here we see, as S. John says,
that the Son of God has appeared to this end, 1. John. 3.
that he should destroy the works of the devil. For seeing that the devil
presumed to go into Paradyse, to destroy the works of God there, and to make
of righteous and holy persons (I speak of Adam and Eve) disobediente and
wicked people: It seemed good again to God, for to be revenged of this his
enemy. Genesis 3.
He therefore recouereth and makes whole again, whatsoever was destroyed of the
devil. He destroys again the deuyls works that is to say, sin, death,
and hell, and as we see in this our Gospel, he delivers the tongue out of
the bonds; wherewith the devil had bound and tied it: and opens the ears,
which the devil had stopped. Christ came to do this work, and he does it
still continually among his Christians, as we shall herafter hear. And thus
much of the miracle and work of Christ, whereby he has declared here
himself, that he is the healper of all such as are in myserie, and that he
will heal all euyls and afflictions, which the devil heapeth upon us, yea
and utterly put him away from us.

Moreover Christ by this would also show unto us that these two things most
specially appertayn unto a Christian, Christen men must have their ears opened
and their tongues losened.
that is to say, that the ears be opened, and the tongue be losened, and
that he exercyseth this work diligently in his congregation or church against
the devil. For as concerning the corporal benefit, as the ears and the
tongue with the use of them. he gives that also to the Heathen.

But the spiritual benefit is only among the Christians, when he opens
their eyes, and loseneth their tongue. For this is certain and sure, Romans
1.10. Jacob. 1.
that all salvation comes to us only by the word of God. Otherwise, what
could we know of Christ and his sacrifice, of the holy ghost, of the will of
God. etc. Wherefore this also, Gladly to hear the word of god is the gift of
god.
even in these our days is an exceeding great miracle, and a most high
benefit, when God gives to any man such an ear, as gladly hears his word,
and such a tongue, as does not blaspheme, but bless and glorify God.

Our adversaries the Papists are much more miserable, and in aworse case then
this dumb man was, The papists are both deaff and dumme.
For their ears are stopped. And although they hear the word of God, yet can
they not hear it. I mean unto their profit and edifying. But they hear it,
as the Jews did, when Christ most excellently preached of the forgeuenes of
sins, and of everlasting life: they understood nothing: they delyted not in
the sermons of Christ, but contrarywyse they were utterly mad, and
blasphemed Christ and his doctrine. Such are all they, that will not hear the
word of God. They are deaf and dumb, and in a far worse case, then this
miserable man was, of whom our gospel makes mention. For they can do
nothing else with their tongue, then blasphem, and most spitefully rail upon
the word of God, that most excellent and precious iewelle. But they that
gladdely hear the word of God, and unto whom Christ says, as he said to
this dumb man Ephata, that is to say, God opens our ears by his word.
Be opened, and have the benefit of hearing: are those, to whom healpe is given
in deed against the devil. For God has opened unto us none other way unto
heaven, then his word and his holy Gospel. He that gladly hears that,
diligentely keeps that, and has his chief delyght in that, is safe and
without all danger. This is one miracle, which is even at this day in the
church among men, that our ears, which the devil through sin had
stopped, are made open by the word, that we may hear the word of GOD, which
is the doctrine of our salvation.

An other is, that he touches the tongue, and makes it to speak, Romans 10.
as Paul says: With the heart it is believed unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation. For when we believe in Christ, we
obteyn thereby remission of our sins. But after this, We must both believe and
confess the word.
it is necessary also to confess and to open by speech that, which is felt
and believed in the heart. And this makes a christenman. All other works can
not do it. It is possible, that a Monk may fast, watch, and wearye his
body more then a Christian: but by that he is not made a Christian manne.
For in this one thing he fails, that he is yet deaf and dumb: He will not
hear the word, and much less confess it. But a christen manne hears and
believes, and afterward confessethe. These two things make a christian
manne. Thus CHRIST, exercysethe his work daily in the Congregation
spiritually and by the word, which he wroughte then corporally, that he
might testifye, how he gives healpe against the universal myschiefe of
the devil, but specially against the spyrituall wickedness of Satan the
devil, that we might stedfastely believe, and put our whole trust in him.

Now must we consider this also, what Christ means by this ceremony, Why
Christ used so many circumstances in restoryng this man to his health.
that he uses about this deaf and dumb person. The people brought this
wretched man unto Christ, and desired him to lay his hands upon him. Christ
takes him aside from the people, puts his fyngers in his ears: he
spitteth, and touchethe his tongue: he looks up to heaven, he mourns and
says: Ephata. All this must sygnifye some special matter, seeing that Christ
uses such circumstances in doing this miracle, passing all other that he
wrought.

Now therefore, for as much as we have declared what it is to be dumb and
deaf: let us consider also, what meruaylous Ceremonye this is, and why
CHRIST, would specially use it in this miracle where as nevertheless, he
might have done it with one word. For this is most evident and plain,
that when so ever Christ spoke the word, straight ways the word took
effect.

Ueryly Christ by this so exquisite a ceremonye has respect to a
spiritual miracle. For by this he will show, what an hard matter it is, to
restore the deaffe to their hearing, and unto the dumb their speech. He
rayseth up Lazarus with one word. John. 11. Math. 9.
To the manne that was sick of the palsy he said: Rise and walk: and he
immediately was made whole. But with this manne, which was deaf and dumb, it
pleased him not to use such speed: But he doothe use a syngular kind of
proceedynge and order in woorkynge of this miracle. He puttethe his fyngers
into the deaf man's ears. He towcheth his tongue with spetle. He looks
up into heaven. He mournethe, and then at the last he says Ephata: that is,
Be thou opened: that by this he might signify unto us, that if we will escape
the bonds of the devil, and have a ready tongue to speak, and open ears to
hear, it must be done by the external and outward word, and by the ministry
of the same: again, by the outward signs or sacraments, that he has
appointed to be used in his church. For the word is first to be heard, and
then Baptism and the Lords supper must be joined thereto: Note this well.
unto the which things the holy ghost comes, and delivers the ears and
tongue from their bonds, that they may learn to avoid all sectaries, which
despise the outward word and sacraments, and look till God talks with the^
inwardly. But Christ says: This is my finger, even the outward word. This
ought to sound in men's ears. This is my spettle, wherewith their tongue
must be touched, and made moist. Then shall my work very well and
prosperously proceed, as ye may see. For where the outward word is sincerly
taught, there are christians: but where it is not taught, there are none.

Therefore, let every man provide, that they follow these steps. Let him
gladly hear the word of God. For God will not shine, nor give the glorious
light of his Gospel into thy heart, except thou first hear his word. If
thou be desirous to see and to know him, it must be done only by the word
and sacraments. For without this, the holy Ghost will not proceed to his
workynge, as God himself, even from the very heavens protested unto us, whenne
he said: This is my derely beloved son, in whom I greatly delight: Math. 17.
Hear him. Christ also gave this commandment to his disciples; Go into all
the world: teach and baptize all nations. Again: Mat. 28. Marc. 16. Luc. 10^
he that hears you, hears me. Here does Christ with open mouth command,
that his Gospel should be preached to men, and that they should be baptized. And
by this his commandment he shows, that this is the true way unto salvation,
and none other. He that hears you (says he) hears me. Therefore if thou will hear the word of God, hear thy father and thy mother, thy preacher, and
pastor, and finally thy Prince and magistrate. etc. what they say. when thou
hear them, thou hear God, except that in executynge their office, they
command any thing that is contrary to the word of God. Then are they not to
be heard. For we must obey God more then men. Act. 4.5.
We must first here the word of God in the congregation, and afterward men.
But this one case excepted, what soever thy pastor or curate, thy parents or
magistrates say to thee, that says God unto thee, and that must thou
remember to receive and to obey.

For what is he among us all, that would not take a long journey to go unto
such a church, where he might hear God preach? For all men would be glad to
hear and to know that voice. But Christ says: I will bring that to pass
nerer home, so that thou shalt not need to travail so far. Hear thy Pastor
and thy parents: and so haste thou heard me. For these are my disciples, when
thou hear them, I will sound in thy heart Ephata, Be thou opened, as I did to
this deaf person, that thy ears may be opened, and thy tongue set at
liberty, and that thou from hensforthe may be no more deaf in thy heryng, nor
dombe in thy speaking, as thou were before. But how goes ye world? The children
and household, although they hear their parents and masters, Disobediente
children and servants.
yet would they not do the least thing that is commanded them, except they
were compelled, such stubburnesse and disobedience reigns now a days in
the hearts of them that ought to be most humble, and most obediente. And
as in families, so likewise in common welthes, men are very negligent and slow
to obey the officers. What soever they ordeyne in a realm or city,
Disobediente subjects.
ye shall find very few among so great multitudes, that will trewely and
syncerely execute the commandment of the magistrates. The subjects show
more disobedience toward the high powers in this time of this their so great
knowledge, then they did in the time of darkness, ignorancie and blyndnes:
such is the wyckednes and ingratitude of this our most wicked and ingrate
world. And it is apparent also, how few there are, which with true zeal
and fervent desire hear the sermons: which is euidentely known not only by
their fruictes, but also by this most specially, that the men of towns and
villages, yea and of cities also, do most unworthily handle their ministers
and pastors, not only by railyng irreverently of them, The vnreuerent handling
of the spiritual ministers in these our days.
but also by taking away unjustly from them such tithes and duties, as by
publyke order are appointed unto them. Therefore, a worthy pain follows, even
this, that when the word of God pronounced by parents, ministers of the
church, and by magistrates is neglected and nothing set by, the devil by
little and little should stop their ears more and more, and tie their tongues
streyghter then it was before, and so set them in such case, that they can not
abide either to hear or to speak the word of God.

But on the other part, it makes their ears wide open to hear the dotyng
dreams of the sectaries, The wicked world hears gladlyer Robyn Hood then
the word of god.
and their false and diuellyshe doctrine: again, to hear baudye balades,
fylthy fables, triflyng talk, whorish words, and such like, as corrupt
both body and soul. It loseneth and sets at liberty also their tongue to
blaspheme God, to slander their neighbor, to lie, to backbyte, to rail, to
scoff, to ieste. etc. that it may be an offense to all good and godly men.
And this is a reward worthy such ingratitude, unthankfulness, vngentylnesse,
yea plain churlyshenesse: and it worthily chances unto them on such sort,
because they wyshe it to be none otherwise. But what shall be the end?
Uerily that all things shall go to havoc: the word of God shall be taken
away from us, seeing we have no delyghte therein, As it is written: He would
none of the blessing, Psalm. 109.
therefore shall it be far from him: And as our Savior Christ says:
This is condemnation, that light is comme into the world, John. 3.
and men have loved darkness more then light. For their works were
evil. And in the place of the word shall the wicked decrees of Antichriste
be thruste into the church. O England take heed be times and say not but
thou art warned.
Our country shall be oppressed with diverse kinds of plagues, as pestilence,
famyne, tempests. etc. Our common wealth shall be turned into common woe.
Myseries, yea and those most grievous and intolerable, shall ouerflowe this
our countreye, Insurrections, commotions, Rebellions, Conspiracies, tumultes,
civil war, murdering one of an other. etc.

And after al these things (except we repent, turn unto God with all our
hearts, gladly hear the word, and with our tongue magnify the same, to ye
uttermost, yea and frame and fashion our life and conversation according to the
doctrine thereof.) shall this our realm be a spoil to foreyne nations? This
has our ingratitude worthily deserved, which being provoked so often with so
many benefits at the hand of God, will notwithstanding not only not repent,
but also where as we ought to proceed from faith to faith, and from virtue to
virtue, we go from vice to vice, from syn to sin, and so we cease not daily
more and more, to heap the whote wrath and most horrible vengeance of God upon
us, to the destruction of our country, and unto the damnation of our selves
both body and soul.

And this is the cause, why Christ looks up to heaven, mourns, and as one
greatly troubled, says, Ephata, Be opened. For this greatly greueth our savior
Christ, Why christ lokethe up to heaven and mournethe.
that where as the good pleasure and merciful will of GOD, is to deliver us
from the bands of Satan thorough the word: we as people without all
reason, refuse our own Salvation, and through our contumacie and stubbornness
haste unto our selves everlasting damnation, and provoke the wrath and
vengeance of God to fall upon us.

Therefore let us consider well this miracle, and follow the example of these
good men, God is to be praised for his gifts.
which glorifye, commend, praise, and magnifye CHRIST, affyrmynge and openly
confessyng, that he has done well, in that he of his great mercy and
infynyte goodness, has made the deaffe for to hear, and the dombe to
speak. And this does our Savior Christ, by his finger and spetle, even at
this hour, yea continually in the world, that the ears of the deefe may be
opened, and the tongues of the dumb losened by the outewarde word, which we
hear in the Church, of our Pastors and Mynisters, The word of god is
christ's finger and spettle.
and at home of our parents. For by this word the holy Ghost woorketh
myghtely in us, and by none other thing. Mark that well, and so much the
more studiously and diligently embrace thou the word For this is the next and
most certain way, that our ears may be opened, our tongues losened, and we
our selves at the last, obtain everlasting salvation.

Which thing our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus grant us for his mercies
sake: To whom with God the Father, and the holy Ghost be all honor, glory,
praise, and dominion worlds without end. Amen.

The.xiii. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. x.
Happy are the eyes which see the things that ye see. For I tell you that
many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and
have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them. And behold a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying:
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? He said unto him, what is
written in the law? how read thou? And he answered, and said: Love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. And he said
unto him: Thou have answered right. This do, and thou shall live. But he
wyllyng to justify him self said unto Jesus: And who is my neighbor? Jesus
answered and said: A certain man descended from Jerusalem to Hierico, and
fell among thieues, which robbed him of his raiment, and wounded him, and
departed, leaving him half dead. And it chanced, that there came down a
certain priest that same way, and when he saw him, he passed by. And
likewise a Leuite, when he went nigh to the place, came and looked on him, and
passed by. But a certain Samaritane, as he iourneyed, came unto him, and when
he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to, and bound up his wounds,
and powered in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to
a common Inn, and made provision for him. And on the morrow when he departed,
he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him: Take cure
of him, and what soever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will
recompense thee. Which now of these three thynkeste thou, was neighbor unto
him that fell among the thieues? And he said unto him: He that showed mercy
on him. Then said Jesus to him: Go and do thou likewise.

THE EXPOSITION.
This gospel is long. Therefore we will selecte and chose out of it one or two
parts thereof, which we may remember, and feel the fru^ct and swetnesse
thereof. The first part is, that Christ greatly extolleth and auanceth his
word and Gospel, The first part of the gospel.
and turnyng him self unto his Disciples, he said unto them: Blessed are the
eyes, which se the things that ye do se. For I say unto you, many Prophets and
kings would have seen the things which ye do see, and they have not seen
them, and have heard the things which you hear, and they have not heard
them. By this Christ's mind is to confirm and strengthen us against the
misery, which we see in the world, The world despyseth the gospel of
christ.
for as much as nothing is more vile and more despised in this wicked world,
then the Gospel. For the world can abide and hear all other doctrines, lies,
and heresies: but as for the Gospel, it will neither see it, nor hear it:
yea, the world blasphemeth it, and persecuteth it most cruelly, and vexes
them with all kind of torments that profess it, as there has been great
store of examples before certain years (the more pity) in this realm of
England, and yet is in diverse places of the world.

This sees Christ, and therefore he comfortethe his disciples, and says:
The world blasphemeth the Gospel, but he that is so wise as to hear it,
has blessed and happy ears, and is most indebtedly bounden to give god
thanks therefore, that he is made partaker thereof, and so he may worthily
magnifye that, which the world does so contemptuously handle, and so
spitefully entreat. For this is most certain, that ye are happier and more
blessed then David, and other kings, For this was al their desire, that they
might live in that time, when they might see me with their bodylye eyes,
behold my miracles, and hear my Sermons. But that their desire could they
not obtain. For the full time, that GOD had appointed from everlasting,
was not yet come. In spirit, and with the eyes of their Faith they saw me,
my coming into the flesh, my birth, my passion, my death, my Resurrection,
my Ascension. etc. and greatly rejoiced. Note well.
But unto you, it is given to see me in the flesh, to behold my miracles, and
also to hear my Sermons. Therefore see, that ye be thankful to God, that such
felicity is chanced unto you, that ye may both hear and see me.

For our state is so miserable* and specially when we are without the Gospel,
They are most miserable which have not the knowledge of the gospel.
that by little and litell errors crepe in, yea error upon error is heaped, so
that there is almost no end of errors and heresies, in so much that very
hardly many times we can defend our selves against them, as alas (for
sorrow) we had experience hereof to much in the time of the Papacy. For at
the last the matter came to this point, that the devil was taken for a
preacher, and credit was given unto him, whatsoever he feigned by his busy
wicked spirits and most vain and lyeng preachers, as touching Mass,
pylgremages, purgatory, pardons, and such like trumperie. And even so is at in
all places, where soever the word is not. Errors and lies are there received
and believed: And then is this the opinion also, that yt is the way unto
salvation, where as in deed it leads straight unto hell, and to the dyuell.
But on the contrary part, if the Gospel be present, so great madness
reigns in the world, that very few receive it. Therefore I may well and
truly say, that the state of us men is most miserable and hard. If God
denies us his word, we can not be without the destruction of our souls. If
he give it us, all the world refuses it: so that it were best for men, that
God would haste his coming unto the judgment, and shortly make an end of
this wicked, wretched, synnefull world. For this vnthankefulle world is never
the better, whether God sends unto it punyshementes or benefits, so truly
is it said of S. John: 1. John. 5.
All the world is set upon wyckednes.

And this is the first thing whereof Christ complayneth here: which is, that
he offers and gives to the world his word, and with that remission of
sins: and yet is the word despised and set naught by. Therefore he turns
himself to his Disciples, and says: ye are blessed, which have the word of
God, and hear it, and that ye dyed not before it was reveled and brought to
light. I say unto you, that most mighty and puissant Kings, and most worthy
Prophets also would gladly have lived in this time, and have both seen and
heard these things. And yet (such is the wickedness of the world) whereas it
may have now plenty and abundaunce of so noble things: it regards them not.
Let not this wickedness of the world trouble you, but so behave your selves,
that ye be not void of so great grace, but that ye may take fruit thereof.
Christ in this place (as it manifestly appears) intends to commend and set
forth his word, to make men desirous of it, and not to contemn and despise
it, as the manner of the world is, and as we see in all degrees both high and
low. They that can not persecute the Gospel, despise it. The lessest part of
the world receaueth it with thanckes geuinge, and so amend their lives. But
they that thus do, are only blessed and happy. For they have blessed ears and
eyes, which is the great and merciful gift of God. And this is the first
part of our Gospel.

In the other part CHRIST puts forth the fruit of the Gospel (that is)
good works, which ought to ensue when Gods word is preached. This does he
describe with a plain example, of a certain man which as he descended from
Jerusalem. Chanced upon robbers, of the which after that he was beaten and
robbed he was left half dead. And it chanced that a Priest went that way,
which seeing him, passed by and was nothing moved to help him. Likewise the
Leuite that came after the Priest, had no regard unto him. At last came the
Samaritan, which had no holy name, but was a gentile, neither was he any kyn
at al to that wretched man that was a Jew. For he came not of the same stock
as the Priest and Leuite did, but was a stranger. He sees this miser and is
grieved with his misfortune, he goes down of his beast, he pours oil and
wine into his wondes, he byndeth them up, and puts him on his beast: He
walks on foot himself, and carries the wonded man into an Inn. And whereas
he could not tarry long there for his business, he commits him to his host,
and gives monye to ouersee him until he retourneth.

What manner of men the gospel makethe.
This is the second picture, in the which Christ peinteth the fruits of the
word and Christian charity, (that is) that the word does make such men, as
this Samaritan is, that is, gentle, merciful, which despise not other men in
their calamity, but when they see them, bestow their goods on them, and help
them with all that they can. I speak here of the poor and nedie, which are
not lewd, as the most part of beggars be, that of purpose seeks gaynes after
this sort, and will not take money to serve, either to help the sick, or to
do any other thing, that they can do: to such must nothing be given. But
whereas be nedie persons in deed, there does a Christian mind behave himself
after the example of this Samaritan, and thinks: this poor man is my
neighbor, he is a man made of body and soul, as I am, yea he has the same
God as I have: Wherefore he is more nigh unto me in kyn, then a brute beast, or
than ye devil. Wherefore I do not well, if I forsake him. He embraces him as his
brother and least he should perish without help, he takes compassion of
him, as a father. And these are ye true saints.

But other stony hearted saints has no natural pity toward the wretched,
but are men of exceeding great chorlishenes. For this they think, that God is
therewith delighted if he serve them, and therefore they think yt they are not
bound to help other, as this priest does. He was an holy one for his office
and kyn, but what does Christ pronounce of him? even that when he saw that
miserable man, he passed by. The opinion of holiness puffethe men up with pride
and makethe the unmerciful.
Truly these are mischeuous holy ones, that sees their neighbors in peril,
and may help them, and yet will not. Whereunto then is it like that they trust
and maintain their pride? Truly to no other thing then their own holiness,
whereas they think, when they have said Mass, done sacrifice, song, and
such like, that they have done enough, and that they need not to do an ynche
more then their prescripte. Such are stony saints, yea rather deuelishe
Saints, which seem to count GOD for their dettour, and that they owe
nothing to any man.

Against this monsterous kind of saints makes this parable. For CHRIST in
this place is moved by the example of a proud hypocrite, which steppeth forth,
to declare how great his Godliness is, and thyncketh this surely with
himself, that if CHRIST knew of his righteousness, he would not speak a
word of such matters in his presence. Which thing he means, when he says:
Master what shall I do, to obtain everlasting life? Christ will not
answer him, and he says, Ask thy self, what is written in the law? How
do thou read? The lawyer has forth with to answer, and says: thou shalt
love GOD with all thy heart, etc. And thy neighbor as thy self. For he
counts, both these things an easy matter to do. Christ says, do this and
thou shalt live. By this is the lawyer confounded. For he is not so bold as to
say, he had done it. Wherefore he comes forth with an other question and
says: Who is my neighbor? As though he should say: I know no man, to whom
I owe any succoure: But rather I know very many, which ought to do me service,
because I am an holy man.

The laweyer.
But here does CHRIST rise against him with all vehemence, in this parable of
the wounded man and says. The priest saw him and passed by, and also the
Leuite, both are just by thy example. The Samaritane is moved with mercy, and
helps the miserable man. Tell thou therefore who was ye neighbor to this
wounded man? The lawyer answered, he that showed mercy unto him. Yea and he of
pride despised ye name of a Samaritan. So does Christ revenge him and says, Go
and do like wise. As though he should say: Thou art holy after the example of
the priest and Leuite, thou have no pity on thy neighbor although he be in
peril of life, and yet thou ask, what thou may do to get everlasting
life. Be not thy nedie frindes and and miserable men thy neighbors? Is not
there misery and wretchedness enough in the world? And yet do thou being so
great a doctor doubt, who is thy neighbor? away with this trifeling. If thou will be counted holy, do as this Samaritan did. He sets forth this boster
well in his colors. For the plain meaning of this is nothing else, then that
this lawyer is not yet come to this degree of holiness, that this Samaritan had
attained unto.

Wherefore all the matter hangs on this, What it is to love god.
that we learn what it is for a man to love god, and his neighbor as
himself. Love GOD: is no hard saying. For he has no need of our service. And
yet, if his person were present, it would then evidently appear enough, who
loved him, and who would put himself and al his in danger for his sake. But
he shows us not his person to see and to use our service presently, as other
men do, that are conversant with us. Wherefore if thou will know who loves god,
consider how children honor their parents, how servants obey their masters,
how the ministers of the church are handled, then shall ye understand, who
loves god, and who does not. For children have this commandment and word
from god: Honor thy father and mother. But they say, I let pass my father and
mother, and will honor and love thee, Exodus 20.
which art God in heaven. Do not God say, thou have my commandment set forth,
wherefore if thou love me, thou must love and honor thy parents also, and obey
them in all things. And this is the true loving of god. But what do they?
Children would have their parents away, To love god is to keep his
commandments
that they might live masterlesse. Wherefore this must needs be true that they
love not God. So is it also in other kinds of life. Princes has in their
offices officers, they charge them to do their deutie diligently. If thou ask
whether they love God, all will say: yea, and that they have no cause to hate
God. Well I grant that. But answer: why show thou no obedience and
fidelity to thy king? If thou love god with all thy heart, thou would
be more faithful unto thy King, and would do thy office with more
diligence. So is there no servant in any house so far paste shame, that will
suffer this to be said by him, that he hates God, and love him not. But what
does the loving of god signify? does it not signify, to keep Gods
commandment and word? As Christ also says: If any man love me he shall keep
my word. For if thou love God, thou can not despise his commandments. But
what commandment gives god to servants? Or what does servants promise their
masters? does not GOD require that? And they do promise also meat and drink
with wages, John. 14.
and for that cause makes a covenant, that they should be faithful in doing
such service, as belong to the house, and show obedience in their service.
And for this cause also are they called servants, because they serve the
household by their service, and help them that have families with their labor
and service. But where be any such in housholdes? Yea rather there is almost
no greater disobedience, negligence, pride, then amongst such. Ye and here I
let pass the pickynge and stealing of many of them. Wherefore they love not
GOD, they hate GOD and care not for his word, or else they would show more
diligence in their service. But at last they shall be rewarded for their
ungodliness, and live all the time of their life with the curse of GOD in
misery and beggerie.

But as touching the pastors and ministers of the Church, it is no need in
this place to make long rehersall. The matter is plain, how they are handled
of rulers, husbandmen and of their neighbors, crafts men and courtyers, so
that almost they that keep hogs are more set by. But the commandment of GOD
is straight, that they should be counted worthy of love and honor, and that
nothing should be denied them, that is dew unto them. As it appears in
Malachie, Malach. 3. Matthew. 10. Luc. ^0.
and Christ himself says also: every workman is worthy of his wages.
Wherefore as thou maiste not deny thy servant his wages because he is evil: So
must not thou defraud thy pastor and curate because he is evil. If Gods
commandment move thee not, be thou sure of this punishment, that thy corn,
beasts and other things shall prove ill, and thou shalt louse more thereby,
than ever thou tokest from thy pastor and minister. Whereby it is evident, that
the world not only loves not GOD, but that it is full of hatered toward
GOD. And the condition seems almost tolerable, not to love GOD, if it would
not hate him. But all deny this crime. But in deed this is very hatynge of God,
when thou art stubburne against thy parents, Lords, and Officers, and when
thou doste not that, that God command thee. For this is his commandment,
that thou should obey, and by obedience honor them, this commandment doste
thou hate. For thou can not find in thy heart to do it, and thou doste
refuse to hear hit. Who will say than, but that thou hateste god? This do al
men crake that they love god, but where as they hear commonly to be gods
commandment, that they should flee covetousness, exercise upright bargeining,
and avoid avarice, the more that these things are beaten into them by common
sermons, so much the more stuburnely they go against it. What need that
priest care (say they) what I do with my goods? Will he take upon him to rule
me? If this belongs not unto the priest, it belongs to god. He will surely
revenge it, when he shall see his time, by pestilence, famine, and other
mischeifes of fire and water, etc.

This shall take from thee, neither shall they knowledge any benefit therein:
Whereas thou if thou were a Christian, might get favor before God and man,
and feel and perceive all thy goods to increase. Wherefore it comes to pass,
that the Pope, the Bishops, and tyraunts, but also towns men, rustikes,
noble men and yomen, do not only not hear, but also move persecution against
gods word. For they ought to give honor unto gods word, to obey it, to find
the ministers of the church that, that is dew unto them. But they are more
ready to catch that from them that they have, then to give them more, and then
they stand in their own conceits, as though they did well.

Wherefore this lesson ought to be borne well away: He that has the word,
ought also to love god, (that is) he ought to know, what works god requires
of him, and obey him and say: Lord Jesus Christ, thou have opened mine eyes to
see and know, how thou have delivered men from death and syn by thy death, and
have made me heier of the kingdom of heaven, and of everlasting life. I give
thee thanckes for so great, a grace, and will gladly do again all that thou
requirest of me. Thou command me by thy precepte, that I shall honor my
father and mother, and I will do it gladly and with all my heart. Thou gave
me charge that I should serve my master faithfully and with all my heart. I will
do my work diligently, and with all obedience. I will not refuse to do thy
commandment. Thou haste made me a mother, and houswyfe over a family, I will
well regard thy precepte, and will rather bestow my life, then not regard my
children and family, and see to them with all diligence, that they be not
seduced. This is the very fruit that ought to proceed of the wo^de. And it is
not possible but god must needs reward such Christian men. To love god is to
love thy neighbor.
But here let every man, try inwardly with himself, how greatly he loves
god. For to love god consists not only in the thoughts, as the Monks
believe, but to love god is as Christ says in an other place to love thy
neighbor. For so says god: If thou will love me: do this for my sake to thy
father and mother, children and wife, husband and Lord: This do I require of
thee. And consider diligently whether thou do so, then shalt thou find out,
whether thou love god or hate him. For they are only Christian men, that has
the word of God, and love Christ. These do say: I will gladlye and with all my
heart do for my neighbor, that, that thou have commanded me. But if I shall be
now and then prevented with anger, impacience, and such like, then can he not
please me, but I will amend. Christians do this, The unkindness of the world.
but they that are not Christians do it not. Wherefore this must needs be true,
that Citizens, husband men, children, servants, officers, subjects, commonly
belong unto the devil. For they hate god, and care not for his commandment.
And whereas he made them, gave them body and soul, found the^ their living,
and gave his only begotten son, which is greatest of al: They for all this
sing him this song: eue^, hatred. And if they could, they would thrust him out
of heaven. Such is the love they bear to God and his word. Go to now and
bost of thy love toward God and his word, where as thou art so full of hatred.
And contrariwise love him show obedience unto him, which is to us the
cause of death and sin, in whom thou have also thy hole delight, being
utterly disobedient to God? Wherefore the world generally does show obedience
only to the devil, which is chiefly delighted with the hatred of God, and wha^
that is not done that god has commanded, this enemy makes us subject to sin
and to death. And if he could at this present hour corrupt all vital, he
would gladly do it. Yet are we obedient to such an enemy, which is so much
given to seek our destruction. And in the mean time, we suffer all yt to be
void and frustrat, which is put forth to us of god, yt gave us all things,
and in especial his son and with him everlasting lif, and we cast away his
co^ma^deme^t. Who therefore may not praise gods righteousness. if he minister to
us that are disobedient, all kind of plages? The samaritans love toward god.
Wherefore leave, what it is to love god. The Samaritan loves god, not in that
he gives him any thing, but because he helps the miserable wonded man, for
his power. For this says God. If thou will love me and serve me, do that for
thy neighbor, that has need, I have no need. Wherefore this Samaritan, is
ready to serve God which is in heaven with his money, beast, wine and oil.
Not because God needs it for his own person, or because he does this for GOD,
but he does it for his neighbor. But therefore is it taken as done to GOD,
because God, commanded it. He commanded not this, to go a pilgrimage to Rome,
or to saint James, or to build monasteries, or any such like thing. But
this is his will that we should help one an other. It is no need (says he) to
seek me at Rome, thou shalt find me at home, with thy wife, children,
family, Lord, God is every where and in all places a like present.
maiestrate, and also in thy neighbors house, in the streets, in the market
place, and every where. And how can he make himself more nighe unto thee? But
the devil casts a dark myste over the world, that it can not see, what it
is to love God and to hate the devil. Wherefore we must learn this with all
diligence.

This Samaritan, look what care would have done and what benevolence he would
have showed to his own body being in like peril, the very same he does to
his neighbor, and has dew commendation, for that he loves GOD and his
neighbor. This must be learned, to the intent, that thou do it also. For this
fruit must needs follow them, that have the word. If it do not follow, they
are no Christian men in deed: As this priste and Leuite, which are saints,
without any feeling or affection. For he that passes by his neighbor, passes
by GOD. Wherefore beware of the example of the world which hates, both GOD and
his neighbor. But do you for all men. All that ye can. And GOD will surely
recompense it.

But if thou will not love god, but pass by thy neighbor in his peril, thou
shalt not escape unpunished for so doing. Which thing be thou sure of.

And this is the second doctrine out of this gospel. but Christ by this
parable would signify also, what benefit he has bestowed on us men, and how
we may taste the true fruit thereof. For we miserable men have fallen upon most
cruel robbers by sin, whereby death and the devil, has power upon us. which
has not only spoiled and rifled us of all spiritual gifts, which God gave us,
but has also beaten and wonded us: that is to say, by sin are we cast
hedlonge into all kind of miseries. Romans Gal. Iobn.
In this might we perish, for any help that we can have of the priest and
Leuite. For they pass by and give no help to that miser. For by the law is
no man justified and made righteous, neither delivered from sin. But at last
comes the Samaritan even Christ Jesus our Lord, whom his own people would
not receive, but counted him for a Samaritan. He is moved with our mischance,
he washes our wondes with wine, and pours in the helthfull oil of his
grace, he takes to cure our sins, and bears them in his body, and
brings us into the true Inn, that is, into the holy church, and there
charge the host to take cure of us. They are the ministers and teachers of
the word. But many of them, as it appears in the Pope, the Bishops and
such like, regard the charge but little, that the church may be an hostrie
and Inn, the steward whereof is lewd without faythfulnes and humanity, and
the sick men are but coursly handled. For they should teach the word of God,
but they persecute it, they should bring men to Christ that they might so be
delivered from syn, but they drown them the more depely in sin. And yet we
know that Christ does not wholly cast away this hostrie and Inn. If the
Pope and Bishops will not teach uprightly let them do it to their own peril,
which they shall feel at last, yet in the mean time Christ raises up certain
persons of low degree, despised, and abiecte, which profess his word, and
take cure of the poor and miserable, that they may recover their health, that
they may obtain through the gospel, remission of sin and everlasting life. For
without this word is it impossible to get such a great thing. Wherefore we
may well give thanckes unto God for this great benefit, and pray him, that he
will preserve and continue us in such grace and save us for ever.

Amen.
The xiiii. Sunday after Trinity sunday. The Gospel. Luke. xvii.
AND it chanced as Jesus went to Jerusalem that he passed through Samaria and
Galile. And as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten men that were
lepers, which stood a far of, and put forth their voices, and said: Jesus
master have mercy on us. When he saw them, he said unto them: Go show your
selves unto the Priests. And it came to pass, that as they went they were
cleansed. And one of them when he saw that he was cleansed, turned back again,
and with aloude voice, praised God, and fell down on his face at his feet,
and gave him thanks: And the same was a Samaritane. And Jesus answered and
said: Are there not ten cleansed? but where are those nine? There are not found
that returned again to give God praise, save only this stranger. And he said
unto him: Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made the whole.

THE EXPOSITION.
YE hear how Christ in the gospel of this day sets forth a notable
example of faith. Thy faith (says he) has saved thee. And by this he
ascribes all the glory of the saving of this Samaritan not to himself, (as he
should have done, if he had said: I restore thee to thy health) but to faith.
Which thing is done of Christ to this intent, that we also should he
encoraged by this example and believe boldly, and think surely, that through
Christ we shall obtain, Faith obtayneth all thingges.
whatsoever we believe. If we believe remission of syn and everlasting life,
that faith shall not deceive us. If we believe that God is favorable and
merciful, that he can not, but be favorable and merciful. So that all things
be on this wise referred to faith and not to God, which in deed works all
things. That all men may learn, that whansoeuer we lack any thing, that
we would have, or whereof we have need, that the fault is not in God, but in
our self, because we believe not. For otherwise if we believed, we should surely
have it.

He that believes not obtayneth nothing.
And this is the first doctrine of this gospel, that we believe this, that we
shall be sure of all these things, which we hope and look for of GOD with a
constante faith. But he that believes not, neither hops for any thing of
God, let him not trust to obtain any thing: Iac. 1. Heb. 1.
As James says in the first chapter of his Epistle. For he that makes suit to
god, and asks any thing of him, he ought not to doubt and say: Who knows
whether GOD will grant it, or whether I be worthy? It ought not so to be
said, but this rather: An apt similitude.
I know that GOD will grant what soever I ask of him. And although he does it
not now, nor after that sort, yet will he do it at an other time and after an
other sort. For a wauerynge heart, that believes not stedfastlye, and
thinks not surely that he shall obtain, obtayneth nothing at all.

For GOD can give him nothing, if he would. He is like a vessel that by a man's
hands is moved hither and thither, wherein nothing can be poured, and
whatsoever is poured, it falls beside the vessel and is lost.

This is it also with an unbelieving heart. GOD is ready to give, but we make
our selves unapt to receive, for as much as we profer nothing to receive
the gift withal. And we greatly offend GOD by so doing, that whereas he is
most ready to show his liberality, yet we by our wauerynge do cause, that
there can be no place in us to receive gods gifts.

Contrarily, to him whereas is no wauerynge, but the mind is still by faith, he
will give gladlye and willingly: As it appears in these ten leapers. They
cry, Jesus master have mercy upon me. They all are still and doubt not but
Christ will help. And as they believe, so is it done unto them.

This must we learn, to trust steadfastly to his mercy, and not to waver in
heart, but to be still and trust for that we desire, whether it be health, or
liuelowd, prosperity, wisdom, or righteousness.

The second doctrine of unkindness.
In the other part is an horrible example, whereas ten believe and are healed,
but nine go from their faith, and give not Christ thanks for his benefit. We
ought to refer this example to this end, yt we may learn hereby to be
thanckefull, and to avoid the wicked sin of unkindness. For God does worthylye
challenge this glory to himself, yt we should render him thanckes. And that
should we do gladlye and willingly. For it is a thing of no great labor or
difficulty. For what labor is requisite to this, if thou turn thee to God
and say? Lord, that have given me sound eyes hands, fett* etc. I thancke the
heartely for thy gift. So likewise what hard thing is it to give thanckes to
thy parents, masters, lords, neighbors, when they do thee good. It is done
only, that they may understand, that their benefit is well bestowed. This
also does this Samaritan, he retourneth to the Lord, and gives him thanks.
This required no cost or charge but a few words, and yet it pleases Christ
maruelously. This is acceptable to men also, and they take great pleasure
thereof, and by this they are provoked, afterward to do them good again.

The very Ethnickes said this, that unkindness is the greatest syn. Unkindnes
is the greatest sin.
Therefore when a man is called chorle, they judged that to be the greatest
reproach, that is. And we prove by experience, that this vice greueth thee
parents very much. They bestow for their childrens sake all things, body,
life, goods, feign and al things. But what recompense do children make for for
the most part? It chances seldom to find amongst many, one that is
thankful. This comes of nothing else but of the dyuell. Likewise also it
chances with other. Wherefore think this for a surety, that unkindness is
the greatest and fylthyest vice, whereby the spring is stopped up, out of
the which proceeds all beneficence and liberality amongst men. But all this
chances through the great infirmity and weakness of men. For this is very
grievously taken, that he that healpeth other by benefits, gets nothing
thereby but unkindness. Wherefore by this men's mynds are discoraged from doing
good, and ar loathe to cast away their kindness upon them that are unkind.
Unkyndnes is the cause of all this, which nevertheless men do oftentimes feel.
Wherefore if ye regard godlynes earnestly, se that ye be thankful. First to God
our father in heaven, which gives and preserves body and life: and afterward
gives all things that belongs to everlasting life. Then to our parents.
friends, neyghbors, which have been good to us, that ye may knowledge this,
and give thanks, although ye be not able to requite it. But seeing this is
such an hard thing amongst men to obtain thanks, how much harder is it,
The manner of the Monasteries.
to make them to requite and recompense it? There was a manner in monasteries,
that if the younger had taken of gift but a quill of an elder, he should have
declared himself thankful with these words: Blessed is God in all his gifts.
This was no evil manner. For it was done, that youth might accustom them
selves to receive all things with thanks geuyng, both from God and manne.
Wherefore although this was not always done with the heart, yet the use of these
words were good. So out of the.116. Psalm: what shall I render to the lord
(says David) for all that he gives me, Psalm. 116.
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of ye Lord that is, I
will praise him, glorify him, and give him thanks, and confess that he has been beneficial unto me. God answers to this: My son, this is enough for me.
But the bountiful Father can obtein this of few: The world is most unkind to
god.
A great part does persecute him and his word: thinkyng nothing how that we
have all things by him, and of his grace. But this is but a small thing. They
hang on the cross his only begoten son, which he has sent for a gift to us
against syn and everlasting death. This world were well worthy with his great
madness to be cast clean out of Gods sight. yet God doothe not so, but is
present every where with his goodness and help. Wherefore we must not only
learn the office and propretie of kyndnes, but we must put in practice also
this virtue with his propre office, which is not made werie of well doing for
unkindness sake. And this is the peculiar virtue of God and of all true
christians. For there are examples enough, which testify that the world
through chorlishnes does make men cease from well doing. Amongst the Gretians
were there noble men, which had done much good in their countries, and put
all their goods in hasarde for their countreies sake: The acts of certain
Gretians.
But as soon as they felt unkindness, so that they not only receued no fruit
for their industry and labor, but were also more in peril then other, they
became impatient, and as they defended before their country against the
enemies, so they fled afterward to their enemies, and assaulted their country
with most spiteful minds.

Wherefore, a christian must not be ignorant hereof, that unkindness ensues
after the most excellent merits of good men, lest they should thereby be
discoraged from well doing. For this is christian virtue, and the true fruit of
faith, yt when thou have declared thy study and great love toward other, and
also haste proved what recompense the unkind world is wont to make, yet that
thou should not be dehorted from well doing thereby. For Christians behave
themselves after the example of god, which does not only good himself to ye
unkind. but does requite and recompense them yt do good amongst men, which
they regarded not. It is a christanis duty therefore to do good to the unkind,
yea and to them yt do evil for good, and according to Salomo^s saying: to hepe
coals of fire upon his head. Thou may not take the world for an example in
this matter. Pro. 25. Romans 1^.
For it does clean contrary: If it perceive unkindness, it think al lost and
cast away, and that it will never after that bestow any benefits. It is the
father of heaven, yt can teach the truly this. Math. 5.
In ye day he suffers his son to rise not only upon ye good, yt give thanks,
but upon ye evil, which give no thanks, yea rather they misuse gods gifts. God
him self also might well say this: These many years have I given thee ye light
of ye son, and have found the vital, We must learn to be kind of god. The
nature of Christen charity.
and all kind of goodness: but there comes little thanks of it. I will make an
end of my good doing. I will deny living to ye unkind world. But ye merciful
father does not so, he suffers not his goodness to be overcome with the
unkindness of the world. If men will not be thankful now, he will punish them
herafter for their unkindness. So must we do also, if we will be christian men.
For this is the nature of Christian charity to suffer and abide all things,
and not to be made impatient thereby. But there be very few, that are endued
with this charity, wherefore there are also very few christians. Nevertheless
if we will be Christians, we must be ready to do good, neither ought we after
the example of the world, to give up our studious zeal in doing good,
because of unkindness. If thou haste ben beneficial this day to any manne,
and he the morrow after show him self strange through unkindness, be not
grieved therewith: For at his appointed time, he shall suffer due punishment for
his fault: Do thou only continue, and say: If this benefit be cast away
upon this man, I will study to do good for an other. If thy benefitte be
neither well bestowed in him, despair not of the third, and so forth: That
thou also myghteste say so, (as Christ says here?) were not ten made
clean, where be the nine becomme? Christ has little thank for this
benefit, yet is he content with that the tenthe retourneth, and gives
thanks. yea, he would not have made mention of the other, if it had not ben
for this, that we might learn that they did wyckedly. For he declares by
this inquisition, that the unkind shall not escape unpunished, for because
they are not thankful to GOD, for his benefits. Than verily shall they know
how greatly they offended through their wicked unkindness.

Wherefore after the example of Christ must we also care nothing for men's
unkindness. The unthankful shall not escape unpunished.
The matter is plain, that for so many benefits of God, that we receive
daily from him, he receaueth very cold and slender thanks. Wherefore let
not this thing move us, but let us think it sufficient, if there be one
amongst ten, in whom a benefyte is well bestowed. Other shall feel and
prove by experience at their time appointed, that, that they would not believe
now by our warning. For they shall not escape so unpunished from God, that
requires faith. The second, of two most beautyfull virtues, that is, of
kyndnesse, and of pacient sufferyng unkindness, at other men's hands. The
Samaritane by his exaumple teaches us to be kind, and to thank both God and
man for the benefyte that we receive. But the exaumple of Christ does
admonyshe us, not to be vnpaciente, neither to cease from well doing,
although our benefyttes prosper not well, and although they that receive
them be unkind. For this is the manner of the world, that thoroughe unkind
persons, they that are beneficial: are vnthankfullye entreated, and
discouraged from their well doing so that afterward, for one chorles sake,
many fare the worse. But if thou be a Christian do not so: although nine
deceive the of thy hope, be content, that the tenth is found thankful. For
Christ himself found them not, to give thanks for such a great benefit.
What? wylt thou look to be in better case then he was? Wherefore take not
grievously the loss of nine. Thou shall have no more loss thereby, then
Christ had. But all this shall turn to their great loss, when these
wicked persons, shall be destitute of all good success in their matters.

And these are the things that make true christians, first, that they have a
sure confidence and faith, in Gods mercy: then if thank be not rendered unto
them for their benefits that other received at their hands, that they suffer
not their patience to be overcome by their unkindness. For if we are
Christians we must look to be in no better case than Christ was himself. We
must do the best that ever we can for all men, and yet look for such
unkindness, that scarsly one amongst ten be found thankful. And it is
possible, that he may be found kind, and woorthye of a benefit. of whom we
thought least, that he would be kind, as this Samaritan.

The Lord our GOD have mercy upon us, and grant that we may bear away these
lessons, and use them well. Amen. Amen.

The xv. Sunday after Trinity sunday. The Gospel. Math. vi.
NO man can serve two masters, for either he shall hate the one, and love the
other, or else lean to the one and despise the other. Ye can not serve God and
Mammon. Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye shall
eat or drink, nor yet for your body what raymente you shall put on. Is not
the life more worth then meat? and the body more of value then raiment?
Behold the souls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
carry into the barnes, and your heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not much
better then they? Which of you (by taking careful thought) can add one cubite
unto his stature? And why care ye for raiment? Consider the Lillies of the
fields, how^ they grow: They labor not, neither do they spinne, and yet I
say unto you, that even Solomon in all his royalty, was not clothed like one
of these. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field (which though it
stand to day, is to morrow cast into the furnace) shall he not much more do
the same for you. O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought saying what
shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? after
all these things do the Gentiles seek: For your heavenly father knows that
ye have need of all these things. But rather seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and the ryghteousnes thereof, and all these things shallbe ministered unto
you. Care not then for the morrow, for to morrow day shall care for it self,
sufficient unto the day, is the travail thereof.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe matter of this gospel is very large conteynyng a long Sermon against
avarice or covetousness, The whole world is set on covetousness.
the which God does hate above al other vices, because there is no other vice
that does hinder the Gospelle more then this, and that is more hurtefull to
Christian men. And yet we see that all the world is oppressed therewith. For all
their minds are day and night upon their living. And Avarice does specially
stir men to this, that no man should be content with that lyuelode, that he
has given from god. All men couete more, and desires a higher degree. For
fair houses they would have towers and palaices, and yet after all this,
their covetousness gapeth for greater things, and if it were not for avarice and
pride, we should all have enough, neither should we need of so great
pensyuenesse, scratchynge and catchynge.

Christ would remedy this wickedness with this sermon, and he sets forth the
matter very hardlye and straightly. No man (says he) can serve two masters.
For either shall he hate the one, and love the other, or cleave unto one, and
despise the other. And hereby it appears, that the whole care of the Lord is,
that his true service and worship be not hyndred. And it is a kind of
temptation that causes Christ to give this precept, so that this Gospel is
not for youth. For it has not yet that care for living and household stuff,
they never ask how the market goes. For this they think for a surety, that
they shall lack no living. This sermon appertains specially to householders,
This sermon appertains to householders and to preachers*
and to them that are procurers. Furthermore it belongs to the preachers of
the word, which have scant of living in the world, and are constreigned by
poverty and need to seek some means to find them, and their family. This
men does Christ here comfort most specially, and studieth to ryd them of their
care, and commands them to behold the birds of the air, that sith God
provides for them so plentyfully, the preachers shall not lack their
portion, so that they shall not dye for hunger. Wherefore this sermon belongs
to us, which perceive our life to be in peril for lack of living, which
are compelled to provide living both for our self and also for other, least
that while we go about the office of preaching, we fall to unlawful and
dishonest shyftes.

But forasmuch as Christ says precisely, that no man can serve God, What it
is to serve,
and Mammon, it is necessary for us to learn, what it is to serve God. For to
serve is nothing else after the common manner of speech, then to do that thou
art commanded, and it is as much to say, I serve a master: I do that that
my master command me, so that the service may seem to be referred not so
much to the person, as to the word and commandment. For the masters have
no need in their housholdes to be fed with meat and drink of their
servants. For they them selves have store and plenty enough thereof: but this
have they need of, that their servants do execute their word and
commandment. But when the servant sees to another matter, and regards not
his masters commandment, but cares for that that an other command, this is
verily the seruyng of two masters.

After this manner also, we must learn what it is to serve God, that serving
of God is no other thing, then to hear what he says, and to do it gladly,
and with all our heart. But what does God command us? before all things he
byddeth us to hear Christ, and hyghly to esteem his Gospel. What it is to
serve god.
This is the only true and acceptable service which we may do to God. For
here have we his most assured commandment. Then does he command children to
honor their father and mother, and the father and mother to nourishe, bring up,
and instruct their children, and the wife to love her husband, to se to her
family: the husband to provide for sustenance and defense. etc. Wherefore when
the children honor their parents, they serve God thereby. For it is Gods
commandment that they should do so. Likewise is it with the servants in a
household, when they do that that is commanded them diligently, they do
this service not only to their master, but also to God. For it is his word
that commanded this. So is it also, as concerning other kinds. All gods
service is contrary in the word*
All should be Gods service, if we would only discern the cause why they
should be so. For as I said before, to serve GOD consists not in the
work, but in the word and commandment of God. This is counted a great thing
before the world, that a monk doothe renounce all things, and enters into an
abbey, lives a hard life, fasteth, watches, says his prayers. etc. here
lackethe no work, but here lacks a commandment, for that that God never
commanded it by his word. Wherefore this can never be counted seruyng of God.

Contrarily, this seems a little thing, whenne a handmayde doothe her work
that belongs to the householde by washyng, swepynge. etc. But because there
is a commandment of God as touching this, be the works never so small, What
the true service of god is.
yet they have the name of Gods service, and passes far all that is holy and
devout, with the monks and Nuns. For the monks have no commandment of
God. But it is commanded, that parents should be honored, and that the
household business should be done. So that generally this is the true service
of God, to do that that GOD commanded, and to eschew that that God forbyddeth.
And all foul corners may be full of Gods service, and not only churches and
temples, but also houses, kytchins, shoppes, cotages. etc. And it may be done
of citizens, of men that go to plowe and tylle the field, if we would but
esteem the matter uprightly. For it is certain, that God commanded not only
the Ecclesiastical and civil administration, but also the guydyng of
housholdes, and that his will is, that it should be preserved. Wherefore all that
does help thereto, first the parents, then the children, and last of all the
servants and neighbors, all do serve God. For it is his will and
commandment. If this reason were well pondred, it would certify all men, as
well high as low, as touching their busynes, that they might know, that
although that, that they must do in the house, be very small, yet they serve
not men but God. What business therefore can be peynful unto them at al when they
understand, that all their work is acceptable to God? But the devil hyndreth
men's Judgment, that they can have no such joy in doing their work and
vocation, and he causes that every man may have a singular pain in doing
their office and executyng Gods commandment, that both may be spoiled and
defrauded of their commodity, that is, men of the ready and glad will, and God
of his service. If it might be purchased by any money, that a man might be
received into that order or college, where as he might be sure of this, that
Gods service should be done, men would gladly bestow all that they have, that
they might come to this point.

It is a marvelous thing. What these monks should mean, when they would
serve God in their rules? But as I said before, that thing was wantyng in them,
that was the chief in this matter. For if thou demand of them who commanded
them to go to the cloister, they can not say this, that God commanded them,
but this must they needs say, that they thought that they might so please God.
But they are worthy of evil for their rashenesse. It is even as much as if I
should command my servant to fet meat, and he in the mean season make
ready a horse. He should not much please me in doing this, and specially
if that he would defend his dooynge, and boaste thereof, as though that he
had done a hard piece of work in brydelyng, sadlyng, and currying the
horse. Likewise is the matter with Mounkes, they crake of their service, and
yet God gave them no commandment so to do.

Whefore if thou purpose to serve God truly, apply thy vocation be it never
so low, and first hearken to Gods word in the church, then to the word of
thy maiestrate, masters, and parents, and this is the true seruyng of God.
This must we learn therefore, and bear it well away, what is gods service,
even to do that that God commands by preachers, parents, and masters. If
thou do this, thy heart may be at rest before God: neither shall thy work
and labor that thou do be painful. And this pl^aseth God, and is Gods true
service. And that that thou do in thy house, is as much as even thou had
done it to god, which is in heaven. And furthermore this is the chief renoume,
wherewith man is adorned above all creatures, which does obey God also. For
the son, the moon, the earth and all things behave them selves after Gods
commandment. So likewise the water has a commandment to bring forth
fyshes, Genesis ^.
so says God in the first book of Moses. And the water does even so among
all men, where as men hinder not Gods blessyng by their sins. So all
creatures are most beautified, when they serve God through obedience. And Christ
says so here, that Solomon in all his glory, was not so apparailed, as one of
these lilies of the field. But what does the lylie? what commandment has
it?, no other but that it may bring forth a show and beautyfull favor,
savor, and color. If then God does so much praise this in a flower what a
great renoume is this thynkest thou, for a man to be found in the
commandment and obedience of God? The maidens are decked to dance, it is but
a toy and a trifle. For this is her chief renoume, when she applies her work
and vocation, sees diligently to her masters children, and to such other
service. For so does the Psalm. 45. extol Christians, and says: In thy
honor comes the daughters of kings. Psalm. 45.
What honor is this, when it is evident, that christians are poor, nedie, and
despised? It is a spiritual honor and renoume, it is not gold, perles,
purple, tissue, but the commandment of our God. This honor shyneth more
brighter then the Son, for it is Gods honor.

He then, that walks in Gods commandment, walks in the very honor of
God. If I should go in the Emperors apparel, or a maid in the apparel of a
great Queen, this would be counted a marvelous noble thing before the world,
but in deed all these things are but toys to mock an ape, and nothing in
comparison of the spiritual ornature, whenne a maid goes gaye in the
obedience of God and her master. In respect of such ornature, all other
common gorgeous things are but nifles and trifles. For that is the true
ornature and comeliness, which is called Gods word, Gods commandment,
Gods obedience. This is the Crown and very ouche, Pro. 1.
as Solomon calls it in the first of the proverbs, and says: My son
hear the discipline of thy father, and let not go the law of thy mother,
that grace may be given to thy head, and a chain to thy neck. In this life
this ornature seems a thing of no great valuation, but in the life to come,
it shall be most excellent, whenne God shall say: Come my son, thou haste
done thy duty in thy vocation. Then shall it appear, that obedience
toward GOD and his word, yea although it be in small matters, gives more
renoume than that that may be most magnificent. And this is sufficient for the
first part, that we may know surely what is gods service, and that the bond
service of Mammon may not hinder us in greater service that we are bound to
do. Now let us see a conforte and consolation as touching this, Now
covetousness may be avoided.
how we may cast avarice and covetousness from us. First (says Christ) that
no man can serve two masters, and he gives them both their names. One is
God, that is the true lord and master, whom we are wholly bound to serve and
honor. The other is Mammon, this is not the true master, where Christ
forbyddeth us to do him any service, that is to say, to be careful for the
life, how it may get his living, and for the body, how it may be apparailed.
And he applies all his sermon to this end, yt we should cast away such care,
and that because it is not only unprofitable, whereof we have no need, and
whereby we nothing prevail, but for that it hyndereth gods true homage and
service. Wherefore we must beware of it, and see diligently that we serve God,
and persuade our selves certainly, that he does now know what we have need
of, and that he will find it us gladly, if we do but only require it at his
hands. And it healpeth much to the attainynge of this faith, to call to mind
those things which God has now given us without our help. For he made us,
and not we our selves, he gave us body and life. Now let the world judge this,
Psalm. 59.
if all the sustenance that is, were cast together in a heap: would it not
esteem the life more? So likewise is the body more to be regarded then all the
apparel in the world.

Is not this then a great madness and folly, worthy of Gods wroth? we can not
but confess, that we have received all these things that are chief of all
from God, and yet doubt we whether he will give us these base and vile things?
This might well be judged a contumely or reproach, if one that has felt any
rich man's liberality in a great thing, would not trust for the same in a
littell thing. Likewise is God handled of us, when we mystrust whether God will
find us food or no. But how this pleases GOD, Christ declares, when he
straightly commands that we do not this, least we commyt idolatry.

And as we may know by the condition of our body, life, and of all our members,
that God is bounteous and liberal, and has given us very many things: So
has Christ also set before us the examples of other creatures, whereby we may
learn to trust in God, and to cast all our care on him. For the birds of
the air be before our eyes in the element, to our great reproach, that where
as we be excellenter creatures then they, yet we give not so great honor to
God as the birds do, which by night take their rest in their nestes without
care: In the morning they fly forth cherefully, they sytte upon the boughs
of the trees: They make goodly sweet noyses, they praise and give thanks unto
GOD: and then seek for their living, and find it. But we can not abstain
from this cursed and execrable care. The birds have no lands, no barnes, no
storehowse or spence: yet they do sing, they do praise GOD: They rejoice,
and be ioyefull. For they be sure of this, that there is one which prouydeth
for them. His name is, heavenly Father. Why then do not we likewise, which
nevertheless are better in this point, that we can work, gather in the
harueste, lay it up in barnes and reekes, and preserve it for other
necessary uses? yet can we not abstain from care. Wherefore we ought never
to forgette the exaumples of these birds. They are merye and cherefull without
care. And why should they take thought and care, seeing they have God to their
nourysher. whose store is so great, that it can not be contained in the
world? Wherefore he has prouender and food at hand every where. Such a
one (says CHRIST) would the Father of heaven be toward us, if ye would give
place to his liberality thorough Faith.

But here do we see by experience, that the world is a fylthy synke of most
filthy and covetous men, which trust not in God, serve not God, but serve
Mammon, and only endeavor to increase their substance. If they are not
deceived of their hope, they are glad. But if their substance be not to
their mind, they are sorrowful, they vex them selves, they are consumed
night and day with cares. But thou dooest not think this, that if all ryuers
flowed with gold, and yet we lacked lyuelode, as meat and drink, that the
life could not be preserved with gold. For we live not by gold. Is not this a
shameful worshipping of gold? which the Ethenykes mocked also by the fable
of Midas? The fable of Midas.
He had so great desire of gold, that he wyshed, that all that he touched,
might be made gold. But when he obtained his petition, the meats, and all
other things, which he touched for an other purpose, were turned into
gold, and so he was punished for his covetousness, when he should needs die
for hunger because all things were changed into gold. Wherefore let every man
flee avarice and abhor it as much as he can. For neither gold, nor silver,
nor perle, nor any such thing, has power to nourishe. And yet the madness of
the world is so great, that beside liuelowd they require also gold and
silver, as though it had no need of gods gifts, but have need rather of this,
that is not given of him.

He therefore that is a Christian, Let him se diligently unto himself, that he
be not oppreste with avarice, but let him learn to put his trust in GOD,
which has declared so much both in us and also in other creatures, that he
will provide for us, and will leave us destitute of no good thing. As the
psalm also makes notable mention as concerning the young crows, to the which
he gives meat. Psalm. 47.
For this is the ordinance of God, that whereas he gives life, he suffers not
that thing as sustaineth life to be lackyng. And if he does that in Catle and
beasts, how much rather will he do it in us Christians, to whom he has not
only given life and body, but also his only begotten son, that they may
live not only here, but also in the kingdom of GOD? this would CHRIST, that
we should learn, and that we should forsake that execrable incredulity and
distrust, which avarice stirs up.

It were a very foolish thing, if a man would in a solitary place make
himself bare and leave, that he might add somewhat to his stature. This man
should be a mocking stock to all other. So does the world, says Christ, when
it is vexed with pensiuenes in gettinge of riches. No man shall wax rich by
care. Gods blessing and not care makes men rich.
All that consists herin, that God may bless and not in our cares, if there
be blessing, there is substance enough, But if not, although there be never so
much, yet the use and fruit of the substance is lackyng: As examples do
declare. This ought to be a just cause to drive us to faith, not only because
this care hinders our faith, but also it causes a great tormentinge, and yet
do we prevail nothing thereby. But are not these manifest signs of avarice, of
cares and of unbelief? For these are always Joined to gether? Or if we would
use but only reason, it behooved us to hate these vices, and to avoid them.

He adds more beside this, that this confirmation may be perfect against
covetousness. He byddeth us also to consider the things, which come before
our eyes, as we walk in the country. There are flowers of all kinds, which
show them selves unto us with most beautiful and sweet colors, and does
almost speak unto us and adhort us to trust in God. For sith that they are
decked with such magnificence, that the apparel of mighty kings can not be
compared with flours, much more does God take care in appareling and deckyng
his own. For we may not think of apparel as the common sort does, as
though all things went by chance. Christ in this place does pronounce with
very plain speech, GOD (says he) does appareill the grass in the field.
Birds fyndeth not their living be chance. But the father of heaven fedeth
them, and gives to every one his portion.

This is it also as concerning the lylies. For if gods wisdom were not in
the cause, they could not be so like to gether in color, leaves, number of
leaves, roots and form etc. Wherefore since he bestows so great care upon
flowers, that are but for pleasure, and that beasts might live therbie, is it
not an incredible incredulity and mistruste, that we do yet doubt, whether
we also shall have appareill from God? For as we have a preferment before all
birds, when we till the ground, mow, and gather into our barnes, and provide
for certain times, where as birds can do no such thing, and yet they are
fed: So says Christ also to us, that we have the preeminence also in
apparelynge, There is so much flare, hemp, and such like herbs brought
forth by tillyng, there is also a great multitude of sheep, so many weauers
and spinners etc. every where, what great madness is it then, not to think, that
part thereof belongs unto us? And especially when we spare no labor. For in
this place must we put a difference. For labor is not only not forbed, but
also enjoined, Not labor, but carefulnes is forbidden.
that we should do all things most studiously and diligently, and utterly
flee all slouthfulnes and slouggyshnes above all thing. But the care of
living and appareill is utterly forbedden. For such care is a sure token,
that we have not so much trust in GOD, as that he will feed us and provide
other things for us. Wherefore that care appertains to Gods dishonor and
blasphemy. That these two things may so be joined to gether. First that thou
do thy work diligently, and spare no labor. Labor and faith must go
together.
For that did God command man in Paradise, that if he would eat, he should
labor. The second is, that thou be a Christian and believe. For to believe is to
put thy trust in Christ, that he is our parent, and knows what we have need
of, and that he will give us these things liberally and plenteously. Care can
not agree with this faith: but as soon as care takes place, faith departs.

Wherefore Christ forbyddeth and says: be ye not therefore careful, labor:
for of this ye have a commandment. Let care alone for me. For that is mine,
that I may be your father. And I can also somewhat prevail: but so can not ye,
Wherefore attempt not a thing in vain. Or if ye are not content to be reuled
with this my council, know ye, that ye are not my worshippers, but the
worshippers of Mammon. Him do ye love, and me do ye hate, to him do ye cleave
and me ye do despise, as is the example of the world. And if there were any
occasion at this time of advantage: thou should find many, that would
rather let pass this sermon, than not to regard the advantage, or at least
wise to differ the tune thereof until after sermon. Mammon moves them so
much, that they feel that the time of it, will never return again, but the
time of the sermons not so. Now the matter is plain, that whatsoever is done
to the word of god, is done to GOD. He that despises the word of god
despyseth god him self.
He that despises it an prefers money, the despisynge and contempt thereof
belongs to GOD. There is no place for glosis: the word and speech is to
evident: there can be no other thing gathered. Wherefore this sermon is
belonging to Christians, that they be not pensive, nor say: what shall we
eat or drink, or what clothing shall we wear? The Gentiles, says Christ,
inquire thereof, that know not, or believe not tha^ they have a father in heaven.

But ye have a father in heaven, which gave you body and soul, yea and his
son: he knows whereof ye have need, as touching whom, how can ye do so great
injury, as to think him hard and unmerciful unto you, as though he would
deny you lyuelowd and sustenance, so that ye must needs die for hunger?
Wherefore behave your selves after the example of your children, at evening they
go to bed without any care, they take not thought for to morrow, for they
know that their parents will provide for it, do ye also likewise. My sons
says Christ, have respect unto your father in heaven and all other things
shall be given unto you, only beware of care. For this should be a sign that
ye have no trust in the heavenly father, or else ye would cast away all care,
and would be of good hope.

Wherefore Christ concludes his sermon and says: seek first the kingdom of
God and the righteousness thereof and al other things shall be cast unto you. This
is a necessary doctrine, and an excellent promise. The world seeks his own
kingdom, when it has need of riches, and money, and yet there is no surety in
the^. But contrariwise, gods kingdom is eternal, that must we Christians make
search for. This kingdom, says Paul, is amongst us, and it is nothing else.
than to hear the word and to believe, (that is) to trust unto God truly, and
to knowledge him for our father. Look where such faith is there is GOD present,
and forthwith follows righteousness, and remission of sins. Let this (says
Christ) be first with you. Care ye for the word, hear it diligently,
exercise it and believe it. When ye have on this wise made search of Gods
kingdom and righteousness, care ye for no more, let every man do his business in
his vocation. Not idleness but labor becomethe a christian.
For it becomes not Christian men to be idle, but to labor. Then shall all
things be given unto you. For if ye goodness of god be so great, that it find
al things abunda^tly to the evil, which do not only not serve him, but
moreover persecute his word and blaspheme it: How is it possible, that he
should suffer you to be forsaken, yt love him, and hear his word gladly, and
set it forth as much as ye can, and put all your trust in him? Wherefore ye
doctrine of Christ te^deth to this end, yt we should embrace his word, believe it,
and follow godliness, and lay aside all care, and believe yt god will find us al
things sufficiently. But what do they? A great part cares not for the word but
rather gives them self to play, pleasure, pastime, sport, and wa^tonnes, the^
to the hearing of holy sermons. After the which must needs follow an unholy
and bestiall life, which is of necessity subject to diverse curses of
poverty, evils, and manifold discommodities.

Then comes there to this also an other disprofite, y^ many being slouthful
and sluggishe have no regard of labor. Or if they labor, and grant them
selves no time void of labor, Ryotus persons.
yet they spend and riot out of measure, that oftentimes they spend in one
holyday, all yt was gathered to gether the hole weke before. GOD forbids
both, as well prodigality as idleness. But whatsoever is gotten, Prodigality and
idleness forbidden.
yt should be preserved studiously. Therefore he says: byrds does not mow, nor
gather into barnes. As though he should say. Ye do both of them, and both must
be done, in that ye labor, and lay up afterward that, that ye got, that it
may be saved for necessary uses. But as for him that does not so what fault
is there in God, if all his business lacks success? Thou may blame thy own
negligence, slouthfulnes, and wasting, and not God, which would give gladly, if
thou would embrace godliness, Note we^^ the^e ^yue points.
and hear Gods word, believe, put away care, and fall to labor. As he says
here: All things shall be given unto you, but thou do refuse it. When thou
should hear a sermon thou fallest a sleep, or doste some other trifles.
When thou should labor, thou art idle etc. Not so much as the foul has
his meat without labor, he finds it not in his neaste: do thou also
likewise fear God, and labor diligently, let God care for the residew, how he
will find thee thy living, yet, as I said before, beware beware of covetousness,
and rake not up to much. For GOD can not abide that. This is the doctrine of
this Gospel. The Lord our God grant us through his holy spirit, that we
may earnestly embrace Godliness, and that our hearts may be inclined to his
testimonies and not to covetousness, as David says.

Amen.
The.xvi Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. vii.
ANd it fortuned that Jesus went into a City called Naim, and many of his
Disciples went with him, and much people. When he came nigh to the gate of the
City, behold there was a dead man carried out, which was the only son of
his mother, and she was a widow, and much people of the city was with her.
And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, weep
not, And he came nigh and touched the coffen, and they that bare him stood
still. And he said, young man I say unto the, arise. And he that was dead
set up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother. And there came
a fear on the^ all. And they gave the glory unto God, saying: A great Prophet
is risen up among us, and GOD has visited his people. And this rumor of him
went forth throughout all Iewry, and through out all the regions which lie
round about.

THE EXPOSITION.
MAny things were to be spoken touching this gospel, howbeit we have chosen
but two things thereof. The one is, how we ought, to take confort against
death. The other is, as touching Christian pity, and mutual affection in
these common evils. Ye hear here of a miserable widow, which first lost her
husband, and then her son which was her only solace in all her trouble. For
it was counted the chief myserie in this people, to have no son to be heir
of the family. For the trade of this commonaltie was such, that al was
appointed to the heir. Wherefore this widow was miserable in all points, and
in great adversity, in so much that this seemed sure tokens, that God was
displeased with her and against her, for yt he took away first her husband
and then her son. And it was no marueill, if she had cast away all her hope
and trust in God. Christ has respect to this woman, and has pity upon her,
and restores her ded child to life, and turns her great sorrow into great
joy.

This history is therefore to be marked of us, A comfort against death by
Christ.
that we may confirm our faith. For Christ does the business not only of this
woman, but he studieth to certify all us of this what a weak thing death is,
that we should not fear it at all, but that we should do all things with a
pacient mind on such wise that we may not be put in fear, by death or by
any other things: For that, that we have such a prince to aid us, which has
present and ready help against all evil and death: yea, and in this example
he declares, how soon he can put away death. For who would have thought,
that this dead young man, that was carried forth to be buried, could have
reliued again? But Christ coming upon them, when the matter was past cure,
speaks but this: young man, I say to thee arise. Christ is the lord of death.
And the dead rose and began to speak. Whereby ye may understand that death
before Christ is even as life. And all is one with him whether we live or be
dead. For although we be dead, yet are we not dead to our destruction. The
reason why is this: with one word he can call life again, and put away death,
So that hereby we may well understand Christ's saying to be true, even that
god is the god of the living and of the dead. For although Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and other holy Patriarchs be dead to us, yet they be alive to god.

This must we learn out of this Gospel in this widows son, how great, god
will declare his power to be in the last day through Christ, when he with one
word will call men to life again, and give to them that believe, everlasting
life. This shall be done in a moment, so that we need not doubt but that both
these things are in Christ, (that is) power, as he declares here, and also
will, to do it gladly. For this is an evident proof and example thereof. The
widows son is dead, he is void of sense and feeling, but as soon as Christ
speaks with him, he hears. Is not this a wonderful thing? He that hears
not, now hears, he that lives not, now lives, and yet is there nothing
else done but that Christ speaks a word, and byddeth him, Arise. This only
word is of such force and might, that it puts away death and restores
life.

But for as much as we know, that Christ can so soon rydde us from death, and
restore us to life, let us se also how ready he is and willing to do it. For
there is none amongst them all, that desire this of him, only is he moved with
the misery of the widow, and goes unto her without asking, and restores her
son unto her alive again. Wherefore let us think that this example belongs
unto us: that we should not fear death. We must not fear death.
For this was done for our sake. As though he should say. It is not unknown
unto me, yt you fear death, but put away all fear. For what power can it
have on you at all? It may make you fear, but provide you such sauegard
against it: yt ye may not only judge according to your sense, which is the
very cause of your fear, but have ye respect unto me also, what I can do, and
what I will do, even that I can as easily raise you from death, as you are wont
to raise a man that is a sleep, and will do it gladly and desirously, so that
there can lack neither power, neither will thereto. Wherefore it follows
thereof, that they that are buried in their graves, do sleep more lightly, John.
^1.
then we in our bodies. For it is possible that thou be in such a dead sleep,
that although thou be called ten times, yet thou can not hear. But the dead
awake at one word of Christ, as ye see by the example of this young man and of
Lazarus.

Wherefore death before god is not called death before us it is both death and
is so called, The death of Christen men is a sweet and quiet sleep.
but before god it is so quiet and light a sleep, yt nothing can be lighter.
And this would Christ have to be well beaten into us, yt we should not fear, when
ye pestilence, or death it self takes us, but that we should with a bold mind
answer thus against it. What is thy greatest might then? Tou layst before me
very grievous matters, thou put me in great fear, and how thou will execute
punishment on me like a torme^ter. But I will consider, what god on ye contrary
part can do, and will do, when y^ have slain me. For he fears thee not,
neither do he care for thy outragiouse fury, but iesteth more rather upon ye
saying: O death I will be thy death, o hell, I will be thy destruction. If thou
killest my Christians I will kill thee again, and restore them to life. This is
ye comfort yt Christ sets forth in this gospel, yt although Christian men
dye, yet they be not dead, but sleep a sleep, yea and yt, such a light sleep,
yt Christ can awake the^ with his little fingar, but this is but a little praise
for death, that when it does here the worste, yet it can do no more by all his
rage but cast a man into a sleep, so that Christ may raise him up with one word.
As it is written. The hour comes, when they that are dead in their graves,
shall hear ye voice of the son of man, and shall come forth, John. 5.
they that have done well to the resurrection of life, but they that have done
evil, to the resurrection of Judgment.

This hope have Christians, but the Turks and the Jews have it not, neither
the Papists. This they know, that they must die, and that there remains
judgment and hell. But what do they? They have no trust in Christ: But they
seek help of their diriges, Masses, trentalles, pardons, fastes, and such
other things. And they take Christ for no other but for a Judge which has
only the office to judge and condemn. This is the greatest wickedness that is,
that they Imagine that Christ is crueller then death. Wherefore when they hear
of the day of Judgment, they are afraid, they tremble and quake in their
hearts. So do not Christian men. They know that Christ in that day shall
judge them that believe not, which will not receive the word, or believe it.

And therefore they boldly say: I am baptized and do believe in Jesus Christ my
Lord, that he dyed for my sins, and that by his resurrection he has gotten
me righteousness and everlasting life. Why should I fear therefore? he is not
mine enemy, but my friend and patron with the father. Wherefore although the
last day draws nigh, or death chances unto me by any other means, all this
shall not put me beside my state. My Lord Jesus Christ holds himself still
for a time, at the injuries, that death does unto me. But when death thinks
that I am wholly oppressed, then am I only holden with sleep, and that with such
light sleep, that Christ can scarselye speak a word, but I hear and rise
unto everlasting life.

Let this seem a necessary lesson for us, that we may fear, neither at death,
nor at the last day: For Christ comes not to judge and condemn us. He
comes as he came in this place to the widow, and to her dead son, to raise
us from death, that we may hear, see, speak again and do other things. After
this sort will he come to all us that believe and save us. But they that believe
not, them will he judge. Wherefore we must accustom our selves to look for
this our Savior, and to believe in him, that by a little and a little we may be
more and more certified of this our hope and salvation, and that we may fear
neither death, neither the last day. But he that fears, follows the flesh
and the old man: and not Christ and his word. For the matter is plain, that
Christ shall come, and raise us from death. Where Christians bodies reaste in
their sepulchers, and sleep until Christ come and knock at the sepulcher, and
says, Arise, arise. Then shall we rise as out of a most quiet and sweet sleep,
and we shall live and rejoice with Christ our Lord for ever. And thus ought
Christians to have other thoughts, tha^ the Turks or Jews have, which are
utterly confounded with fear. Yea and the Papists, and monks all are dismayed
in their hearts. And this chances unto them worthily. For why come they not
to learn this lesson, and believe that CHRIST is the helper of them that
believe, and the judge of them that believe not? If thou art a Christian, and
have hope in Christ, he will not take away his help, succor and salvation
from thee, when deliverance, and defense shall be requisite for thee against
death and the devil. But if thou trustest for help any where else, and
despisest his help, as the Pope both teaches, and does so in deed, look for
no other of Christ, but a very Judge, for because thou art the servant of ye
devil, and the minister of death, and take that on thee, that is the work of
the devil and of hell. They hate Christ, and care not for his kingdom.
Wherefore he can be no other to them then a judge. But for the good, that put
their trust in him, he will procure them peace and salvation for ever and ever.

After this lesson and doctrine, which is called the doctrine of faith, must we
learn also of Christ ye doctrine of pity, Pytie or compassion.
merci and compassion. And this ye hear often times in the year as touching
charity, that we should remember, that one of us is bound to help an other.
But pity is a thing somewhat greater, as when we are grieved with other men's
miseries and calamities, no less then with our own: as when I have a
neighbor that is nedie or sick, I ought not only to be ready to help,
Charity issuethe out of faith.
but I must be sorry for his misery, and that at my very heart, as though it
were min own evil. As this is put forth to us in Christ. He is in this place
as a foreiner and stranger. But when he sees the misery of this widow, he is
as much grieved as though it were his own son, he gives confort and help.
This is ye example of charity, which ought to follow after faith, and it does
alwais follow faith, if it be true faith So yt we ought not to behave our self
after ye example of certain merciless people which has stony and iron
hearts, and laugh at their neighbors miseries, and are grieved at their
prosperity. The affections of Christian men ought to be otherwise, which ought
to be grieved at other men's misfortune, and glad at their prosperity, as Paul
says, yt we may be grieved with the^ that are grieved, Romans 12.
and rejoice with them yt are joyful. This is the property of envious
persons, to be glad of other men's hurt, and to be grieved at every ma^s wealth
saving their own. Too sorts of compassion and pity.
But there are two sorts of pity, A spiritual, and a corporal. In these
corporal and bodily evils, we must succor and help al yt we can for their
defense, wha^ we see this, yt the poor have need of help, and can not help
the^ selves. It is a spiritual evil, when ye soul is in peril, Spiritual
pity reprouethe sin.
as wha^ I see a yo^g man void of al holiness, and caryng nothing for religion,
holy doctrine, but is ignorant of ye principles of religion, and lives without
any discipline or order, fearce, stubborn, obstinat. Here it is ye office of
pity, not to speak faier and gentle words unto him, but to chide him and
sharply rebuke him, yea and rather to beat him, or stricke him. For there is
greater peril, when ye soul is diseased with such evils, tha^ wha^ ye body is
sick of any disease. Wherefore we must let nothing pass as touchi^g this
pity, yt these euilles may with words, stripes and wandes, and such other
remedies be restrained. But you say, yt this is a cruel pity, to vex ye
body with stripes? Yea but necessity causes this to be the best pity, that
is in this case. For the Physicians must needs show cruelty upon some part of
the body, that the hole body may be saved: and so is it also as concerning
this pity. For such chastisements are done, to see to thee, that thou may
be delivered from the tyranny of the devil, and from his kingdom. Apt and
very proper similitudes.
He yt is almost drowned in a floude, takes it for no wrong, if he be plucked
out by the hear, although it be done to his great grief and pain. Wherefore if
thou do not refuse in the bodily euiles to suffer a little pain for the
avoiding of great peril, why shouldeste thou in a more dangerous peril of
soul and everlasting life, take grievously such chastisement as is requisite
and necessary? So is it truly the work of pity, when stubburne children and
obstinate servants are sharply by stripes put in remembrance of their deutie.
This is a spiritual medicin, against the disease of the soul, which is the
rebellyng against the parents and masters. Wherefore this is the work of
mercy, when man's misery is considered, Folyshe petie marrethe the city.
and help is given. This pity ought parents chiefly to regard in a family,
and maiestrates in a communaltie, and to beware diligently, that neither yt
sufferers impaciens, neither their own negligence make them give up this pity,
as it comes to pass oftentimes. For he that would be pitiful, and will
dissemble or wink at syn, he should commit two kinds of cruelty toward his
neighbor, and should fall into gods high displeasure. Wherefore thou must not
seek after the praise of gentleness and pitifulnes by dissembling and winkyng
at sin, A good lesson for maiestrates.
when everlasting peril depends thereof, neither must thou look for that time
when he will come to himself and amend by his own accord. Thou must cut of
the snares of the devil by sharp discipline, but as touching this sort of
pity I will entreat more largely in an other place.

But now is the example of Christ put forth to us, how he pitied the misery of
this woman, and thereby taught us true pity. That we should remember that this
precepte is set forth to us, to think surely yt this is our duty to help,
yea with the lssoe of our goods, when our neighbor is in bodily necessity,
and so truly to show the office of pity. Which thing afterward has so
great renoum, that it is commended, not as though it were done to our neighbor
only, but also to God himself, which promises also to requit it by a reward.
Or if the contagion or disease be spiritual (that is to say) syn, as if our
children and family be stubburne, negligent, wanton in doing and saying: here
must be showed pity, that is cruel in sight, and yet for all that, does all
things for the best. But that that is past tamyng and amendment give it up as
a thing past cure into the hands of the ministers and officers. For the matter
can not escape unpunished. And it is to be counted a part of pity to punyshe
in such case with extremity of death. For they that are paste grace, can be
restrained by no other means. They would be the destruction as well of other
as their selves, if this office of pity were not exercised upon them by the
sword. To punish the wicked is great (...) and mercy.
Wherefore punyshementes are very works of pity, seem they never so cruel and
bitter to a man's sight. For if it were not for this punishment and sharp
correction, there could be no co^minaltie, nor civil fellowship mainteyned.
Wherefore let every man in his vocation show pity not only with affection, but
also with discretion, and let him not help in bodyly euyls only, but much
rather in spiritual euyls.

And these are the two doctrines out of this gospel whereof the one belongs
unto faith, that we should be without fear in the myddest of all evil, and
specially when the fears and terrors of death come to sight: And let us think
that the almighty healpe of all our salvation is set in Christ. Wherefore we
can not despair of him without our hurt. The help of man and of us, is but
vayn. For they can not repress death: Death is valyant against them. But we
must have all our trust in God, and in his son Jesus. For that that we can
not, he can, if we our selves have no help, yet he has wherewith to help us,
and is ready to do it with all his heart, as the matter is plain. And where as
is such a mind which believes consta^tly in Christ, it does the true service,
which he requires All other that despair, hate him, and do not acknowledge
him for God, or else they would have all their comfort in him. The second
example is, that we after the example of Christ have respect to the necessity
of our neighbor, and pity him. The Lord our God have mercy on us, that we may
learn both these lessons, and that with these men, we may glorify Christ
for his benefit. Amen.

The.xvii. Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Gospel of Luke. xiiii.
IT chauncede that Jesus went into the house of one of the chief Phariseis,
to eat bread on the Sabbath day, and they watched him. And behold, there was
a certain man before him which had the dropsy. And Jesus answered, and
spoke unto the lawyers and phariseis, saying: Is it lauful to heal on the
Sabbothe day? And they held their peace. And he took him and healed him, and
let him go, and answered them, saying: Which of you shall have an Ass or an
Ox fallen into a pit. and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath
day? And they could not answer him a gain to these things. He put forth
also a similitude to the geastes, when he marked how they preacede to be in
the highest rowmes, and said unto them: When thou art bydden to a weddyng of
any man, sit not down in the highest rowme, lest a more honorable man then
thou be bidden of him, and he (that bad him and the) come and say to the, give
this man rowme, and thou begyne with shame to take the lowest rowme. But rather
when thou art bydden, go and sit in the lowest rowme, that when he that bad
thee comes, he may say unto the friend sit up hyer: Then shall thou have
worship in the presence of them that fit at meat with thee. For who soever
exaltethe him self shall be brought low, and he that humbles him self,
shall be exalted.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospelle are two questions. The first belongs to the service of
GOD, which ought to be done unto God. The second is, what one man owes to an
other between them selves. And here ryseth a question, whether it be better
before God to keep the Sabbath, or to help thy neighbor and to do him good.
For the Phariseys had no other matter but to prove and mark what Christ
would do, as touching the man that was diseased of the dropsye. If he healpe
not, he might be reproved as hard hearted but if he helps, then is he
wicked, and keeps not his Sabbath, and may be reproved in this that he
obeys not God and his word. Therefore what soever CHRIST does, he is taken.
For they have every where places to turn unto. For amongst the Jews the
ceremony of the Sabbath was most holy Wherefore they keep it straightlye. But
what doothe Christ being so belayed on every side? they thought he had no
ways to escape: He uses few words after his manner, and so confuteth his
adversaries with their folyshenes. For this is the sum of all the matter,
where as he says plainly, that they understand not what it is to sanctify
the Sabbath. This think you (says he) that to keep the sabbath were to be
idle, and to do no good. This interpretation is very leude. For sanctifying of
the saboth signifies to hear gods word, What is the sanctifyeng of the Saboth.
and to serve thy neighbor as much as thou canste. For God does not so
highly esteem the holiness of the Sabbath, that he would that the peril of the
neighbor should therefore be little regarded. Wherefore when I help my neighbor,
although this is done with labor, yet hereby I have sanctified my Saboth
truly. For I have done a godly work therein. So that this doctrine ought
chiefly to be referred to this end, that we may learn thereby to keep our
Sabbath, that is not, to do nothing and to be idle: but sermons must be heard,
and there must be had respect to the works of charity. But what do the
sermons teach? do not al things thereof tend to this very end, that we should
love one an other, and be diligent in doing good one for an other? This does
God require that thou should hear and learn in the Sabbath. Hear and do
Whereof it follows that thou must do the same also on the Sabbath, if thou
wylt truly sanctify it. Wherefore Christ says, you Phariseys are gross
doctors: For ye say, that the Sabbath is broken, when any good is done on
the Sabbath. Where as this is the chief doctrine of the Sabbath to have mutual
love. What is it to love This thing is not done by thynkyng but by true and
effectuous affections, which stirs up the tongue, the hands, and other
members, whereby good deeds are done, as John says: Children let us not love
in word and tongue, but in deed and truth. This has GOD (says Christ)
commanded thee to do on the Sabbath. 1. John. 3.
yea and that that is more, he ordained the Sabbath, that thou should hear
and learn this, and that thou sholdest declare al benevolence in word and deed
toward thy neighbor, whenever he has need

Wherefore CHRIST reproves this overthwart kind of saints, which deprave and
corrupt the word of God, and boast that they keep the Sabbath, where as yet they
are so out of Charity, that they will not bestow a worn garment, to the
covering of a poor naked man. They are false writhers, that inuerte and
change the word of God. For where as the word of God commands: Love thy
neighbor, and do the best for him that ever thou can: They answer, this
will we not do, least we violate the Sabbath. But Christ confuteth them by
this, that GOD procures that thing to be preached on the Sabbath, that in it
thou may love thy neighbor, care for him, and help him all that thou can.
As it is plain in that example, that no man thinks it a breakyng of the
Sabbothe to deliver him by all means possible. Now what an unreasonable way
is this, to excuse it when it is don in the danger of a brute beast, and to
affirm that it is a grievous offense to do the like when a man is in peril,
least any work of charity should be done unto him in the Saboth: yea, and
thus is it mete, that they should stumble, which take upon them to judge and
give sentence of Gods doing, that they might entangle them selves, and so
betraye their foolishenesse. For this do the Phariseis take upon them in this
place, and presume against Christ, that they may have him in their danger to
trippe him, whether he helps, that then he may seem to violate the Sabbath,
or whether he helps not, that then he may be reproved for the neglectyng of
charity. But Christ does not only defend and mainteyne his doing against
them, but also lays the same crime to their charge. For sanctifying of the
Sabbath is to hear Gods word, What it is to sanctifye the Sabbothe.
to do holy works, to love thy neighbor, to help him at his necessity, and
to show obedience, to be mercyful, to help to give council, to conforte, to
break bread to the hungry. etc. This ought to be done on the Sabbath. For he
requirethe no counterfaited service that we should exercise all the day in
syngyng in the Temple, after the example of the papists. This is his will that
the word should be heard, and that which is commanded thereby, should be
performed in deed. As there is an excellent saying in Osee: For I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, Osee. 6.
and the knowledge of God more then burnt offerynges.

For the knowledge of God is nothing else but to hear Gods word. The reason
is, because that with out the word no man can know any thing as touching God.
But when the word is pronounced, which says: I am the Lord thy GOD, which
sent my son, and delivered him to be slain for thee, which had mercy upon
the at Baptism. etc. By such a word is the knowledge of God communicate unto
us, that he is favorable and merciful, which thing reason can never perceive
and know by his own strength. Fur^hermore of this it follows, that sith the
knowledge of God comes by the word, that this is Gods service and
sanctifyeng of the Sabbath, to here the word of God, and to put it in
practice. The perverse and overthwart phariseys neglect all this, they hear
not the word of God, they care not for his commandementes: and yet they would be
counted for such as violate not the sabbath. So does al papists, kings and
princes that resist gods word. They hear masses every day: they never hear any
preaching of the word, and yet they would be named with the excellent name of
christians that serve God. But he yt desires to know what it is to serve god,
let him learn that thing in this place, even to hear his word, and to keep his
commandments. To a Christian every day is the sabbath
Wherefore every day is sabbath day with us christians. For we must every day
hear Gods word, and order our life thereafter. And yet for the peoples sake is
the sunday ordained to this intent yt they should chiefly hear on yt day ye word
of God, and live after it. For the other six dais ar left for every man to do
his busynes. This is the first part of this gospel, that this is ye true keeping
of the sabbath and worshipping of god, when ye word of god is herd, and his
commandments regarded. Wherefore when thou co^mest to a sermon, or redest some
gospel, this is ye worshipping of god, and more acceptable service unto him,
The second part entreats of humility.
then all other sacrifices as Osee says

The second part teaches of humility. For so does Christ expound the
parable in the end: He that exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that
humbles himself, shall be exalted. Which is thus to be understood, that men
also and not only God, do use to hate the proud, and none but light persons
and wicked do hate the humble and lowely. For it is given by nature, that all
men love such. When a handmayde shows her self humble and obediente in
doing her business in the family, her maistres can not hate her. To be
short, Nature it self causes all men to favor the humble and lowly, and to
hate the proud. As soon as the parents perceue disobedience and pride in the
children and servants (for these two vices are always joined together) when
they answer proudly, that they are not bound to be obedient at every word: the
parents can not abide this, and they seek some means to restreigne this
fierceness: Or if that they will not be ruled, to cast them out of the
house. Likewise do the officers and Magistrates in their calling. They that
among their subjects are proud and stubborn, those they tame by punyshement.
How chances it then, that no man can abide pride? God and his word is the
cause, which says, that he will labor all that he may to repress the
proud and stubborn. 1. Pet. 5.
As this appears in all kinds afterward. All rich men, learned, wise,
beautyfull, strong, myghtie, as soon as they began to be proud, and to
forget modesty, they were cast down hedlong of God. For as it is written, God
resists the proud. He that has such an adversary, can by no means escape
from falling. 1 Pet. 5.
Contrarily, he that is sober minded, obteyneth the favor both of God and
man, so that God with his angels do highly esteem him, and men has him in
great estimation and singular renoume, as examples do declare, yt oftentimes
poor men's children com to high renoume, so yt princes are fayn to have the^ in
honor for their wisdom and counsels sake.

Whereof comes this felicity? Uerily hereof that God can not be lackyng to
them that are sober minded and lowly. Psalm. 113.
As the.113. Psalm shows: Who is as our God, which dwells on high, and
has respect unto the lowly in heaven and in earth? He raises up the simple
out of the duste, and lifts the poor out of the mire, that he may set him
with princes, even with the princes of his people? Thus does God deal with
the humble. But as for them that are proud, and can not refrain from
excess, and ouermuche, against them he sets him self with all indignation,
and he never cease, until they be throwe^ down. This ought to admonyshe us,
to behave our selves soberly, and that children and servants should show them
selves obedient, and think? God requires this, that I should be obedient,
and that I should not be proud, but walk lowly. This will I do, neither will I
care for that I am in such a low and a base state and condition. For this I
know, that when I do my duty, God will regard and care for me, how he may
bring me to a better state.

Thus came it to pass with Saul, Saull.
which when he was obscure, and a keeper of mules, and thought him self the
lowest of the stock of Beniamyn, he was advanced to such honor, that the
Prophet Samuel received a commandment from God to make him king over
Israel. For as long as he was humble, God was present with him by his mercy
and grace.

But after that he was puffed up with pride, and began to be high minded, and
to despise God and his word, he perceived that God had no less mind to cast
him down, then before he had mind to advance him, until at last he
dispeired utterly, and killed himself, and all his kynne was destroyed. The
example of David belongs to this matter also. David.
It appears that his might and doctrine was excellent, yet was he not therefore
proud and high minded. He followed the state of a shepehearde, and obeys his
fathers commandment, until Samuel comme, and anoint him king. yea and the
history makes special mention, that he had seven proud and stately
brothers, which despised him as the youngest. But God says to Samuel: Let
pass these stately persons, and anoint him king, whom I show unto thee, for
I will none of the other. David, when he was now exalted of God, is not
stately. For if he had been so, he should have been rejected of God, after the
example of Saul. But for as much as he shows modesty and lowlynes, although
he be put beside his kyngedome, yet does he recover it again, and is also
advanced to great renoume of God, for that that he promises, that Christ
shall proceed of his stock and kynred.

All these things are written and declared in sermons, to the intent that we
should use humility, and beware of pride, and not say after the manner of the
stately: Who can abide this drudgerie? Let us couete to live more
gentylmanlyke. But whenne thou thynkest thus, thou art more certain of
nothing, then that GOD is made thy adversary thereby. God can not abide pride.
For this is true, that God can not abide pride and loftynesse, as we have
exaumples to prove this every where. For what other thing (thynkest thou) to be
the cause of so great trouble in the world, and that there is such a multitude
of rustikes, barbarous, rude, and wretched men, then because they were delited
in their youth with pride and lice^tious living? wherefore after that God
counts them not worthy to be regarded of him, neither can they ever wax
thriftie in any kind of life. For this is surely decreed, that what so ever
exalts it self, shall be brought low. Contrarily what soever humbles it
self, that God can not chose but exalte.

Most hearty thanks be unto our God, which has showed forth to us this
day this doctrine, and grant us his grace, that we may show our selves
obedient to this doctrine, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The xviii Sunday after trinity Sunday The Gospel Math xxii.
WHen the Phariseis had heard that Jesus did put the Saduceis to scilence, they
came together, and one of them (which was a doctor of law) asked him a
question, temptyng him and saying: Master, which is the greatest
commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is
the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like unto it: Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all
the law and the Prophets. While the Phariseis were gathered together, Jesus
asked them, saying: what think ye of Christ? Whose son is he? They said
unto him, the son of David. He said unto them: How then does David in
spirit call him Lord? saying: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my
right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stool. If David then call him
Lord, how is he then his son? And no man was hable to answer him any
thing, neither durst^ any man (from that day forth) ask him any mo questions.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel are two things to be marked above all other. The one is of yt
scribe which demands what is the greatest commandment in the law? The other
how Christ demands again the phariseis, as touching Christ whose son he
should be? For David in spirit calls him his lord. The first question
declares, yt the ignorance and blindness of ye Jews was so great, yt they had
forgotten the ten commandments, which children are wont to learn by heart.
Wherefore it were an easy thing for a child to give them answer: The first and
greatest commandment is: Thou shall have no other Gods but me. But the
phariseys and scribes take it not for the greatest, and they be fallen to such
folly, that they call in question what that commandment should be. One says
that it is sacrifice, an other to give alms, an other, to fast and to use a
peculiar kind of apparel etc. As we see it to come to pass, when men fall
from Gods commandment and word, and ordeyn and set up other works for
them self of their own inuentyng. For this came to pass with our religious
men also, when they became cloysterers, they made their profession, they had no
propre goods, and therewith they forgot also what is faith, and what is
charity. And their Religion they called afterward, the state of perfection.

What it is to be perfect.
But is not a child now more able to declare, what is the state of perfection
then all the monks? The reason is, that they have only in their sight, their
rules of their profession? But a christen man says: To be perfect, signifies
to fear and love God, and to profit thy neighbor with al kind of benefit. For
god gave no other commandment. But at last the matter came to that point,
that ceremonies be invented, which appear pleasant, and full of pomp: as
when days, vestures, meats be chosen, wherein they diffre from ye other
multitude. This moves the eyes of the rude, and turns them on them selves.
But in the mean time the principal works and commandementes, where as God is
commanded to be loved, and thy neighbor to be helped, is clean left a side,
as the example of the phariseys and Scribes is evident in this place. Wherefore
this is a notable exaumple, where as such notable learned men were in so
great blyndnesse, that they knew not, which was the greatest or smallest
precepte. And yet if a man may say the truth, they were doctors, which
ought to make declaration to the people, how God was to be worshypped truly
As our religious men be also: If a man should demand of them, as
touching good works, and what is to be done, they would not put forth
the ten commandments, but answer, that he must become a religious man,
and bye Masses, go on pilgrimage, fast. etc. But this is nothing else, then to
withdraw men from the true commandments unto trifles. And such reward have
they at length for their errors, that follow man's doctrine, and set forth
such works, as touching the which God gave no commandment. By such are
men deceived, so that they have no more respect to the ten
commandments, but do let them wholly pass. For if it were not for that, it
would not have been hard for them to answer, that that is the greatest
precepte that God commanded. But the phariseys, Scribes, priests, and monks
knew not that. Wherefore this error is to be avoided, and your own
foolyshe devotion is always to be eschued* But contrarily, the Catechism and
Christian discipline is not lightly to be regarded, if that men would be
instructed to know what is their duty to do. For here we do learn that GOD
is to be loved, and that we must have no other Gods (that is) we ought to
prefer nothing before the love of God. but rather to let all things pass,
and to suffer all things for his sake. And thou art in the state of perfection
when thou do this: But they say, that this is the duty of every common
Christian, but they will do some peculiar thing, that every man doothe not:
which rise not in the night, which eat flesh, and are apparailed after the
common sort, where as they bestow the night in holy service, and eat fyshe,
and use a kind of apparaile by them selves: And so at last the matter comes
to that point, that man's traditions keep them so occupied, that they can have
no respect to Gods commandementes. Wherefore it is no small doctrine, where as
Christ says, that it is the chiefest precept, to love god, and that the
second is like to the first, to love the neighbor as him self.

For of these two depend all things that may be taught as touching good
works. Out of this fountain ought all things to proceed, and to this ought
they to be referred agayne^ For this is decreed, if thou thynkest how thou
may serve God, that can be done by no other means, then that thou love God
and thy neighbor. This doctrine will cause a straight judgment to be had in
the last day. For what was done in the Papacy every manne knows. The
blyndnes of serving god in the papecie.
He that would serve GOD, became a cloysterer, he went to Rome, or to Saint
James. He prayed to this saint, or that: he did serve him either by
feastyng or fasting. And at that time was this called Gods service. But tell
me, is not this true, that thou seruest God, when thou do that, that thou
art commanded? Wherefore to serve God, can be no other thing, What it is to
serve God.
than to do that, which God has commanded, and not that which ye think
best your self. But what has God commanded? truly, as Christ reherseth
here: If thou think to do Gods service, thou must not go far for that
cause, or bestow any great cost or charge. Love God and thy neighbor. How
can gods service be more nere unto thee, or be done better cheap, then by
this means, that when thou love thy neighbor, and do all kind of
benefit for him, God will accept it as though it were done to himself? This
is verily a marvelous doctrine, that this service is Gods, and done to God,
when thou do good to thy neighbor. And this as I said before, shall be the
cause of a hard and grievous judgment in the last day. For thus (says
Christ) that the wicked shall say: Math. 2^.
When did we see thee hungry or thirsty? But Christ shall answer: That ye
have not done to any of the least of mine, that have ye not done to me. So
that thou may be sure hereof, that whenne thou healpest a poor Christian
with rayemente and meat, it seems to be done unto CHRIST. And it is even
all one. But is not this a grievous thing, that we let pass such an easy
and ready occasion to serve God? We think that if we could tell where Christ
might be found, that there we would gladdely do, and bestow all that we
could. But it is no need to think so. We do hear here, that the second
precepte is like to the first. There can be no other meaning thereof,
then that GOD will take it as done unto him self, what soever is done to
the neighbor. But thou will say, that God is in heaven. This makes no
matter, he is also here in earth. Wherefore, whenne thou seeste a Christian in
peril, think this, that it is Christ that suffers it, and that he has
need of thy healpe, as he says himself, that in the last day he will make
such complayntes, that we have not cared for his hunger and thyrst.

It was a common facion in the popedom, that the old soldiers, which had been
horsemen and fotemen in war, and also lawyers and such like, which were
thought to have lived in a prophan and an unholy kind of life, would say, yt
they had served the world hitherto, and that now ever after they would serve
god, Monkery is against charity and the true service of god.
and so they went to some monastery, where they were made monks and heremites*
but this is a falls and peruers way. For he yt will serve god must not seek
solitary places and corners but must be conversant amongst men, and help them
all that he can. For by so doing is service done unto god, which commanded it.
By monkerie is not gods service fulfilled. For it is not only a thing
vnco^manded of god, but also al ye trade thereof is against charity and the
true service of god, whereof Christ in this place speaks nothing. This was
used also amongst the Jews. They hurted their neighbors diversely, and
thought that if they offered much burnt offering, that all things pleased
god highly. But what says God also psalm. 50. I will not argue with thee for
thy Sacrifyces. Thy burnte offerynges are always in my syghte. I will not take
calves out of thy house, neither kiddes out of thy heardes. For mine are all
the wild beasts of the woddes, and thousand beasts in thousands upon the
mountains. In an other place he says also, that he has no need of their
gold and Temple: But if thou studyest to do me true service go thy way unto
thy neighbor. Thou haste a wife, children, a famyly, neighbors, rulers,
lords, masters, and many other states. These shall find the business enough.
Therein do me service. If there be any stubburne in thy family or children,
wynke not at it, but see it duly punished. If thy neighbor be nedie,
sorrowful or sick, help him, se unto him, conforte him. Obey thy governor,
and think that all this is done unto me.

But it is greatly to be lamented that these things can by no means move us.
For whatsoever we have trespassed against god, all that does god forgive us of
his own free will, so that we will only be beneficial unto our neighbor,
which thing god will so take, as though it were done unto himself. He therefore
that were ignorant what the world were, and how it handles God, might learn
hereby. For what other thing do al men of all degrees, then through wantonness
and folly daily buffet god and tread him under fete? For this is all men's
desire how they may wax rich them selves, how they may heap up their own,
caring nothing, how it goes with their neighbor. He that could think this
with himself surely, that what soever he does to his neighbor, is done to
god, might worthelie abhor and tremble at the fashion and manners of the
world. But there is no man that thinks this to be true. As Christ says also.
That the wicked shall say in the last day: Lord, Math. 25.
when saw we thee hungry and thirsty? But this shall nothing prevail them.
For as Christ says here. The second is like to the first: So shall he say then:
That, that ye have not done to one of y^ least of mine, have ye not done unto
me. This is the first doctrine out of this Gospel. God grant, that we may be
moved therewith, and let every man so consider his neighbor when he does him
good, that god may take it as done unto himself. Then is there nothing in the
world so vile and base, with which God may not be served. The servant in the
stable. The maid in the dayrie or kitchyn, the child in the schole, yea all
should be the Lords servants, and worshippers, if they would do that
diligently that God command. So should houses be made churches, where as
nothing is kept but gods service. But no man ca^ be persuaded to care for
this. No man will serve his neighbor. All men endeuer to serve them selves and
to seek their own commodity. Wherefore even as by doing good to our neighbor
we may work a thing acceptable to god: So the world does always gratify and
please the devil in that it regard not Charity toward his neighbor. But the
end thereof will be sorrowful. For how can this please God, where as god has
ordained his service to be done so nigh, that with out in the field, within in
the house, and whersoeuer thou do the works of thy vocation, thou art
occupied as it were in an holy temple, where most acceptable service may be
done to god. And yet we regard it not, but despise it, and had rather serve the
devil than him.

Wherefore learn this, that he that gives a benefit to his neighbor, does it
not only to his neighbor, but to his heavenly father also. For there is a
saying in this place, that God will take this to be done unto him even as
though it were done to him in heaven. Math. 25.
For else would not Christ have said: The second is like the first. He that
can not be brought into this belief, The benefit done to our neighbor on
earth, is done to god in heaven.
that he may do heavenly things in the earth, and that he may find every
where a temple let him get him to the devil. For even as thou may make thee
here a Paradise and an heaven, when thou do good to thy neighbor (for
therein thou do good to God which is in heaven) so when thou do not good
to thy neighbor, thou make a hell and damnation for thy self. For thou
do gratify the devil, which is appointed to hell. Neither does it skyll,
if thou do not yet see it and feel it. For the time shall come when thou
shall both feel it and see it, when thou shalt accuse thy self for thy
stubburnes and great folly.

Wherefore it were very necessary for us to learn to exercise our selves to
do good unto our neighbors. Why god geuethe us his gifts, and to what end.
For all things are given to us from god to this intent, hole and perfect
senses, riches, understanding, and such other, that we might thereby obey this
commandment, and do to him this service. And as this doctrine as concerning
love of GOD and our neighbor belongs to this present life: So the second
doctrine which teaches, whose son Christ is, does teach us, how we may
obtain an other everlasting life after this life. For we shall not obtain
everlasting life by this, if we know how GOD and our neighbor ought to
beloved of us, although we begyne to perform this in deed with all diligence,
as the Phariseyes did suppose, which thought that if they had Moses, they
neded no more. But Christ shows here, Too know christ is most necessari
unto salvation,
that this preuayleth not unto the obtayninge of everlasting life. We must
clyme and ascend to a hyer step, and learn perfectly what is Christ, and
whose son he is. The Pharise^es knew, that he should be the son of David.
But Christ requires more in this place. The reason is this.

For if Christ were no more but the son of David, he must needs die, as
David did, and should he have only a corporal kingdom. But Christ has an
eternal kingdom. And David his father calls him father in spirit. How
does this agree that Christ should be both Dauides son and Lord? This is a
question, to the which, the Phariseyes can make no answer, neither can any of
the Jews at this present time answer thereto. In this question is nothing
belonging to thy neighbor, to charity, and to good works. But this is
intented, even to teach us to know what Christ is. He that learneth y^ can not
wander from the kingdom of heaven and everlasting life. For it is not
sufficient to everlasting life, The knoweledge of the law suffices not unto
sal^^cion.
to know the law and what is to be don. The reason is this. Because, that also
is required, that it should be done. Which thing is wont to proceed very
slowly. Wherefore this is of necessity required, even to know perfectly what
CHRIST is. Wherefore Christ does so put forth the question, and byddeth them to
make answer, whose son Christ is, which after the flesh was David's son?
But for as much as David calls him not son but his Lord, yea and such a
Lord, that sits at the right hand of god, and to who^ god will make all his
enemies his footstool. By this question Christ minds to stir up the Jews
and all us, to have a more higher judgment of Christ, and to behold him with
other manner of eyes, than with such as see him only to be the son of David.
For he is David's Lord also, that is, he is not only a man, but also very God
borne eternally out of the father. Or else would not David have called him
Lord, if he had not ben more then a man, and if he had only been David's son.
For David was an excellent holy man, and a most learned King, and yet he
calls Christ, which is his son, lord. As though he should say and openly
confesse-My son passes me far. I am a King, and bear the name of his
father, but yet he is my lord, and such a Lord, that sits at the right hand
of God, and by gods commandment bears rule over all his enemies. For where as
he is a man it is easy to judge what manner of enemies he has, even the devil
and death, as Paul gathers out of this very psalm. Psalm. 110. 1. Cor. 15*
If the devil then and death ought to be made a footestoole to this son of
David, that he might be their Lord: this must needs follow, that a godly power
is in this son of David. For without this virtue he could do nothing against
death and the devil, no more then other men can. By this means than does
Christ bring us to the true meaning, declaring the way to everlasting life.
The law is a most profitable and necessary doctrine. The law.
For it shows what we ought to do to please God, and to serve him and to
escape y^ punishment of sin. But this doctrine belongs only to this
present life. But for as much as after this life we must come to an other life
which is everlasting: the doctrine of the law preuayleth nothing there unto.
The reason is. There can be no hope of life, except we be wholly rid and
delivered from sin. And although the law be given to this end, that sin
might be restrained, yet sins be not thereby laid a side. Wherefore we have
need of an other doctrine above the law. For sith we can not perfectly fulfill
the law. The law causes us to have an evil conscience, and to fear gods
wroth for our sins sake. Wherefore this doctrine tends to this end that
thou sholdest learn what is Christ, and what he has done. And now this is
his voice, that he is not only the son of David, as the Jews believe, but also
David's Lord, that is an everlasting and very god. But what does he? he
puts aside from him the form of god as Paul says and becomes a man.
Phil* ^
He takes upon him the death of the Cross. And why so? Uerilye because he is
the son of god. that is to say, a sacrifice for the sins of the world.
After that he dyed and rosse again the third day from death unto everlasting
life, John. 1.
and sytteth at the right hand of god. This must we learn and bear away as
touching Christ. For he that holdethe this fast, is safe. He that holds it
not, shall perish under his sins. The reason is, Romans 3.^.7.
we are all sinners, and the law does not only not deliver us from our
sins, but makes us more grievous sinners against god, and accuses us before
God so that we are in great danger and can find no ways to escape by all
that we can do. In sins are we conceived and borne. Psalm. 51.
and the longer that our life is, the more do our sins increase. For this
burden is put on us not as an other burden, which we may put down and cast of
when we will. It cleaves to our very mary bones, and most secret parts of us,
and never suffers us to be at reast, as we ca^ not deny this, if we would
consider well, and prove our strength. Against this, is this the only remedy,
to learn what is Christ. For as soon as thou know, who he is, and then what
he does, this is the very way to come unto salvation. The reason why is this.
If thou be a sinner and haste sinned much against God, have respect to this.
God sends this Christ to suffer for sinners and to make satisfaction for
sins. But what should this debte trouble the, which that most rich Christ
has taken upon him to pay, yea and has paid it allredie? wherefore this only
remains, that thou embrace with true confidence and faith this death and
cross of Christ.

This can be unknown to no man, Death*
that death is dew to us all, and no man can have any hope of a privilege for
the contrary. When we are dead, we are undone. We can not help our selves.
But consider whereof comes death. Is it not for sins sake? Now haste thou
heard where thou must set remission of thy sins, even in the death of thy
Lord Jesus Christ. This Christ when he was dead, Christ Lord over death.
remained not in death. But he arose from death to life. And this is a sure
proof, yt he is Lord over death. Wherefore even as thou have remission of syn
through him, so by him thou have everlasting life, in yt he shall raise thee up
again thy flesh and body in ye last day. And this the true knowing of Christ
and to know whose son he is, even ye son of David. For he is a man: and yet
nevertheless ye Lord of David which sits at ye right hand of god, and has
for his footstool his enemis, sin, death and hell. Wherefore he y^ needs any
help against these enemies must not require it of Moses, nor of ye law, nor of
his own work or righteousness, but let him require it of ye son and Lord of
david, whereas he shall be sure to find it. This does ye idle kind of Phariseies
not know. Wherefore they care not for Christ, and are content with this yt they
know out of ye law, how god and the neighbor is to be loved. Whereas yet it is
not possible that god should be known (I will not speak of the love of him)
except Christ be known first. As he says in Math. 11. Math. 11.
No man knows the father but the son, No man can love god except he
knowethe Christ.
and he to whom the son opens him And this is the cause why Christ by this
occasion moves this present question: As though he should say. This ye know,
that god is to be loved. But ye shall never love god with all your heart, with
all your soul, with all your mind, except ye know Christ well and perceive
who he is. For how can we otherwise know, what grace and mercy God has given
unto us: This is no small thing, that God has made us, and given us body and
soul and all things. But we use these things but for a little time in this
life. John. 3. Romans 8.
But herein appears most especially the riches and great goodness and mere
mercy of God, whereas he spared not his only begotten son, but delivered him
unto the death of ye Cross for our sins, that we should be delivered from
sin, and obtain everlasting life through him. This is the everlasting
infinite, and incomprehensible love and grace, which no man can know except
he know Christ. And therefore he can never love God truly without Christ.

Wherefore it appears hereby, what the Phariseies and Scribes get by their
question. Even this verily, that they are openly convicted of Christ before
them al, that they can talk much of the love of God: But they understand not,
nor yet perceive the least part thereof truly. And whereas they know not god
which has bestowed so great benefittes and liberality upon them, how shall
they love their neighbor, that has need of their help, and can recompense
nothing for their poverty? Wherefore let us highly esteem this doctrine, and
let us give thanks to God with all our heart, that we are delivered out of
incredible darkness under the Popedom, even like as the darkness of the Jews
were here. And we have the pure doctrine of Christ, whereby we do not only know
how we ought to be delivered and saved from sin, but we receive the holy
ghost. Which by this doctrine moves our minds so far, that we may begin
to love God and our neighbor. The which thing our Lord Jesus Christ grant
us. Amen. Amen.

The.xix Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. ix.
Jesus entered into a shipe, and passed over, and came into his own city. And
behold, they brought to him a man sick of the paulsey, lying in abedde. And
when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said to the sick of the paulsey: Son
be of good cheer, thy sins be forgeuen thee. And behold, certain of the
Scribes said within them selves, this man blasphemethe. And when Jesus saw
their thoughts, he said: Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? Whether
is it easier to say, thy sins be forgeuen thee? or to say, arise and walk?
But that ye may know that the son of man has power to forgive sins in
earth. Then says he to the sick of the paulsye: Arise take up thy bed and
go unto thine house. And he rose and departed to his house. But the people that
saw it marueyled, and glorified God, which has given such power unto men.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE ought especially to mark out of this gospel the word of grace which god
has communicate and given among us, that we might pronounce it amongst our
selves: Thy sins are forgeuen thee, that we might merueil at it with those
that are present here, and give GOD hearty thanks, for that he has given man
such power. For it is doubtless a great power where as Christian men may say one
to an other: Man has power to forgive sinnnes.
brother mine, fear not: god is merciful unto thee, only believe ye promise,
which I pronounce in the name of Jesus. And so the matter shall be as sure, as
though that God had pronounced it himself: Thy sins are forgeuen thee. This
power began by Christ as we have heard, and afterward remained with us men,
and specially with the^, yt are ministers. How be it nevertheless every
Christian man has this power, when thou felest desperation through sin, to
say unto thee: why art thou sorrowful? I as a Christian man say unto thee, that
thou do wrong to thy self. For god is not angry with thee. These words
ought to have no less estimation with him that his grieved than if Christ
himself had pronounced them out of heaven, neither ought they to be any thing
less esteemed, for the person that pronounces them. For all the effect
consists herein, that thy heart should apprehende and believe the promise,
and think it to be most certain, that GOD will be merciful unto thee for
Christ's sake, as is the example of this man that was sick of the palsy.
Christ does first adhort this man to faith: be of good confort, says he, and
doubt not, Thy sins are forgeuen thee. As soon as the sick of the palsy
believed this word, his sins were without doubt forgeuen him. So doubtelesse
do we obtain remission of our sins in the congregation, when the minister or
any other Christian says unto thee: GOD is not angry with thee. Beware that
thou do no wrong to thy self. For he has forgeuen thee all thy sins for
Jesus CHRIST his sons sake. Now is it thy duty, to believe this promise with
all thy heart, and rather to suffer all evil and harm than to doubt of it.
For if thou boubte, absolution does thee no good, no although GOD himself
with his angel should pronounce it over thee. For where as faith is not, there
is god reproved as a light and vain person, as though it were not true that he
promises. God save us from such unbelief and mistrust, which is the most
greuouse sin. How be it, the devil is a very subtle craftesman to bring us
to this that we might count God a liar, that is, that we should be loath to
believe gods promise.

But when the heart does embrace the promise, God is glorified with the
greatest glory which pleases him most. For he is affirmed to be true, and
that he can not deceive, although he promise all things that are impossible.
Wherefore this pleases Christ specially in this man, and therefore he speaks
so gentilly unto him, my son. Thou art vexed with syckenes, the devil has
endamaged thee with the palsei, and God for thy sin has suffered it so to be
done, there ensues upon this also a dread and an evil conscience, so that thou
thynkest that Christ is angry with thee, and that thou have no way to escape.
For it is naturally given, when the punishment of God is on a man, to fear
and dread in conscience, but thou must not give place to this fear. Thou must
not think this: that God has no regard of thee, and that thou canste not tell
whether he will have mercy on thee or no, and that no sinner ought to be
brought to GOD, al these thoughts are wicked? Thou must not have respect to
sin or to the punishment of sin, but to that, that CHRIST speaks: even
that thy sins are forgeuen.

Wherefore the sick of the palsy must think this, that although he suffers
the palsei for his sins, yet that his sins are forgeuen. Such a faith can be
hindered neither by the palsei neither by any disease.

On this wise ought faith and the word to be joined to gether. The word and
faith must be joined together.
For none of them both can be without the other. He that believes and has not
the word, believes as the Turk and as the Jew does. They think that god is
merciful and favorable. But they lack a promise. For out of Christ god will
not be merciful. If any man has the word, and is without faith, there also
is the word of no efficacy: Gods mercy is to be found in Christ alone.
so that faith and the word are knit to gether with such a sure knot, yt they
can not be sundered by no means. A pha^tasticall person believes that the end
of the world shall be within this month, but this is but a counterfayted faith.
For it is without the word. The Turk believes that he may hope to be saved
through Mahomet, but it is a lie. For there is no word for the proof thereof.
The Pope believes that Christians may get righteousness and salvation by their
own works, but this is a feigned faith. For there is no such word or
promise. So is it possible that there should be a faith, but because there is
no word, therefore can it not be a true faith.

But we Christians lack not the word. For we have the pure and sincere word.
But we feel a want in our faith. In that we can not so believe the word, as we
ought. This does the devil and original sin work in us, and withdraws us
from the word unto lies. For all we are naturally borne with this sin, that we
are glad to give credence to lies. Wherefore it is a hard piece of work to shake
of this unbelief, although we have this word present. For the flesh and the
devil withdraws us always from the word. For consider thou this with thy
self, if I could truly and perfectly believe this, which Christ speaks here
to the sick of the palsy, and also that, that is spoken to every one of us in
baptism, In absolution and also in common sermons, how that there is no wrath
of God to be feared, no indignation left to be dreadded, think thou not
that it would be an excedyng joy unto me, and that all things should seem
full of joy and pleasure? But for as much as we do not so, it is a sure token,
Note well.
that the old man and the devil do all that they can continually to hinder our
faith. Wherefore think this for a surety, that both of them be necessary.
First the word must be heard, the^ must it also be believed and that without al
doubting as much as is possible: With out the word it is an easy thing to
believe lies.
and after all this, must all those things be hoped for, which the gospel
promises, that are necessary either for the spiritual or for the temporal
life. And they that have no word may easelie believe. The reason is. Because
this vice is given by nature, that we are glad to believe lies, for because our
heart is prove thereto. By this means the Pope and his sectaries believe
constantly in the mass, and in the service and intercession of saints, in
monastical vows, ceremonies, fastes, etc. But it is a false and feigned faith,
and by your reverence full of whoredom and baudrie. The heart is full of
fornication. False faith causes spiritual whoredom. But on the contrari part
we which (thanks be unto god) have the pure and chaste spowse (for the word is
doubtless sincere and true) do not believe constantly, where as nevertheless we
should believe constantly. But they can not believe so constantly, seeing they
have not the word. All the cause thereof is in our old man and in the devil,
for that, that we through original sin depart from the word and truth unto
lies.

What things are to be learned of this gospel.
Out of this gospel we must first learn, that we have need of the word. And
then that we embrace it with a sure faith. And that afterward does thereof
ensue remission of sin and everlasting life, so yt we are surely rid from all
difficulties and dangers both in this life and in the life everlasting. But
when the word is lackyng, there is a faith also, as the Anabaptists, Arrians,
Turks, Jews and Papists have a faith. But it is a faith without the word,
which is ingenerat in us by nature through the fall of Adam. This is a lying
faith, which by nature we may keep more surely then the word of God.

After that Christ had preached this to the sick of the Palsye, and forgave
his sins: The scribes think that Christ blasphemeth God, in that he
forgeueth sin. This part is necessary also and of great wayght. For this is
evident by the example of all fantastical persons, that all are in this
error, that they know not how sins be forgeuen. Demand this of the Pope
and of his doctors, add they can not tell thee. what absolution does. For all
the Popedom holds fast by this doctrine, and it is surely holden up thereby,
that grace is powered into them, and that he yt would obtain it, has need of
contrition, confession, and satisfaction. But when it is demanded, what is the
office of absolution and of the keys: they answer that it is an exterial
administration, which is observed in ye church. So say the Anabaptists also:
what shall baptism prevail to the obtaining of remission of sins, since it
is but a little water? The spirit is requisite.

To be short, no sect maker, no monk, no priest could see this, that
remission of sin, is a power given to man. As it is here in the gospel.
Wherefore learn thou this and say: I know that God does only forgive the
sin, that I confess, yet this is also to be known, by what I may be
certified, God alone forgeueth sin. The Minister certifyethe the conscience
there of by the word.
that my sins are forgeuen, or what is the mean by the which my sins are
forgeuen. And there say: If I desire remission of sin, I must not go into some
corner and say: O god forgive me my sins. And the^ look for some Angel, whom god
should send unto thee to say, Math. 28. Marc. 16.
that thy sins are forgeuen. For god promises that he will come unto us,
that baptism may be among us, and his word most holy, that it might be said:
I baptize thee in the name of the father, of the son and of the holy ghost. He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved. But thou sayste that baptism is
water only. It is true, but this water is not alone, but Gods word is with
it. Therefore when I come to the minister, which has the peculier commandment
of GOD, or to any other Christian, and desire remission of my sins. There
does the minister pronounce: I in the stead of GOD declare unto thee through
Jesus the remission of all thy sins. And here may thou surely trust, that
thy sins are forgeuen, For baptime and the word will not deceive thee.

This did they not teach in the Popedom, neither does any of their preachers
understand this. Wherefore give you thanks to God for this benefit and light,
and learn diligently that God alone forgeueth sin. But how? verily no
otherwise then it is here: in that he has given men such power: As Christ
begins that in this place, and afterward gives commandment, that from
henceforth it should always be observed and kept in the congregation unto the
end of the world, that repentance and remission of sins should be preached
in his name. So is remission of sins amongst men to be required, or in the
word, and no where else. Luke. 4.
For there only may it be found. This suffers thee not to ascend into heaven
therefore: But when thou desire remission of sin, receive baptism if thou
be not yet Christined, or if thou be, see that thou do call to mind that
promise, and be not hard of of belife. Go also, and be at one with thy
neighbor, and then ask absolution. And as thou hear, that remission of
sin is pronounced unto thee in the name of Jesus, so believe, and thou shall
obtain thy desire: So that baptism absolution, the public word, the
sacrament may not seem a light thing unto thee, but that remission of sin may
be asked and required thereby. For to this intent God has called and ordained
thy Pastor and Curate, Math. 5.
thy father and mother, thy Christian neighbor, and has put his word in their
mouth, that thou should ask confort and remission of syn of them, so that
this may so be counted the commandment and ordinance of god, that we should
give credence to the words of men, when they according to Christ's word and
commandment, use their ministration and office. For these are not the words
of men but of God. Wherefore these words are to be believed constantly and not
to be despised. When the minister baptiseth a child according to Christ's
commandment There thou hear the words pronounced of a man, Math^ 18. John.
20.
But they are the words of God, neither must thou take them any otherwise,
then if god had pronounced them himself. So whenne thy sins are forgeuen
thee in absolution, thou may no more doubt, then if God had spoken them
himself. For GOD him self pronounces this sentence, that thy sins may be
forgeuen thee. Wherefore learn in this place the way how to answer these
fantastical persons, when they cry on this wise: What is water but water? We
know this also. Of the water of Baptism. Note.
But they are ignorant hereof, that the word of God is joined with such
water. Wherefore it is no longer pure water: but divine water, which the
mynister gives not of himself, but God commanded it so to be given, to the
intent that by it we might have a new birth to enter into the kingdom of
God, and Remyssion of all our sins. And as GOD geuethe the word, which is
his and not ours, so does he give also Faith unto the word. For both of
them are the gifts of God, Faith and the word. Faith an the word are both
the gifts of god.
Wherefore Remyssion of sins is the work of GOD although God woorketh it by
man. Thus then must Remission of sins be required in the word, which is put
in man's mouth: and in the Sacraments, which are ministered by men, and no
where else. For it can be found no where else.

Who can not understand this, that my works are far otherwise, which I
do, than the word and works of God? What madness then moves the
Papists, to attribute the Remission of their sins to their works? Wherefore,
whenne they in the last day shall comme forth with their works, CHRIST
shall ask them, and say: Where is my word then? I ordained in my
Congregation, Baptism, the Sacrament of my body and blood, absolution, the
open preaching of my word, that men might by them obtain remission of their
sins, and be partakers of my grace. Why have not ye used this way and trade?
Here might ye have had a sure way of remission of sins, but in your works,
there is no certayntie. Wherefore you must mark this doctrine diligently, what
is proprely the remission of sin, and how we may be assured thereof, and whereof
we must ask it and receive it. In the true church of Christ is remission of
sins and no where else.
Uerily in this ye must have respect only unto ye holy church, where the word
and sacraments are: there is it found, and not in heaven, as the Phariseis
thynk, supposyng that Christ blasphemeth God, because he remitteth syn. But
beware thou of that, and say: God has bestowed remission of sin in Baptism,
Math. 18.
and in the word, yea he has put it in every Christian man's mouth, when he
conforteth thee, and shows to the the grace of God, that thou may receive
and believe it, no otherwise then if Christ him self had pronounced it by his
own mouth, as he pronouncethe to the man that was sick of the palseye.
Wherefore these heretics are greatly deceived, where as they sunder the
word from Remission of sin. This might be done if it were the word of
man, but it is Gods word, and Gods water. He that goes about to take that
from man, and to defraude him of it, takethe away from manne also remission
of sins, neither is there any remedy against it. Wherefore the Anabaptists
and other heretics do loose also the Remyssion of sins, Baptism, the
Sacrament, the holy Congregation, and all christian works, because they
cast away the word, that they hear of their mynister, and care no more for
it, then if it were the voice of a beast. God spoke ones by an ass, and if he
should yet speak by an ox, or by any other beast, he ought to be heard. Why
should it not prevail than, when men speak by the commandment of God? For
although thou do hear the voice of a man, yet doste thou hear God, and
receauest for a surety Remission of thy sins from GOD, if thou embrace it
only with Faith. Numer. 22.


I thought it good to make mention of this matter in this place, that ye might
make strong your selves against sects, and that ye might be prepared
against their assaults. For as I said, in the Popedom they knew nothing less
then this doctrine. For this they thynk in the popedom, that baptism came to
an end now long agone. But if they have need of remission of sin, then
that contrition, confession, and satisfaction are requisite. For thus did
they describe penance. But this divinity is such, that the dyuell can well
away therewith. For it hurts not his kyngedome. This is true, that
contrition is requisite, and that we must be sorry for our sins, but we
obtain not remission of sin thereby. For Remission of sins comes only
hereby, if that I have respect to the word, and promise of God, and embrace
that with a strong faith. But they inuert this and turn it up side down.
They omytte the word, they regard not what the Minister pronounces by the
commandment of Jesus CHRIST: they have respect only to their contrition and
penance. But by this means they lose both Christ, and all his benefyttes.
Neither is it possible, Contricion.
that they should conforte or solace as much as one troubled conscience. For
they let pass the word, in the which only remains all hope of
salvation, and brings men to contrition and righteousness. But learn you
this, as concerning Remission of sins, to conforte both your selves and
other also. For as much as God in Baptism, in absolution, in the open
preaching of his word, in the sacrament, does talk with us by his minister,
and by all other christians, to this must credence be given, and then for a
surety we obteyn remission of our sins, which remission in the Popedom was
dead and buried. For as touching it, there is not a word mentioned in all
the Popes bulls, only they make rehersall* of contrition, and refer the
remission of sins unto it. And thus have we remit sin.

Now let us briefly touch the history. The sick of the palsy is an example
of all sinners. For this is the propretie of this disease. The property of the
palseye.
The members can not do their offices: and when a man goes about to draw his
fete or his hands to him, the farther they fall from him. Wherefore
Aristotle in his Ethikes compares such a man to wild and fierce youth,
which can by no means be tamed. But he that will well understand this
disease, must take it to be spoken of hypocrites that will be justified by
their works. For the more that these labor to draw nyghe unto God, and to
pacify him, the farther they are cast from him. And when they think that they
do him most pleasure, they displease him most. For they have no Faith. He
therefore that coueteth to be rid of this evil, let him come to this man,
which delivers on this wise when he says: My son, be of good comfort, thy
sins ar forgeuen thee. By such a word is strength restored to the members,
that they may healpe one an other. For where as is remission of sins, there
shall ensue very true good works, for sin is taken away. This was Christ's
especial meaning with ye sick of ye palsy. He lay down sick in his bed, for
his disease would suffer him to do no otherwise, he was as a killed hog and
unprofitable in all his members But when Christ bids him to rise, he rises
and is strong and lusty, and where as he was wont to be carried from home, now
he bears home his own couche.

This would Christ that we hereof should take and behold an example and sign of
that that he has power in earth to forgive sin. He speaks plainly in the
earth, that we should not look for it from heaven, or as the Pope taught to hope
for remission of syns in purgatory, by other men's works and merits. For so
it is in this place, that remission of sins is a power, which is given to men
in earth at Baptism, at ministryng of the sacrament, in absolution, and in
open preaching. Contrariwise, whatsoever is bound (that is) is excluded from
Baptism, the sacrament and the word, is bound also in heaven.

By this power that we men in earth do lose and bynd sins, god is not
spoiled of his glory, Note well.
neither ar we made Gods thereby, as the profane and wicked minded men do
oftentimes say of this matter. For we have no more than the ministry and
office. Wherefore God has coupled us together by this ministry, that always
one of us should conforte and confirm an other: And that the other should
think him self bound to believe as far as the word is purely preached unto
him, that is to say, remission of sins in the name of Christ. And this is the
very bryngyng unto God and remission of syns. He that dies in this belief
dies to his salvation. But he that dies, as he is taught in the Popedom,
with a confidence and trust of the intercession of Saints, dies evil, and
to his destruction. For he lackethe those defenders which God ordained
against the violence of death, (that is) the true pastor, the pure word, and
absolution. So great misery the devil brought in by the Pope, yea and now
begins to be the author of an other infection by the sectaries. For they
can not abide the word. This offends his eyes. Wherefore the Pope took it
clean away, and in his place brought in the monks rules, masses, pilgremages,
pardons, and such other. This can the dyuel well away with. For it hyndreth
his kingdom nothing. The Anabaptists further the matter, which speak very
contemptuously of the water of Baptism. The Swenckfeldians also most vilely
and wickedly contemn the outward preaching of the word. All have lost the
word, wherefore they are to be avoided, and this is to be learned, that
remission is no where else, but there as the word is. That word is in
Baptism, in the Supper of the Lord, in absolution, in public preaching.
Wherefore remission of sin is there also, and let him be accursed, that says
otherwise. But where as the word is, there is faith requisite. And then the
members begin to be fastened which the syck of ye palsy could before move by no
means. But look where the word is not, the palsy is never taken away: and it
is impossible, that any true mouyng should ioyn the members together. This would
I the more earnestly drive into you, because the Pope and sects are the
authors of such great disorder in the Congregation. The Pope brings neither
to the word nor sacraments. The sectaries can not but speak contemptuously
of the word, and sacrament, and nothing preuayleth with them, but the holy
Ghost. And we know this, that the holy ghost will not do his work without
the word and sacraments. Wherefore we can not despise the word and
sacraments, but we will observe them for the chief things that we have. God
grant his grace, that we may preserve this pure doctrine, and continue in it
to the end and be saved. Amen.

The.xx Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Gospel. Math. xxii.
Jesus said to his Disciples: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
was a king, which made a marriage for his son, and sent forth his servants
to call them that were bydden to the weddyng, and they would not come. Again,
he sent forth other servants, saying: Tell them which are bydden, behold I
have prepared my dinner, mine Oxen and my fatlynges are killed, and all things
are ready, come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their
ways, one to his farm place, another to his marchaundise, and the remnaunt
took his servants and entreated them shamefully, and slew them. But when the
king heard thereof. he was wroth, and sent forth his men of war, and
destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City, Then said he to his
servants: The marriage in deed is prepared, but they which were bydden, were
not worthy. Go ye therefore out into the hye ways, and as many as ye find,
bydde them to the marriage. And the servants went forth into the high
ways, and gathered together all, as many as they could find, both good and
badde, and the wedding was furnyshed with geastes. Then the king came in, to
see the geastes, and when he spyed there a man which had not on a weddyng
garment, he said unto him: Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a
wedding garmente? And he was even spechelesse. Then said the king to the
ministers: Take and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter
darkness, there shall be weepyng and gnashynge of teeth. For many be called, but
few are chosen.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel ye hear that the kingdom of God is like unto a marriage, unto
the which many are bydden, that not only come not and regard not, but that
also revile and kill the servants that call them Here must we first learn what
this word Kingdom of heaven signifies, even that it is no worldly kingdom but
a kingdom in heaven, What the kingdom of heaven signifyethe.
where as God only is king, That do we call the holy church, which is
now. For Christ does therefore use the parable of the marriage, because that he
being the kings son, takes the church to be his spouse. Wherefore the
kingdom of heaven is to be taken on such wise, that it is in earth, and yet
it is no political or earthly kingdom, but spiritual and eternal.

For the state of the Christians that are in this life is such, that they are
half in the kingdom of God, that is in soul and spirit, and after their
faith. Wherefore when thou heareste of the kingdom of heaven, thou must not
look to heaven, but thou must seek after it in the earth amongst men, and that
in all the world where soever the Gospel is believed, and the true use of the
sacraments ministered. So yt proprely ye kingdom of heaven is nothing else, then
the kingdom of Christ, the kingdom of the Gospel, and of faith. For
whersoeuer the Gospel is, there is Christ. And where Christ is, there is the
holy ghost, and his kingdom, which is the true kingdom of heaven. For the
which cause, all that have the word and sacraments, and believe and continue in
Christ by faith: they are heavenly princes and sons of God. And only this
remains, that God move away the half wall, which is put between, that is,
that we die: then shall all things be heaven and salvation.

This therefore must be learned first, that the kingdom of heaven is the
kingdom of Christ, where as the word and Faith is. For in this kingdom we
have life in hope, and are clean from sins, free from death and hell: Saving
that the body of sin is left, which is not yet abolyshed, and yet shall be
abolished when al things shall be life, salvation, and heaven.

To this marriage (says Christ) God has called the Jews his people, diverse
times before his coming, by his holy Prophets. For it was their office
specially, because they commanded the Jews to wait for the marriage, that is,
they put this people in a sure hope, that Christ would set forth the gospel
throughout all the world: and procure that remission of sins and everlasting
life should be preached in his name To this ought men to be exhorted, and they
should wait for the gospel, and trust in it, that they might be saved by
Christ. But Christ says here, they would not come, as the Jews in the desert
would have returned into Egypt. After that, he sent other servants when the
time of Christ's coming was, which should open himself with teaching, with
miracles and great wonders For John and Christ's disciples said, that all
things were ready, and that there was nothing lackyng, but that they should
make them selves ready to the marriage: But they could not be persuaded by the
messengers to comme. They regarded not, says Christ, and one went to his
farm, an other to his business and merchandise. etc. It is a very unworthy
thing to despise this feast, even remission of sins and everlasting life,
and yet to hope for salvation. For if it were not so, they would never so
gredilye have gone to their farm or merchandise, and utterly set at naught so
noble a marriage.

But this is always the state of the Gospel, as often as it is preached, the
world waxes worse then it was before. They used no such merchandyse before.
But as soon as this calling to the Gospel was set up, they fall to
merchandyse with all their study. It can not be otherwise.

Wherefore let no man be offended for these present manners, for that they
give them self so to covetousness both in the city, and also in the
country, for that they be so insolente and proud, and handle their
shepheardes and curates, which call them to this feast, more unworthily then
they handle other men. Let no man think, that this perverse manner shall have
good success. Neither will I hope for much better state then other have. Let
not this offense move thee much. For it is the long sufferance and patience of
God, yet will he not suffer it to escape unpunished. So now GOD can suffer men
in their licentious living, The long sufferinge of god.
to despise the Gospel and faithefull warnynges, to bring in the dearthe of
all things, to increase their own substance, he wynketh at this, and makes
as though he saw it not. But whenne God shall send the pestilence, that men
may dye and fall down as flies, or leaves in the harueste, whenne he shall
stir up battle, so that the violent soldiers shall break into thy house,
and destroy all things, and beat thee, and handle thy wife and children
vilainously* before thy face, whenne thou shalt cry out, at their cruel
doings, and complain of the great wrath of GOD. Then shall it appear, what
God thinks of thy avarice, insolence, and great madness. For then shall thou
be reproved on this wise: If thou could despise the counsel of God
before, thoroughe thy covetousness and insolencye, now must thou hold thy
self content with these things, which thou haste stirred upon thee by thy
licentious and long outrageous living. For GOD suffers not him self to be
mocked long. Wherefore men might do well, if they would cease betyme and
amend, as Gods word does diligently exhort us to do. But we would have
license to do both, even now to despise the word of God, and to follow our
lusts, and yet that God should absteyne from punishyng us. But it will not be:
as this Gospel teaches farther of this matter.

Some of them that were bid, were so bold, that they took the servants,
reuyled them, and killed them. By this does Christ specially mean the city
of Jerusalem, which killed the Prophets, and at length the son of God. But
what comes thereof? The king when he heard thereof was wroth, and sent his
warriors, even the Romans. These could not but serve Gods turn, and kill
these murderers, and burn their city, so that the Jews were sold better
cheap then birds, even thirty for a penye. There lacked no lamentation and
co^playnyng, when God took vengeance, but for as much as they refused to come,
when they were called to repentance, and the marriage of the son: therefore God
refuses now again, to hear them: which thing beware that it chance not to
thee, There are many things enough, with the which we offend god, as ire,
vnpatience, avarice, care of living, lechery, hate, and other vices. All these
are sins, yet are all these things nothing in comparison of this sin, The
contempt of gods word is the greatest sin that is.
which is contemnyng of gods word. And yet it is the most common sin. To
be given to avarice, to steal, to commit whoredom and fornication are not
so common sins. For all the world is in danger of this sin, the citizens
and husbandemed set not this much by the gospel. All sleep at this
service, as a man may se in the church. When one looks this way, an other
that way, and in so great a multitude scarsely ten or twelve come to thintente
to learn any thing.

Yea, and furthermore beside all this, this encreseth the matter also, that it
is such a common sin, so deathlyke, so grievous, so hellyshe and diuellyshe,
that it can not be noted, as other sins be. All count this for a light
matter, to be present at a sermon, and to take no head, yea rather a great
part give them selves to bousyng and bybbyng in time of the sermon, and regard
it not, and think it no matter at all. No man is moved with this, no man is
grieved therefore, that men are so coldly affected with the word, but it is not
so in other sins. For other sins as slaughter, adultery, theft. etc. does
make men oftentimes contrite and sorrowful, so that they would wish it undone.
For no man can count these things well done. But not to hear the word
diligently, to despise it, to persecute it: no man count these, matters of
conscience. Note and take heed.
Wherefore it is such a sin, for the which imperies, commonalties, and
cities must be destroyed. For when it is not acknowledged, nor received, no
repentance or amendment of life can ensue. So chanced it therefore to all
kyngedomes and to Jerusalem. And England also shall grievously be punyshed for
this sin. For this sin cries daiely to God, neither does it suffer God to
rest before he says in his wroth: I gave you my son the highest price that I
had, and would gladly have had communication with you, to teach and instruct
you to everlasting life, but there is none that is desirous to hear. Wherefore
I can not withdraw the punishment, as it is in John. John. 3.
This is damnation, that light came into the world, and men love darkness more
then light. For their works ar evil. As though he would say: I would gladly
wynke at the other syns, but this is damnation, that the world condemns that
I have sent, even my word, and it cares not for it. This greueth me, they are
full of sins, and I would healpee them by my word, and they will not.
Therefore if they will not hear my word let them hear the deuyls word, and let
them perish also in the kingdom of confusion.

Thus has it chanced to the congregations of the east, and to the most
flouryshynge communalties, The East churches.
and to great regions, which are now under the Turk. Hungary also is
almost undone utterly. In other places they will not hear the gospel.
Wherefore for a punishment they are constreigned to hear the Anabaptists and
other diuelyshe doctoures. This is the punishment where as Gods word is
despised and not heard. For it is the greattest and most heinous sin, and
therefore the most greatest and greuousest punishemente is provided for it.
This is gods will, that we should embrace the word most louyngly, and not
only write it in fine letters in our books, but also in our hearts. But the
world will not grant him this place, and it scarcely suffers it to be in
books and sermons, it had rather have the dyuel in the heart and it shall have
him at length. Wherefore learn this also, that God has cause enough to punish
other sins of ours. But this sin passes all, whenne his word is set at
naught, and when they are ill ordered that call men to this marriage. He
therefore that is holden with this sin, let him learn to see unto him self
by this doctrine, that he may know that it is no little sin, but the most
greatest and most grievous of all sins, which God can not suffer, but
punysheth it most grievously. All men cry out against perjury and avarice,
that they bear such route in the world.

And thus is true, that these things can not long escape unpunished. But
in that we have the Gospel, and care so lyghtely for it, and in the mean
time set our minds idelly upon trifles, while that the word is preached,
this is a sin passing all other sins, and doubtless shall so be punyshed
of GOD, that errors and lewd teachers may enter in with all power, to take
away all things. As it is in Greece and in other Regyons, where as now
Mahomette reygneth, which at this time dryuethe them to the abominations of
the dyuell, which before had the word of GOD, but would not believe it.

In the Popedom it chanced thus also. There was first the true doctrine.
When men were unkind, and despised the doctrine, God punyshed that sin on
this wise, that they allowed monkery, and most impudente lies. Now also is
this coming to pass again. (For there must needs chance to this sin both
corporal and spiritual punyshementes) where as the dyuell castethe amongst
us Arrians and Anabaptists. For why is not Gods word regarded? Why is it
not received thankefullye?

Remember ye therefore, that we must beware of this sin, and magnyfye the
word of GOD, and hear it dylygently. For although we had none other cause to
do it, yet this were a sufficient cause, that GOD has commanded it, for
that it is a most acceptable service unto him. For it is no littell matter,
that we do serve such a great Lord, He can requite and recompense it
most lyberallye. Wherefore this service ought to be most acceptable to all
Christian men, that they might thynk: Trewely if my Lord and my GOD require
this that I should hear his word, I will gladly do him this service, that I
may boaste of this that I have bestowed an hour of a day in Gods service.

This should be a sufficient cause for us to regard Gods word. But besides
these, there are other causes also more euidente. For this does GOD promise to
the also, if thou wylt hear my word, and keep it. Thou shall subdue the
devil, Causes that ought to move us to hear Gods word.
so that he will not be so bold as to come nere unto thee. For where my word
is, there am I. And where I am, the devil can have no place. And beside all
this profit, thou shall have all thy sins forgeuen thee, and thy heart
inflamed to the true study of religion and obedience toward God and man: and
to be short, thou shalt obtain at last life everlasting. For I point and
prescribe to thee such service to do, as for the which great profit may
redounde unto thee. For if there were no profit for thee at all, yet were thou
bound to do it, because it is my will, that it should be done. But now I
command thee to do such service, as is most for thy profit. As we prove by
experience, when we do nothing but repete the ten commandments and the Lords
prayer, there comes always thereof a new profit, that we may understand
some thing that came not to our mind before. And this commodity is specially
therewith, that the dyuell thereby is driven from thee that he may not hurt
thee. Wherefore let no christian be so arrogant, that he think that he
understands now the Lords prayer, and the ten commandementes. And if any
such thing come in mind, judge it to be a temptation, and say: If I have
said it to day, now will I say it again, that thou may always repelle
and put away the devil from thee, and so shalt thou do unto GOD most
profitable service. If thou do not so, thou shalt offend God greatly. But
who would gladly prove and feel so great wrath of God?

But alas, thus goes the matter: A great part nothing regards the word.
But yet nothing is more certain, then that if for sins pestilence and war
befalls, that God will not regard thee, but that he will stop his ears at
thy cry. Even as thou also have deaf ears at his word. As it is in Solomon:
Because says he, I have called, and ye have refused, Pro. 1.
I have put forth my hand, and there was none that would see, ye have despised
all my council, and neglected my discipline, I also will laugh and scorn you,
when that, that ye feared is chanced unto you: When sodein misery shall fall
upon you, and destruction as a tempest break in on you. When tribulation and
anguishe shall come upon you. Then shall they call m to e and I will not hear
them, in the morning they shall rise and shall not find me, because they hated
to be reformed, and received not the fear of the Lord, and obeyed not my
council, but did cast of all my correction.

This shall be the punishment of this sin, when thou shalt at thy appointed
time be bytterlye punished, even then thou shalt have GOD to laugh thee to
scorn, which shall say, that this chanced worthily unto thee, because that
whereas he put forth unto the doctrine of sincere council, thou despisedst it,
now therefore it chances worthily unto thee yt thou hear ye devil. If thou will not hear him that says: Come unto me all that labor and are heuie
burdened and I will refresh you: hear thou the ungodly soldier, which first
curses and banneth, and afterward thrust thee through with a spear. Thou
can not refuse this as wrongfullye done. For why did thou so despise the
word of God, which thou sholdest have heard and taken for thy chief salfegarde?
But thou set more by thy feldes and possessions then by ye hearing of a
man. Think thou that God will not take it grievously? Six days has he
appoi^ted to thee for labor: and to exercise husbandry, he requires no more
for himself then the seventh day, that then thou sholdest do him service
also, and yet shall he not obtain that of thee? Wherefore learn this, it is an
horrible and dreadfulll sermon against the Jews, because they despised this
marriage, that is the preaching of the Gospel, and reviled and killed up his
servants. This king can not abide this. And therefore he sends his warriors
even the Romans, and destroys these murderers, and burns up there city.
Who can say that god does any wrong in this? If a great prince should send
his son to certain bound in prison, Note.
to deliver them, and they would not only receive that deliverer tha^ckfully,
but also would kill him, and mock the father also, how would the father take
this, think thou. He would destroy both the prisoners and the prison also. So
does our god. He sends his son to deliver us from syn, death and hell, and
to give us everlasting life. He ought to be heard of us, and to be received by
faith. But we cast him behind, and go to our lands and possessions. These
things seem much better to us. Wherefore if the plage and punishments of God
break out upon us by heaps and swarms, in pestilence in the Turk, and other
wars, whom can we blame but our selves? And if we come unto him then with
mourning and lamenting, it shall not prevail. For think thou how much thou
have displeased God, in that so long time thou have denied him his true
service. Compare thy fault with this wrath of GOD, and thou shalt think it
well, that he differreth so long the everlasting pains of hell. And by this
temporal pains he calls thee to repentance, that thou may amend, and
cease from sin at last.

This is it in this gospel, that the king destroyed the murderers and burned
up their city, to give us an example, that these despisers in the feldes and
cities seduce us not to follow their manners. For it will be no otherwise in the
world: it can not be persuaded to care for the word. They always set more by
their feldes and merchandise. But they shall grievously be punished. For what
Judgment they shall abide, the Jews show by their example. Wherefore let us
not follow it, but let us rather hear the word diligently and with devotion.
And before all things let us honorably receive the servants that call us for
ye lords sake, from whom they are sent. Then shall we perceive god to be our
helper in all things of difficulty, which shall be present with us and defend
us, and at length shall give us life everlasting through his son, our bridgrome
Jesus Christ.

This is the first part as concerning the Jews. They are now gone. And now
harken what he says to the Gentiles. These were without, having no law nor word
of god. They were not within ye wales, but in an open place, through yt which
the devil might run at his liberty. These also commands this king to be
called, that they might come al without any exception, men, women, old, young,
poor, rich. As we se at this day, how god has set forth baptism, ye word,
and ye supper, that all might take part, that will. Wherefore that calling is
nothing else: then that Christ is preached to all men, we are baptized, that we
might be gestes, and make merry in this marriage, that is, that we might have
remission of sins and life everlasting against ye devil and hell gates. All we
are bydden to this marriage.

And now when the number of the gestes is fulfilled (for it is plain here that
both evil and good were called) the king himself comes in and sees what
gestes he has, and perceaueth some of the^ to be with out their marriage
garment. For so will it always be amongst Christians, that all are not true
Christians, some are faulty and vicious, and yet have ye name of Christians,
because they were baptized, use the sacrament, and hear sermons, and yet they
have no more but the name. For they think not ye matter to be earnest and
true. This must a man accustom to know. For it will never come to pass by
teaching, yt a whole City or vilage, yea or a hole house should truly ensue
after godliness. This will not come to pass, but as the manner is, there comes
both good and evil. This must we abide, and as touching the name to suffer
them to be called Christians. For we are al bydden, but al come not with ye
marriage garment. This will be even so unto the last day. The^ at last there
shall be made an other difference.

For thus is it surely decreed, that this king will not only have all called to
the marriage of his son, but also he will see this, whether they that be called,
come with their marriage garment. If any man should come to a marriage feast
foul and sluttishe out of their working shop, no man would gladly receive
such unto the^ although they were bide^ to ye feast, yea and specially ye
bridgrome would be grieved therwt if he should perceive yt he were mocked of this
or yt mad or proud person. For they must come to the feast with the marriage
garment.

So says Christ yt it shall come to pass here also like wise. Although thou be
Christened, hear sermons, use ye sacrement, and yet art without the
marriage garment, (that is) beleuest not, carest not earnestly for the gospel,
and would use but only the name of a Christian, as the Pope and his do,
that thou might get commodities and prebendes thereby: Thou art not a
Christian for gods sake, neither for thy own salvation, for then thou would
take greater pleasure thereof. And truly thou must not think that thou may
lie hyd there with thy hypocrisy. No hipocrite can hyde him self from the
face of god.
The king at his coming in, will see thee, and pluck the forth in the
midst, or else in that last common day, or when thou shall die, and will say:
What make thou here, sith thou have but the name, and not the property of a
Christian, thou beleuedst not, as it behooves a Christian? Thou did never
earnestly regard religion and godliness, how thou might be delivered from
syn in deed, and obtain righteousness and salvation, Thou did only aspire
to substance, thou gapedst how thou might get and heap up that. Wherefore
now thou art come, with out the marriage garment. Get the hence. There is no rome
for thee amongst them, that were goodly decked against the marriage.

When this (says Christ) shall be laid to these hypocrites charge, either in the
later day, or at their death, they shall be dombe, yt is, they shall be able to
allege nothing for their defense. For what can they bring? God made all
things, he gave unto them the most holy baptism: He put the gospel yea all
most in thy mouth, he gave his supper and communion every where, and
absolution. He ordained common ministers, thou had at home both parents
and masters, which should teach the what thou sholdest believe and what
godliness thou sholdest show in thy living. Wherefore thou can not lay for thy
excuse that thou were ignorant of the articles of thy belief: but thou shall
needs be constrained to confess: I was baptized. The gospel was sufficiently
preached unto me, But I cared not for it. I did set more by wordlye things.
This does that signify in this place, where as he that lacked the marriage
garment, is done. For what could he answer to this, whereto we must bear
record, yt he gave unto us his son and showed all manner of grace in baptism
and in the gospel? so that this only remained: that we should receive with
embracing arms, that which he offers so willingly unto us.

Wherefore an horrible judgment shall be given to these hypocrites, even yt
they may be cast, bound hand and foot into the utter darkness, (that is) that
they may be damned with the devil in hell unto everlasting chains. For their
hands and feet are bound, so that they can not deliver the^ selves by their
works, and they shall abide their damnation in darkness, They shall lack the
light of god (that is) his confort for ever, being always in perpetual
misery, anguishe, and torments, so that they shall never come unto the^ so
much as a spark of light. This is an horrible misery. Oh, that we could be
moved thereby, and consider what a dolful pain it is, to live miserablye in hell
in chains with weping and gnashinge of teeth. The gnashinge of teeth shall be
through frost and cold, the wepinge and waylinge for heat, as the doctors
have expounded it. Albeit Christ would signify hereby all manner of torments,
that may be invented. This shall be their punishment, because ye time of their
visitatio^ is not known and received, whereas we were called, had the
sacrament, baptism, the gospel and absolution, and yet we believed not, we used
the^ not. And Christ would teach us, and bring us to this, that we might know,
how great felicity has chanced to us, in that we are called to such a
magnificent noble and glorious marriage, where at we may be sure to find a
recoueri^g from sin, devil, death, hell and everlasting wayling. But he yt will
not knowledge so great grace, but counts these things of no estimation, has
worthily for his reward eternal death. For one of these two must needs be, yt a
man either receive ye gospel and believe and get everlasting salvation, or not
believe and so get everlasting da^natio^. So yt the gospel may justly say ye
same, yt Paul said to the Jews, which spoke against him and blasphemed: your
blud be upon your own head, I from this time forth go giltlesse to ye ge^tils.
For when ye Jews would not come, god subdued the^ to destruction, and sent his
gospel to us gentiles. And for as much as it is come to us, this only
remains, as it is describe here, yt god will cast out all the^ yt have not
their marriage garment. And ye lord will partly by alluring and partly by
fearing, bring us to that point, Act. 18.
yt we should take ye gospel for our chief safgard and studiouslye hear it,
and believe it. He allureth us by his promise and great grace, and through his
great punishments he fears us. But when he preuayleth by none of these two,
an extreme destruction is sure to come. If god would rain down gold, perchance
there would some begin to look up to heaven. But whereas he puts forth unto us
the punishment of eternal death, no man cares for it, or has respect to
life. This therefore is ye some of ye whole sermon, Christ would gladly both
allure and fear us, yt we might earnestly embrace and believe his word, look
and wait certainly for ye most joyful coming in ye last day, when he shall
return and deliver us from all evil both bodily and gostly. The which thing
yt almighty god and merciful father grant us through Christ his son and the
holy ghost. Amen.

The.xxi Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Gospel of John. iiii.
THere was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum. As soon as the
same heard that Jesus was come out of Iurye into Galile, he went unto him, and
besoughte him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was even at
the point of death. Then said Jesus unto him: Except ye see signs and
wonders, ye will not believe. The ruler said unto him: Sir, come down or ever
that my son dye. Jesus says unto him: Go thy way, thy son lyuethe. The
man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way: And
as he was going down, the servants met him, and told him, saying thy son
lyuethe. Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend? And they
said unto him: Yester day at the seuenthe hour the fever left him. So the
father knew that it was ye same hour in the which Jesus said unto him, they
son lives: and he believed and all his householde. This is again the second
miracle yt Jesus did, when he was come out of Jury into Galile.

THE EXPOSITION.
THere are two things in this gospel, which are very profitable and therefore
most worthy to be had in memory. The first is the miracle that Christ
shows to the child that was in peril, whereas he heals him and yet comes
not at him, only he says to the father: Go thy way, thy son lives, and
forthwith by this word the child is recovered, which was many a mile from
thence, and knew nothing of this word. This is a great miracle, which
declares unto us how mighty the word of our lord Jesus Christ is, The power
of gods word.
and that whatsoever it sets upon, it brings it to pass, although the
devil be never so much against it. For this disease is no otherwise to be
esteemed of us, than the other works, wherewith the devil vex us most
miserable men. To the destroying of this work of the devil is nothing else
requisite, but the word of Christ, and then is health gotten. For the devil
must give place whether he will or no, as soon as the word of this man
Christ sounds, As we see here.

Wherefore this miracle pertayneth specially to this end, that we may well
know Christ, which is not only a man as other be that live a bodilye life, but
he is also almighty god, for as much as he is the Lord over death and the
devil, yea such a Lord, which with a word can help against all evil.
Therefore we also in our peril and necessity must seek help at him, As this
prince does. And specially we ought to make much of his word, as we would
of a power that is almighty. For he that has that, has all, and can do all
things. And he that has it not, can do nothing against sin, death and the
devil. For look what Christ does here with the son of the ruler, Rom 1^ Iac.
1.
where as he defends him by his word against death and that life should not
be oppressed of death: the very same does he make to work in us all by his
word, if we do but receive it, and purposes not only to deliver us from
corporal evils, but also from sin and eternal death. Wherefore we must follow
the example of this ruler, that in our peril and euilles we may here require
health, whereas the almighty word, has so ready and present power and will to
help us. For where as this ruler makes haste, and hates all delay, Christ
makes much more haste, and differreth not the helpinge unto the coming of
the father, but rather in this very hour and moment he will have the sick
child made whole. So we also must not doubt, but that Christ will be most
ready to help us: if we do but ask it of him, and trust surely for it of him.
Why christ was sent into this world.
For to this intent was he sent, and came into the earth, to deliver us from
sin and death, to destroy the tyranny of the devil, and to open the kingdom
of god for us. For this very cause ye father, our most merciful god sent him,
for this cause he came into the earth. Wherefore he that asks help of him,
shall not depart without help, as we see in this ruler, which only entreats
for bodily health. How much more ready shall his will be, whereas is more
peril, and where as help is more necessary for us, where as the matter of
everlasting life is in hand?

This is the first, as touching the which, it is the use to instruct, and
teach when such kind of miracles be taught. For therefore did Christ work
them, and afterward they were preserved in monuments and books that we might
know the power and will of Christ, and have our refuge unto him in all trouble
and peril.

The second, whereof we must teach in this history, is, that a notable example
is set forth unto us, in the which we may know certainly and truly what is
faith. Our adversaries the Papists teach none otherwise as touching faith,
then that it is a certain knowledge concerning Christ and what he has don.

But in this ye true Christians have no more than the devil and hipocrites
have. For these also know of Christ and of his miracles, and acts. But as
concerning Christian faith ye scripture speaks on this wise, yt by it we
obtain remission of sins, righteousness, Of the christian Faith.
and everlasting life. For this says Paul, we suppose yt a man is justified
by faith, without the works of the law. Romans 3. Abacuc. 2. Luc. 7.
And ye Prophet Abacuk says: The righteous lives by faith. And Christ says
to Mary, whose sins were forgeuen: Go thy ways, thy faith has saved thee.
Wherefore this faith, is no faith of the devil and of hypocrites in the
congregation, which know only the history, and hold it as purely and
sincerely as Christians do. For this could not be hid privy from the devil,
what he did and suffered in ye earth. But although this is necessary for a
Christian to know, yet this is not the true faith by the which we obtain
remission of sins, and life everlasting. But in this place it is described
by an example what is true faith, eue^ to think surely yt, that Christ
speaks and promises, is most certain, and without all fault. For these two
are joined together, What the true faith is.
when god promises yt we should e^brace it with faith, and doubt nothing but yt
it is most true: And yt it is most certain, although we do not perceive it or
see it. And look where ye promise is, and we embrace it with faith, that is a true
and Christian faith, as we see in this ruler. He comes to Christ and
desires him, to go down with him, and to help his son. The ruler took it
very heuily and was greatly afraid. For he dreaded greatly, least yt if he
brough not christ betimes, his son should die, and afterward there should be no
hope of help. By this he declares what manner of faith he has, where as he
knowledgeth christ for his helper. For without this meaning, he would never
have come to Christ.

Wherefore this ought to be counted a great thing, that where as by nature he
despeired of recoueringe of life (for men had no longer hope of life in him.)
Yet he takes a long journey to Christ, with that hope, that if he might bring
Christ to him before he was dead, he should not be past cure. But yet could
not Christ take this for faith, because that although this was a certain
knowledge of Christ, yet was it not such, as for the setting forth whereof, he
came into this world. For he will not be taken and acknowledged only for an
helper in bodily necessities, yea and that, so he be present but such word is
set forth as touching him in the promise and reuelacion of the gospel, that we
may feel, that his godly power is present against all evil, but specially
against spirirual evil. If he has divine and godlyke power, them must his
word be thought almighty. And to this point does he adhorte this ruler, that
he might rather have respect to the cause of the miracles then the miracles
themselves, and that he might begine at last to hope for salvation out of the
word, although there had been no miracle showed. For in the miracles is there
always present aid required.

But this is true faith, that despeireth not of the promise of the word,
although there be no sign of present aid and succoure. And this must be the
faith of al saints, that god may be glorified and not our will. And that if
god shows not himself appliant unto us as soon as we will, and after what
way we will, yet that we should not cease from praisyng him, as the hypocrites
do. Wherefore he requires such a faith, that can abide patiently, although
gods miracles be not done at his beck. But this faith can not be, except
there be respect had, to this word as touching Christ, which is that the
deadly malediction and curse is by him taken away, so that all that are
incombred with bodily evils and with death, although they are destitute of
other signs in their deliverance, yet should not despeire as touching the
final and last deliverance through the death and resurrection of Christ. And
Christ commands that all should look and seek for this sign, and as for the
other he would not have us careful for them. For as touching this chief sign,
he has put forth his express word, and that without any condition, Math. 12.
that al might certainly believe to have remission of sins, deliverance from
death, and life everlasting, for Christ's sake. And he would that all his other
miracles and signs should serve and give place to this that is chief. Wherefore
these things must be looked for in none other, then in them, which know that
God is to be praised in this great sign above all, and does so use this, that
nevertheless they may chiefly regard the first and chiefest sign. And if it
pleases God to omit the inferior signs, for the true procuring of that
chief sign, let us beware that we be not importune, and that we think not,
that they must be done of necessity. For God requires that the chief should
be counted such amongst us al, that al should believe surely that they shall be
saved, for the most evident and pure covenant of God. Nevertheless in the
mean season god does not suspend and prolonge the end and success of these
present temptations and specially among the weak, but yet so that they
strenghthen themselves by little and little to the spiritual use, and learn to
obey god in all things yt please him, and put his word before them. And
although the promise of this is to be looked for without a sign and sensual
feling for a time, yet let them not faint and give up, but use the holy ghost
as a president and confortour although Christ depart with his signs and
miracles.

And this is the true faith, as I said before, which stycketh unto the word of
Christ as touching salvation and everlasting life, and also as concerning the
sure preservation of the church, and also of every one of us all, so yt it be
done without the temptation of God, and we wholly depend of his will, which
therefore has so bound himself, to the principal salvation which is certain,
that he might have all other things depending on y^ faith and trust thereof,
and that he may be judged to administer them well unto us, although he fulfill
not our desirs in all points. And between these two, which belong to the
common ecclesiastical trade, he grants, as a man would say, personal
privileges to this king, even a peculiaer word as touching the salvation of
his son. The which sith it is put forth so plain and evident, it ought to be
embraced with as sure faith, as that, that is put forth to all, as concerning
remission of sin and everlasting life in the name of Christ. For look of what
thing the word is put forth? with a promise that it shall certainly come to
pass, that must certainelye be believed. For as GOD is tempted, when that a
sign of a determined and appointed promise is required: So is he not truly
glorified when the appointed word is not believed, as it was in Achas but this
ruler does glorify GOD, when he believes the determined word of CHRIST, 4.
Reg. 16 Esa. 7.
and forthwith obtayneth health for his son, as he knows of his family at
his retournyng home.

Learn therefore in this place what is true faith, even to doubt nothing of the
word of Christ and of his promise, but to believe surely, that as the word
promises, so shall it come to pass, The nature of Faith.
although it be not seen and perceived. For this is the chief nature of faith,
to embrace and believe that, that is not present. For things present are not
believed, but are seen and felt. The rich man although he believes that he
shall not die for hunger this year, yet is this no faith. But he yt has no
store nor substance, and yet sticks surely to gods word, yt god as a father
will provide for his living, but yet so that he cast not away ye fear of god,
but serve his own vocation, he believes truly, and it is not possible yt such
a faith should deceive him. For it is grounded on gods word, which is almighti
and promises, that if first we seek ye kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, yt all other things shallbe cast unto us. So all we do prove this, that
we are so corrupted by sin, Math. 6.
yt we live void of all righteousness. But when the word preaches unto us
remission of sins and righteousness, this can none otherwise be apprehended,
but by faith. Wherefore ye state of a Christian is such, yt although he
sustaineth ye body of sin, yet he is pure and righteous and without sin through
faith and ye word. And this does faith work in him, the work ca^ never do it
as ye brainlesse papists teach. For as touching ye works, although they be
never so good yet are we unprofitable servants, as Christ says.

And as I have said as touching righteousness, Luc. 17.
so is it also as concerning life. We are so infected by sin, and drowned up
in it, that we can not be sure of life for the space of a moment. So yt this
may truly be said with ye wise Paynimes and Ethnickes: that nothing is more
certain to a man then death. As we prove that to be true not only by our
examples, but also by the example of others also, that is, how soon men are
inuegled and environed with sycknes and other dangers. And yet have we ye word
set forth to us which puts us in hope not only of life, but also of
everlasting life. This do not we, that believe, touch with our hands, we feel
it not, we grope it not, but it is promised to us in the word, and we believe
it. And it is sure that this faith shall not deceive us. For it is grounded on
gods word, which is omnipotent and everlasting.

To be short, this is the nature of faith, As the word does promise things
that are unvisible and things to come, so does faith believe these invisible
things and surely looks for them to come. The reason is. It knows that ye
word of god is almighty, and that god is true, and without lyinge, wherefore
faith has diligent respect unto the word. If it perceive the word, it embrace
it boldlye, and cares nothing either for the world or for the devil. For it
is sure of the end and what shall befalle, although the devil the flesh and the
world make never so much a do. But where as it perceaueth, that the word is
lackyng, it sets not this much by the outward appera^ce, by yt threats, nor
by any violence, which is done of the world, so that it may perceive that to
be true, and will suffer all extremity, rather then to be constrained to
receive any falshod. And if in the Popedom we had had such respect unto true
faith, we had never fallen into such horrible Idolatries and errors.

Wherefore it is a very necessary and profitable doctrine for us, to be taught
and certifyed as touching true faith, that is, that we should have the word
of god and promise, and stycke surely thereunto, and believe that it shall surely
come to pass? For to believe any thing without the word of God, is no Faith,
but a vain opinion, which can never well escape. Where the word is not there
can be no Faith.
As if thou should believe, that thou should be Emperor of Rome. Thou
may this persuade thy self, but yet so that thou perceauest not how it
should come to pass. But when David, which was of no high blud heard the word
of God by Samuel the prophet, as touching the kingdom of Israel, the end
and success thereof could not be void or frustrate, whatsoever Saules friends
did to the contrary.

So is it here also. This Ruler, where as he requires a sign and present aid
of Christ somewhat importunately, is by Christ wholly driven to the word: And
although that Christ would now also show a sign, and healpe the Ruler out
of hand, yet he would have him endewed with Faith before he feel healpe. And
when the word appoynteth him so to do: Go thy ways, thy son lives. There
doothe the Ruler believe, as concerning the life of his son by the word.
And as Faith follows the word: so does life follow Faith thorough the
word. As we also have the word and promise, where as God does generally
confort all the world, and says: He that believes in me, shall never see
death. Likewise (says John Baptist of him: John. 8.
) Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. These are
universal and general sermons, John. 1.
which pertayne to all men. For he says not, when he or this man shall
believe. But he speaks generally: He that believe the in me, shall never see
death. Likewise John says not, that Christ the Lamb sent from God, shall take
away the sins of this man or that man, but the sins of all the world.
Wherefore if thou be a sinner, Note.
and art in the world, think that it appertaynethe unto thee, and doubt not
but that thy matter is in hand, and that it is done for thy sake. This is the
foundation, wherein our Faith, as much as belongs to Remission of sins and
everlasting life, ought to lean: And shall no more deceive us that do stick
thereunto, then the ruler was deceived by his Faith.

For we must not think that it was an easier matter for so great a ruler than
it is for us, when Christ puttethe forth unto him such a certain word,
where as he says: Go thy way, thy son lives But it is an harder matter
for us, because there is no such certain word put forth unto us, but
generallye to us all. For CHRIST him self, although he put forth a
general word, yet as he speaks it here privately to the Ruler, saying: Go
thy way thy son lives: So does he speak this to every man by himself:
Son, thy sins be forgeuen thee: thine is that life everlasting. For to what
other man does he speak this, but to every one of us, that are baptized?
Does not baptism belong to every man? If other will be partakers of baptism
they must take it for them selves. But what does God say to thee, and to all
that are baptized? Is not the promise, that who soever believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved? Likewise thou art baptized to dye with Christ,
because he dyed for thee, and by his death redeemed thee from sin and
death. How can God speak with thee more certainly, or ioyn thy person more
certainly with his word, Romans 6. Marc. 16.
then it is done in Baptism, where as it is bestowed in thee alone, and is
thy propre Baptism? So whenne thou would be absolved from thy sins, and
come to the Mynister or to any other Christian, with the hope to hear the
word of GOD, and to obtain conforte, this word that thou hear there
openly to all, that Christ dyed for the sins of all, is pronounced to thee
alone, that this death is auaylable for thy sins. For the words of
Absolution be these: Brother mine, all we are sinners, The words of
absolucion.
and therefore all should abide and sustain damnation. But the son of God is
become man for our sake, and dyed also, and rose again from the dead for our
Justification. Romans 4.
Despair not therefore, Christ has satisfied for thee thou must pay nothing:
only stick unto his passion, and trust in the same. Thus is it also
concerning the Supper of the Lord. There is the body and blood of Christ,
given to thee alone, and there is it pronounced to thee alone, that his body
was given for thee, and his blood shed for the, that thou may not doubt, but
trust to such a sacrifice of Christ, as though it were proper unto thee alone.
For it is put in thy mouth, and given peculiarly to thee, that thou may eat
and drink for thy self. There does God meddle with none beside: he speaks
with none but with the, yt co^mest unto his supper, and there do eat and
drink, as he commanded thee.

And here consider, and think with thy self, what manner of christians they be,
which let pass such opportunity and never come to this most joyful supper of
the Lord. Wherefore if thou desire not this, that God should comfort thee alone,
and speak with thee and pronounce unto thee remission of thy sins, and life
everlasting, thou art worthy to talk and company with the devil. Wherefore,
this is not lacking, as though God spoke not with us, but the fault is in this,
that we follow not the example of the ruler, and that we receue not, neither
believe it to be true, whatsoever Christ speaks unto us privately. The Ruler
also had occasion not to believe, if he would have followed his reason, and had
no respect to the word. For how could he believe, that this little word
would have been so effectuous so far of, and brought such a great thing to
pass? He might have said: It is not unknown to me, in what case I have left
my son. Seeing there is no hope of life against so great peril, so small a
word can be of no efficacitie. He must needs come more nere, and do greter
things, if he will bring to pass so great a thing. But the Ruler omitteth all
these things, and only embraces the word, and gives so great credence
thereto, as though he saw the health of his son presently before his face.
For except he had been of this mind, he would not have departed, as content
with this word. But he was content, as John says very well: The man believed
the word that Jesus spoke unto him, and went his way.

And here do thou know what Faith is proprely, if thou seek the
definition thereof, What faith is.
even no other thing, than to believe that, that Christ promyseth. Get thee
therefore acquaynted with it, and first learn whenne God promyseth to thee in
Baptism, Christ in the Gospel, and in his Supper. Embrace that promise with
all thy heart, and let nothing hinder thee therein, although thou shall have
many lettes. We feel sin and death, which offer them selves always to our
sight and sense. And if thou let pass the word in this case, sin and death
will oppress thee, and cast thee headlong into destruction. But what does a
Christian? he confesses his sin, neither is he uncertain of death. But yet
he despaireth not therefore. But he takes hold of the word as much as he
can, and says: CHRIST dyed for me, therefore am I free from sin, and I
can not dye, neither has death nor sin any power upon me. For Christ
has made satisfaction for all things that I shod pay. This is true faith,
neither is it possible that he should be deceived of this hope yt sticks to
the word on this wise, This is true, it is not yet seen, or felt, but yet it
is true, and the time shall surely comme, whenne it shall be opened. The ruler
did even so, and sticked surely to the word. He perceived not the thing, but
because he believed the word, his servants come on the next day with
ioyefull tidings, that his son was alive. At length also, he sees it with
his eyes. Then is Faith no longer requisite, it is come to pass as he
believed. Thus is it with us also. We have remission of our sins and
everlasting life. We hear the Gospel, we believe the absolution, we use the
supper of the Lord, yet do we still feel always death and sin, neither can
we remove this sense and feelynge from us, while we live in this life. But
yet believe thou the word nevertheless. For so must we also wholly believe gods
word without signs, and use the condition of Paul (that is) to live content
with Gods grace. John. 2^*
We must believe the word, although it is not our chance to see with Thomas.
But we shall see when the time shall come with this Ruler, that as we believed
the Remyssion of sins and everlasting life by the word, even so shall we
have it in deed in everlasting righteousness and life. As long as we live
here we must be content with the word, and believe it. After this life, we
shall feel it, and have it in deed. The which thing God our merciful Father
grant for his son Jesus Christ's sake, thorough his holy spirit. Amen.

The.xxii Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Gospel. Math. xviii.
PEter said unto Jesus: Lord how often shall I forgive my brother if he sin
against me, till seven times? Jesus sayethe unto him: I say not unto the
until seven times, but seventy times seven times. Therefore is the kyngedome
of heaven lykenede unto a certain man that was akynge, which would take
accoumptes of his servants. And when he had begone to reckon, one was brought
unto him, which ought him ten thousand talentes. But forasmuch as he was not
hable to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children,
and all that he had, and payment to be made. The servant fell down, and
besought him saying: Sir, have patience with me, and I will pay the all. Then
had the Lord pity on that servant, and losed him, and forgave him the debt.
So the same servant went out, and found one of his fellows which ought him
an hundred pence, and he laid hands on him and took him by the throat,
saying: pay that thou owe. And his fellow fell down and besought him,
saying: have patience with me, and I will pay the all. And he would not, but
went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt. So when his
fellows saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their
Lord all that hadd happened. Then his Lord called him, and said unto him: O
thou ungracious servant, I forgave the all that debt when thou desiredst me;
should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity
on thee? And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Iaylers, till he
should pay all that was due unto him. So like wise shall my heavenly father
do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not (every one his brother)
their trespasses.

THE EXPOSITION.
YE hear in the very beginning, what is the sum of this Gospel: When Peter
asks of Christ, what was needful to be done, Christians must forgive and
not revenge.
when his brother sinned against him, and how often he should forgive him,
whether seven times were enough? Christ answers: Not seven times, but
seventy times seven times. That is, the forgeuyng of sins amongst
Christians, ought to be without measure and end, and they must pardon one an
others sins, and beware of reuengyng. For that belongs only to God, whose
majesty ought not to be violated, Deuteronomy. 32. Romans 12. Heb. ^0.
neither his jurisdiction to be broken. As the parable also shows it in
order. And we afterward will gather together the causes, and declare them.

But here must we especially mark how Christ says: That the kingdom of
God is like a king, which purposes to make a reckenynge and account with his
servants. For this commandment as touching remission of sin, is not to be
applied to the governance of a comminaltie, where as are several offices and
diversities of persons, and therefore all things there consist in the varieties
of rulynge and obeyeng, that license may not be given to the lusts and vices
of men, but that a discipline and honest order may be had for the
restraining of the lewd and wicked. Wherefore it is not meant, that parents
should give their chylderne all lycencious liberty. They ought to use a
certain kind of reuengyng, and by no means to couete and desire the name of
facility and gentylnesse. Likewise is it also with the masters over their
household servants, and with maiestrates and officers. The world is the worse
for liberty.
Let all them know, that they are appointed certainly to revenge. For this is
the worlds fault, that it is the worse for liberty, as it appears by wyld
children, that will not obey their parents, until at length they come to
hangyng.

Wherefore, this commandment is not to be used in a commonwealth, but in the
kingdom of God. where all we are equal, and are subject but only to God,
which is the head of the life of us all. He calls the kingdom of God not
only the life that is after this, but the holy church in this life, What the
kingdom of god is.
where as God by his word and by his holy spirit has the governance. In this
church thou must observe this trade, if it be not thy peculiar office to
revenge sin, that there may always be pardonyng one an other, and no
reuengynge, that al things may be done toward thy neighbor with mercy and
gentleness whersoeuer he has need, although by reason we might seem to have a
just cause to do the contrary. Why Christ requires this, he shows sure
causes in the parable of the two servants, and of the king. The first is, that
Christ requires, that the christians should thynk with themselves how great
mercy God has showed unto them, which also if he would deal extremely with
us, had many and great causes to be revenged of us, and to vex us, with most
grievous euyls. But seeing that we obtained mercy without our desert, we must
show mercy and gentleness to our neighbor. And this must be observed with great
diligence. For by this Christ declares, what is the true way to obteyn
remission of sin, and shows us to our selves what we are, as it were with a
finger, and what God is: again, what is our merit before God, and yet what we
obtain.

For as concerning the parable of the servant that ought ten thousand
talentes, Christ puts it forth to this end, that he may teach us, what
our cause is before the Judgment of God. A talente with them that were in
times paste, What a talente was in times paste.
was almost in valor six hundredth Crowns. Of these the servant ought
ten thousand Talentes.

To so exceadynge great a sum are our sins justly compared before GOD,
Our sins are innumerable.
that by this it may be declared, that those our sins can never be put away
by our selves, or by our own works: again, that we are not able to make
satisfaction for them For the first beginning of us, and the very propagation
of our stock is in sin, so that as soon as we be borne, we bring sin with
us into this world. And afterward, the longer we live, the more we sin,
Psalm. 51. John. 3. Ephe. 2.
so that besides the Original sin, wherein we are begotten, conceived, and
borne: we also accumulate and heap up our own actual syns, and by this
means become so great debtors unto god, that we may right well be resembled,
lykened and compared to this servant, being in deed by no means able to satifie
so great a det.

But what judgment shall such a servant have? Ueryly even this. The Lord
commaundethe, that he, his wife, his chyldern, and all that ever he has,
should be sold. By this Christ shows, that we sinners are not only not
able to pay our debtes, but we must also of necessity for sins sake, suffer
death as S. Paul says: Romans 6.
The reward of sin is death. And God in Paradise threatened the same to Adam
and Eve, Genesis 2.
saying: On whatsoever day ye eat of this tree, ye shall dye the death.
After the transgression of this commaudement we al came to this point, that the
law of God does utterly condemn us, yea and judges us unto death, Romans ^.
as S. Paul says: By one man sin entered into the world, and death by the
means of sin: and so death went over all men, in somuche that all men
sinned. For if syn were not, we should never dye. Whyther therefore shall we
turn us? The debte is certain, we can not deny it, and the Lord requires
the debte, but we are not hable to pay it.

And here now is set forth unto us a most joyful and luckye thing, which
we ought to embrace, as they say, Sin with all humility must be confessed
and mercy craved.
with metyng arms, that by this means we are delivered from our debt, and so
escape death. But for the attaynement hereof, we must do that, which Christ
says, this servant did. He confesses his great debte: he acknowlegeth also
his extreme poverty and beggary, and his pain, which he by no means can
avoid. Therefore he falls down before his Lord, worshyppeth him, and says:
Lord, bear with me, and I will pay thee altogether. This order of praying in
this servant, Christ full well allows, and would have us to pray after that
manner, whenever we desire forgiveness of our debtes. God by no means can
abide any Iusticiaries.
For in so doing we both confess the debt, and also desire to have favor
showed us. For he that denies the debt as the phariseys do, which maintain
their own rightousnes before God, sets himself in worse case, then he was
before. And when it is ones confessed, than is the danger present, forasmuch
as we are not able to pay it. Therefore this is an abominable error in the
Papacy, when men be sent away unto their own works and satisfactions, that by
them their sins may be cleansed and put away.

But thou wy^t say unto me: The servant byndeth him self to pay altogether. It
is true. He promises that he will so do. But we may not consider what he
says, but what he is able in deed to do. In danger we seek all means to
escape trouble.
Though he promise it, as one out of his wits, yet though he with all his
should be sold, he is not able to satisfye for the least debte. Therefore
it appears euidentely, that this is CHRIST'S mind, even to declare, how it
goes with manne, when he is in fear, danger and trouble. In such case he
doubts not to bind himself to extreme inconveniences, yea to things
impossible, so that he may escape the present trouble, and the dangers and
pains, that are like to ensue. yea in such case he would guage all his
promyses, bargaynes, compactes, goods, lands, mouables, and vnmouables, yea
and his very life also, so that he may be delivered from those euyls, that
hang over his head. In like manner when the matter is come to this point
between God and us, that thorough the law our sins are reveled and brought to
light, Romans 3.5.7.
(for by the law comes the knoweledge of sin, as the Apostle says) to
escape that danger, wherinto through sin, we are fallen, we spare no
impossible conditions, so that we may obtain some respite and favor, for as
much as we right well perceive, that we are not able to satisfye the debte.
But yet the Lord here doothe not forgive his servant for the condition of the
bargayne, which he knows to be impossible, but because the servant desires
favor, mercy, and pardon, which he estemeth more then the debtes of all the
world. Which notwithstanding, We ought to be such to our neighbors, as
god is to us.
is not so to be understood, as though after that a man has obtained
forgiveness, he should afterward in no point show him self thankful for
so great liberality and loving kyndenesse, as it shall afterward be
declared, when this servant shows no gratitude, no thankfulness, no
gentylnesse, no kyndenesse again: but rather declarethe himself most
cruel, most fierce, most churlysshe against his fellow servant. Of gods
mercy only must we look for remission of our sins.
Obedyence toward the law of GOD is with a necessary condytion: and yet it
is not to be referred unto this end, as though the Lord because of that,
should remytte and forgive the debt. The forgiveness of debt and of sins is
grounded only in the mercy of GOD. Unto this alone must we have our
resort: This is to be desired and heartylye to be called for: neither ought
we to doubt, but that we shall have God as merciful, and as ready to
pleasure us, as he showed himself good and bounteous, beneficial and lyberall
to this servant. As the Son of GOD, which is in the bosom of the Father,
pronouncethe in this our gospel of the servant: The Lord (says he) had
pity on him, set him at liberty, and forgave him all his debte.

What we ought to think of god in the myddeste of our sins.
This persuasyon and Faith must we undoubtedly have of God, when sin and law
do most of all vex us, and threaten unto us death and damnation, that GOD
desires not the death of a sinner, Ezech. 33.
but rather that he should turn and live, as he says by the Prophet: My
desire is not, that any manne should dye (says the Lord God) return and
live. Again: As surely as I live (says the Lord God:) I will not the death
of the ungodly, Ezech. ^8.
but rather that the ungodly turn from his ways and live. Turn, O turn from
your wicked ways, and wherefore will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? For where
as our hertes think, that God is a cruel Judge, with whom sinners have no
hope of forgiveness of their sins: it is a false imagination. For this ought
not to take away our hope from the mercy of God, because the law is so fierce
and unmercifully against sinners. For the Law does but her office, declaryng
what the Judgment of God shall be against sinners. Neither can the cause of
sinners be otherwise, The law.
if it be examined by the Law, which accuses, curses, condempneth,
wounds, and kylleth so many as it fyndeth gyltie without exception. For
sinners must needs abide the sentence and Judgment of the Law, because of
the ryghtuousnesse, which GOD lawfully requires of all men. Yet for all
that, the Law is no let unto God, but that he by his grace may restore
them, and set them without all danger, that were before condemned of the
law. Who so ever therefore appeal from God, through the decrees of the law,
cruel, and such one as will not be entreated, unto god merciful, and such one
as will not the death of sinners, and fall down before the Lord with this
servant, and desire mercy, they without doubt obtain the inward mercy of
Gods most merciful bowels, as the testimony of Christ is here, that the
bowels of God yearne and are moved, when sinners are driven by the law and
sin to destruction and everlasting bondage. Wherefore when thou feel thy
debt, have thy recourse with this servant to the mercy of God, and think for
a suertie, that it is Gods will, that thou sholdest not dye, but have
everlasting life.

And what is the mean by the which God would have mercy upon us, the Gospel
shows in other places, even that the son of God Jesus Christ is become man
for us sinners, and took our syns upon him, and satisfied for them by his
death. Look where this faith is, as touching Christ and his death, there is
the wrath of God overcome, so that he suffers himself to be reconciled to
man, and is no more angry with him. For he has declared in Jesus Christ, that
he has a very prompt and ready mind to mercy, which has mercy on us, as the
father on his children. For he forthwith as soon as the kingdom of death and
of sin was set up by Adam and Eve, Psalm. 103. Genesis 3.
set forth a hope of salvation against this kingdom by the promise as
touching the seed of the woman.

And this is our doctrine, which thanks be to god in our Church is set
forth syncerely and without fault, that remission of sins comes unto us
only by the grace and mercy of God: As it is described in this place by the
servant, which owes such a great sum but yet obtains a quittance of it,
not by merit and desert, but only by mercy and grace, and that only for this,
that he sticks sure to grace, and prays for the mercy of God. Wherefore the
doctrine of the Papists is erroneous, false, and blasphemous, whenne they
preach as concerning remission of sins. For they cast men with their
vnpayable dettes unto their own works. But when we teach, that remyssion of
sin is only to be asked of God by Christ, they condemn it as heresy and
false. But judge thou this by the true meaning of the Gospel, which of us both
do preach more truly as touching remission of sins whether we that commend
the mercy of God in Christ, or they that persuade me^ to works and
satisfactions? To be brief, all this sermon tends to this end, that we should
learn that God has mercy on us freely, and forgeueth all our debt for naught.
Esa. 43
Christ admonishes us here, as touching this grace, that we also by this
example should behave our selves likewise, and show no cruelty toward our
neighbor, for that we have received the remittyng of so great debtes from God.
For other wise can they not do, that acknowledge truly ye remission of sins
before GOD. And this is the first cause the which Christ has set forth,
and in the mean time he doothe teach, what is the way unto Salvation,
whereby we might obtain grace and Remission of sins.

The second cause is, when Christ requires of us, to consider well the wrong
and damage done unto us. For if that we try all things by a just balaunce,
we shall perceive that our debtes to God be always ten myllions of
talentes, in comparyson of the debte of the hundred pence, that our neighbor
does owe unto us. If this be well considered, it will admonyshe us, where
as GOD has forgeuen us so great a sum, that we should not to straightly
require our minute, but judge al things according to equity. For what are a
hundred pens in respect of ten millyons of talentes? Wherefore these things
will make us ashamed, and not without a just cause, if that we, which have
gotten Remission of so great things, will not pardon our neighbors in little
things. They do not well esteem the mercy of God, that are so strait to their
neighbors.

The third cause is, that Christ in this Parable calls us all servants.
This servant (says he) went forth, and chanced upon one of his fellow
servants that owed unto him an hundred pence. This also might worthily adhort
us unto mercyfulnes, and withdraw us from reuengyng. For we are but fellow
servants, and all we have one Lord, whose propre office it is to revenge all
trespasses, whose majesty is not to be resisted, nor his power to be mynished:
neither will he suffer thee, if thou do so: as he says in an other place:
Deuteronomy. 32. Romans 2. Heb. 10.
Leave to me the reue^ging, and I will reward (says the Lord:) For without
thy reuengyng it is Gods office to punyshe syn. And to this ministration he
has not only the devil, that vexes the body and goods, when GOD permytteth
him so to do, but he has also certain powers in the earth, that every one
for their part should punyshe and revenge, that is, the parents, and
officers. All these are commanded to be a terror and fear to evil works.
To these reuengers must al flee unto, that suffer wrong either in Cities, or in
housholdes. For they are all fellow servants, and ought not to revenge their
own wrongs. If any have an office to punyshe, and yet punysheth not, GOD will
not leave him unpunished. For he doothe not only challenge this for his own
office: But he him self also, whenne these reuengers appointed of him, cease
from dooynge their duty, exercises revenging for the oppressed and vexed.
Wherefore all men must beware yt they revenge not their own wrong. This is the
meaning of Christ's saying, whereas he says in the parable: This servant fell
upon one of his fellow servants.

The fowerth cause is. He that will not also think upon the greatness of Gods
mercy, and the little and small debt of his fellow servant, in whom he has no
power but is only a fellow servant, and would require his right rigorously of
him, he shall do nothing else by this means then cause, that this rigorousnes
and cruel bytternes can not long lie hid. Other Christians will take this
grievously, and will bring this cruelty of this servant to the lords ears:
That is to say, that unjust pride and unmercifulness, will give and move the
holy spirit in Christians, that they in their sorrow will make their pitiful
complaint unto the Lord. And let no man think, that this complaint shall fall
void. For although that god would of him self neglecte this wrong yet should
he be constrained by Christian men's prayers, not to neglecte it. Therefore as
the prayers of the righteous are not void, so shall not the common curses of
the people, and the crying out for reuenginge, fall void and frustrat. And
therefore Christ will not have us neglecte them, but for fear of this peril to
show our selves gentle to our fellow servants.

Then shall thou perceive in deed yt there be some, yt for this thy gentleness,
will wish all prosperity and success to thee again. Wherefore these men can
never thrive, that regard not the cur^^ngs and blessyngs of of the people. As
it is to see in time of dearth. The miserable multitude curses ye covetous
^^gardes as Solomon says in his Proverbs: The people curse him that hydeth
his grain, Pro. 11.
but blessing is upon them that sell. But the ungodly covetous regards this
not. But consider thou, whether this curse be not effectuous, whereas they with
all their goods are compassed about with all troubles and miseries. Wherefore
this is not to be esteemed lightly, whereas Christ in this place shows how we
should beware, that we give no occasion to make our fellow servants to
complain unto the Lord, and show what they have seen in Judgments. For it
is an horrible thing that follows. The lord, says he, called the servant unto
him.

And this is the fyfte cause, yt thou might think well upon this end. For if
thou will show no mercy unto thy fellow servant, but requirest thy right
rigorously, think not, yt god will wink at it, and lay nothing to thy charge
for it. But he will declare this his revenging both at other times and
specially in the latter Judgment, when he shall give his grievous sentence
against thee. Even that thou be delivered to the tormenters, until thou payst
the whole debte. What special thing shall you have then for thy stubburnes?
Whereas thou with thy gentleness and mercy to the neighbor sholdest have god
merciful unto thee, and should have escaped scotfree from all thy debtes:
Now shall thou feel him unmerciful, and yt he will pardon no part of thy debtes
And this is nothing else the^ according to ye Proverb, to take up the stalk
and let go the ear, whereas thou castest away many thousand, to win one
halfpeny: Although this parable is far beneth ye matter, without the which a
man can not obtain remission of sins, but is constrained to sustain ye
everlasting wrath of god.

Wherefore Christ concludes and says: thus shall my heavenly father deal with
you also, if you forgive not every man his brother from the bottom of your
heart al their offenses. He says, that we are brothers, therefore there ought
to be no enmity and hatred among us. Howbeit our infirmity is so great, that
we shall never live without offending each other. But what does god require of
us? even that we should not live in hatred and strife, but from our hearts
forgive one an other, and think this: he is my brother, why should I be so
cruel against him? Seeing God is so good unto me, and forgeueth me such a
great sum freely for Christ's sake, what should I estime my self so highly
and disdain to forgive my brother such trifling debtes? If I may come to
that point, that he will forgive me. I will be right glad to suffer my
neighbors debte to be stricken out of my counting book. Yea and will thancke
god also for that he of his mercy has pardoned me, whereas he might have
required of me innumerable debtes and cast me to be bound in everlasting
chains.

And this is the doctrine, which the Lord Jesus Christ puts forth to his
people this day, even that we should refrain our selves from wrath and
revenging, and forgive our neygbour gladly, that so we may be sure that god
forgeueth us.

But daily experience teaches, how disobedient we are in this behalf, and
how obedient we are in following the devil, whansoeuer he moves us to wrath,
to revenge, and to all that he requires of us, although it be to our great
damaige. For Christ's saying is true. If thou forgeuest, thou mayeste be sure
god will forgive thee, so that if thou be merciful, thou shall still obtain
gods mercy. If not, look for asuretie, that God will be merciful unto thee. If
thou have a pleasure to revenge, then must GOD do likewise unto thee. And yet
thou can revenge and hurt for a time, but gods revenging and wrath, which
thou procurest by thy folishe and impotent wrath, has no end. And this
reuengynge of thine has no just cause. For all power of reuengyng belongs to
God and not to thee. And thou may be sure, that if thou resign thy right of
reuenginge to god, and preuentest him not through thy hasty wrath, then he will
revenge and punish it much more greuouslye, then thou would desire.

But how it goes with them, yt are so desirous to revenge, may well be
perceived, if men will consider but this, how sin is punished by him. For they
that are given to wrath and desire of vengeance, are so fare out of Charity
through ire, that at last they cease from saying of the Lords prayer. For here
is ye sharp nail alwaie in their sore, Math. 6.
which continually pricketh. Then whereas they are commanded therein to pray unto
god for the forgeuinge of their trespaces, as they forgive other that trespace
against them. Here they know that if they cannot obtain forgeuenes of their
own trespaces, except they forgive other, that then they shall never obtain
it. Wherefore lest they should by this means give judgment, to their own
damnation, they never say that prayer. And what thing may we thyncke that the
devil can devise more grievously and cruellye against a man: Prayer.
than to bring him in such case by wrath and anger, that he dare not pray?

And what shall a Christian man do if he can not pray? If prayer, which is the
only refuge of Christen men, be taken from them: than must all go to naught.
Yea and all such also begin to refuse the communion, and so thereby depriuen
themselfes of great confort and solace, which they thereat should receive
against syn and grief of conscience. But were it not much better for them,
to suffer wrong and to lay aside all wrath, rise it never of so just a cause:
then this by their stubburnes to purchase gods wrath and heuie displeasure?
Wherefore he that feleth his heart thus to be hardened with desire of reuengyng,
let him look in this gospel, and behold as in a glass what great danger he
is in, and let him pray unto God for forgeuenes, for that he has so long time
borne hatered in his heart against his neighbor, so proudly despisynge the
Judgment of God. And let him also forthwith begin to forgive his neighbor
from the bottom of his heart, least he fall into the Judgment of god, before
he obtain remission of sin and life everlasting, through Christ our red^mer
and savior. The which thing the merciful God and heavenly father grant us.
Amen.

The xxiii. Sunday after trinity Sunday The Gospel Math. xxii.
THen the Phariseis went out, and took counsel how they might tangle him in
his words. And they sent out unto him their Disciples with Herodes
servants, saying: Master, we know that thou art true, and teacheste the way
of God truly, neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the out
ward appearaunce of men. Tell us therefore how think thou? Is it lawful
that tribute begeuen unto Ceasar, or not? But Jesus perceiving their wyckednes
said: Why tempte ye me ye hypocrites? Show me the tribute money. And they
took him a penye. And he said unto them: Whose is this image and
superscription? They said unto him: Ceasars. Then said he unto them: Give
therefore unto Ceasar, the things which are Ceasars, and unto God, those
things which are Gods. When they heard these words, they maruayled and left
him, and went their way.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe cause of this gospel depends hereof, that the Jews in the law of Moses
had such a promise: A conditional promese made to the Jews
If they kept the commandementes of God, they should have a kingdom and a king
of their own, and never be subjects to any strange governor. They trusted so
much to this promise, that they thought they should never loose their kingdom.
And although at yt present they served a strange ruler, yet they thought, yt
they had not lost their right of ye possession of that their kingdom. And
therefore they many times rebelled against ye Romans, The cause of rebellion
among the Jews.
when they had never so little occasion offered, to this end, that they might
recover again their kingdom and imperie, although many of them dyinge for ye
matter, they never prevailed against the mighty Romans. And albeit with al
their iurisdictio^s, co^motions, and rebellio^s they did so little, yea rather
nothing, profit, yt al things at al times grew to be worse and worse: yet for
ye recovery of their right, which they thought to be right good and lawful,
they left nothing vnatte^pted. This is a marvelous example of hypocrisy. The
Jews could both nobly and notably brag and boste of ye promise yt was made
unto them concerning the propriety of their kingdom, and the continual
possession of the same, but they never remembered ye condition, which was, if
they kept the commandments of God and walked in his ways, We would also have
heaven but we do nothing worthy of heaven
yt they might observe yt for ye promise sake. They would have the kingdom made
sure unto them, and yet the obedience, which they promised to god, they
performed nothing at al. The kingdom, said they, is ours: it is promised to us,
therefore will we by no means suffer it to be taken away from us: even as
stubborn and disobedient servants allege always their couenau^tes and
bargains, whatsoever they do afterward. But they ought to know, Servants.
yt as ye master is bound to perform ye couenauntes and bargain made with his
servant: so is ye servant first of all likewise bound to work, and
diligently to do yt, which his vocation and calli^g requires, and what his
masters will is yt he should do. So was ye matter also with ye Jews. They
rebelled against god, and utterly neglected this co^ma^dements, and yet would
they enjoy their liberty. Therefore this was a weighty and earnest question
among them, whether they ought of right to obey the Emperor of Rome, which
was a stranger, and none of the Jews stock, seeing they had so evident and
plain promise, yt they should have a king of their own. And about this matter
come they now to Christ, Why the phariseis and herodians came to christ
that they may snarle him, and take him in a trappe (as they thought) what
soever he answers.

They join unto the^ Herodes servants, and demand, whether it be lawful to
pay tribute unto Caesar, or not. For thus they were persuaded and surely
thought, that if Christ answered: It is lawful: he should fall into the
indignation of the people, Note the subtlety of the adversaries.
and be counted to have done a great fault, for as much as he spoke that,
which was contrary to the law of God. For the promise was, that this people
should have a king of their own blood, and that they should have no strangers
to reign over them. Now on the contrary side, if he should say, that it is
not lawful: then were there no way with him but present death. For the
Romans would never suffer that. Christ therefore after their judgment, must
needs be taken in a trap and fall into present danger, whether he does affirm
or deny: so maliciously go they about to snarle Christ, and to cast him into
danger.

But what followed? how handled Christ ye matter? verily even so, There is no
wisdom no forcast no counsel that can prevail against the lord says
Solomon.
yt he cut his adversaries throtes with their own sword. Show me, says he,
the tribute money. And when they showed him the coin according to his
request, he demanded of them, whose image and superscription that was? The
Phariseyes thinckyng that their device should nothing be hindered by their
answer, Pro. 21.
said: It is Cesars. Christ has now that he desired, and therefore
streightwayes he answers them to the question: If ye, says he, say, that
this is the image and superscription of Caesar, then according to your
confession give Caesar his own, and that which is due unto him. For why should
ye not give that to Caesar, which ye your self say, that it is his. This
could none otherwise be understood, but yt they confessed, that they had
received Caesar to be their Lord, ruler, and governor. Therefore it was no hard
matter for Christ, eue^ by their own words to turn the whole matter upon
their own heads, that he should not take that away from Caesar, that was
Cesars in deed, even by the confession of them, that put forth the question.
And this is the cause of this gospel, a most wise and prudent stratageme, or a
politic subtilitie or subtle policy of war, whereby he casts his
adversaries into that snare, which they had prepared for him. Their desire was
to snarle him in his answer. For they thought, that Christ durst neither
affirm nor deny the matter. Christ provoke the^ again to answer, and when
they have answered, they are snarled in their own snares, taken in their own
trappes, and perceive right well, that their devise was naught and plain
folyshnes, yea and most pernicious to them selfs.

In this history two things are dilgently to be considered, noted, and
marked. Two things are to be learned of this history.
First in this example of the Jews, let us learn our peruersitie and
frowardnes. We gladly complain, when we are oppressed, and always think
that we have wrong done us. And it is true, if we consider the state of the
world, we are many times injured and wronged. And afterward we think, that
we have a just and sufficient cause to set forth our right, and to accuse the
violence and iniquity of other, so that there is no end of complaining, as
here the Jews complained of ye Romans for usurping their kingdom. For what
just cause had the Romans against the Jews? Therefore by this comparison they
were certain, In all miseries our sins against God are to be considered.
that they had the best and greatest right, and the most just title to the
kingdom. But yet there was a fault in the Jews. For although thy neighbor
does the wrong, yet must thou consider the matter more depely, and think on
this manner: what if I have most grievously offended the Lord my god, and have
long before this deserved, that he should take away from me not only this my
ritght, but also my very body and life. This one thing must we learn. For this
seemed very grievous to the Jews, to be subjects to an heathen Emperor. They
thought thus with the^ selves: We are the people of God. The heathen know
nothing of god. They are defiled with Idolatry, with adultery, whoredom,
dronckennes, and all other kind of wickedness: why then should we serve them,
and knowledge them to be our lords and rulers. But they that feared god, and
prayed unto god for their deliverance, trusted little or nothing at al to their
right and title, neither did they brag of yt matter. For they perceived right
well that they had deserved that plague, if it had been much greater. For as
concerning ye doctrine yt was publicly and commonly taught, it was very
corrupt and vnpure, The miserable face of the common weal of the Jews
as ye Euangelical history testifies, the common wealth was not justly and
uprightly governed. As for covetousness, usury, pride, dro^cke^nes, bancketing,
fleshely pleasure, and such other vices, they were commonly used, yea and that
freely and without punishment, as it is also among us at this present day.
Among ye Jews there was nothing almost in good order, whether we respect
duties toward god or man What should god now do? Should he disse^ble and wincke
at such and so great contempt both of himself and of his word, and in the
mean while defend these naughty packes with their right and title, when they
to set forth his honor would do nothing at all, nor amend any thing that was
amiss? Uerely God had here a just cause, that forasmuch as they did cast
away so beastly the right of God, he also should suffer the right of this
people to decay and come to naught.

For the Jews had not their kingdom on this condition, that it should stand
for ever. The right is claymede, the condition is forgotten.
For god gave the^ that kingdom under a certain condition, which was that they
should perform, that, which he commanded them to do. On this manner was his
promise: If they were righteous and obedient, and kept his commandementes. But
they would have this promise without any condition, although they on their
behalf showed no obedience at all. A good kind of people, which would have
all things, and do nothing, yea they should have remembered this rule: do thy
duty, and so shall thou receive what is due unto thee. If an husbandeman of
the countreye plaiteh the unthrift and riotously spends away that he has,
so that he pays not his rent at the time appointed: is he iniuried and
wronged, if he be put away from his farm, and that farm hired forth to an
other, which is better then he, Note and practice.
and will keep his couenau^tes better? Therefore must we also learn to moderat
our complaining, and not only consider our right, and what unright our
neighbor does us, but also what gods right is, and how unrightly we have
dealte with him, and so patiently and humbly lyftynge up our hearts and hands
unto god, mekely and reverently say: I have not deserved, that this man should
do me this injury and wrong. Notwithstanding I must let him go, and look upon
my self, and consider how ye matter goes between god and me. Oh, there find
I a great and long register, which declares unto me, yt I am ten times worse,
and yt I have ten times, yea ten thousand times more offended god, the^ my
neighbor has offended me. Therefore will I pacie^tly bear this little
displeasure yt my neighbor has done against me, lest God seeing my fearce and
cruel mind against my neighbor revenge also and punish that wickedness,
which I have committed against him. O Lord, forgive me, handle me not
according to my deserte: and I will also gladly forgive, whatsoever is done
against me.

For it were against all right, that we should so greatly urge and force our
right, which have so unrightly dealt with God concerning his right. He that can
preserve, keep, and defend his right, life, and goods by lawful means, does
well. But he that can not this do, let him not outragiously complain, but
quieting himself, let him with a contented mind say: That should be my
right, and they that thus wrong me, do very unjustly: Notwithstanding I
franckly and freely confess, that before God I have deserved far more
grievous things. And by this means we shall not be like the Jews, which
through their own wickedness were the cause of all their miseries and plagues,
and yet thought to enjoy their right and liberty, although they had cast out
God among them from his right long before: even as evil subjects should
require of their maiestrate help and defense against their enemies, and yet
would be free from paying tribute, toll, rent, subsidy, and such other
paymentes that are due from them to the maiestrate. Maiestrates.
But God aforeseing this, has given the maiestrate a swearde, that he should
compel the unwilling and disobedient. The common people also would gladly have
Pastors and preachers among them, Preachers.
and yet do they defraude their ministers most unjustly of their tithes and
other duties, The wickedness of the common people against their Pastors.
which they ought of conscience to pay. And forasmuch as the spiritual
Pastor has no power to compel them, that refuse to pay their duties: the
miserable caytiues poll, and pill, bribe and steal, defraude and convey from
the good pastor, which continually both in prayer and exhortation watches
like a faithful sheppeheard for the salvation of their souls, all that ever
they can, and think it well gotten good, Math. 10. Luc. 10. ^. Cor. 9.
although they have gotten it never so wickedly and unjustly. I swear* say
they, by Jesus Christ: It is well gotten, that is gotten of a Priest. The godly
maiestrates in this behalf ought to maintain the right of the Pastors, and
severely to punish such rebels as walk inordinatly, and will not pay their
duties. Deuteronomy. 2^.
The worckeman is worthy of his reward, says our Savior Christ. The blessed
Apostle writes who goes a warfare any time at his own cost? Who planteth a
vineyarde, and eats not of ye fruit thereof? Or who fedeth a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? say I these things after the manner of
men? Says not the law the same also? For it is written in the law of Moses.
Thou shall not mosell the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn? Does
not God take thought for oxen? Says he it not altogether for our sakes? For
our sakes no doubt is this written, yt he which eareth, should ear in hope,
and that he which thresseth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If we sow
unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we reap your bodily
things? etc. Do ye not know, how that they, which minister about holy
things, live of ye scripture? They which wait of the temple, are pertakers of
the temple. Even so also did the Lord ordain, that they which preach the
gospel should live of the gospel. Again he says: Let him that is taught in
the word, Math. 10. Luc. 10. Galat. 9. 1. timoth. 5. Deuteronomy. 25.
minister unto him, yt teaches him, in all good things. Be not deceived: God
is not mocked. Also in an other place: The elders that rule well, are worthy of
double honor most specially they which labor in the word and teaching. For
the scripture says: Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the Ox that treads
out the corn. Luc. 10.
And the labourer is worthy of his reward.

But if ye maiestrate be negligent, and will not look to this matter, as he
ought, and as he is bound by his office, so yt by this means ye ungodly
parishioners are encouraged to go forth in their wickedness, and to wthold from
ye pastors yt is their due: is it to be thought yt those ungracious people
shall escape unpunished? Nay verily. What shall be ye end the^? verily if ye
pastor be not able to follow his right, God will revenge the cause of the
spiritual pastors.
god without doubt both is able and also will do it. He will se^de to those
caterpillars, plagues, and pestile^ces, to destroy both man and beast. He will
se^de thieves to rob and spoil those cormora^ts goods, he will se^de also
tempests to destroy those things yt are necessary for their living as their
corn, Be hold the Parishioners and beware.
their wine, their herbs, their fruits, etc. Yea he will send those
unrighteous persons short and few days upon the earth, and give their goods,
which they unjustly got, to other, which shall as wastefully spend the^, as
they warely and niggardlye kept them. Now what then have these leude people
gotten by this their deceit to their pastors, in defrauding the^ of their
duties? verily ye anger of god, a wicked conscience, a guilty mind, loss of
their goods, corn, and cattle, short life, and an utter dissipation of all
that they have, as I may speak nothing more grievously. When men are thus
justly plagued for their sins, though they complain, yet shall they receive
this answer. Why, ye have no need to complain. There has nothing chanced
unto you, which ye have not worthily deserved, look upon your covetousness,
pride, gluttony, dru^cke^nes whoredo^, adultery, envy, malice, contempt of ye
word, disobedience to the maiestrats, dishonor to their Pastors, carnal
security, careless life, etc. have all these your evils deserved no plagues?
It is ye great mercy of god, that ye and all yours are not consumed with fire
and brimstone from heaven, as Sodom and Gomor was. Your sins are ye
occasion, that ye are thus afflicted. Gene. 9.
So does Christ in this place admonish ye Jews also, yt seeing they have lost
their kingdom, and be now brought into the power of ye Romans, they should not
so greatly complain of loosing their right, but rather consider their sins,
which are ye occasion of all their plagues, miseries, and punishments, which
they now worthily suffer: again, seeing yt they have not performed yt unto god,
which they ought him, yt god is no more bound to perform yt he promised the^.
But this could ye Jews by no means be persuaded, yt they were dispossessed of
their kingdom for their sins sake, and that therefore they ought to take it
pacie^tly and quietly. They objected always their right and title, and yt they
had greatly wrong done unto the^. But all this profited nothing at all, seeing
ye God was otherwise determined for the punisheme^t, of their sins, yea and yt
worthily and not without desert. Therefore he sends the Emperor of Rome unto
them, which co^pelleth them to obey, will they, nil they, For the kingdom was
not otherwise promised to the Jews, then under a condition, yt is to say, if
they served god according to his word, lived uprightly, did no man wrong, etc.
If they did not this, it was told them plainly, that they should loose their
kingdom, and they become subjects to a stranger. Our sins are the occasion
of all our (...).
And thus must we also think in all our miseries, calamities, and woeful
chances. Our sins are the occasion of them all.

The Turk is a more fearce and cruel enemy to the Christen religion, then
any Prince in the world, although never so savage and barbarous, and daily
gets victories of us Christen men, so that by this means his empire is
maruelouslye enlarged, and he become a most mighty and strong Prince. Now in
the consideration of this matter, where shall we begin, of the Turk, or
rather of our selves? verily of our selves. We through our sins have given him
entrance into the Christen borders: we have weakened our selves, and fortified
him. We have given him prosperous success in his wars, and many noble and
notable victories against our selves. Our sins against God, and our wickedness
one against an other, has brought this thing to pass, so that whatsoever we
suffer at the Turckes hand, we suffer it worthily and according to our
deserts.

The Papists also go forth to defend their Idolatries and supersticions, The
papists
and most cruelly persecute and put to death the true professors of gods
truth. We would gladly have their Idolatry and tyranny taken away, that we
might have the gospel of our Savior Christ quietly and freely preached and
taught among us. But why then do not we, yt know the gospel and profess the
same with our lyppes, repent us of our former wicked life, and so live, as it
becomes them that profess Christ? How can God otherwise do, then suffer
such Idolatrous tyrants and tirannical Idolaters to live and reign among us,
to persecute, and plague us, to beprickes and thorns in our eyes, seeing that
with our mouth we profess that we know God, Tit. 1.
but with our works we utterly deny him, as the Apostle says? Thus much have
I spoken concerning the first part of our gospel.

In the second part we learn, Civil regiment is approved of god.
that there is a difference between the kingdom of the world and the kingdom
of Christ, and that Christ in this our Gospel does not condemn the civil
regimente, but rather confirms the same, with all the things that pertain
unto it, as lands, possessions, tribute, families, and whatsoever other thing
makes unto the confyrmation and ornamente of the politic state. For where as
Christ says: Give those things to Caesar, that are due to Caesar, it is as
much as though he should say: If thou be a subject, or one of either the
higher or lower degree, be content with thy state, and trouble not the
politic order with thy importunity and lewd behauioure. He that has an
householde, let him faithfully look to his household. Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
Let the subjects obey the rulers as officers appointed of GOD for the
punyshement of wicked doers, but for the praise and safegarde of them that do
well. Let the children be obedient to their parents. Christ reproves not,
neither doothe he condemn any of these ordinances, or degrees of persons. For
they are necessary unto a politic kyngedome, which God can not want. All
this tends to this end, that a Christian manne should not exempt him self
from the politic kyngedome, as the Monks did, which thought thus, that if
they should live after the common sort of men, they should hardely be saved.
But Christ teaches the contrary, because that no man should think, that he
with his doctrine and Gospelle, takes away any Civil ordinance and
politic regiment. Therefore abide in thy state. Continue in thy vocation and
calling. Give to Caesar, that is due to Caesar: And give to god that, which
belongs to God: that is to say: Believe in Jesus Christ, hear his Gospel,
and embrace the same: Live in ye fear of God: Be obedient to his
co^mandementes: Be charitable, loving, mercyful, gentle* paciente. etc If thou
give this to God, he requires no more. As concerning things belonging to thy
body, to thy householde, to thy state or condition of life, let all these
things be subject to Caesar: A Christian may serve God and Caesar together.
But the truth is, the Jews would neither have given to God that was due to
God, nor to Caesar, that belonged unto Caesar.

And here must we diligently note, that as GOD gives to Caesar his imperie and
regimente perfect, whole, and sound. (For before God, or in thy Faith, it
brings no impediment, The temporal Magistrate may not trouble the kingdom
of Christ.
whatsoever thy office or vocation be: thou may also, if thou will, with
that thy outward office, exercise true godliness.) so likewise Caesar ought
not to trouble the kingdom of God, nor violentlye to compelle men, that they
should not give that to God, which is due to god. What we do owe to God, it
was declared before, namely to hear his word gladly, and according unto that,
to order our life, and to do nothing contrary unto it. We can do no more
to God here in this world. Neither ought Caesar, nor any magistrate, to be an
impedimente to their subjects in this service of GOD. For if the Magistrate
would presume to do it: the subjects ought not to obey him, Rulers
commandyng agenst god, are no^ to be obeyed.
yea, they ought rather to suffer all extremities then to do any thing
against God, and their conscience. Therefore this is a most horrible sin,
whenne the Magistrate is so importune in requyryng obedience, that he will
forbydde that obedience which is due unto God. As whenne they forbydde the
true doctrine of the Gospel to be taught in their countries, and punyshe
their subjects, whenne they receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of
CHRIST under both kinds, according to Christ's institution: Again, whenne
they enforce and by compulsion drive men unto Idolatry, worshippyng of images,
going on pylgremage, invocation of Saints, byenge of the Popes pardons,
Masses for souls departed, and such other abominations. In these and such
like they excede and pass the bounds of their power, Note well.
and hinder that obedience, which is dew unto God. For that does God require
of us above all things. And let us obey him in all points. Therefore when
the Magistrates set them selves against God and the true woorshyppyng of
him, the subjects ought to know, that in this behalf they owe no obedience
to their rulers, neither are they to be obeyed. For it is written, We must
obey God more then men. Act. 5.
And Christ commands here not only to give to Caesar, that is dew to Caesar,
but also to give to God that is due to God.

If the magistrate can not abide this, but for thine obedience sake toward god
and his word, does cruelly entreat thee, yea takes thy life from thee: be
content, suffer his tirany patiently, and commit thy cause to God: and let this
comfort thee, Subjects may not rebel agenste their Rulers be they never so
wicked.
yt although the magistrate has power over us, yet has he not power alone, but
god also, even the Lord that dwells in heaven, which is greater then either
king or Caesar, and therefore more to be obeyed tha^ any magistrate under ye
heue^s. And if it so be, yt one of their commandments must be neglected
and set aside: the commandment of Caesar ought to give place to the
commandment of God. For if thou will not obey God, God is more to be obeyed,
then man.
but show thy self a flatterer to the Magistrate, God is so myghtie a Lord,
that he will punyshe that disobedience, that thou do unto him, with hell
fire and everlasting dampnation. Who knowing this, will wyttingly cast
himself into such myserye, and not rather wyshe only one Caesar, but also all
Cesars, yea the whole world to be against him, then he should disobeye the
Lord his God, and thoroughe that disobedience to purchase to him self
eternal death? Be the magistrates never so mad, Math. 10.
they can do no more but punyshe the body, as our Savior CHRIST says: Be
not afraid of them that kylle the body: As for the soul they can not
kylle: But fear him rather, which is able to destroy both body and soul in
hell fire.

Caesar what it signifies in this our gospel.
But we shall here mark, that under this one word Caesar, not only the person
of Caesar is to be understood, but also every civil Magistrate, temporal
ruler, worldly governor, officer. etc. Give (says Christ) to Caesar, that is
dew to Caesar, and to God, that is due to God. Now consider also the rewards.
If thou obey God, and follow his commandemente, the reward of this obedyence
shall be everlasting and immortal, that is to say, heaven and eternal life.
But if thou obey the temporal magistrate against God, the reward that thou
shalt receive, Apoc. 20.
shall be but short and transitorye, and after that thou shalt suffer the
peynes of everlasting damnation in that most horrible lake that burns with
fire and brymstone. Such as live under tyrants ought to consider this, that
they may certainly know, that God requires of all men his obedience, which
also ought unfeignedly to be showed, come life, come death, mangre the
tyrants beardes. GOD doothe not forbydde, but that thou may give to Caesar,
that belongethe unto Caesar: yet so, that that which is due unto him, be not
omitted nor left undone. And that not without a cause. For of Caesar we have
no more, but meat, drink, cloth, defense, peace, and whatsoever is requisite
unto this present life. But of God we have all these things, body, soul, and
at the last everlasting life. Why then should we set less by God, of whom
we have all good and heavenly things, then by men? God forbydde, that we
should grow unto such madness so to do, and so to offend the Lord our
God. The magistrate ought to look better unto his office, Note well.
then to compel his subjects so to do. If CHRIST had thus said: Give to
Caesar all that he desires, or all that thou haste: he might lawfully have
required it of his subjects: and if they would not have given it him
wyllyngly: he might justly have taken it away from them. But our Savior
Christ in this place says thus: Give those things to Caesar, which are dew
unto Caesar. What is Cesars.
That is to say, It is certain and determined what is his, and therewyth he
ought to be content. Civil obedience, outward honor, tribute, toll, and
such like worldly things are due unto him. All this give him. This ought to
suffice him. If he will require more, and challenge that which belongethe unto
GOD, then know ye, that in this behalf ye owe him nothing at all. No man under
pain of everlasting damnation ought to give that to the temporal magistrate,
which is due to God alone. For as Caesar can not lawfully require it: so does
God straightly forbid the subjects to give that to Caesar, which he unjustly
asks. Therefore this is a great impiety and wickedness, that certain
Popyshe Princes, but chiefly Bishops, which in deed are nothing else th^n
Princes and worldly potentates, are so proud and stately toward their
subjects. For they are not content with this obedience that they have both
the bodies and goods of their subjects, O tyranny.
not only to serve their necessities, but also their pleasures, except they
also require this, that the subjects do believe and serve GOD as it pleases
them, not only not agreeable, but also contrary to the word of God. The true
religion of God they forbid. They will not suffer their subjects to resort unto
such places, where the word of God is truly taught. They forbid both the
books of holy Scripture, and also all other good and godly works, that their
subjects should not read them, and so come unto the knowledge of their
salvation. They hyre blasphemous preachers to set forth and mainteyne the
old abominations of Antichriste, at whose mouths not one word can be heard,
that may comfort the conscience of the weaklyngs, or edify in true knowledge
such as be ignorant: yea and that is most horrible, these sycophantes do
nothing else, then in all their sermons blaspheme the Gospel, and most
spitefully rail on the professoures of the same. And they think, they have
done their duty notablye well, if they maynteyne the sacrifice of the Mass,
the Invocation of Saints, Pylgremages, Purgatory, pardons, the Monastical
life, the syngle life of Priests, the receiuyng of the Sacrament under one
kind, The doctrine of the papists.
the Popes primacie. etc. and confirm a false perswasyon of the remission of
sins, for confession, contrition, satisfaction, penance, will works. etc.
But they exercise their tyranny chiefly, The receauynge of the Sacrament
under both kinds.
when their subjects receive the holy mysteries of Christ's body and blood
under both kinds, when notwithstanding it is most evident and plain, that so
is the institution of Christ, and the primative church and the holy Fathers
used the same order many hundred years after Christ's Ascension. Math. 16. 1.
Cor. ^^.


And notwithstanding this popyshe and wicked order, they will have to be
observed of their subjects, yea and that under the pretense of the obedience
that is due unto the magistrate. As though it were here thus commanded: Give
all things to Caesar, and to God nothing. For in matters of religion to obey
Caesar, and not the word of God, is to set Caesar above God, to rob God of all
things, and to give to Caesar all things. But so ought we not to do. Sedicion
against the Magistrate never escapes unpunished.
God does not only grant to Caesar the obedience of his subjects, but he
also stablysheth the same with his commandment, and defends the same so
earnestly, that no sedition against the magistrate did ever escape unpunished,
as examples both divine and profane do evidently declare. But in the mean
while God also requires his obedience. He wills body and goods to be
subject to Caesar: only this he requires, that the heart and conscience be
kept for God, that he by his word and by his holy spirit may govern there
alone. But whenne GOD may not thus do, for as much as Caesar contrary to
right, chalengeth also that is none of his, even to be Lord of the
conscience, and that men should have no other opinion of religion, then it
pleases him, and not as God appoints in his word: the end of this
violence, tyranny, and wyckednes can not be good. For God by no means can
abide, that his kingdom should be destroyed, or that his worshyppynge and
service, which he has commanded in his word, should be abolyshed. That
magistrate, which takes upon him so to do must needs come to confusion, as
the exaumples of most mighty kings and princes, do testifye. So soon as they
challenged altogether to them selves, and left nothing for God: God defended and
recouerd his own right, and as for the tyrants, the brought them to naught
shame and confusion.

Therefore this is worthy here to be remembered, that Christ has appointed
certain lymittes, beyond the which Cesars power ought not to go, namely,
that he rule in his court, and that he meddle not with Gods kingdom. Give to
Caesar says he, the things that belong to Caesar. As though he should say:
That which is Gods, and not Cesars, look ye give it not to Caesar, lest ye
fall away from me, and obey Caesar to much, which peradventure will reward
you for a time: but notwithstanding whosoever shall thus disobeye me, either
for fear, or for favor, either for reward or otherwise he shall surely
suffer the pains of hell fire. Let Caesar therefore be content with his
own: or if he will not so do, never give thou that to him, which is none of
his. For there must be a difference kept between these two kingdoms, that
there be made no confusyon, that GOD may have his, A christen magistrate
ought to keep a measure in his exactions.
and Caesar likewise that which is, although in corporal matters also Caesar
ought to keep a mean, and to excede in nothing. For there is a difference
between a laufull magistrate and a cruel tyrant. A tyrant violently plucketh
unto him all that he can get. He measurethe his right by his power and
pleasure.

But a Godly and lawful magistrate knowethe, that he is appointed of GOD for
the health and preservation of his subjects, and not to oppress and to
destroy them, which Christ also declarethe by this, in that he makes a
difference between every private man's goods and possessions, and between
that which is dew to Caesar, or to the Magistrate. The temporal ruler
therefore doothe not his office, whenne thorough his polling and pyllyng, he
dryueth his subjects unto slauerye and beggary. Sheep are to be shorn, and
not to be all rent and torn. The magistrate must so take tribute and toll of
his subjects, that he leaves unto them sufficient, wherewith they may defend
them selves, exercise their occupations, and norishe both themselves, and
such as appertayn unto them. When any other great peril and danger is at
hand, there to maynteyn the public peace, and to defend the country, all
things ar to be don of the subjects. All that ever they are able to do either
in body or in goods, they ought to do it at the magistrates commandment. For
the defene of their contreye all men ought to bestow both lives and goods.
But in all other matters, ye magistrate ought not to forget righteous
moderation and te^perat rule, yt he oppress not his subjects with unrighteous
and unlawful exactions, but be content with that which is sufficient, and
that is all ready appropriated to his office and calling. Otherwise the
Magistrates are unrighteous and wicked, and take away that which is not their
own, and they do give GOD a great cause to be angrye with them, and surely
he will revenge it, by one mean or other, by seditions, conspiracies,
insurrections, invasions of foreyne ennemies, or by some other way, as he
says by the Psalmographe: For the oppression of the poor, and for the
pitiful complaynte of the nedye, I will now rise up (says the Lord.

Thus much have we spoken of this Gospelle. GOD give our magistrates and us
grace, that we together may give that unto God, which is due unto him:
again, that we, which are subjects may give wyllyngely and gladly that to
our rulers, which is dew unto them, and that they therwyth may be content.
So shall we in this world lead an honest and godly life with all peace and
tranquillity, Psalm. 12.
and in the world to comme thoroughe Faith in CHRIST, obtain everlasting
Salvation.

Whyce thing the Lord our God grant us, thorough Jesus Christ his son and
our alone savior: To whom with God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, be all
honor, glory, and praise both now and ever. Amen.

The.xxiiii Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Gospel. Math. ix.
While Jesus spoke unto the people he hold there came a certain ruler and
worshippede him, saying: my daughter is even now diseased, but come and lay
thy hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose and followed him, and so
did his Disciples. And behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood
twelve year, came behind him and touched the hemme of his vesture. For she
said within her self: If I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be
safe. But Jesus turned him, about, and when he saw her, he said: daughter be
of good comfort, thy faith has made the safe. And the woman was made whole
even the same time. And when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw the
minstrelles and people making a noise, he said unto them: Get you hence, for
the maid is not dead, but slepeth. And they laughede him to scorn. But when
the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and said,
damsel arise. And the damsel arose. And this noise was a broad in all that
land.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel are set forth two miracles, which ought both depelye and
diligently to be considered and pondred of us. First of the diseased woman,
which had so strong faith in Christ, that if she might but touch his
garment only, although he knew not of it, she doubted not, but that she should
recover her health. The second is of a certain ruler, which believes also,
that although his daughter be dead, yet that Christ will make her alive
again. And truly Faith is meruailously set forth in both these miracles,
yea and that for our sake, that we may know and understand, of how great
virtue, might, strength, and power, the true and christen faith is, and what
excellent and great things it works: again, that whosoever has this faith,
that leads unto Christ, he shall never lack healpe and confort at Gods
hand, but abundantly receive, what soever he has need of, according to this
promise: what things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them.

But first of all let us consider the exaumple of the woman that was troubled
so long with a grievous and noysom disease. Mark the Evangelist says, that
she had spent all her substance upon physicians. Marc. 11.
For she had been diseased of that sickness by the space of.xii. years, and was
always worse and worse, so that it is marvel, that she continued alive so
long, having that disease, Marc. 5.
and yet is she easily restored to her health, doing nothing else (for as much as
she had heard that some had recovered their health only by touching Christ's
garment) but labouryng that she also might come unto the touching of his
vesture. Therefore she enforces her self as much as she can, to go throw ye
great throng of people unto Christ. For she is afraid to make intercession unto
Christ for her health, so that of very humility and lowlines of mind, she
comes behynd, as though Christ should not know of it, touches his garment,
and straight wais as she believed, she began to be better, and the issue of
blood was stayed, where as before she had proved all things, ye and that with
great loss of her goods, and yet found she no ease, but daily worse and
worse, as S. Mark in his Gospel does testify.

And this also is diligently to be noted, that Christ not have this miracle of
healyng the woman, kept secret, but he demands, who touched him? The
Apostles also thought, that it was a matter almost worthy to be laughed at,
that Christ should ask this question, who touched him, seeing there was so
great a thro^g of people about him on every side. But Christ felt that, which
they knew not. How the woman touched Christ.
For there was not only the touching of hands, but also of heart, and of a
certain and sure faith, confidence and trust in Christ which was the cause
that so great power went out of Christ, so that he him self perceived it. And
Christ would not have that touching hyd, yea and that for our sake. By asking
the question, who touched him he urged, and as it were enforced the woman to
comfoorth, and to declare openly al things before so many as were present,
what had chanced, that he might have an occasion to commend this woman's
Faith. For this is the most acceptable and highest honor, that we can give
unto Christ, even to believe in him and to look for all good things at his
hand. Therefore he prayseth the womanne, and speaks unto her most
courteously, saying: Be of good confort daughter: Thy Faith has made thee
whole. Go in peace, and be whole from thy disease. And here now must the
disciples needs confess, that it was not for nothing, that Christ asked, who
touched him? Again, that it was no common touching, but some notable and
excellent thing, seeing that Christ so greatly commends the woman, and
calls her daughter, ye and also makes her whole, with no small praise of her
faith.

But this is a marvelous saying of Christ, if we will weygh the matter
aryghte. He confessethe that power proceeded from him* And when the woman
confesses the matter openly before him, he doothe not impute it to him self,
but to the faith of the woman, that so great virtue and power goes from him,
when notwithstanding this health proceeded not from the womanne, but from
Christ. But Christ doothe this to this end, that he may show unto us, how
greatly this thing pleases him, when the Faith is such, as most certainly
hops and looks for health and help of him alone. As though he should
say: only provide this, that ye may be well endewed with Faith, in what
soever danger ye be. For my mind is much more ready to help, then your
desire is to crave it. I do much more redyly deliver you from death, then ye
desire life. This to be true, Christ declares it plainly in this place,
seeing that he so both liberally and gladly suffers virtue and power to
proceed from him in healpynge this woman.

Therefore we ought to learn by this example, that in all peryls and dangers
we should set our Faith only upon Christ, From christ alone must we look for
all healpe, in our adversity.
and look for all healpe at his hand only. But what do we? We hear this at
sermons in the temples: we are put in remembrance thereof at home, neither do
we want his miracles at this day: yet can not our Faith be excited and
stirred up to believe him. Men will not believe, till they have great abundance
of all necessary things. As long as we are in health, we hope and believe
well, of the help of God. But if poverty and sycknesses ones come, we have no
Faith at all. We lament, we cry, we complain, as though there were no healpe
to be had neither in heaven, nor in earth, although we hear daily both in
sermons and otherwise, that God will have mercy on us for Christ's sake, and
deliver us from all evil, if we flee unto him with strong Faith, and doubt
nothing of his merciful promise made unto us in the blood of Christ. But how
does this agree with the woman's act? which peradventure ones or twice had heard
of Christ, and of his miracles, and yet comes she with so stout and strong
faith unto Christ, that if Christ had been in the highest part of heaven, The
force of faith.
this Faith would have brast through all things yea and have brought Christ
down into the earth for to have helped her. For as we have oftentimes said:
God can not there deny help, where he is truly and with a right faith sought
and called upon.

Wherefore we are (alas for sorrow) to much wretches, which having the word
of God so plainly, yet suffer not our faith thereby to be excited, stirred up
and confirmed. But all the fault of this matter is in the devil, and in our
corrupt and wicked flesh. For if this were not, we should never be so
untoward to believe, that Christ would help us in all our necessities and
combraunces, were they never so great and many. For as it is said, Faith can
not deceive us. Therefore Christ does here ascribe it to Faith, that he made
this woman whole. Thy Faith (says he) has made thee whole: Go in peace, and
be thou whole from thy disease. So likewise shall faith in Christ raise up
from death unto life, vanquyshe the devil, destroy sin, and bring
everlasting salvation. Although CHRIST doothe such works, yet are they the
works of Faith: for without faith such works are not wrought, as ye know, that
neither Christ nor the sacraments, nor the word of God profit any thing
without Faith. Faith must do all things, or else they must be left undone:
I speak of things pertainyng unto salvation. Romans ^4.
For what soever is not of Faith, is sin. And thus much of the first miracle.

The second miracle is of the rulers daughter, that was dead. Luke records,
that this maid was so old in years, Luc. 8.
as the woman was diseased of the bloody issue, that is to say, she was.xij.
years old: for so long had the woman be troubled with her sycknesse. All
things were prepared for the funeral The minstrelles, which by their syngyng
and playinge (as the manner of that people was) gave tokens of the buryall, were
there present. There was a great noise of them that wept, and cried, as the
manner is in preparation for so noble a burial. In the mean season, the Father
of the maid, when all things were paste hope (for what hope can there be,
when life is gone out of the body?) makes haste unto Christ, nothing
doubting, but if Christ were present, the maid might easylye be restored unto
her life. For so declare his words: He fell down at the feet of Jesus (says
the Evangelist, and said: My daughter is dead: I pray thee, come, and lay thy
hand upon her, that she may be safe and live. For although Mark and Luke say,
that he came to Jesus, when his daughter lay a dyenge, yet they also declare,
that before Christ came to the rulers house, the maid had given up the Ghost,
and notwithstanding they signify, that the father did not cast away his
Faith, but surely believed, that CHRIST would restore unto her both life and
health. Who has ever seen or heard of such meruaylous people? A woman
which in no place of the world could find healpe, conceived such a faith,
hope, trust, and confidence in Christ, that if she might but touch the hemme
of his garment, she should be healed. And this her persuasion was not so far
out of the way, but that as she believed, so came it to pass in very deed. In
like manner the maids father, when his daughter was dead, was certainly
persuaded, that if Christ did but lay his hand upon the dead maid, she
should receive her life again. It is easy to be believed, that a man by his
hand may raise up one that is fallen a sleep: But to raise up one from death,
no hand, no diligence, no pain taking, no noise etc. Is able to do it. Would
not reason thus think? But the ruler thought not so: for if he had, he would
have tarried at home, and never have taken that journey unto Christ but he
surely believed, that Christ both was able and also would restore his dead
daughter unto life. And here may we see, how acceptable and pleasant a thing*
faith is to Christ, which faith notwithstanding reason and the world judges
plain folishnes. For although Christ was occupied about necessary business, and
was in disputation with the disciples of John, yet all these things set a part,
when he perceived this faith of the ruler, he turns unto him, follows him,
and satisfies his desire according to his faith: in so much that when he
comes into the house, and sees all things prepared for the burial fearinge
lest that present sight should turn ye fathers mind, and that the example and
incredulity of the men that were there present, should cause him to fall from
his faith, he straightwayes falls unto the co^firmatio^ of the fathers faith
bydding him to be of good cheer, and not to fear, but only believe. He
co^ma^deth also the people, yt were present, to accompany the corpse unto ye
burial, for to depart and to go out of the house, where the dead maid lay. As
though he should say: what have ye to do here? Do ye think to carry out the
dead? ye are deceived, ye must seek a dead corpse in an other place. Here is
none for you. This maid only sleapeth. But they laughed him to scorn,
knowing right well yt she was dead. But Christ affirms, yt she is not dead, so
that now this only remains, yt he prove his sentence to be true be showing yt
she lives. And among all that were there present, there was none of that mind
with Christ, but the father of the maid, and Christ was content therewith, so
that for him, that is to say, for his faith sake, he worcketh this miracle and
shows evidently, that the maid lives. If it had not been for the fathers
faith, the maid had never revived, nor had life again before the great day of
the general resurrection, but had remained still not in sleep, but in death:
so noble a thing before God is faith, which looks for health and help at the
hand of Christ only. Therefore Christ comes unto the maid, takes her by the
hand, and by the power of his word he calls her again unto life: and
streightwayes the maid rose up, even as though she had been waken out of a
sweet sleep. We ought to note diligently these words, that Christ says
here: The maid is not dead, but she sleapeth. For they are words right well
worthy to be remembered, yea and if it were possible, all that we have, were to
be given, so that we might keep, understand, and believe these words, even so
as Christ means. For he that knew this, when he beholds a dead corpse of a
man, he would consider and right well understand that the man is not dead, but
sleapeth. He that could so change his judgment, that he would count him
that is dead to be but as one a sleep: he might worthily rejoice, yt he has
learned a most excellent art. But this we learn by experience both in our
selfs and in other, that the more any man excels in reason, the less does
he believe this, Reason can not comprehend the mastereis of god.
and the more laughe it to scorn as a drousie dream and mere madness, as it
appears here, when they deride the Lord Christ, and laugh him to scorn, and
think on this manner: what, will this fellow raise up dead folk unto life? Is
it not to be thought yt he is mad? But so goes the world: So high is the
wisdom of God, that reason cou^teth it plain folishnes. For thinck this with
thy self: if thy child were dead, and I should say to the: He is not dead,
but sleapeth only, and he may be waken and raised up from his sleep with
this little finger of mine: would thou not take it for a plain mock, and a
plain laughing to scorn of thy calamity and mishappe? Even so Christ in this
place is in like manner handled, that is to say, laughed to scorn, and taken
for a fool.

Wherefore learn thou this of this gospel, that death before Christ is but a
sleep, as likewise sickness before him is health, as we see here: He rayseth up
the dead maid with his finger, as one that wear a sleep. The woman was
deseased, but when she comes ones unto Christ, she is diseased no more. So
likewise of other. The blind, when they come to him, receive their sight,
sinners are justified: ye condemned are saved, so wonderfully can he deal with
us, and far otherwise then either reason can ymagine, or believe. This maid
before all men is dead. But before mine eyes, says Christ, she lives, and
only slepeth. David before his own, and before all men's eyes is a shepehearde
and keeper of sheep, but before me he is a King.

All ye that believe in me, before your selves are sinners, but before me ye are
holy and as the Angels of God. For I do no more but speak the word, and sin,
death, disease, etc. streightwayes gives place, and in their stead comes
righteousness, life, health, etc. As I speak the word, so must the matter be.

Therefore god in this place speaks so marvelous a word, and so against all
reason after the judgment of the world, when he says of the maid, that she
is not dead. If he had said only, she sleapeth: me^ might have said according
to the common proverb, yea she sleapeth S. Michaels sleep, which continues
till the day of judgment. But he says expressly: she is not dead, other
say: Surely she is not alive. It is true before their eyes, but before Christ
she lives: and yt they may understand this to be true, he rayseth her up only
with his finger, as one child uses to raise up an other, when he is a sleep.
To be short all these things tend to this end, that we should not consider our
mishappes according to the judgment of reason, with Christen eyes must we
consider all things.
but with Christen eyes and after the sentence of faith. For the Christen eyes
are such, that when they look upon sin, hell and death: they say. I see not
death: I feel no sin: I perceive no damnation: but I see through Christ life,
holiness, and salvation, In like manner when I am poor, I feel no poverty, but
I perceive that I have enough even to the uttermost. For I have Christ, which
in a moment is able to give unto me, whatsoever I have need of, although I have
nothing presently. He that could get such eyes, he might truly glory of the
Christen eyes, and he should far otherwise judge of things in ye time of
dearth, pestilence, etc. Then the world uses to judge. All men behold and look
upon the present abundance: and as the store is, so is their hope concerning
the life. If there be much, then are they of good confort. If there be but
little: Then they despair. So likewise when the plague is, they that are able,
provide for them selves by fleing, Note.
and think they may be sure in other places. But a Christian man although he
be never so greatly diseased and infected with the plague shall notwithstanding
think thus: I have Christ: If it so please him, this disease can not hurt me.
And undoubtedly, if we had such faith, what so ever adversity came, it
should never trouble us, but we should be without all fear, yea merry and
quiet. But when we believe not, neither have such eyes, but behold all things
with carnal eyes: hereof comes unto us so great fear and tremblyng, that we
think that the vengeance of god will fall upon us out of hand, and that we
by no means can avoid it.

So says Christ in the gospel: It is written, ^ath. 21. Exodus 3.
I am the God of Abraham, and the god of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is
not the god of the dead, but of the living. Ergo Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob do
live, and are not dead. When notwithstanding they were dead and buried more
then iij, thousand years past and consumed before many hundred years unto
duste, so that there remains nothing at all of them. But Christ proves for
a certeintie, that they live. The reason is: For all things live to God, but
to us all things are dead. For the world and reason can none otherwise but
behold death. But the eyes of the Christians see those things, which they see
not, and only hear in the word, as here Christ and the father do behold the
dead maid. And as we have spoken of death, so may it be said of sin. The
knowledge and confession of sin is necessary, and the glory of righteousness
ought to be in sight. Marc. 16. Mat^. 26.
For the word of Christ in baptism is: He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved. Again, his word in the supper is this: Take, eat, 1. Cor. 113
this is my body that is broken for you: Drink: This cup is a new
Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you unto ye remission of sins.
This word must be believed that it is true: and although I feel and see the
contrary, yet is there no credit to be given unto it. In like manner when thou
see a Christen man dyinge, thy eyes behold the dead man, but thou must
shut and close up those eyes, and open such eyes as behold the word, and so
shall thou see that the man is not dead, but that he lives before god. For the
word of Christ is: John. 8*
He that believes in me, shall never se death. And this must we learn of this
gospel, that all that is before our eyes, be it never so plain and evident,
never so wide and open. Yet is it nothing. For if death in a Christian is to be
reputed and taken for nothing: Uerely blindness, deafnes, leprosy, pestilence,
and other diseases are to be counted less then nothing. Therefore when
poverty, sickness, syn, etc. offer them selves to thy eyes, be not therefore
troubled, but shut thy carnal eyes, and open thy Christen eyes, and say: I am
a Christian and have a Lord. Which is able to rule all these things with a
word. Why then should I vex my self? For this is certain: look how easily
Christ delivers this maid from corporal death: even so easily also will he
deliver us, if we only believe, and have a sure hope to be relieved and helped
by him. For this also must we consider here, that this maid was not restored to
life by her own faith. For he that is dead, believes not no more then he sees
or hears, but her father believes and this his faith is so mighty, that the
maid receaueth life again. Again. For as Christ says: All things are
possible to him that believes.

So mighty is faith. Be the matter never so great, if thou can believe, and
have sure hope in Christ, thou shall never be deceived of thy desire, neither
shall the devil or death be able to prevail any thing at all against thee, as
both these miracles testify, which are set forth to us for this purpose, and
the faith both of the woman and of the dead maids father commended of Christ,
that he might provoke us also to believe, and that we should otherwise behold
creatures before god, and otherwise before us. Therefore although before our
selves we be poor and dead, subject to syn, and afflicted with poverty,
pestilence, or any other diseases yet must we believe, that it is otherwise
before god, and boldly say on this manner: Although poverty, pestilence, sin,
death, do now trouble me, yet this as a christian I know, that there is no
poverty, no pestilence, no sin no death at hand. For before Christ al
things are wealth, health, righteousness and life. And although I see not this
presently, yet if the word should come, I should see it with these my carnal
eyes. And this is true, and by no means to be doubted of. God grant us for
his son Jesus Christ's sake our alon Savior and redemer through the holy ghost,
such eyes, as may behold all calamities and mishappes otherwise, then the
world beholds them, and keep such conforte and light unto the end, that in
this world we may receive joy and pleasure and in the world to come
everlasting life. Amen.

The xxv Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Gospel of John. vi.
WHen Jesus lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he
says unto Philip: Whence shall we bie bread that these may eat? This he said
to prove him, for he him self knew what he would do. Philip answered him:
Two hundredth penyworthe of bread are not sufficient for them, that every man
may take a little. One of his Disciples (Andrewe, Simon Peter's brother) said
unto him: There is a ladde here which has five barley loaves and two fishes,
but what are they among so many? And Jesus said: Make the people sit down.
There was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five
thousand. And Jesus took the bread and when he had given thanks, he gave to
the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down, and likewise of
the fishes as much as they would. When they had eaten enough, he says unto his
disciples: Gather up the broken meat which remains, that nothing be lost.
And they gathered it together, and filled twelve baskettes with the broken
meat of the five barlye loaves, which broken meat remained unto them that had
eaten. Then those men (when they hadd seen the miracle that Jesus did) said:
This is of a truth the same prophet that should come into the world.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe Gospel of this present Sunday is red in the temples of the Christians
twyse in the year. First, on ye fourth sunday in lent. Secondly, on this
present Sunday, as ye have heard. And albeit we treated of this Gospel in
lent and declared what good and confortable doctrine is contained in the same:
yet for as much as it is read this day in the Church, I will speak somewhat
of it again, that our faith may be increased, and we well comforted through the
merciful promises of god against the care of the bellye. Belly care is a
great enemy to religion.
For there is not at this present day a greater obstacle and let to the gospel
of Christ, then this belly care. It utterly plucketh us away from the true
faith, which we ought to have in God and in his promises, and enforces us unto
diverse vices, sins, and wickednesses, as we may see in these our days
through out the world. For what is it, that is not attempted to avoid belly
care, and that we may have, whereof commodiouslye and wealthely to live? One
plays the usurer, an other the Iugler, the third a baude, the fourth an
extorcioner. etc. As I may speak nothing of the whoredom, theafte, murder,
perjury, flattery, dissimulation, feigned frendshippe, contempt of true
religion, and such other most vile and wicked vices, which are practiced in
this our time, yt the bellye may not lack. Forasmuch therefore as this belly
care provoke men unto all kind of wickedness, and suffers them not to aspire
unto any point of godliness: our Savior Christ in this our gospel labors to
heal this disease, and to cure this mischief, by fedyng a great multitude of
people in the wilderness, by this means declaryng, what a fatherly care he has
for all them that seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and that
we therefore ought not to be careful for corruptible things appertainynge unto
this mortal life, but rather study to walk worthily and faithfully in our
vocation and calling, All care of lyuinge is to be cast on christ.
and as for all other things cast our care upon him. Therefore taking an
occasion through this miracle, we will exhort all godly men to cast all care
for their living upon Christ, which is careful for ye faithful, as a most
kind and loving father for his children, and liberally nourishes and fedeth
them. I beseech you therefore give good ear, and harcken well to that, which
shall now be spoken in this behalf. For the often meditation of this miracle
shall be a most present remedy against ye ungodly carefulnes, which many times
disquieteth and vexes our minds. It shall therefore be your part diligently
to consider this miracle, that ye may be ye more able to overcome the tentation
of hunger, and learn to trust in Christ, and to look for all good things at
his hand. Christ according to his natural disposition and singular bounty
was greatly moved with the necessity of the people, and miraculously fed in
the wilderness a mighty great company of people, that we might have a most
certain sign, and sure argument of his carefulnes for us, and so commit all
our whole life unto him, with all that ever partayneth to the same.

We ought worthily and not without a cause to cast our care on Christ, which
can none otherwise do, but be careful for the faithful that put their trust
in him. And that has he here declared by this present miracle. For when Christ
was accompanied with great multitudes of people, and they had nothing to eat.
He was streightwayes moved with their necessity, and willingly without any
motion of other, co^sulted with his disciples concerning meat to be prepared
for the^, before they should fall into danger for lack of sustenaunce. Whom
would not this singular goodness of Christ move, to commit him self wholly unto
him, If this example can do no good, nor take any place with us* then are we no
true Christians, but falsely and unjustly challenge unto us that name, which
ought only, to be appropriated to the faithful. For he is no Christian, that
disdaineth to co^mitt the care of his belly to Christ. Math. 6.
In consideration whereof Christ himself admonishes us of our duty, saying:
Be not careful, saying: What shall we eat, or what shall we drink or
wherewith shall we be covered? Do not the heathen enquire after all these
things? your heavenly father knows, that ye have need of all these things.
Seek ye rather first of all the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and
all these things shall be cast unto you. Christ does here take away from us the
care of temporal living* and attributes that to the profane Gentiles, which
are without faith. It is therefore very unsitting and vnwourthy a Christen man,
after the manner of ye heathen to be troubled with belly care, whereby also he
degenerateth and grows out of kind, and is made of a Christian an Ethnicke,
an heathen, an Infidel. Christ requires this in a godly and faithful man,
that he should avoid the carefulnes of the belly, and labor for the kingdom
of God, that is to say, the gospel, wherein he shall find heavenly treasures,
as Christ says in an other place: work for ye meat, John. 6.
not for that meat which perishes, but for ye meat, which abides unto
everlasting life. We ought not only directly and plainly to cast away from us
all belly care, but we are commanded of God in his holy word.

So to do. Exodus 20.
For what other thing means this commandment: Thou shall have no strange
gods in my sight: but yt we should trust to ye goodness of god, alon, and ask
and look for at his hand all good things both for body and soul? He that is
infected with belly care, depends not on god alone, neither can he believe, that
he shall receive all good things of him, yea he puts all his hope and
confidence in worldly richesse for the provision of his life. This incredulity
and unfaithfulness does merueillously fight with the law of god: and whosoever
is infected therewith, he worshippeth that foul dombe Idol Mammon in stead of
the most noble God and living Lord, which thing Christ himself also reproves,
saying: ye can not serve two masters either he shall hate the one, and love
the other: or he shall cleave to the one, Math. 6.
and neglect the other. (I mean) ye can not serve god and Mammon. Here is it
evident, that belly care and the true worshippinge of God can not agree
together. Therefore that we may not fall away from true godliness, it is
necessary, that we cast away that filthy care for the belly.

Furthermore the holy scriptures with many promises do commend and set forth
unto us the fatherly goodness of God. Sentences concerning gods providence.
For thus says that Princelike Prophet David in his psalms: They that fear
ye Lord shall have no scarsenes. Psalm. 3.3.
They, which seek the Lord, shall want no good thing. Behold, the eyes of ye
lord are upon them that fear him, Psalm. 34.
and upon them yt trust in his mercy, that he may deliver their lives from
death, and nourrishe them in time of honger. Lay thy care on the lord, Psalm.
55. Psalm. 105. Psalm. 4.5.
and he shall nourrishe thee. All creatures depend upon thee, O Lord, and thou
geuest them meat in due time. For thou giving it them, they take it: and thou
opening thy hand, they are well satisfied. The eyes of all things look upon
thee) O Lord) and thou geuest them meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand,
and fyllest every living thing with thy blessing. Psalm. 146.
The Lord gives meat to the hongrie. King Solomon also David's son says:
The Lord will not let the soul of the righteous suffer honger, Pro. 10.
but he puts the ungodly from his desire. The blessing of the lord makes
men rich, and there shall no grief acco^panie the^. Jesus the son of Syrach
says: Trust in God, Eccle. 1^.
and abide in thy place. For it is an easey thing in the sight of god, quickly
to enriche a poor man. Old Tobias said to his son: Fear not my son, we led a
poor life: Tobi. 4.
Notwithstanding we shall have plenty of al good things, if we fear the
Lord, depart from syn and do well. The blessed Apostle S. Paul says: The
lord is at hand. Be not careful for any thing. Phil. 4. ^ timoth. 6. 1. Pet. ^.
God gives us abundantly in all things to enjoy them. Likewise says S.
Peter: Cast all your care upon God. For he cares for you. I omit to rehearse
mo places of the holy scripture. These may seem for this present abundantly to
suffice.

Seeing then we have so many noble and liberal promises of god, it is mete, that
we give credit unto the^. For whatsoever God has promised, that will he
undoubtedly perform to them that believe. It were then very vnsittinge and
unseemly for Christians to doubt of his truth and of the performaunce of his
promise, ^ohn. 14.
saying he is not only true, but also the self truth, and such one as
neither will nor can deceive, and to accuse God of vanity: whereas we ought to
be thoroughly persuaded, and most certainly assured of his promises, seeing he
has not only promised, but the heavenly father also has confirmed and
ratified those his promises at diverse times with many and diverse miracles,
wherein contrary to all reason he vouched saffe to feed many people, when they
were oppressed with great penury and hunger. Who knows not, Examples. ^xod.
6.
that God in times past maruelously did feed the people of Israel many years
in the wyldernes with meat from heaven, and gave them drink out of the hard
rock, so that they wa^ted nothing, that was necessary for them? Did not God
send meat by the Ravens to Helias ye Prophet? How liberally God dealt with the
wydow of Sarepta Helias hostess, 3. Reg. 17.
who knows not? did not the Angel of god take Abacuck the Prophet by the
top, and bare him by ye hear of the head, and thorough a mighty wynd set him
in Babylon upon the den, Dani. 14.
where Daniell was prisoner for ye Lords cause, and gave him ye meat, which
the Prophet had prepared for his reapers? Our Savior Christ being at a certain
marriage, John. 2^
when they lacked wine, supplied their necessity by turning water into wine.
John. 6.
And in ye gospel of this present sunday we heard, that Christ with five barley
loves and two fyshes fed five thousand people: And yet thereof remained xij.
baskettes full of ye fragme^ts. At an other time in like manner, Math. 15. Marc.
8.
with seven loves and few little fishes he fed four thousand men besides
women and children, and yet there remained seven baskettes full of ye broken
meat. There are many other miracles, which ought to move us not to distruse the
goodness of our heavenly father. but to flee unto that, as unto an holy ancker,
in all our necessities. Seeing then that God has corfirmed his promises with so
many noble and notable miracles: how can we otherwise, then resign and give
over our selves, our thought for living, and our whole care for the body, to
the providence of God, and look for all necessary things at his merciful
goodness. This requires our profession, our faith, our doctrine, our vocation
and calling. Otherwise we show our selves no Christians, but Ethnickes, not
faithful, but unfaithful, not such as believe the promises of God, but such
rather as count God a liar: which thing ought to be far from a Christen
heart.

If we worship god with a true faith, depend wholly upon his fatherly
providence, cast the care of our body upon him, and look for all necessary
things at his liberal hand: we shall do that, Iere. 5.
which most highly please god, whose eyes look only upon faith, as the Prophet
says: Yea by this means we shall obtain al things needful and expedient for
this present life. For God gives to the faithful his blessing, Psalm. 37.
and grants to them all things, whatsoever they have need of, as the
Psalmographe testifies saying: I have been young, and am now old: and yet did
I never see righteous man forsaken, nor his sede begging their bread. Psalm. 107.
Again he says in an other place: He satisfied ye empty soul, and filled the
hongry soul with goodness. These present places and such like declare, yt god will
not forsake ye faithful, but yt he will help and bless them in all their
necessities, as god himself says: I will not fail thee, Iosue. 1.
neither forsake thee. How mercifully dealt he in times paste with that poor
widow, which was Eliseus hostess, in multiplying and increasing her oil.
Hereof comes it, that Jesus Syrach conforteth and exhorts us most goodly,
saying: Abide thou in ye word of god, Heb. 13. 4. Reg. 4. Eccle. 11.
and exercise thy self in it, and remain in thy vocation. Let it nothing move
thee, yt the wicked are rich and welthy, put thou thy trust in God, and abide
in thy calling. For it is an easy thing to god, suddenly to make a poor man
rich. God blesses ye goods of ye righteous. This place fortresseth us against
ye covetousness of ye wicked and exhorts us to trust in god, and to do our
duty in our vocation, and in so doing it promises that GOD will prosper and
increase, the goods of the righteous, that is to say, of them that do believe.
Labor or pains taking is not here excluded, but faith is required, which
faith does her office in every vocation, Labor is not forbidden, but gredy
carefulnes.
and yet commits all care to God.

Therefore he that desires to live in this world co^modiously, and to want no
good thing, let him commit himself wholly to god* and truly believe in him, and
at his hand look for all necessary things: so shall he have good success in
all his doings, and have abundance of all things necessary for this present
life. Of this thing the present miracle contained in the gospel of this day
is a most evident testimony, and sure witness, wherein is expressed Christ's
hospitality toward the people which for the fervent affection and dear love
that they bare both toward ye hearing of Christ's doctrine, and the beholding of
his miracles, followed him even into the wyldernes, having no regard neither to
their things at home, nor to their things abrod: yea the care of fedinge
their belly they utterly neglected, and thought them selves most happy, in yt
they might hear and see Christ. Here appears it manifestly, that they shall
lack nothing, which follow Christ with a faithful mind.

Moreover if we commit the care of our belly to god, then shall we be free from
many and diverse troublesome cares, wherewith the unfaithful and covetous
persons are wrapped, vexed, and entangled: We shall also be preserved and kept
from many grievous and noisome sins. For we see, that the wicked moyle and
turmoyle them selves, swyncke and sweat beyond all measure, carcke and care
without end, to get ye goods of the world: neither can they have any quietness
in their breaste, but are like to men that are diseased of the dropsye, which
the more they drink, the more they thyrste. For such insatiable covetousness
occupyethe their hearts, that the more they have, the more they couete,
according to this saying of the Poet: Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa
pecunia crescit, That is to say: The more money a man has, the more does he
desire. 1. timoth. 6.
Blessed S. Paul paynteth out this matter very lively and truly. They, says
he, that will be rich, fall into temptation and snares and into many foolyshe
and noisome lusts, which drown men into perdition and destruction. For
covetousness of money is the root of all evil: which while some lusted after,
they erred from the faith, and tangled them selves with many sorrows. But
thou manne of God, flee such things. Follow Ryghtuousnesse, Godliness, Faith,
Love, Patience, Meekness. etc. These words of the Apostle prove
sufficiently, that the wicked and ungodly are troubled with marvelous great
cares and lusts, yea and holden captive at the deuyls pleasure: in danger of
perdition and utter destruction: free from all goodness and godlynes. These
ragyng lusts and carkinge cares do so greatly vex the unfaithful, that to
satisfy their covetous desires, they attempt all kind of mischief: to get
money, they spare no man, neither are they afraid of God, Couet^snes.
nor stand in awe of Gods vengeance. For covetousness blyndeth men's eyes, and
provoke them unto all ungodliness and cruelty, so that it is not without a
cause called of the Apostle, 1. timoth. 6.
the root of all euyls. But Faith delyuereth us from all these things.
Faith.
For faith takes away from us all belly care and pensiuenes for the
sustentation of this present life: it works according to her vocation and
calling: it takes in good part, whatsoever God sends, be it much, be it
little: it uses no unlawful means to get the goods of this world: it
depends only upon the blessyng of the heavenly Father, and with that is
abundantly content. Godliness is great riches (says ye apostle) if a man be
co^te^t with yt he has. For we brought nothing into the world: neither may we
carry any thing out. But when we have food and raiment, we must therewith be
content.

Such as are ungodly and wicked people take unrestful pains for a little
and transitory pealfe of this world. To gain and to get, they spare no
labor, no travail, both by sea and by land, yea and that many times not
without great danger of their life. Uerily no lucre, no gain, no advantage
ought so to be esteemed, that for that any man should rashely cast him self
into a danger, or hasarde his life. Notwithstanding at this day all men in a
manner without exception, are so given to covetousness and filthy desire of
worldly goods, that for their sake they neither spare good name and fame, nor
life, nor substance: yea the salvation of their souls will they not fear to
hasarde for to get money, so that it is truly said of the Prophet: From
the least unto the most, ^ere. 6.
they hang all upon covetousness, and from the Prophet to the Priest,
they go all about with falsehode and lies. Again he says: From the lowest
to the highest, they follow all filthy lucre, and from the Prophet unto the
priest, they deal all with lies. (...). 8.


But the faithefull with much less business and travail do get all good
things at the hand of the Lord, seeing that they first of all seek the
kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof, and trust only to the
goodness of God, and afterward eschewyng ydelnesse, they labor in their
office, every man according to his vocation and calling. By this means it
comes to pass, that God blesses their travail, and increases their goods
daily more and more, as the wise manne says: Pro. 10.
The blessyng of the Lord makethe men rich: as for carefulle travail it
does nothing thereto. This is therefore the true and spedy way to wax rich,
even first of all to seek the kingdom of GOD, The true wa^ to wax rich
and the righteousness thereof, to believe the word of GOD, to look for all
good things at the hand of God, to be content with that which is sufficient
and diligently to labor in our office, every man according to his vocation and
calling: and so may we be sure to have good success in all our trauayles, so
that we shall want no good thing They therefore are utterly deceived, which
otherwise go about to get the go^des of the world, Pro. 28.
and will sodeinly wax rich by right or by wrong. Hear what Solomon says: A
man that deals faithfully, shall be filled with blessings: and he that
makes to much haste for to be rich, shall not be vngyltie. He that will be
rich, all to sone, has an evil eye, and consydereth not, that poverty shall
come upon him.

Here we see, by this testimony of Solomon, that the blessyng of GOD is
granted to the faythefulle manne: but contrarywyse, to him that is unfaithful
and covetous, poverty and the curse of GOD is threatened, according to our
common proverb: Haste makes waste. Again: Soon ripe, soon rotten: Let us
not therefore thorough infidelity make to much haste unjustly to be rich, but
let us patiently and with a faithful mind look for all necessary good
things at the hand of God: and so undoubtedly shall all things succeed and
come to pass according to our desire.

But if we trust not God, nor cast all our care upon him, but walk in
infidelity and unrighteousness: then shall we not only labor in vain, but
also through our incredulity, we shall provoke the whotte wrath, fierce
anger, and the unquenchable displeasure of almighty God against us. For God is
most highly offended, when we believe not his promises, but doubt of his
fatherly care and bounteous liberality toward us, which he has confirmed,
declared and showed with so many signs tokens and miracles. Therefore Christ in
a certain place of the Gospel did upbraid his diciples by their incredulity
and unbelief, saying: Why take ye thought, Marc. 8.
because ye have no bread? Perceive ye not yet, neither do ye understand?
Have ye your hearts yet blinded? Have ye eyes, and see not? And have ye ears
and hear not? Do ye not remember, when I brake five loaves among five
thousand men how many baskets full of broken meat took ye up? They said unto
him, twelve. When I brake seven loaves among four thousand: How many baskets
of the leauynges of the broken meat took ye up? They said seven. And he said
unto them: How happens it then, that ye do not understand? Here may we see
how greatly the slownesse and unbelief of the disciples grieved Christ, and
how sharply he reproved them that by this means he might heal and redress
their infirmity. If we also will not cast away our unbelief, surely we shall
worthyly deserve the wrath of god and most grievous punyshement. Therefore
blessed Paul does dehorte and dissuade us from incredulity or unbelief,
saying: Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them tempted him, 1. Cor. 10.
and were slain of the serpents: neither murmr ye, as some of them murmured,
and were destroyed of the destroyer. The apostle in this place very wittily
fraieth us away from incredulity by the example of other, that is to say, the
old Israelites. It is a fair thing to beware by an other man's madness. Hitherto
pertains an other exaumple, wherein we read, that a certain noble man was
trodden down of the people even unto death, because he would not believe the
promise of Helizeus the prophet, 4. Reg...
which he prophesied concerning the deliverance from famyn to be at hand.
This present fact threatens also to the unfaithful the vengeance of GOD
which shall fall upon them that believe not the promise of God. Therefore that
we may not so wretchedly peryshe with them: let us cast the care of our life
on God, believe his promise, and look for all good things at his merciful hand.

Ye have heard (derely beloved) how Christ even of his own free will was
moved with fatherly pity and tender compassion toward the people, which
followed him, to hear his doctrine, and to se his miracles, and how
miraculously and meruailously he fed so great a multitude in the wyldernes,
that hereby we should have a sure argument and an infallible token of his
fatherly care toward us, and so commytte our life unto him. Ueryly this so
ready care and goodness of Christ toward the people, ought of right to move us,
that we should give over our selves wholly unto him. This requires of us also
the first commandment. And that we should thus do, we are provoked with many
and noble promyses of GOD, which he has also confirmed with so many noble and
notable miracles. To end, if we worship GOD with a true faith, and cast all
the care of our life upon him: then undoubtedly will God give us all things
that we have need of for the sustentation of this present life, and deliver us
from a great multitude of cares, wherewith the hearts of the unfaithful are
continually most myserably vexed and tormented. For there is no surer nor
more easy way to get richesse, then to trust in God, and with a faithful and
constant mind to look for his blessing, and to hope for to receive of him
all things, whereof soever we have need. If we will not thus do, then through
our incredulity shall we deserve the wrath of GOD and have our portion with
the Idolaters and hypocrites in that lake, that burns with fire and
brymstone. Which thing GOD for his son Christ's sake turn away from us,
Apo 20.
and make us partakers of his glorious kingdom, through the same CHRIST our
Lord: To whom with God the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory
both now and ever. Amen.

Thus ends the Postill upon all the Gospels that be read in the Church
through out the year on the Sondayes.
To God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the holy Ghost, which is one
everlasting God, be praise, glory, and honor, for this wholesome doctrine, and
for all his other benefits, both now and worlds without end. AMEN.

