

Hungers Prevention: OR, The whole Art OF FOWLING BY Water and Land.

Containing all the Secrets belonging to that Art, and brought into a true
Form or Method, by which the most Ignorant may know how to take any kind of
Foul, either by Land or Water.

Also, exceeding necessary and profitable for all such as travel by Sea, and
come into uninhabited places: Especially, all those that have any thing to do
with new Plantations.

By GERVASE MARKHAM.

LONDON, Printed by A. Math. for Anne Helm and Thomas Langley, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Saint Dunstons Church yard, and over against the
Sarazens head without Newgate. 1621.

TO THE HONORABLE KNIGHT Sr. EDVVIN SANDS, and to his much honored and worthy
friends Mr. THOMAS GIBBS Esquire, Mr. THEODORE GVLSTON Doctor of Physic, and
Mr. Samuel Rotte Esquire, Adventurers, and Noble favorers of the blessed
Plantation of VIRGINIA.
Custom which makes this claim of Dedication, and the goodness of your
noble and worthy Natures, stirs in me a boldness to call upon your names,
and to fix them to the Frontispiece of this small and little Treatise, that as
a safe Armor they may shield it from the bitterness of Envy. What the work
is, or how profitable it may be, either to the present times, or those of the
future, your own judgments can better tell, then any defense in me make
perfect; It is sufficient that I have have brought it into the world to do you
Service, at which end if it have the happiness to arrive, it has the full
gain of all mine own wishes; if otherwise it stumble on mischance, the
oblivion which shall cover me shall be no greater then the patience which I
have long since made mine own and only companion. Howeuer my hope which
cannot sincke, and your goodnesses (which is the strong groundwork of this my
poor endeavor) shall keep me thus confident that what I have done is both
honest in it self, and wholesome for others, and with that Liuory I send it
into the World to do you and yours service, both here, and in other foreign
places.

By him that is the true admirer of your Virtues.

GERVAS^ MARKMAM.

To all the most worthy and noble Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and Merchants,
Counselors, and Adventurers for the blessed Plantation of VIRGINIA.
I Have here presumed (Right Honorable, right Worshipful, and most worthy
Gentlemen) to present unto your hands this small Treatise, being a Work long
by me thought upon, long by many of my dearest friends urged upon, and now I
hope (to the glory of God and my Countries profit) in a good and prosperous
hour brought forth to be looked upon: The Liuory it wears is Truth, the
reward it seeks is trial and experience, and the full aim at which it bends
is the general good of all good men, whose painful industries makes them the
Masters, Fathers, and Nurses of the best Knowledges.

Ignorance, Wealth, and Ease may hold sleight of the argument, but that Wisdom
and Experience which has run through the test of Affliction, will say it is
worthy and necessary: for it will feed the hungry, cloth the naked, and give
soft rest to the weary; it will appease Mutenies, breed Love, and make men
able every way to do and suffer.

Being then so good in it self, and so glorious in others, to whom can I
better pref^rre it then to your worthy goodnesses, whose pyous and religious
hearts, aiming to reduce an Infini^e number of yet lost souls to the
possession of the true heavenly Jerusalem, have already kindled the glorious
Star of example in the South, which doubtless gives that certain promise of
never to be extinguished Sunneshine, that men which are now living, Babes
sucking, and Infants yet unborn, shall travel as holy Pylgrimes to your
monuments, to admire and praise your virtues. To the Treasury of that action
of Plantation, lo, I bring this my poor mite, and offer it to your service,
which if you shall please to accept, I doubt not but the benefit shall return
to those in your employment a revenue worthy their practice; and my self rest
ever ready to do you and my Country Service.

Geruase Markham.

A Table containing all the principal matters mentioned in this Book.
Chap. I.
OF Fouling, and the knowledge thereof. Page 1. The Art. ibid: ^iuersities of
Foul. 2
Chap. II.
The several kinds of Foul, and the taking with Nets. 5 The haunts. 6
Chap. III.
Taking of great Foul with Nets. 12
Chap. IIII.
Taking of small Foul with Nets 16 Taking great Foul with sprindge. 20 Taking
small Foul with sprindge. 23
Chap. V.
Taking great Foul with Lyme-twigs. 26 Taking small Foul with Lyme-twigs.! 30
Chap. VI.
Taking Foul with engines. 36 Of the great Sprindgs. 37 Taking small Foul with
engine. 41
Chap. VII.
Of the Fouling Piece, and other Engines. 43
Chap. VIII.
Of the stalking Horse. 47 Seueral^ engin^ to stalk with. 49 The Horse
vnstoopt. 52 The Ox stalk. 53
Chap. IX.
The use ofthe Water-Dogge. 67 His training 73 Of the moulting time. 85
Chap. X.
Of Land Foul, and the general taking of them. 88 Diversity of Land Foul.
89 Diversity of ^aking. 90 The Crow Net. ibid: Taking by night, and first
of the Low-bell. 92 Of the Tramell. 96 Of Bat-fouling. 98 Of ^he Sparrow Net.
100
Chap. XI.
^erticular taking of particular Birds with Nets. 110 ^f Day Net. ibid: ^me of
the year, and place. 111 ^he fashion of the Nets. 112 ^f the (...) 115 ^f the
Stale. ibid: ^eseruation of Stales. 120 ^ing with the Lyme-bush and shape of
the bush. 124 ^e manner of lyming. 125 ^f the bird Call, and how to learn to
call. 128 ^he manner of taking. 129 ^king with Lyme-twigs. 131 (...) of Stales
with the Lyme-bush. 132
Chap. XII.
^taking of Hawks, and of such as breed in England. 134 ^king of young Iasse
Hawks. 135 ^ow to find the Ayrie. 136 ^king of Braunchers. 138 that Nets to
be used. 139 ^he placing of the Nets and other observations. 141 that to be
done when the Nets are placed. 142 ^e mayling of Hawks. 144 ^e trussing of
Hawks. 145 The S^ling of Hawks. 146 Discommodities in Seeling, and the helps.
147 Taking Hawks in their Soreage. 148 Placing the Vrines. 150 Taking with
Stales. 151 Taking with Lyme diverse ways. 153 The making of the little
Lyme-bush. 156 Discommodities of Lyme. 157 Remedy against Lyme. 159 Taking
Hawks with the Lantern. 16^ The art how to follow a Hawk fled. 163 What a
check of any Foul is. ibid: The coming in of the wild Haggard. 17^ The
haunts of Haggards. 17^ To know the good Hawk from the bad. 17^ How to take
the Haggard. 17^ The placing of the Cradle. 17^ How to know the Day stand from
the Nig^ stand. 17^
Chap. XIII.
How to take Foul with Baits. 18^ How to destroy Kites, Ravens, etc. 18^
Other ways to use Baits. 18^ Of fastening baits to the ground. 18^ Of caryon
to be used for Baits. 19^ Taking of other Foul with Baits. 19^ Taking of
small Birds with Bates. 19^ ^f other Baits. 193 ^aites with Hemblocke. 194
^aking wild Foul with baits. 195 ^ow to recover Foul entranced. 197
Chap. XIIII.
^f the taking of Pheasants with Nets, etc. 198 ^iuers ways to take Pheasants.
199 ^he nature of Pheasants. ibid: ^he general taking of Pheasants. 200 ^he
haunts, and how to find the (...). 201 ^f the Call for Pheasants. 203 ^mes to
use the Call. 204 ^he manner of using the Call. 205 ^he taking of many
Pheasants together. 208 ^he Dryuing of Pheasants. 209 ^seruations in driving.
214 ^king Pheasants with the Lyme-bush. 216 ^e fashioning of the Lyme-bush. 217
^he manner of taking. 218 ^he taking of old Pbeasa^ts. 219 ^seruations when
they are taken. 220 ^he seasons for the use of the nets or li^e. 227 ^he
fas^ion of the Nets. 228
Chap. XV.
^aking of Partridges with Nets or other engines, of drying, or setting them,
and of the setting Dog. 230 Four ways to take Partridges. 231 Haunts of
Partridges. 232 How to find Partridges. 235 To take Partridges by the luke.
ibid: To take Partridges with the Call. 241 Taking of Partridges with Nets. 244
Taking of Partridges with Ly^e. 247 Taking of Partridges with engine, and of
driving them. 249 Taking Partridges with the setting Dog. 252 How to set
Pari^dges. 254 Helps in the use of Nets. 258 Taking of Rayls, Quails, etc. 259
Diversity of Nets. 260
Chap. XVI.
Of the setting Dog, his election, and manner of training from a Whelpe, till
he come to perfection. 264
Chap XVII.
Of the making of the best Ly^e, and of the preservation, as also of the lyming
of Rods, Bushes, Strawes, Strings, etc. 279
FINIS.
Hungers Prevention. CONTAINING The whole Art of Fowling by Water and Land.
CHAP. I.
Of the pleasant recreation of Fowling, and all the particular knowledges
belonging to the same.

FOwling is an Art of discerning The Art of Fowling.
and understanding how to take all manner of Foul, and it is to be applied or
used two several ways, that is to say, either by enchantment, or enticement,
by winning or wooing the Foul unto you with Pipe, Whistle, or Call: which
either beguileth them with their own voice, or amazeth them with the
strangeness of the sound: or else by Engine, which unawares surpriseth and
entangleth them: of both which I shall speak more largely hereafter.

Now for the Foul on which this Art D^sitie of Foul.
is to be exercised, they are diverse and of sundry natures; and so as if a man
should run into all the particularities, it were infinite to discribe,
because they alter in nature as in feather: but for the purpose of which I
intend to entreat, and for the better understanding of the Reader, I will
reduce them only into two general kinds or heads: that is to say, into
Water-Fowle, and Land-Fowle, concluding under them all whatsoever is useful or
necessary for man: as whether it be for his pleasure, his particular profit
and vocation, or for his dishe, whereby his Table and diet may be supported
and maintained, and but for some one of these three, this Art is needelesse and
vselesse.

To speak then first of Water-Fowle, The nature of Water-Fowle.
which for their more abundance and generality of use, you shall understand
they are a kind of Foul which naturally take delight to live in the water,
gathering from thence their food and sustenance: and out of the which they
cannot by any means live, which makes them more particular in some places then
other Land-Fowle are: for into high and dry countries they will not come except
in the Winter season, and not then neither, except it be upon great inundation
or ouerflowing of Brooks, which commonly so soon as they return into their
first narrow and small estate, they forthwith quit the places and are no more
seen there; for it is to be understood that all Water-fowle are in their own
nature the subtillest and wisest of Birds, and most respective to their own
safety: whence it came to pass that the most auncientest and skillful
Faulconers have compared them to a well ordered, and well governed Camp
strongly fortified and entrenched with floods of waters, Rivers and Ditches,
with their high banks almost impassable, and having Scouts on land far off,
and Courts of Guard, Sentinels, and all sorts of other watchful Officers
surrounding the body of the gross, to give a speedy allarume on any aproach or
dismay taken; and indeed, who soever shall observe their manner of living or
coutching, shall find no less then I have spoken, and how ever some straggling
Foul which lie alooffe from the greater number, or whole body will still call
first, and as it were awaken the rest upon the least noise, amazement, or other
affright discerned; for it is the nature of Water-fowle never to fly alone,
but in great flocks and herds, having ever a most especial respect to the
general safety: and where at any time you shall see a single Foul, or a
couple flying alone, there you may be assured they have violently been stirred
up by some affright, and so either in the amazement or pursuit, have been
compelled to separate and disperse themselves, yet such is their natures, and
so adicted to sotietie and company, that they will not cease; nay, hardly
sometimes leave wing until they have met together again: and as this may
sometimes happen by men's passing up and down by their haunts, so it most
commonly chances by the beating of Hagards, and wild Hawks upon rivers and
blanke waters which turning alost, and watching for their pray: when at any
time they arise, presently pursue them, and cause these alterations: Nay, the
very bald Buzzard, and Ring-tayle will sometimes occasion the same.

CHAP. II.
The several kinds of Foul, and taking with Nets.

NOW of these Waterfowle, and such as may very well pass under that title,
there are innumerable kinds, if feather or proportion should distingush them:
but for the better order and method of this work which I intend, I will only
reduce them into two several kinds. That is, such as live of the water, and
upon the water by gathering much of their food from thence, and swimming
continually thereupon, and such as live of the water, but not upon the water,
as by the gathering of most of their food from thence, but not swimming upon
the same, more then wading with their long legs therein, and diuing with their
long necks to gather that wh^ on they feed. For such as live of the water and
on the water, are wild Swannes, or Elkes, Buztards, will ^cese, Barnackles,
Mall^ds W^, T^s, Snypes, Shelfo^le, and all manner of Foul whatsoever, which
has a whole w^bbd foot like the Goose or Mall^d b^ing, as it were, by nature
made and accommodated for the water; those w^ w^bde feet like Oars rowing
their bodies upon the waters in what (...) they please; and the^ are called the
^ler kind of wild Foul: Those which live of the water, (...) on the water,
are Cranes, Herons, Bil^s, S^s, and any Foul whatsoever which ^th in,
sustenance in the water and y^h (...) his foot cloven, and these (...) c^lled
cure the greater sort o^ water Fo^le.

Now to proceed to the pleasure, pros^nd ^
knowledge of this Art, which is the manner of taking of either of these (...)
of Fowls: The first and principalest thing our skillful Fowler has to learn,
is the knowledge of the hannts or places of residence where these Foul for the
most part abide; for to hunt (as men say) after Had I wist, or to find the
pleasure you pursue but by chance or hazard, without Art, knowledge and
experience, makes the toil so much greater then the delight, and the profit so
incertaine, that both lie drowned and lost in the ignorance. This to redress
and draw a certainty to the recreation: you shall understand that all sorts of
greater Wilde-fowle, which are those which cleave the foot; their haunts are
commonly by the edges and sides of shallow Rivers, Brooks, or other rundels,
or currents of water which do either come from their especial heads, or else
are worn and made by the violence and force of the inundations of Land-waters,
which falling down into those low places or draines, do for the Winter time
run like small Brooks, or Rivers, and these Sewers or passages of water
commonly do not last longer then the Winter or Spring, but dry up as the year
grows dry and temperat. Neither shall you here expect to find herdes or
flocks of these Foul, for neither will the place afford them food, nor is
the safety so pleasing to multitudes, only upon such wadable Ri^ers, you shall
find here a couple and there a couple, and hardly above a pair at once in one
place, which makes them somewhat the harder to be taken by engine or^ice, but
are the brauest and best slights for Hawks that can be deuis^; csp^ the Heron
which takes most delight in the so places, because here they may w^ (...) c^t
there pleasures: for by reason of the breaking out of Rin^, whose ou^ falls
into th^se run^ or forced currants, these Fowls often find much small Fish and
other prey which makes them tarry and continue about those places; besides be^
so (...) to wade and diue in, the prey is gotten with case, and the ^le much
^er to continue there then in places of more difficulty: Also they delight in
low sticks and boggy, places, where the Land-waters descending, fall and ^pe a
^ll lake or plash, and the more s^, (...), ^tten and fertile such grounds are,
the fitter they are for the haunts of such foul, provided ^hey have firm
wading therein without ^its, quarries or such places of deepes and dangers:
also they love to haunt and ^bide upon the dry banks, or hard ^nobs of earth
which either border a^out, or are within ouerflowed and drow^ed Meadows, low
Pastures or such ^ke firm earthes, where the Foul may ^ade and wander up and
down to find ^is food, now in the water, and imme^iately on the dry ground;
They love ^lso the dry parts of drowned Fennes, which are ouergrowne with tall
and long ^shes, reads, seges, stouer, or any other kind of Covert, especially
the Bilters which naturaly is a melancholy foul, and ^lighteth not in the day
but in dark sha^ie and obscure places; lastly, they affect to wander upon
rotten and half drowned Mores or Carrs, through which pass many draynes or
sluices for water, or the hollow valleys of Downs, Heathes. or Plains, where
there is shelter either ^fhedges, Hills, Rocks, or other tuffes of ^ushes or
Trees, where they may lurk ^bscurely and be hardly diserned; now for the
lesser Foul and such as cleave not the foot but have it entire as in one
web; their chief and principallest hauntes, and where the greatest numbers
resort, is on continual drowned Fennes or Carrs where the water abides the
longest time without abatement, or when it is by the violence of the Suns
heat, and the dry temprature of the season brought to be firm ground, yet it
is so environed with great Sluices Ditches, and draynes or with the ^allings
down of great maine Rivers or ^ents of fresh water, that there is continually
plenty for them to swime upon, and to find saftie from the affright of men,
and the troubles of the grazing of Cattle; either of which they will not
endure, whence it comes that as the water leaves them so they leave the place,
and remove into the moyster and coulder Clymats; their haunt is the maine
Streams and Channels of the greatest Ri^rs, where the current is swiftest and
least subject to freize, and the broader and deeper such Rivers are, the
greater delight do the smaller Foul take therein. The Wild Goose and the
Barnackle only excepted, which delight not in any water above their sonnding,
for when they cannot conveniently ^ome to the bottom to suck upon the ^uze,
or fatness of the water, they pre^ntly depart thence and secke more shal^w
places; also these two sorts of Foul ^he Wild Goose and Barnackle, are
infinit^ delighted with green winter Corn, ^s the blades of Wheat or Rye:
and therefore they are ever for the most part (...) be found where any such
Grain is ^wne, especially where the ends of the ^ands are much drowned or have
much ^ater standing about them, wherein they ^ay bath and padell themselves
after ^eir feeding. The next place that these ^aller wild Foul delight to
haunt in ^e the smaller Brooks and Rivers; pits (...) ponds full of water, as
where quaries ^stone have been dug, plaster, clay, ^otters earth or such
like matter: also vp^n drowned Meadows, Pastures, Mores or such like places:
also upon plashes and blancke waters, or upon Meares, loughes ^r any great
Lakes, and so much the rather if they be full of little Islands very ^ldome
frequented, and those Islands ^ell furnished with Shrubs, Bushes, Reeds, and
other such like shelter, for then they will build therein and (the water
running continually) not depart at any season, and if these Islands have growing
within them some very tall Trees also, it is a good haunt for the greater wild
Foul also: for the Sorke, Craine; and some other delight to build and breed in
such places. Lastly these smaler wild Foul delight to be wheresoever any
water remains, and little resort of people comes, for the only thing they
labor for t^ sa^, and where they are not pe^aded of it, there is no abiding.

CHAP. III.
Taking of great Foul with Nets.

WHen our Fowler knows the haunts of every sort of Foul, he shall then
proceed and l^arne how to take them; and in it there are diverse things to be
observed, for ^oule are to be taken diverse ways as by Nets, with Fowling
Piece, with the Stalking horse, with the Water Dog, ^r by driving them as in
the time of moulting, and diverse other sundry ways, all which shall be at
large set forth and ^xplained hereafter: First then for the ^king of these
greater sort of wild ^owel with Nets, he shall first observe ^he making of
his Nets, which would be ^f the strongest and best twind Packthred, ^ith great
and large mashes, at least two ^ches from point to point, or from ^not to knot,
for it is to be observed that ^hese mashes the longer they are (so as ^he Foul
may not creep through them) ^he better they are and the sooner and faster they
do entangle and hold the Foul; for the quantity it would be not ^boue two
fadome deep at the most, and ^xe in length, which is the greatest pro^ortion
that can be, and as much as a ^han is well able to overthrow: this Net shall be
verdgd on each side with very strong Cord, and at each end extended out stiff
upon long Poals for the purpose, then the Fowler having observed ^he haunts of
these Foul, that is to say their Morning and Evening feeding, (for ^ou shall
seldom observe both in one and the self same place) he shall make sure to
come at least two hours before those feeding times; which is at twilight in
the morning, and after Sun set at night, and upon those haunts he shall
spread his net plain and flat upon the ground, staking the two lower ends
firm unto the ground, so as they may only come and go and no more: as for
the upper ends or higer verdge it shall stand extended upon the long cord,
the fu^ther end thereof being staked fast down to the earth two or three
Fadomefrom the Net, and the stake which staketh down that coarde to stand in
a direct and even line with the lower edge or verdg^ of the Net, the distance
still obse^ then the other end of the coard (which shall be at least ten or
twelve sa^ome long) the Fowler shall hold in his own hand at the uttermost
distance asoresaid, where he shall make some artificial shelter of grass,
sodds, earth, or ^like matter, where he may lie out of the sight of the Foul,
and neither gi^ them offense by his own view, or the thing whereby he is
obscured, according to this figure following.

(...) these things thus being made fit, he ^l have care that his Net lie so
tickle ^y are that upon the least pull or twich ^ill rise from the earth and
fly over. ^en he shall with his knife cut up short ^d fogge and other grass,
and sprinck^g it on the surface of the Net, hide it much as you can from the
view of the ^wle, for they are subtle, and upon the ^t dislike are gone
suddenly: when ^ngs are thus fitted, you shall lie close ^d watch their feeding
time, and if you ^ll closse by your Net stake down a (...) Heron (formerly
taken) for a Stale, ^d to entice the Foul within your dan^ it will be better,
making her now and ^n to flutter her wings, and thus the ^wle coming unto
their haunt, and ^ding up and down as their natures (...) as soon as you
perceive a competent ^ber come within the danger of your Net, you may draw your
Coard suddenly and cast the Net over them, and so take at your pleasure, and
thus you may do till the Sun be almost half an hour high, but not after;
for till then several flocks of Foul may come and feed, but after not any,
at which time you may take up your Nets and depart, doing the like in the
evening a^ their evening haunts, which is from the Sun set till tw^light at
night, or first rising of the Stars: and thus you may take any of these
greater sort of Wilde-Fowle; as also the Plouer of both kind^ or any Foul
whatsoever which takes his food from the Land as much as from the Water, or
more at some times and seasons.

CHAP. IIII.
The taking of small Foul with Ne^ and great Foul with Strings.

NOw for the taking of your small^ sort of Wilde-Fowle with Nets which are
such as for the most part frequent and feed upon the water, you shall first
observe to make your Nets of the smallestand strongest packthred, and the
mashes of a much less compass the^ for the greater Foul, neither shall they
be of above two foot and a half or three foot deep, and as these are for
diverse purposes so they shall be of diverse lengths as some to pitch overthwart
Brooks or Rivers, and they shall be answerable to the Brooks or Rivers they are
pitched over, ^s some two fadome, some three, some ^iue, and some nine, and
these Nets shall be lined on both sides with false Nets of ^trong packthred,
every mash being very ^eare a foot and a half square each way, that as the
Foul strikes either through them, or against them, so the smaller Net may
pass through the great mashes and so ^raiten and entangle the Foul as thus.



These Nets you shall pitch for the Evening flight of Foul, before Sun set,
and you shall stake them fast down on each side of the River, about half a
foo^ within the water, the lower side of the Net being so plumd that it may
sink so far and no more, then for the upper side of the Net, you shall place
it slantwise shoaling against the water, yet not touching the water by a foot
and a half at the least, and the strings which supports and holds up this
upper side of the Net, shall be fastened to small yielding sticks, pricked in the
bancke, which as the Foul strikes may yield and give liberty to the Net to
run and entangle the Foul: yet one end ever made so fast that the Net may by
no means be carried away, and thus you shall place d^uers of these Nets over
diverse parts of the River or Brook, about twelve score one from an other as
the River shall give you ocasion, so that if any Foul come upon the River that
night, you shall be sure to have your share thereof: this done if there be any
Fenne, plash, pits, or other blancke waters a good distance from the River, you
shall go down unto them, and the Evening beginning to shut in, you shall
shoot a Piece, two or three off upon those blancke waters and raise the Foul
from thence, which at that time being scard will presently pack to the Rivers,
then you shall take your larger and middle sizd Nets, and with them you shall
surround your small plashes, pits, or blancke waters, hanging your Nets
slopewise and houering over them, yet so loose as is possible; then with your
largest or longest Nets of all, you shall go to the Fenns or bigger waters,
and in those places where the greatest haunts of Foul are, you shall stake
down your Nets on the banks, shoaling over the water in such sort as has
been formerly discribed; so as no Foul can come to the bank, or rise from
the bank, but may be entangled: also if there be any covert of Sedge, Reed,
Rushes, or other matter within the water, you shall pitch your Nets about them
also; which done an hour or two before day in the Morning, you shall take your
Piece and go to the River first and see what your Nets has taken, which when
you have vnlayded, you may then take up those Nets and lap them up till the
next Evening, then if you find there be many Foul on the River, you may
shoot off your Piece in one or two places, and that will presently send them
to the Fenns and blanke Waters, which done, when you have bestowed your Nets in
places convenient til you have further use for them, you shall about the first
rising of the Sun, go to your other Nets which are on the blanke waters, and
see what they have taken and unlade them; and so hang them by till the next
time of use as aforesaid, and thus without fail, where plenty of Foul are you
shall take plenty: and where they are the scarcest yet you shall have an equal
share without much trouble.

The next manner of taking of Foul The taking of great Foul with strings.
is with Strings or Lines made of long small Coard knotted here and there, and
containing in length many fadomes, acording to the proportion of the places and
haunts where you are to lay them; and they are of especial great use for the
taking of all sorts of the greater Wild-Fowle, and the Plouers of both kinds,
which when o^ Fowler shall at any time use, he shall take those Strings as
aforesaid, and lime them all over exceeding well with the strongest and best
Birdlime that may be got, then coming to the haunts where these Foul most
freqnent and feed, if it be for the Evening flight then before Sun set, if
for the Morning flight, then at the least two hours before day and having a
whole burden of little sticks about two foot long at the most; sharp at the
nether end and with a little forke at the upper end; he shall prick them in
even rows all over the ground or place of haunt, one row distant from another
a yard or too, and one stick siding another, within four or five yards as
they may conveniently bear up the String, and they shall be pricked a little
shoaling or slantwise: so as they may be within a foot and a half of the
ground at the uttermost, the^ shall these limed Strings be drawn and laid upon
the forkes some rows higher then! other some, like a billow of water, higher
in one place then another, till every row be filled and the haunt covered all
over, then shall you fasten the ends with a slipping loope, in such wise that
upon any violent strain the whole string may loosen and lap about any thing
which touches it, and in this wise you shall take a great number of Foul
together, according to the flocks and herds in which they fly, especially
Plouers, which for the most part come many together, and not in a single file
or row as commonly other Foul do, but in a great broad cluster, spreading
and covering the air as it were all over; and this manner of taking happens
most commonly in the falling or coming to the ground o^ the Foul, whose
nature is to swoope close by the ground a good distance before they light,
which happening amongst the strings, either all or most part are many times
entangled, and these strings you need not over precisely watch, but being
placed you may go about other business till the time of flight be past, and
then returning to see what is taken, you shall find such as are stricken with
the strings fast enough, so as they can neither loosen themselves, nor yet
run away with the string to hide either it or themselves, and noting in what
sort you laid your strings, in the same ranks commonly you shall find them,
or not much further off, which being vnladed you may lap them up again till
you have other convenient time to use them.

This taking of Foul with limed Taking of small fowl^ with strings.
Stringes, may also be very well applied for the taking of the smaller wild-
foul, and such as only haunt the water, only then our Fowler must observe to
lime all his Srings with strong and very good water tried lime, such as will
endure the water and not loose his virtue therein; and these Strings are to be
applied either for the Morning or Evening flight as aforesaid; observing to
take time enough before either of the flights, for the placeing of the String;
and not to place them any where but upon the most assured haunts, where the
Foul certainly do frequent and feed; for otherwise it is loss of labor
and much trouble to little purpose; now for the manner of placeing these
Strings, as before you did them upon the ground, so now you shall do them over
the water within less then half a foot thereof: making your forked sticks
so much longer on purpose, acording to the shallownes or deepenes of the water:
and herein you shall observe to lay these strings seldom or never in any
Mooneshine night, lest the shadow of the Lines give offense to the Foul, or if
you do lay them to set it in such dark and obscure places, where by the help
either of Bancke, Tree, or other shelter, the Mooneshine may be held back and
obscured, and your work not perceived.

And thus you may also lay these strings overthwart Rivers or Brooks, and so,
as they may almost very near touch the water, nor need you herein at any
time to make shorter your strings but pricking down the first end, go from
boughe to boughe till you have covered so much of the River all over, as you
shall think to be fit and convenient, and so as if any Foul light thereon
they may not fall out of your compass, or from your danger: as thus for
example.



And having thus placed your strings both on the bank waters and cross the
Rivers, and observing the earliest hours as soon as the flights are past, to
come and visit your works, you shall find (that knowing the right haunts) if
Foul fall any where, they must necessarily fall within your danger, nor can
you choose but take very many: For (as I said) coming in whole shoales or
flocks together, though these Foul ^ye singly one after one, yet in their
descent or lighting on the water, they do spread themselves and come into a
single rank, all as it were lighting together (though not flying in one rank
or company) on the water in one and the same instant: whereby it is not a
single Foul that strikes the string alone, but for the most part the whole
flock fly so near together, and so come swooping into the Net.

CHAP. V.
Taking of great Foul with Lime-^ggs.

THe next manner of taking of Foul is with the Lime-twigs, which may likewise,
as the rest before spoken off, be appropriated and accommodated to all sorts of
Foul, both the greater and the smaller. Touching the taking of the greater
sort of Wild-fowle with Lime-twigges: our Fowler must provide himself of good
store of rodds, the best kind whereof are the long, small, and straight grown
twigges, or rods which grow on the bushie branches of the Willow, being cut
of an even length one by another; and these twigges of which we speak, being
for the greatest sort of Foul, should be of the greatest length and thicknes,
yet but small, light, and slender, being apt to play, wind about and cleave to
the least feather which touches it; and for the true length thereof, it must
suite the place in which it is to be used, as the length of the grass, fogge,
rushes, or such like amongst which it is to be pricked, or else the depth of
the water, that as much of the twigge as is limed may in the standing be free
from other annoyance.

These rodds or twigs thus prepared, you shall with very good and strong
Bird-lime besmeere all the upper parts or points thereof, down below the
middle part of the rod, and holding them before the fire make the Bird-lime
melt and and run upon them that the bark of the rod may not be discerned
from the Bird-lime; and thus having made a convenient number of them according
to the quantity of grounds or haunts wherewith you are acquainted, you shall
use them in this manner.

First, having well observed and acquainted your self with the haunts and
feedings of these greater sort of Wildfowle, and know both morning and evening
where they usually do light, you shall then before Sun set (as before I
showed) if it be for the evening flight, and before day if it be for the
Morning flight go with your Lime-rods to their several haunts, and in the
very heart or midst of the haunte you shall first pin down a stale, which
should be alive foul formerly taken, of the same kind which they are that now
haunt the place, and for which you now lay, and this Stale you shall pin
down in such sort that she may have liberty of wing to flutter up and down
at pleasure, and then on each side, and round about this Stale every way you
shall prick down your Lyme-roddes within a foot or thereabout one of another
in even rows one by one, and row after row till you have covered the haunt
all over, and left no place for any Foul to fall besides them.

And these rods you shall prick sloape wise with the points bending into the
wind and from the ground a good foot and better. Some use to cross pri^ke
them, that is, one point into the wind, and another against the wind, that
which way soever the Foul comes they may the more readily take them without
any prevention; and truly it is not to be disallowed, for it does afford
much safety to the work: when you have thus placed your Limeroddes, you shall
then place a Stale or two more aloof^ from the Lime-roddes, and then finding
a^fitte and convenient place for your self to lie concealed in, and having
small strings running along the ground, by which you make the Stales stir at
your own pleasure; lie as closse as is possible, and when you hear or see any
Foul coming, stir your Stales and they will presently upon sight of them,
stricke and swoope in amongst them, where if any touch (if you have so much
leisure) you may take them away presently, but if not let them flutter and
tumble amongst the rods till the greater herds come, and that you have lymed
as many as you are able to deal with; then you may rise, and gather them
together at your pleasure; and here is to be noted, that in this case of taking
Foul with the Lyme-rods, as your self may not be absent, so you must have
also for your better aid an excellent good, well-taught and obedient
Waterdogge, that when any Foul offers to flutter away, as ordinarily the
will do though your eye be never so good, the dog may forthwith find them
out and bring them unto you, for in this confusion and taking of mauy there
will be work enough for both: when you have gathered up al your foul, slain
such as you please, and saved those you think meet for Stales, and so bagged
them severally, you shall then gather up your Rods and bundel them up together
and so carry them where they may lie safely till your next ocasion to use them;
and thus you may do Morning and Evening during the season of the year, and as
long as the haunt shall serve you purpose.

These Lime-rods may also be applied Taking of smaller Foul with Limerods.
for the smaller sort of Wild-Fowle, and and such as only frequent the water,
and they must be trimd and sizd out acording to your use, and the depth or
sounding of the water, making them so much longer as the water is deeper: and
the Lime which trimmeth these Rods would be good strong water Lime such as no
moisture or frost may trouble, now for the placeing of these Rods as you did
prick them on the dry Land so you shall prick them in the Water, as much of
the Rod as is limed being above the water, and amongst your Rods you shall stake
down here and there a live Stale being either a Mallard, or a Widgon, or a
Tail, and thus you may do all over either any shallow plash, fenne, or any
other blanck water which is wadeable, or so as you may with conuenience prick
down your Lime-rods, also you prick them down upon the dry banks, or
borders which do surround these Fennes, plashes, pits, and blanke-waters;
fixing a Stale or two amongst them, which may entice the Foul from the water
to the dry Land, and upon the very brimme or edge of the water you shall prick
your Rods shoa^ing or sloapewise over the water, so thick together that a
Foul may not creep between them but upon any approach to the bancke that she
may take the Lime-rod with her. These lime-rods (as the other formerly treated
off for the greater sort of Wild-fowle) you shall not need continually to
watch and ^ttend, for it matters not much in what ^orte the Stales move,
(because their restraint will make them busy enough,) only you shall come
thrice a day to see what is taken, as early in the Morning, at hie noone, and
late in the Evening neither shall you in any wise come without your water
Dog, for he is a maine instrument, and a servant of such use that without him
in this place you shall loose half your gettings, therefore in any wise be
ever sure to have him at your heels; then coming amongst your Rods, if you
find any touched and within your own reach you may gather them up, clear them
of the Rods and bag them, but if they be flutterd or fleikt into any River, or
deep sewer where you cannot come at them, there you shall send forth your
Dog to fetch them; also when you come and find any of your lime-rod^
disordered, twitcht up and some borne away, but no Foul to be perceived, then
you may be assured that some are touch but yet cropen away and hidden either in
holes about the banks, or in other covert adjoining: whereupon you she call
your dog and make him hunt, and search every corner, beating the cou^ round
about, and if there be any goodness at al in him you cannot lose a foul, for
the lime is so strong a sent that almost a man may follow it, thus when you
have gathered what for that time is taken, you shall set all your Rods in order
again, renewing all such as are broken or spoiled, and so let them stand (as
before) till your next time of coming; And thus you shall continue to do as
long as you find the haunts fit for your purpose, but so soon as you see it
begin either to decay or that the game goes away, (for it is to be known
that these Foul are so subtle and careful of their own safety, that being
much beaten upon they will find it and forthwith forsake the place) then you
shall immediately hunt out a new haunt that is untroubled, and there do as
has bin before declared, and then after a month or three weeks rest, the
first haunt will become as good as it was before; and so you may have sport
continually, nor at any time fleepe without haueing your pray in your own
possession; There are some which use to mix with their Limerods and their
Lime-strings, laying a row of the one and then a row of the other, ^y which
means the Lime-rods standing much thinner are not so easily perceiud nor give
that offense to the Foul which in their thick standing many times they do,
whereby the skilfullest Fowler may sometimes miss of his pray, and the course
is not to be disliked, for the taking is more safe and more certain, yet it is
more necessary and more generally to be used for the greater sort of Wild-Fowle
then for the smaller; And now by that way to speak a word or two of the
Wild-Goose or Barnackle which commonly do f^de and haunt together, as they may
be taken by the forms and instructions, before rehearsed, so they may the
better and in more abundance be taken, if their truest and most vsuallest
haunts be applied, and therefore you shall know there is no better place or
haunt to set your limerode in, for the taking of these kinds of Fowls then as
upon the green Winter-Corne being Wheat or Rye; but especially Wheat on which
they feed most earnestly, and by all means you shall choose the darkest and
brownest colored Rods you can find, and which is of nearest color unto the
Earth, for though the blade may be shot up above the Earth yet in the Winter
time it covers not the Earth, nor is the blade so twight that being near, it
is much discerned from the Earth, therefore as I said the darkest colored Rods
are the best; and these you shall place sloape-wise upon the Lands as was
before declared for other dry places, and about the water Furrows on every
side and in the midst, you shall place sundry rows of lime-rods so as the foul
may in no wise come to the water without the touch of them, and these Rods
shall be of the largest and heauiest, for the Foul is of great strength and
will bear a little Rod clean away; and from these Rods when you have plast
them, you shall not be far distant more then to avoid trouble or suspicion of
the Foul, (which ^y all means must be eschewed) but standing on some high
knobe or other ^aisd ground far off, mark when, where, and in what manner the
Foul lights, and if you find any touched or taken, which you may find by the
sudden rising ^f the rest of the Foul, and the flutte^ing and struggling of
them to rise which ^re touched and connot; where upon you ^all make in, and if
any half limed be flecking away, let your Dog fetch them in whilst you your
self take up the rest, and thus you may pass from haunt to haunt till you be
fully satisfied in your pleasure; also it is not amiss if when you have plast
your Rods you beat the Foul off from all other haunts, which will make them
come the sooner to that where your Rods are placed, and make your sport much
the quicker and mo^ certain.

CHAP. VI.
Taking Foul with Engine as Springes, etc.

THe next manner of ta^ ing of Foul is w^ Engine or artificial d^ uice, and
is also app^ pryated and acom^ dated to both sor^ Foul (as the others formerly
tre^ off,) both perticularly and generally, (...) there be some Engines which
perticu^ ly take those Foul which cleave t^ foot, others which take those
only which cleave not the foot, and others which take both sorts; as those
which do cleave the foot, and those which do not cleave the foot, and of
these which are so general are the greater number.

To speak then first of those Engines Of the great Spring.
which take the Foul which cleave the foot, they are the great and lesser
Springes, which are thus to be made and thus to be acomodated; first knowing
assured^y (as it is ever to be presupposed) the true haunts and places where
the Flocks or coupels of greater sorts of Foul do ^sually feed both evening
and Morning, and noted well the furrows and water tracts, where they usually
stalk and pa^dle to find worms, flotte-grasse, roots and other such like
things on which they feed, you shall mark where many fur^owes meet in one,
and break out as it were in one narrow stream or passage, and so descending
afterward deuides it self into other parts and branches; this middle part or
chore being the deepest and as it were feeding the rest, then no^ing how every
furrow breaks and comes into this Center or little pit, you shall mark
which is most padled, with the Foul, or which is easiest and fittest for Foul
to wade in, not being much deeper in water then the Foul is from the eye to
the bottom or lowest part of the beak, this passage found out and chosen you
shall take, small and short sticks and prick them cross wise over, thwart all
the other passages, one stick within half an inch of an other making as it
were a kind of fence to guard every way but one which you would have the Foul
to pass, and if hese sticks stand but above the water a handful or somewhat
more such is the nature of the foul that they will not press over them but
stray about till they find the open way, wherein they will run swiftly up,
pad^ ling up and down for their victuals; when thus you have hemmed out al
wai^ but one, you shall take a good stiff sti^ cut flatt on one side and
pricking both ends down into the water make the (...) per part of the bought
or flat side of the stick touch the water and no more; then you shall make a
bow or bought of small Hazell or Willow, made in the fashion of a pear broad,
and round at one end and narrow at the other, at least a foot ^ong and five or
six inches wide or better, and at the narrow end a little small ^icke or dent,
then you shall take a very good stiff young grown Plant of Ha^ell, Elm, or
Witchen, being rushie grown, and clean without knott, three or four Inches
or better about at the bottom, and an Inch at the top, and ^auing made the
bottom end sharp, ^t the top you shall fasten a very strong ^oope or swickell
of above an hundred Horse hairs, platted very fast together with strong
Packthred, and made so ^mooth and yare that it will slip and run ^t pleasure,
and this swickell or loope, shall be of the Just quantity of the hoop, ^ade
pear wise as was before menti^ned, then hard by this loope or swickel, shall
there also be fastened with strong Horse hair within an Inch and a half of
the end of the plant, a little broad thin ^rycker, made sharp and equal at
both ^nds after this proportion.



And then the bigger sharp end of the Plant being thrust and fixed hard into
the ground, close by the edge of the water, the smaller end with the loope and
the tricker, shall be brought down to the first bridge, and then the hoope
made pearewise being laid on the bridge, on^ end of the tricker shall be set
upon the nicke of the hoope, and the other end against a nicke made on the
small end of the plate, which by the violence and bend of the Plant shall make
them stick^ and hold together until the hoope be^ moved; this done the
swickell shall b^ laid upon the hoope in such fashion a^ the hoope is
proportioned, then from cach side of the hoope you shall pri^ little sticks as
aforesaid, as it were (...) a very impaled path or hye-way (...) the hoope, and
as you go farther and farther from the hoope or Spring, so you shall make the
way wider and wider, that the Foul may be entered a good way in before it
perceive the fence; the beginning or first entrance being as wide as the
largest furrow whatsoever, so that any Foul falling near the same, they may
be enticed to go and wade up the same, where they shall no sooner touch the
Spring either with head, foot or feather, but they shall presently be taken,
and that member swickled which first touches the Spring; and acording to the
strength of the plant, so you may take any Foul how great or big soever:
for I have my self taken a Faune in one of these Springes, which has equald
the strength of any Foul, and that by one leg only, whereby it has had the
whole body to strugle withal.

Now for the taking of smaller Foul Taking smaller Foul with Engine.
with this Engine as the Snipe, the woodcock^, Puett, and Lapwing, or any other
foul which feeds in marrish and moist grounds, or amongst water furrows,
sucking the fatnes of the soil, the device and Engine is all one without
alteration, only it may be of much less strength and substance, according to
the Foul it is set for, especially the sweaper or maine plant, which as it is
prescribed of Hazell, Elm, or Witchen, so in this case it may be of Willow,
Sallow, strong grown Ozyer, or any yielding plant which will bend and give
again to it own straightness; and this kind of Engine is for the Winter
season only, when much wet is on the ground, and not when the furrows are
dry; But if there happen any great frosts so that you are locked out from these
ordinary waters, then you shall search out where these standing waters have any
dessents or small passages, so as by the swift current or motion the water is
not so apt to frieze, and in these places you shall erect your Springes, and
where such currents are not, there you shall as much as you can enforce and
make them; for although the greater Foul will pack to the Rivers, and deeper
running Brooks, yet these smaller Foul cannot go thither, but will labor
and plye any place which is made or prepared for them, and the greater the
forced is, the sooner and apter they are to be taken.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Fowling-Piece a another Engine.

THe next Engine to these is the Gun or Fowling Piece, which is a general
Engine and may serve forany Foul great or little whatsoever, for it has no
respect at what it strikes, being within the level: And of the Fowling Piece
you shall understand that to be the best which is of the longest barrel, as
five foot and a half, or six foot, and the boar indifferent, as some what
under Harquebush, for these hold the best charges, and carry the farthest
level, which is a principal thing to be regarded; for Foul are of such a
tickell and counning nature, that a man shall hardly get within any indifferent
or near station, and to shoot ^ut of level or distance were to shoot
against the wind, and scarr-Crow like, only to affright Foul with the loss
of labor; as for the shape or manner of it, it is better it be a fire lock or
Snaphaunce then a cock and tricker, for it is safer and better for carriage,
readier for use and keeps the powder dryer in all weathers, whereas the very
blowing of a coal is many times the loss of the thing aimed at; as for the
charge your round haileshot or drop-shot, is better then the single or doble
Bullet, and this halle-shot would be of bigness according to the Game you
shoot at, which if it be great and large, then it would be of twenty or thirty
to a charge, or less as the Piece will carry; but if the Game be small, then
it would be of forty or threescore, as shall seem best in the discretion of
the Fowler; Now for the use of this Fowling-Peice, it is either for Land or
Water that is passable or may be waded, as whether it be in Fenne, upon
Plash, or Pits, or any other blankwater; and herein first the Fowler is to
observe the finding out of his Game, and which Foul lies fittest for his
purpose, at no time striving to shoo^ at a single Foul, if he can by any mean^
compass more within his level; then he shall seek as near as he can to
shoot with the wind, not against the wind, and rather sidewaies or behind
the Foul then full in their faces, then he shall seek the conuenientest
shelter he can find, as either hedge, Bank, Tree, or any other shadow which
may hide him from the gaze of the Foul, for they are so fearful of the
proportion, visage, or motion of a man, that upon the least suspicion they are
gone in a moment, and therefore when under his covert or pertision he is gotten
within his level and has the Wind fit and certain, then he shall make
choice of his mark, which (as before I said) would in no wise be a single
Foul, having more within your level, but rather the longest and largest
Rank or File of Foul you can find, for since one shoot is as much as you
can get at one time and in one place, it is meet you put it to as great use
and profit as you can possibly, which done you may instantly and speedily
discharg, and then send forth your Dog to fetch what you have stricken, both
as well those which are slain out right as those which are hurt and mayned;
and being so as you cannot your self conveniently come by them: but by all
means you must have your Dog in such true obedience that he may not stir
from your heels, or let so much as his shadow be perceived, till you have
shot and your self bid him go, for to rush forth too soddenly or upon the
first fire or cla^ of the Snaphaunce, though the Piece go^ not off (as many mad
headded Currs w^ do) is many times the loss of very much good sport; which to
avoid suffer no^ your Dog to stir till you bid him; Thus as you do upon
these blanke w^ters, so you shall also do upon the brooks and greater Rivers,
where if you have not shelter sufficient by reason of the nakedness of the
banks and want of Tr^, then you shall creep upon your hands and knees under
the banks, and lying even flat upon your belly, put the No^ of your Piece over
the bank and so take your level; for a Foul is so wonderfully fearful of a
man, that albeit (...) H^ke were turning over her to ke^ her in awe yet upon
the least show of (...) man she will rise and trust to her wings and Fortune,

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Stalking-Horse an other Engine.

NOw for as much as these shelters or couerts are after a way then found, and
that Foul do many times lie so far removed within ^he water, that unless a
man do go in^o it where no shelter at all is, more then (...) man brings
with him, he cannot po^iblely compass a shoot; so that of ne^ssity a man must
have some moving ^addow or shelter to walk by him; In ^is case there is
nothing better then the ^alking Horse, which is any old Jade ^yned up for that
use, which being stripped ^ked and having nothing but a string ^out the nether
chappe, of two or ^ee yards long, will gently and as you ^ue ocation to urge
him, walk up and down in the water which way you will have him; flodding and
eating upon the grass or other stuff that grows therein; and then being
hardy and stout without taking any affright at the report of the Piece, you
shall shelter your self and your Piece behind his fore shoulder, bending your
body down low by his side, and keeping his body still full between you and
the Foul; Then haueing (as was before showed) chosen your mark, you shall
take your level from before the fore part of the Horse, shooting as it were
between the Horses ne^ and the water, which is more safe an^ fur^r then taking
the level under the Horses belly, and much lesser to be perceived; the
shoulder of the Horse co^ ring the body of the man, and the Horse^ legs
shaddowing the legs of the man also: and as thus you stalk upon the great
blanke waters, so you may stall^ also along the banks of Brooks i^ great
Rivers, by little and little winn^ the Foul to as near a station as can (...)
desired, and thus you may do also vp^ the firm ground, whether it be on mo^
Heath, or other rotten earth, or else up the tylthe where green Corn grows;
or generally, in any other haunt where Foul are accustomably used to feed or
abide.

And as you make use of this Stalking horse, so must you not in any wise want
your Water-dogge, for he is as useful at this time as at any other, nor can
you well do any thing without him; especially if it be upon Rivers or broad
deep waters, yet you should have him at such obedience that whilst you are a
stalking you may leave him with your Bags, sadle and bridle and other
needments, where he may lie close, and never stir till you have shot, and then
upon the least gybbet or call, to come running unto you, and to fetch forth
what you shall kill, which with a small practice he will do readily and
willingly after you have made him ^nderstand your mind, for they are ^reatures
of wonderful great capacity, and naturally inclyned to the sport, so that
being kept in true awe there is no^ing which they will not with great rea^nesse
perform. Several Engines to stalk with.


Now forasmuch as these Stalking hor^, or Horses to stalk withal, are not
ever in readiness, and at the best ask a good expense of time to be brought
to their best perfection: as also, in that every poor man or other which
takes delight in this exercise, is either not master of a Horse, or if he had
one yet wants fit means to keep him: and yet nevertheless this practice of
Fowling must or should be the greatest part of his mantenance.

In this case he may take any pieces of oulde Canuasse, and having made it in
the shape or proportion of a Horse with the head bending downward, as if he
grased, and stoping it with dry Straw, Moss, Flocks, or any other light
matter, let it be painted as near the color of a Horse as you can devise; of
which the Brown is the best, and in the midst let it be fixed to a Staff with
a pick of Iron in it to stick down in the ground at your pleasure, and stand
fast whilst you choose your mark, as also to turn and wind any way you
please, either for your advantage of the wind, or for the better taking of
your level, and (...) must be made so portable that you may bear it easily
with one hand, mooui^ and wagging it in such wise that it may seem to move
and graze as it goes; nether must this in any wise exceed the or dinary
stature or proportion of a common Horse, for to be too low or little will not
cover the man, and to be two big and huge will be both monstrous and
troublesome, and give affright to the Foul, therefore the mean in this is the
best measure, and only worth the observation.

The form and manner of the Stalking horse of Canuasse stopped.


Now these Engines are ever better and more proper for the water then the Land,
and though they will serve very fitly for both, yet are they more conueuient
for the Water, by reason that the Water hides all their imperfection, and
makes them appear to the Foul one and the same thing which at the first they
did seem.

Now there be some which do not so The Horse vnstopt.
well approve of this Horse thus stopped and furnished out; alleging it to be too
heany and troublesome, and though a man use all the Art that may be in the
lightness thereof, yet still they say it is to weighty; and therefore they
will by all means have them made of single Canuas vnstopt at all, but only
strecht out upon splents made of wood, or upon strong wire proportiond like
unto a Horse wherein they vary nothing from the Figure formerly described, but
only in the stoping; for this and the other must be painted also, and that
very thick too, lest in the turning it against the Sun it prove transparent,
or so as a man may see through it, which will give such an offense to the
Foul, that they will in no sort endure it.

Also you must observe in the Stalk to turn that side ever upon the Foul
which is plain without splents, or other marks more then the painting only
for fear of offense, and these are as good as any live Horse for this use
being artefully handled in the motion, and made to move by slow degrees at
leisure, as a Horse does, and not suddenly or rudely, for that will discover
them and breed affight in the Foul.

There be others which use instead of The Ox or shape of hornd beast.
this Stalking Horse of Canuas either stopped or vnstopt, to make the proportion
of a beast or hornd Neat, as Ox, Cow, or Bull in Canuas, as before is showed,
either stopped or vnstopt, according to the fancy of the Fowler, and as he shall
find fittest for his strength to support and carry without any offense, and
this figure he shall make in as true form and proportion as he can device, for
the eye of a Foul is so cunning that they will easily perceive any gross
absurdity, or misshapen, or unlike form, and thereat quickly take offense, and
avoid the thing deceiving; it shall also be very well painted to the life,
either Black, Brown, or Pied, according to the usual colors of the cattle
in those places; for though black and brown are generally the best, because
of their shadow, yet in such places where no such Black or Brown cattle
are, or at least very gayson or novel, there they are the worst colors, and
ought least to be used; for your Engine must ever be suitable to that wherewith
the eye of the Foul is most acquainted, nor must you alone stand precisly upon
the color, but also upon every other face or maine carracter, by which the
whole body is disstinguyshed; as in fixing the Horns, which must ever be
suitable to the color of the Beast and the breed of the Country, for it is
commonly seen here with us in England, that your entire black, your brown,
and your brended Cattle have ever the goodliest Heads and fairest extended
Horns, the whitest and the largest, and your white pide, and bloodred Cattle
the least Heads, crumpled, short, and foul collored; Therefore to make your
Engine black, brown, or brended with short crooked and ilfauord Horns, or
white or pyed, with great, straight and large spread Horns, were both an
absurdity to be laughed at, and a prevention of the sport you labor for, by
affrighting the Foul out of your company with that, by which you should entice
them only to stay and grow familliar with you; and therefore you must
accommodate every thing in his true and propper nature, without strangeness or
offense. Nor may you in any sort stalk with these Engines in any place but
where these Cattle are usual and in most abundance, for to stalk with a
Horse where no Horses live or are bred, or with the Ox, where no Oxen are know
is absurd and loss of labor, but this is no doubt in our Nation, therefore the
best use I can give you of these Engines, is that when you have so much beaten
the Foul with the Stalking-Horse, that they begin to find your deceit, and
will no more sit or endure you, (as generally it falls out,) then you may an
other while stalk with the Ox or Beast, till the Horse be forgotten, and thus
by the chang and alteration of your Engines you may make your sport last and be
continually, for the shape of your Ox Engine, it follows in the next Page

The form and manner of an Ox Engine.


Now there be others without a further curiosity (and indeed it is nothing at
all to be discomended) which frame themselves Engines like Stagges, or redd
Dear, and these also they frame of canu^sse as the former, either stopped or
vnstopt, with the natural horns of Stags fixed there on, and the color
painted so liuey, that the Foul may not discern them from a Stagge or a thing
that is living, and these Engines are right good and very useful in all such
places or low fenney grounds where any such Stagges or Dear do usually feed;
as about Hatfield Chase in the North parts, or Ramsey in Huntintonshire and
such like where the Stagge is more familiar with Foul, and feeds nearer them
then either the Horse or the Ox, and therefore this Engine being artificially
and well made is of as good use as any of the former Engines, and will indeed
bring a man within a far nearer distance; only it is subject to quicker
discovery, and therefore it must be the oftener altered and changed to prevent
the subtlety of the Foul: as for the proportion or form of this Engine it is
placed in the next page.

The form and manner of the Stagge Engine.


Now there be some that will only but make the moulds or models of the heads
of these beasts only, and putti^ them upon their own heads so sta^ therewith,
holding opinion that it is b^ only the face of the Man which is drea^ full,
and breeds affright in the Fow^ and that if it be hidden in any of the forms
before showed, a man may win his sport at pleasure.

I do confess it is the face of a man which keeps all living things in the
greatest awe, and that the face being covered or concealed a man may proceed
better in these pastimes, but that it should work this great effect and be as
useful as the former models, I utterly deny and differ from; for the very body
of man is too well known unto Foul, that when soever it is mixed with any
unnatural form or monstrous shape, it presently causes amazement, which
amazement though it may a little hold the Foul at gaze, whereby the man may
come at a much nearer distance; yet before the mark can be chosen and the
level taken commonly the astonishment wastes away, and fear entering the
mind, the Foul suddenly arises, before the Piece can be discharged: And
therefore though (...) well allow that the face of the man should be covered
with some hood or other garment, which may be rather sha^ow-like then
monstrous; yet I would ^ot have him to Stalk with these modells of heads only,
without some thing else to ouershadowe ones body and go by them.

Lastly the skillful Fowler must understand that these Engines of what kind
soever, are fitter for the early morning Stalk or the late evening Stalk,
then at any other time of the day when the Sun is aloft or in his high glory,
for at such time the lest blinke or deformity is very soon perceived, and the
natural fear of the Foul is most prone and apt to raise up by thoughts and
fears, where by they are forced to rise up and fly away before that the
skilfullest man ca^ f^ish his purpose, or recover his mark^ or l^ll.

There are other dead Engines to Stalk withal; as an artificial Tree
Shrubbe, or Bush, which may be mad^ of small Wandes, or thin Splinter^
foulded together in the shape or bod^ of a Tree, and so couerd with Canua^ and
painted like the bark of the Tr^ represents or figures; of which the Willow,
Poplar, or such as grow b^ Waters and Rivers sides are the bes^ for the other
which grow upon the dr^ grounds, as Oak, Elm, and the like, are not so
familiar with foul, and therefore by the strangeness may occasion affright,
and for the leaves it is not much material, because this time and season of
Stalking after Foul is for the most part in the winter season when leaves are
from the trees: But let it be at any season that you please, either in Summer
or in Winter, having made the boale of the Tree, as before is said, with
Canuasse and Wands, you shall in certain holes made ^n the top for that
purpose, stick in ^he boughs and true natural brauches ^f the Tree which you
would figure in ^ch sort as they grow at that season, (...) you shall give no
affright or terror to the Foul; and the Tree will appear after this form or
figure following.

The form and manner of the Tree to stalk with.


As for the Shrubbe or Bushe, it shall not be so tall as the tree, but much
thicker which you may make either of on^ entire Bushe, or of diverse Bushes
wouen and entangled one within another either with small Withy wandes, Coard,
or Packthried, that may not be discerned and this shall not be above the
ordinary stature of a man, but thicker then four or five men, and in the midst
of the bottom shall be a small stake driven with an Iron pick in the end,
somewhat longer then the Bushe, which being driven into the ground may support
and stay up the Bushe whilst you take your mark and find your level,
according to this form and figure following.

The form and manner of the Bushe Engine to stalk with.


The last of these stalking Engines is the dead hedge of two or three yard^
long, and a yard and three quarters hye, made of small wands in the manner of a
true hedge, and busht out with twigges, leaves and such like as hedges are, and
with certain supports or stays, where by not only to bear it from the
ground at your pleasure, but also to stay and hold it up whilst you do find
your mark and take your level, according to the form and manner of these
figures following.

The form and manner of two sorts of Hedges to stalk with.


Now for these dead Engines which carry not the shape of any living creature,
they are not altogether so necessary for the Stalk as the Stand, because the
only thing that can discover them, or breed aff^ight from them is their
motion, for to have a dead thing move to grosely is much unnatural, and the
Foul will not only apprehend it, but eschew it: therefore by all means you
must be careful not to move them at all but to lie at the stand watching
behind them; or if you do move them, to do it like the hand of a Clock,
with such slow and still motion that you may gain your purpose unperceived,
and then it is as safe a way as any of the other before prescribed.

CHAP. IX.
The use of the Water Dog, and the manner of trayning them.

THe Water Dog is a creature of such general use, and so frequent in use
amongst us here in England, that it is needelesse to make any large
descripti^n of him: the rather since not any a^ongst us is so simple that he
cannot say ^hen he sees him, This is a Water^ogge, or a Dog bred for the
Wa^r; yet because in this (as in other crea^res) there are other Characters and
^ormes which pretend more excellency, and figure a greater height of virtue
^en others do; I will here describe as ^ere as I can the best proportion of a
(...) Water Dog.

First, for the Color of the best Wa^r Dog, all be it some (which are
curious in all things) will ascribe more excellency The description of the
Water Dog.
to one color then to another, as the Black to be the best and hardest, the
Lyuer-hued swiftest in swimming, and the Pyed or Spotted Dog, quickest of
sent; yet in truth it is nothing so, for all colors are alike, and so a Dog
of any of the former colors, may be excellent good Dogs, and of any may be
most notable Curres, according to their first ordering and trayning; for
Instruction is the liquor where with they are seasoned, and if they be^ well
handled at the first, they will eue^ smell of that discresion, and if they be
ill handled they will ever stink of tha^ folly: For nature is a true mistre^
and bestows her gifts freely, and it i^ only nurture which abuses them.

To proceed then, your Dog may be of any color and yet excellent, an^ his
hair in general would be long an^ curled, not loose and shagged; for the
first shows hardness and ability to (...) dure the water, the other much
tenderness and weakness, making his spo^ grievous; his head would be round
an^ curled, his ears broad and hanging, h^ Eye full, lively and quick, his
Nose very short, his Lip, Hound-like, side and rough bearded, his Chappes
with a full sert of strong Teeth, and the general features of his whole
countenance being united together would be as Lyon-like as might be, for that
shows fierceness and goodness: His Neck would be thick and short, his
Breast like the breast of a Ship, sharp and compast; his Shoulders broad, his
fore Legs straight, his Chine square, his Buttokes ronnde, his Ribs compast,
his belly gaunt, his Thyes brawny, his Cambrels crooked, ^his Pasterns strong
and dew clawde, and ^all his four feet spacious, full and ^ound, and closed
together to the cley, ^ike a water Ducke, for they being his ^ares to row him
in the water, having that shape, will carry his body away the ^aster. And thus
you have the true description of a perfect Water Dog, as you may see
following.



Now for the cutting or shauing him from the Nauill downward, or back, ward,
it is two ways wel^ to be allowed of that is, for Summer hunting, or for
wager: because these Water Dogg^ naturally are ever most laden with hai^ on the
hinder parts; nature as it were laboring to defend that part most, which is
continually to be employed in the most extremity, and because the hind^ parts
are ever deeper in the water the the fore pa^ts, therefore nature has given
them the greatest armor of hair to defend the wette and colduesse; yet this
defense in the Summer time by the violence of the heat of the Sun, and the
greatness of the Dogs labor is very no^o ^e and troublesome, and not only
makes him sooner to faint and give over his sport, but also makes him by his
ouerheating, more subject to take the Maungie.

And so likewise in matter of wager, it is a very heavy burden to the Dog,
and makes him to swim less nimbly and slower, besides the former offenses
before receited; But for the cutting or shauing of a Dog all quite over, even
from the Foot to the Nostrill that I utterly dislike, for it not only takes
from him the general benifits which Nature has lent him, but also brings such
a tenderness and chillness over all his body, that the water in the end will
grow yrksome unto him; for how soever men may argue that keeping any creature
cold, will make it the better endure cold, yet we find by true experience
both in these and diverse other such like things, that when Nature is thus
continually kept at her uttermost ability of indurance, when any little drope
more is added to that extremity, presently she faints, and grows distempered,
whereas keep Nature in her full strength and she will very hardly be
conquered, and hence it does come that you shall see an ordinary land Spaniell,
being lustily and well kept, will tire twenty of these over shaven Curres in
the could water: whereas let them have the rights Nature has bestowed upon
them, and the water is as familliar unto them as the Land any way can be^
therefore to conclude this point, I would have the skillful Fowler, if he keep
his Water-Dogge only for his use of Fowling as to attend his Nets. Limerods,
Fowling-Piece or such like, which is only for the most part apropriate to the
Winter season, then not to shave his Dog at all, for he shall find in the
sharp frost and snow, when the Air shall frize the drops of water faster on
the hair the the Dog can cast them off; that the uttermost benefit that
Nature has granted, is no more but sufficient, and the careful Master should
rather seek to increase then deminish them.

Now for the manner of trayning or His trayning.
bringing up of his Water Dog, it is to be understood that you cannot begin
too early with him, that is to say even when you first weane him, and teach him
to lap, for even then you shall begin to teach him obedience, which is the
maine thing that includes all the lessons which he shall learn, for being
made to obey your will, he is serviceable for any purpose you shall employ him
in, as one the contrary part, wanting due obedience he is good for nothing at
all but to syoyle the work you shall labor to effect; and therefore (as I
said) so soon as it is able to lap, you shall teach it to coutch and lie
close, not daring to stir or move from that posture in which you put it,
without your especial license, cherrishing it ever when it does your will and
correcting it when it does the contrary, and always observing this maxim in
the first teaching of him, that you never let you Dog eat or taste any meat
but when he does something to deserve it, that custom may make it know, food
is a thing which comes not by chance, or the bounty of your hand, but for
reward or merit when he does your commandment, and this will not only make
him willing to learn, but apt to remember and retain what he learneth, and
diligently to perform your pleasure without stick or amazement, the
carracters of your commands, being so dee^ely Imprinted in his knowledge: and
to this end you must have no more teachers no more feeders, cherrishers, or
correcters but one, for multiplicity breeds confusion, and to teach diverse
ways is to teach no way well: also you must be very constant to the words of
directions by which you teach, choosing such as are the most signifficant for
your purpose, and fittest for the action you would have the Dog do, and by
no means alter that word which you first use, though you use a word of the
same signification: for you must understand the Dog takes notice of the sound
and not of the English, and therefore the least variation puts him into
amazement, and is a language he understands not; as thus for example: I^ when
you teach your Whelpe first to Coutch, you use the word ( Coutch) (...) after
you use the word ( Down) and not Coutch, it will put the Dog into amazement
and he will not know what to do: And how ever some hold of opinion it is good
to use all sorts of words, yet it is not so, for the ouerloading of the Dogs
memory with many words for one and the same lesson, is the first thing that
breeds forgetfulness, and fills the Dog full of by-thoughts and doubtfullnesse:
when you have the Dog thus acquainted with the word which is due to the
instruction of his lesson, you must then teach him to know the word of
reprehension or correction, for no lesson can be taught without a fault, and
no fault ought to escape at the best without chiding; and in this word also you
must be as constant as in the former without variation of sound, or
multiplycity of language, that the Dog may know assuredly when you chide, or
are angry, and not stand amazed between hope and fear, as not knowing whether
you chide or give encourag^ent; and of these words there are diverse; as Will thou villain, Ha Rasball: and such like, which at first should not be used
without a Ierke or small stripe, to make him know that it is a word of wrath
and anger, neither must such words procceed from you lovingly and gently, but
with passion and and roughness of voice, that the Whelp may even tremble when
he hears you: Now to these words of reprehention you must also join words of
cheerishings, that as the one corrects him for faults committed; so the other
may encourage and comfort him as often as he does your pleasure: and in teaching
these dumb things, correction may better be spared then cheerishing, because
the reward and comfort he finds by doing your will, is the only certain and
sure ground which expounds your meaning unto him, and makes him capeable of
those things you would have him learn; and in these words also, you must be as
constant and certain as in any of the other without variation or change of
sound, allacrity and cheerfulness of spirit, being accompanied either with
food, the spitting in the^ mouth, cheerishing of the hand, or other clawings in
which the Dog takes delight, that he may know by such comforts he has
truly done your will, and be thereby encouraged to do it as often over as you
shall be pleased to command him: And these words of cheerishing are also
diverse; as That's a good boy, Well done, S^ boy, and such like as shall best
agree with your nature and invention.

And to these three you shall add a fourth word, which is no less necessary
then any of the former, being nether altogether instructiue, altogether
correcting, nor altogether cherrishing: but taking as it were a part from them
all, and doing something of them all in one instant and one breath, and this
may be called the word of advice or heed taking, being only to be used when a
Dog is about to do his lesson, and either goes the wrong way to work, or
too rashly, too slowly, or too negligently; or else leaves out some
observation which he should perform in the Lesson, any of which as soon as
you perceive him incline unto, you shall immediately use your word of advice
unto him, which both as a bit shall serve to restrain and stay him, till he
have better thought of what he go^th about, or else as a Spur or Rod, put him
froward with more alacrity of spirit, till he have done his Lesson in such
form as may content you, and these words of advice are as the others, diverse
also: as Hem, Be-wise, Takeheed; or such like, and to these you must be as
constant as to the former, and make election of that you intend to use and no
other, and by all means be exceeding careful not to misapply them, as to
advice when you should correct, cherrish when you should advise, Inst^uct when
you should punish, or punish when you should instruct, any of which is gross
in a teacher and brings the Dog into confusion.

When therefore you have made your whelpe understand these several sounds or
words, as that of Instruct on, Correction, Cherrishing, and Advise, and that
he will couch and lie down at your feet how you please, when you please, and
as long as you please, and that with a single word or a look only, you shall
then proceed and teach him to lead in a line and collor, following you at
your heels in decent and comely order, nether treading upon your heels, or
going before or side by you which shows too much have, nor hanging back or
strayning your Line by the means of too much sloth, but following in decent
and orderly manner without offense either to the Dog or his leader, and this
kind of leading is to make the Whelpe familiar with you, that he may love and
acknowledge you and no man else, in which Lesson when you have made him perfect
by his daily attendance of you, and by goeing into no place without the Dog,
you shall then make him attend you loose, in the same manner as he did in the
Line, without straying or going his length from your heels vn^esse you command
him, which is the most necessary Lesson can be taught a Water-Dog, for he must
by no means be a ranger, but upon especial occasion, as either to beat out
Foul from their covert, or to find stricken Foul when ^hey are lost. When
this general obedience is taught (which is done by obser^ation of his going,
and mooueing him ^y sights or sports which may tempt him ^o stay beyond his
bounds and then to ^orrect his offenses, and to cherrish and reward his
obedience, you fhall then teach him to fetch and carry any thing you shall
throw forth of your hand; and this you shall first begin to teach by the way
of sport or pastime with the Dog, as by taking your glove and shaking it
about his head and lips, and making him catch and snap at it, and to play with
it as a thing in which he delights, and sometimes to hold it in his mouth
and strive to pull it from you, and then casting it a little way from you
suffer him to mussell and worry it on the ground, and then take hold on it
again and take it from him with cherrishing, and thus do till he will take it
from the ground, and hold it in his mouth as it were to tempt you to take it,
then cast it further from you and say Fetch, or Bring Sir, and if he do
bring it you make exceeding much of him and reward him either with Bread, or
Meat, and let him have no food but what he deserves by doing your will in
his Lesson, and thus daily and howrely augment and increase your Lesson, till
you have made your Dog so perfect that he will fetch your Glove unto you
wheresoever you thro^ it: In which if at any time he offer to run away with
your Glove, or to toss it up and down, and play with it without regard to
bring it unto you; then first use your word of advice, which if it do not
prevail, then use your word of correction, but if both fail, then give him
blows, and for that time let him loose his food and find no reward till he
do your pleasure: when by this means you have perfeited him, that he will
fetch your Glove quickly and readily unto you, wheresoever you throw it, and
so truly understand that it is his duty to bring it only unto you, that if
twenty men in the company call him severally, yet he will shunt he n all to
bring it unto you, and lepe up to your bosom to deliver it, you shall then
reward him exceedingly and after train him to fecth whatsoever you shall throw
from you, as Staves or Cudgels, Bags, Nets, Instruments of all kinds, and
indeed, any thing whatso^uer that is portable: then you shall use him to fetch
round cogell stones, and flints, which are troblesome in a Dogs mouth, and
lastly, Iron, Steel, Money, and all kind of metal, which being cold in his
teeth, flippery and ill to take up, a Dog will be loath to fetch, but you
must not desist nor let-him taste food, till he will as familiarly bring and
carry them as any thing else whatsoever: as for the using him to carry, dead,
or live Foul, or Pullen, it is not amiss, because by that means he will not
break or tear in pieces any Foul at all, which fault is intolerable in any
Dog whatsoever, and proceeds from too much greediness, but in the use
thereof let him ever bring the least Foul you can get without hurt, that if
you send him for a Lark, he may bring it without brusing a feather. This
lesson this perfected, you shall then as you walk, drop something behind you
which the Dog may not see, and being gone a little way from it, send the
Dog back to seek it, by saying, Back I have lost, or some such like word,
and if at the first he stand amazed, urge him still and cease not, by poynting
with your finger the way you would have him go, till he do turn back and
find that which you have dropped, which make him take up and bring after you;
then drop it again and go twice as far as you did at the first, and then
send the Dog back to seek it, not leaving til you make him hunt and bring it
you, then cheerish and reward him, and where he fails there chide and punish
him, sometimes with blows, sometimes with want of food, and thus continue to
do till the Dog will hunt the way back in which you went, be it a mile or more
according to your occasion: and herein is to be noted that if you send your
Dog back to fetch any thing, if he return and bring back any thing in his
mouth, though it be not the thing you lost, yet you shall receive it and
cheerish him, but not suffer him to stay, but immediately send him back again,
saying Away again, or I have lost more, and never be satisfied till he bring
the thing you want, for the much toil will be punishment enough for his
mistake, and make him more careful to the sent of any thing about you; but if
at any time he return without any thing in his mouth, then be sure both to
chid and beat him, for his emptiness of mouth shows both sloth and
negligence: when he will thus fetch, carry, and find things being lost, then
you may train him to hunting, beginning first with tame Foul, which by your
own help at diuing and other losses, you may make him with little labor,
take, which incourragement will harten and make him delight in the sport, then
after you may make him use all his own cunning, and without assisting him, let
him either get or loose his pray, observing to give him relief according to
his desert in well hunting, and to punish him with want of reward according to
his sloth or negligence; and thus woonte him till he be full master of his
game, and can find the advantages and losses in enery water, and observing
ever to make him (when he takes his prey) to bring it on shore unto you
without hunting, and that he shall not dare to nyppe or bite it, after once you
shall say Forbear, or It Is dead, or any such like thing whatsoever.

After this you shall train him unto you Piece, in form as was showed in a
former Chapter, making him stalk either step by step behind you and under the
covert of your shadow, till you have shot, or else to couch down and lie
closse where you shall appoint him till you have shot, and then by a shout or
gibb^t to make him come running unto you to do whatsoever you shall appoint
him^ and in this you must observe that the Dog by no means rush forth or
discover himself til you appoint him, for it is the nature of every free
m^ttle Dog, and many of those which come from the b^st reputed teachers, that
as soon as they hear the Piece go off, they will p^esently rush forth and
fly in a^gst the Foul, before you can have leisure to open your lips; but
it is a fault and to be reprehended, for the Piece must not be as a warning to
give the Dog liberty, but as a preparation to make him ready to attend your
commandment: for if you give him this lyberty at your Piece then when you come
amongst your Nets or Lyme rods, as soon as he sees the entangled Foul but to
flutter their wings, he will presently fly in amongst them, and not only
adventure the spoiling, and tearing of your Netts, and disordering your
Limeroddes, but also break them in pieces, and breed you a world of trouble
and vexation, and therefore by all means have him in that true obedience that
he may not dare to take any freedom more then you give him.

There are a world of other lessons which may be taught a Water Dog, but
because they do appertain more to pleasure, or the commendation of the
Teachers Art and the Dogs capacity) then any needful use or commodity, I w^
here (for teadiousnesse sake omit them, assuring every industrious laborer in
this Art, that the rules here already described are sufficient to make a dog
do any thing meet for any man's purpose.

The last use of the Water Dog is in Of the moulting time.
the moulting time, when these wild Foul do cast their feathers and are so
disabled that they cannot fly, but do lurk and hide themselves in the
strength of their best couerts, not daring to peep or look abroad, which
commonly is between Summer and Autumn, in these warmer Countries, at this
time you shall bring your Water Dogs and thrusting them into the couerts, make
them hunt the Foul forth, and bring them into the open waters or great
streams, then having in some narrow creek or straightened place (if it be in the
broad blank waters) pitched up your nets, get with your boats between the
covert and the Foul, and so taking up your dogs withal leisure and
gentleness drive the Foul before you (who of their own natures, will shun your
presence) till you bring them within the compass of the Nets, and then
surrounding them about you may ouerthrow^ multitudes of them together, for
sheep will not drive more easily then these Foul at this time; and though
some may object against this manner of taking both in respect it destroies so
many, as also the unseasonableness both of the Foul it self, and the time of
their sickness, yet if such please to consider the great infinits of these
Foul which cannot decrease and the excellency of the time for feeding and
cramming them, whereby one is made more excellent then twenty; they cannot choose
but both allow it and practice it, for who knows not that any Foul which
preyeth for it self abroad, except it be the Mallard, Teyle, and Plouer, but is
a great deal less sweet and pleasant then the crambde Foul, some tasting of
Fish, some of mudde, and some of grass, and indeed not any in general
either very fat, or very pleasant; whereas these which are thus taken and
fed by hand in the house, and there crambd with food in which they most
delight, as the Lyuers of Beasts and Sheep, Whay, Curddes, Barley, Paste,
scalded Branne, and such like, are both passing fat, exceeding sweet, and of
great price, and therefore to be preferred before all other Foul whatsoever.

CHAP. X.
Of Land-Fowle, and the general taking of them.

HAning now discoursed of Water Foul, and their several kinds according to
their manner of feeding, haunts and shapes. It rests now that we proceed to
the discourse of Land-Fowle, or Birds of the Land having no commercement or
use of the Water more then the washing of their Bylles or particular bathings
for the health of their bodies, and that but seldom or in distinct times and
places, as an Element with which they have the least desire of acquaintance:
And of these Land-Fowle there are more diverse and sundry kinds then of the
Water-Fowle, and indeed such infinits, that since the dissolution and spo^le of
Paradise no man has seen them, no man can name them.

To fly then from an impossible treatise Diversity of Land Foul.
(because every nation has his particular blessing, and none can boast to
enjoy all) I will sort the Land Foul of our Kingdom into three ranks: the
first such as are fit for food, as Pigeons of al kinds, Rookes, Phoasants,
p^dge, Quails, Rayles, Blackebyrds, Fellfares, Sparrowes, and a world of
others.

Secondly, such as are preserved for voice, and are called singing Byrds, as
the Nightingall, Throst^ll, L^nnet, Lark, Bulfinch, Spynke, and diverse of the
same nature, all which are good in the dishe also.

Thirdly and lastly, all such as are for pleasure only, as Hawks of all
kinds, Castrells, Ringtailes, Buzards, Kites, and generally all Birds of
prey, which in truth are useful but for pleasure only; Now each of these
kinds may be drawn into two several kinds, as the greater sort and the lesser
sort, the greater sort of those for food, and the lesser also for food, and so
consequently of the rest in their natures and kinds.

Mow these Land-fowle are to be taken Diversity of takings,
two several ways; that is to say, generally, as when all or many kinds are
taken together and at one instant; and particularly as when one kind is taken
alone by it self after a particular form or man^ and no others mixed amongst
them.

Now for the general way of taking The general way of taking Foul.
these Land Foul where many kinds are taken together, it is either to be done
by day or by night; if by day, then with the great Net which commonly is called
the Crow Net, which either is made o^ The Crow Net to take by day.
double twisted thread or fine whip pack^ thread, and it differs nothing in
length, depth bigness of mashe, manner of laying and ouerturning from the plo^
Net formerly spoken of in the Water ^owle; only if it be larger and the coards
^onger it is not amiss, this Net being before or near unto Barn doors where
Corn is a thrashing, or in any such pla^s where Corn has been winnowed and
the chafe remaining, with which you shall ever observe to ^ouer and hide ^he
Net as soon as it is laid so as it may ^ot be seen, and then as soon as the
flocks of birds come, and are scraping amongst ^he chafe, you lying aloof
off conceald, ^ith the coard in your hand shall soden^y draw it and ouerturne
the Net upon the Birds, by which at one pull you may take many Crows,
Pigeons, Kites, Buzards, and such like ravenous birds; and this Net you may
lay in any stuble field upon ^he Corn lands provided the stuble cover ^he Net
so as it be not perceived, for these kind of ravenous Foul are curious eied
and who will quickly spy any train or inticement that is laid for them; also
if you take notice of their morning and evening haunts, where they use to call
and gather themselves together, to worm and feed upon the greeneswarth, or
else the tylthe which has been but newly turned up, and the^ lay this Net so
as it be not too gro^ perceived, and it is as vailable as in the other places,
so that you be careful of two observations the one to conceal and hide your
Person as in some furrow, behind some artificial bancke, or (...) among the
thick tufts of Sedge, or rushes, ror such like covert, and the other not to be
too rash or hasty in striking, but to stay till you have a full number within
your danger, and then to pull freely suddenly, and quickly, for the least
delib^ration you take after the Net is once ray^d, is the utter loss of the
whole pray^ and as a warning-peice make them fly^ the danger.

If you exercise this general manner of General taking by Night.
taking of Land-Fowle by Night then (...) is to be done diverse ways, according
to the nature and manner of the Country wherein you dwell, or the situation and
fashion of the ground, as whether it b^ champayne and plain, or woody, rou^
and Mountanous.

The first general manner of taking o^ O^ the Low-Bell.
Land-Fowle by night, in Champay^ Countries is with the Lowbell, wh^ exercise
may well be used from the end of October till the end of March following, ^s
thus for example.

After the Night has covered the face of the Earth, (which commonly is about
^eight of the Clock at Night) the Air ^eing mild and the Moon not shining,
you shall take your Low-Bell, which is a Bell of such a reasonable size, as a
man may well carry it in one hand, and haue^ng a deep, hollow, and sad sound,
for ^he more quick and shrill it is, the worse it is, and the more sad and
solemn ^he b^tter: and with this Bell, you shall ^lso have a Net (of a small
mash) at least twenty yards deep, and so broad that it may cover five or six
ordinary Lands or more, according as you have company to carry it, (for the
more ground it co^ers, the more is your sport, and the ^icher the pray that is
taken,) with these ^nstruments you shall go into some stub^le field, either
Wheat, Rye, or Barley, but the Wheat is the best, and he which ^ca rieth the
Bell shall go the foremost and ^oule the Bell as he goes along so ^olemnly as
may be, letting it but now and then knock on both sides, then shall follow the
Net being borne up at eac^ corner, and one each side by sundry persons, then
another man shall carry an ol^ iron Cresset, or some other vessel of stone or
iron in which you shall ha^ good store of cynders or burning coal^ (but not
blazing) and at these you sha^ light bundles of dry Straw, Hay, Stuble,
Linckes, Torches, or any other substain^ that will blaze, and then having
sprea^ and pitched your Net where you think any Game is (having all your
lights blazing) with noyses and poales beat all vp^ that are under the Net, and
then presently as they flicker up, you shall see the^ entangled in the Net, so
as you may take them at your pleasure: as `partri^ Rayles, Larkes, Quails, or
any other small Birds of what kind soever, which lodge upon the ground; which
done you shall suddenly extinguish your lights, and then proceed forward and
lay you^ Net in another place, observing to do^ in all things as has been
before described, for the use of these Instrumen^ are, that the souud of the
Bell makes the Birds to lie closse, so as they da^ not stir or offer to
remove away whilst you are pitching and laying of your Net, for the sound
thereof is ^readfull unto them and makes them ^ye closser and fraster; then the
sud^ennesse of the blazing light (which ^hey can far worse endure then the
^ell) makes them spring up and offer ^o fly away, whilst the Net stays and
intangles them, whereby you may ^ake them at your own will and ple^ure.

And in this sort the Country being ^pt and fit for the pastime, you may ^ake
abundance both of great Birds and likewise of small Birds, which though the
pleasure be a little painful for the time, yet you shall find infinite
^elight therein, for every man shall have ^omething to do, and no man shall
stand ^dle that either has ability of body or spirit.

This taking of Birds with the Low^ell as it is used thus in the corn and
stu^le fields, so it may also be used in any other Champaine place, where
either ^here is growing high fogge or grass, Whynnes, Bratts, Lynge, short and
low Grass, or any other kind of low covert wherein Birds may lodge and hide
themselves; provided that such places have no Trees, or high rough Thorns,
bushes or Brambles, for so you shall entangle and tear your Net in pieces, and
loos^ both your sport and your labor.

Also in this pastime is to be observed, that it must be done with great
silence and secrecy, not any noise being hard but the sound of the ^ell only,
until such time that the Nets be laid and the lights are all blazing, and then
you may vs^ your pleasures, but as soon as the lights are extinguished, then
presently a general silence shall be made as before: and each man shall apply
his several busine^ t^ll the sport be finnished, and so much of the Night
consu^ed as you shall immagine meet to bestow on that Labor, which may be as
long as the Night is dark but no longer, for if the Moon rise, whereby the
Birds may make way for themselves, then they will hardly ly^ till your N^ttes
or other Engines be ready, for the very noise of your feet i^ goeing will be
sufficient to affright them.

There is another way of taking both Of the Tr^mell.
of great and small Foul, by Night i^ Champaine Countries, and that is with
the Tramell, or long Tramell Net, being much like unto that Net which is
formerly described for the Lowbell, both in shape, mashe, and all other
proportions, yet if you please it may be somewhat longer but not much broader,
because then you shall be forced to run upon it and endanger the breaking.

This Net when you come into the place where the haunt of Birds are, which
rest upon the earth (being such as are before named) you shall then spread it
upon the ground, and let the nether or or furthest end thereof (being plummed
with small plummets of lead) lie loose on the ground and then bearing up the
former end, by the strength of men at the two for most ends only, traile it
a^ong the ground, not suffering that end which is borne up to come near the
ground by a full yard or more.

Then on each side the Net shall be carried great blazing lights of fire,
such as were formerly spoken of, and by the ^ightes others with long Poles to
beat ^p the Birds as they go, and as they rise under the Netts so to take
them; and in this sort you may go over a whole corn Field, or any other
Champaine ground where the haunts of Birds are, till you have compassed every
part thereof. And this will most assuredly afford you great store, both of
pleasure and profit, according as the haunts of the Birds are, for if there be
plenty you shall take plenty, if their be few, yet of those few you shall have
your share.

Next to the Tramell I think meet to Of Batfowling.
proceed to Batte-fowling, which is likewise a nighty taking of all sorts of
great and small Birds which rest not on the earth, but on Shrubbes, tall
Bushes, Hathorne trees, and other trees, and may fitly and most conveniently be
used in all Woody, rough, and Bushy Countries, but not in the Champaine.

For the manner of Bat-fowling it may be used either with Nets, or without
Nets: If you use it without Nets (which indeed is the most common of the
two) you shall then proceed in this manner. First, there shall be one to carry
the Cresset of fire (as was showed for the Lowbell) then a certain number as
two, three, or four (according to the greatness of your company) and these
shall have poales bound with dry round wispes of hay, straw, or such like
stuff, or else bound with pieces of Linkes, or Hurdes dipped in Pitch, Rosen,
Grease, or any such like matter that will blaze.

Then another company shall be armed with long poales, very rough and bushy at
the upper ends, of which the Willow, Byrche, or long Hazell are best, but
indeed acording as the Country will afford so you must be content to take.

Thus being prepared and coming into the Bushy, or rough ground where the
haunts of Birds are, you shall then first kindle some of your fires as half,
or a third part, according as your provision is, and then with your other bushy
and rough poales you shall beat the Bushes, Trees and haunts of the Birds, to
enforce them to rise, which done you shall see the Birds which are raised, to
fly and play about the lights and flames of the fire, for ^t is their nature
through their amazedness, and affright at the strangenes of the lightt and the
extreme darkness ^ound about it, not to depart from it, but ^s it were almost
to scorch their wings in the same; so that those which have the rough bushye
poales, may (at their pleasures) beat them down with the same, and so take
the^. Thus you may spendas much of the night, as is dark for longer is not
convenient; and doubtless you shall find much pastime, and take great store
of birds, and in this you shall observe all the observations formerly treated
of in the Lowbell; especially, that of silence, until your lights be kindled,
but then you may use your pleasure, for the noise and the light when they are
heard and seen a far of, they make the birds sit the faster and surer.

The birds which are commonly taken by this labor or exercise, are for the
most part, the Rookes, Ringdoues, Blackebirdes Throstles Feldyfares, Linnets,
Bulsinches; and all other Birds whatsoever that perch or sit upon small
boughs or bushes.

This exercise as it may be used in these Of the Sparrow Net.
rough, woody and bushie places, so it may also be used along quickset
hedges, or any other hedges or places where there is any shelter for Birds to
perch in.

Next to these general takings of birds in the dark of night, either in
Champaine or Woody grounds, we may annexe and place the taking of Byrds with
the Sparrow net, which is an exercise to be used after Sunne-set in the
evening and before Sunne-rise in the morning, which is either after birds go
to their roust, or before they stir in the morniug.

The Engine or Sparrow-nette which is to be made for this purpose, must carry
this fashion or proportion.

First, you must have a long poale of the bigness or quantity of a handsome
Hawks poale, and at the upper end thereof must be fastened strongly, either
with one, two or more grains, a small square cross wood like unto the head of
an ordinary Hayrake, but of a much larger length and size and of a little
longer square, according to the fashion or proportion of this figure following.

The form and manner of the first Crosse-staffe.


Then you shall make another staff in all proportions like unto this, but not
above a third part in length at the uttermost this shorter Crosse-Staffe you
shall join to the longer, with a strong small Coard so loosely that at your
pleasure it may fall two and froe from the longer Crosse-Staffe, and when both
the Crosse-Staues meet together, that then they may be both of one equal
length and height, and join even and just together without any difference; for
otherwise they will be out of order, and that which you seek to take will
escape away by means of such disorder, but being just and even, the proportion
will show you this Figure following.

The form and manner of the second Crosse-staffe.


These two Crosse-staues being thus joined together even and fit to meet
together, you shall then both to the one and to the other, fix a large and
wide Purse-net having that liberty at the top that the Crosse-staues may fall
and part the one from the other a pretty distance and the lower end of the
Net shall be strait and narrow, and fastened fast to the same hole in the
longer Cross staff, to which the shorter Crosse-staffe was before fastened,
then shall you have twosmale coards or lines, which with knots shall be fastened
to each end of the shorter Crossestasse passing through the two holes, and so
through the holes of the longer Crossstaffe, through which they may go and
come at your pleasure, and then shall the other two ends of the wards be tied
on a knot together, at such an even distance that the shorter staff may fall at
your plea sure from the longer as far as you think meet, or the widenes of
the Net will suffer it, and then another single ward being made fast to that
last knot of the to cords (which single ward you shall ever carry in your right
hand) with it you shall at your pleasure draw the Cross staves close together,
and close up the Net as you shall find occasion, and also with it you shall
make the staves and Net fly open and widden as the place shall require where
you are to set it; for you must have great regard in the using of this Engine
ever to place it close, for if you leave any part open either by too much
slacknesse, or the whole haunte not covered by too much straightness, the
Birds will quickly find it, and so escape and get away before you can come to
your purpose: But every thing being made handsome and fit, and the Lines yare
and ready to pass too and froe with ease and gentelnesse, then will the whole
and intyre Engine, carry the fashion and proportion of this figure which here
follows.

The form and manner of the Sparrow-Net.


Now for the use of this Sparrow-Net, is (as was before said) to be used late
in the Evening, or early in the Morning, by seting it against the Eues of
thatcht Houses or other houses, or against the eaues of Stackes, Houeles
Barnes, Stables, and other Outhouses, or against the eaues of Doue-coates, and
being set close against them to knock and thrust the Crosse-staues close
against the same, making such a noise as may enforce the Birds to fly out of
their holes and haunts into the Net, and then presently to draw the long
single Line and shut up the Crosse-staues close, and then to take out the Birds
so taken, and in this manner you may in an Enening, or else in a Morning, go
over all your Houses, Barnes or Stacks, where are any haunts of Birds and take
so many as you please. The Birds which are generally taken with this Engine,
are Sparrowes, Robins, Wrens, Starlings, extrauagant Pydgio^ that lie out of
the Doue-Coate, or any other Foul, or vermin which passet^ in or out, at any
one certain hole o^ passage.

The chief benefit of it is for the mewing of Hauks, or geting into lust and
strength, sick and weak Hawks, for with this Engine you may Evening, and
Morning take so many Birds as you please, and no more: and so give them warm
to your Hawk, which is the greatest nourishment that can be, and both raises
a Hawk soon, and makes her mew fast, because they are as it were taken out of
their own nest, and from their own liberty and freedom of feeding, whereas
Birds that are taken long before they are used, and so preserned day after day
for these uses, they mourn and fall away, growing lean, unsavory, and
unwholesome, and the Hawks fedd and nourisht therewith, prosper but little
better then with ordinary Dogs flesh, or other flesh that is lest nourishing.
And thus much for Land-Fowle and the general taking of them, as well by day as
by night; Evening, or Morning.

CHAP. XI.
The particular taking of some particular Birds by Nets, and first of the
Day-Nette.

Having spoken generally of Land Foul of Birds, and of the most general ways
of taking the same, either by Day, Night, Morning or Evening, it is meet more
that we proceed to such particular ways of taking them as is most of use, both
with our Fowlers in this Land, as also with others in other Nations, and being
most agreeable with Art, and Reason, without which hardly shall any man bring
his work or endeavors to any good purpose.

It is meet then, first that we begin with they Da -Net, whose use are
especially for the taking of Larkes, Bunting^ Merlins, Hobbyes, or any Bird
that plays in the Air, or will stoop either to stale, prey, or gigge,
glass or the like.

The time of the year for these Nets, Time of the year and season.
is from August till November, and the ^hower or time a day, very early in the
Morning, as a little before Sun rise so as your Netts may be laid, and all
your Engines and implements fit and in readiness to begin your labor, with
the first ^eepe of the Sun, wherein is to be no^ed that the pleasanter and
brighter the Morning is, and the fayerer and earlier that the Sun shines,
and the milder ^emper the Air is in, the fitter the sea^on is for this
exercise, and the longer and better your sport will continue,

For the place, it would be ever in the The place.
most Champayne and plain Coun^ryes, either on the short Barley Stubles, the
Lands) lying large and plain, on ^uen and smooth green lays, or on le^ill
and slat Meddowes, for it is to be vn^erstood, that the place which is to be
^osen for this exercise, must be so plain and even that the Nets both lying
and ^lling over, may coutch so close and ^me to the ground, that the shortest
Grass or Stubble appearing through the same, the Net may lie as it were
hide^ and unperceived by the Birds which shall play over the same, as also
there must be no hollownesse, or separation betwixt the Earth, and any part of
the verdge of the Net, least the Birds which are sticken, creep and flicker
out of the same, (as they will quickly do) upon the least advantage; and this
place must (...) be chosen near or adjoining to an^ Town, or common course
and meetin^ of many people, (for there these wanto^ fearful Birds seldom
haunte) but (...) remote and silent places, as in valles (...) sikes, at the
foot of hills or mountain in low Meddowes, or other hight grounds, being a
good way distant from villages, yet having ever some Co^ fields near bordering
upon them; so there the Lark sings merriest, and is (...) test to strike and
be Inticst with any Sta^ whatsoever.

Now the next thing to be observe The fashion of the Nets and other Engines.
is the manner and fashion of these Ne^ which we call Day-nettes (because the^
are of use but in the day only) and (...) all the other engines belonging unto
(...) same, and without which the work can in no wise be made perfect.

First then for the Nets, you shall understand that they are to be made either
of very fine small packthred, or else of very strong and big Houswifes third,
the mash small, and not above half an inch square each way^, and the knots
surely knit without slipping, the length would be three fadome (or little
less,) and the debth or breadth, would be one ^sadome and no more, it carries
the fashion of the Crow-Nette, and must be verdgd about (after the same
manner,) with very strong small Coard, and the two ends extended upon two small
long poales, (suitable to the breadth of the Net,) in such manner as has been
^hewed before in the Net for the take^ng of Plouers, and other Foul of that
Nature, with four stakes, tail strings, and draw in lines as has been
before ^escribed, only whereas that was but one ^ngle Net and no more, here
must be ^wo, of one length, one breadth, and one ^ashion; without any change or
altera^ion, these Nets must be laid opposite ^ne to another, yet so close and
even together, that when they are drawn and pulled over, the sides and edges may
(...) and only touch one another; but be^ opened and cast asunder, then the
full length and breadth of both the Nets, of plain ground must be discovered
between them.

These Nets being thus stakt do^ with strong stakes, very stiffly upon their
lines, so as with any nimble twich, you may cast them two and fro at your
pleasure, you shall then to the upper ends of the foremost staves fasten your
hand li^ or drawing Coards, which would be (...) the least a dozen fadome
long, and (...) extending them of such a reason^ straightness, as with any
small aditi^ of strength, they may raise up the Net^ and cast them over, stake
down (...) there end of the single drawing Line, a^most a fadome beyond the
seat when your self must sit to pull, for you mu^ understand that these
drawing Lines (...) not double above two fadome or li^ more, and all the rest
single as you (...) better perceive by the figure, herea^ demonstrated.

When your Nets are thus. laid, y^ shall some twenty or thirty paces beyond Of
the Gigges.
your Netts, and as much on this side, place your Gygges, or playing wantons;
being fastened to the tops of long poales, and turned into the wind, so as
they may play and make a noise therein, and these Giggs are certain toys made
of long Goose feathers in the manner of shettlecocks and with little small
turnells of wood ruuning in broad and flat Swan quilles made round like a small
hoope, and so with longer strings fastened to the Poale will with any small
wind or air whatsoever, twirle and flicker in the air after such a wanton
manner, that the Byrds will come in great flocks to wonder and play about the
same; the more perfect shape whereof you shall see described in the figure
following, for the better help of your memory and understanding in this
business.

After the placing of your Giggs you Of the Stale.
shall then place your Stale, which is a little small stake of wood to prick
down fast in the earth, having in it a morteise hole, in which a long, small,
slender pice of wood of about two soote long is so ^stned that it may move up
and down at pleasure, and to this longer stick you shall fasten a small line,
which running through a hole in the stake aforesaid and so coming up, to the
place where you sit, you may by drawing the line up and down unto you (with
your right hand) raise and mount the longer stick from the ground, as often as
you shall find occasion.

Now to this longer stick (before said) you shall fasten a live Lark or Buti^,
(for you must be sure ever to pres^ some alive, for that purpose) or for wa^
of such any other small bird, which the line making to flicker up and down by
your pulling, will entice the Larkes to play about it and swoope so near to
the ground, that drawing your hand yo^ may cover them with your Nets at ple^;
also it will entice Hawks, and (...) other Byrds of prey to stoop and stri^
at the same, so as you may take them (...) you pleasure; with great ease and
deligh^ and for further satisfaction you shall (...) the portrature hereof more
lively des^ bed in the figure following.

There is also another Stale or in^ Of the Looking. glass.
meant for these Birds which is called (...) Looking-glass, and this is a
round stake of wood as big as a man's arm and made very sharp at the nether
end, so as you may thrust and fasten it into the earth at your pleasure. This
stake is made very hollow in the upper part, about five fingers deep at the
least, then into this hollownes is placed a threesquare piece of wood about
twelve Inches long, and each square two Inches broad, lying upon the top of
the stake, and going with a foot into the hollownes, which foot^ must have a
great knob at the top and another at the bottom, with a deep ^endernesse
between, to which slender^esse must be fastened a small packthred, which
running through a hole in the side ^f the stake, must come up to the seat
^here you sit: Now the three square ^iece of wood which lies on the top of
^he stake, must be made of such a true ^oyze and euenesse, and the foot in the
^cket, so round and smooth, that upon the ^ast touch it will twerle and turn
as ^und as any Scopperill, winding the ^ackthrid many times about it which
^eing suddenly drawn, and as suddenly (...) go again, will keep the Engine in
a perpetual round motion, in such sort as you shall see Children, and
Schoole-Boyes do with wherligiggs, made of (...) Nutt, a stick, and an Aple.
This done you shall with glue, or other strong Cement, fasten upon the upper
most ^att squares of the three square piece. almost twenty small pieces of
Looking-Glasses, and paynt all the spare wood between them, of a very bright
red color, which in the continual motion and tourning about will give such a
glorious reflection, the the wanton birds cannot forbear but w^ play about it
with admiration, til they (...) taken, the true shape whereof you shall (...)
more exactly in the next figure. No^ both this and the other stale before spok^
off^re are to be placed in the very midst (...) Center between the two Nets,
and abo^ 2 or 3 foot one distant from an other, (...) that in the falling of
the Nets the Cor^ may by no means touch or anoy the^ neither must they stand
one before or (...) ter another, but in a direct Line one ou^ against the
other, the Glass being (...) continually moving, and the bird (...) often
flickering. When you have thus (...) c^d you Nets, your Giggs, and your sta^
you shall then go to the farther end of your long drawing lines, and stale
lines, and having a little hassock made of Sedg, about a foot or better hie,
you shall place within a yard or little more of the end of the same, and then
sitting down upon the same, lay the maine drawing line (with a strong button of
wood made fast in the same) overthwart your thye, and with your right hand
continually draw the Glasseline, and with your left hand pull the staleline to
show the bird, and then when you perceive the Larkes, or other Birds to play
near and about your nets and Stales, swooping near and to the ground, then
you shall with b^th hands pull the net over, and so cover and take your pray, in
such wise as you shall find accasion, wherein you are to observe that you must
not be too quick or hasty in pulling, and for greedines to strike often at
single birds (especially if you see the weather to be temperate and the birds
apt to play) for so you may loose both much labor and much profit, for you
must take as much pains for one single Byrd, as for half a dozen, but
nevertheless be patient a little while, and when you shall see many birds
playing about your Nets (as with a little sufferance they will almost cover
them over) then you may stricke and be sure to stricke sure and suddenly, and
you shall seldom take under, four, six, eight, nay, sometimes a dozen at a
pull, according to the fruitfulness of the place, and the aptness of the
weather and season but if the wether be ill disposed or blustering, then you
must make a venture of neces^tie and strike at all that comes, whether they be
single or otherwise, and truly for mine own part I have seen at this one
exercise, thirty dozen of Lark^ taken in one Morning, but that has not been
usual: but for ^ght, ten, (...) twelve dozen, it is an ordinary taking.

Now you are to observe that the fi^ Preservation of Stales.
half dozen which you take, you must by no means kill, but keep them alive
for stales, and to that end you must have (...) neat bag of strong linen to
kee^ them in, the rest as you take them yo^ must kill them, by crushing them in
(...) hinder parts of their heads, and so (...) them behind you in a place made
for the purpose, and thus every day you (...) preserve fresh stales and kill
the old, (...) but in any sort be sure by no means to want any, for that would
be a great hindrance to the whole work.

Again you must observe to lay behind the seat you sit upon, all the spare
Instruments and Implements, which you are to use about the whole work, as
spar^ Stakes, Poales, Lines, packthrid, knitting-Pinne and Needle; your Bag
with Stales, a Mallet to knock in your stakes with, and a nimble little Hatchet
either to sharpen or make new Stakes, when they are decayed. Now for the full
proportion, and demonstration of the whole work, be hold this Figure following.



For the better understanding of this Figure, if you please to note the letters
as they stand, you shall find that the Letter --

A. shows the bodies of the maine Nets, and how they ought to be laid. B. the
tail lines, or hinder lines stackt to the Earth. C. the fore lines likewise
stackt to the Earth. D. the knitting-Needle. E. the Bird stale. F. the
Looking-glass Stale. G. the Line that draws the Bird-Stale. H. the Line which
draws the glass-stale I. the drawing double lines of the Nets which pulls them
over. K. the Stakes which stake down the four nether points of the Nets,
and the two tail lines. L. the stakes which stake down the fore Lines. M. the
single Line with the wooden button to pull the Net over with. N. the Stake
which stakes down the single Line, and where the hassock should be, and the
Man sit. O. the Mallet of Wood. P. the Hatchet. Q. the Gigges.
And thus you have the manner and full description of the Day-Netts, with the^
Taking Birds with the Lim^Bush
use and benefit.

I will now proceed to another man ner of taking other small Birds, as Hed^
Sparrowes, Linnets, Bullfinches, and all sor^es of small Birds, which haunt
Hedgges, Bushes, Shrubs, or any covert whatsoever in the open Field, which
Birds are for two uses, namely, either pleasure or food, pleasure because every
one of them naturally, have excellent Field. Notes, and may therefore be kept
in Cages, and nourisht in their own tunes, or else trained to any other Notes,
according to the pleasure of the owner, or else for food, being of pleasant
taste, and exceeding much nourishing, by reason of their Natural heat, and
light disgestion.

These Birds are best to be taken with the great Lime-Bush, or Lime-Tree after
The shape of Bush.
this manner. You shall cut down the main Arm or chief Bough, of any Bushie
Tree, whose branches, (...) twigges, are long, thick, smooth, and straight,
without pricks, knots, or other crooked and deformed roughn^ of which the
Willow-Tree or (...) are the best, and for want of them you may take the great
Sallow, the Poplar, Aspen, or any other of like thickness, and smoothness,
and when you have picked it and trimde it, from all leaves, knots, crooked
branches, Moss, or any other superfluity, making the twigges neat, and
clean, (yet not taking away any of the little Natural budd knots, which grow
thick on every branch) you The ^ner of Lyming.
shall then take of the best Lime, well mixed and wrought together, either with
Hogges-grease, Goose-grease, or Capons-grease, (but the Goose or Capons is the
best) and being warmed a little, you shall with the same, Lime every twigge and
branch upon the Tree, from the very top and upper end of every twigge, down
(within four fingers or three about) to the bottom. As for the body and main
branches of this Tree, (from whence the smaller twigges do a^ise) those you
shall not touch with any Lime at all.

Now in the Lyming of this Tree, you Observation in Liming.
shall observe not (by any means) to ^able your Lime on too thick, wher^y it
may be too much apparent, for the birds will be apt to find fauit (...), and
then you shall not by any in^ment train them to your Bush, when fore make suer
to spread you Lime ^o thin as may be, even so as you may (...) or nothing
change the color of (...) natural twigges, which may with gre^ ease be done
by working one twigge wi^ another, and one branch with another, and by making
those which have too little Lime, to take it away from tho^ which have too
much, till each have ^qually alike; and yet in this manner o^ Liming, you are
to observe that not any twigge want his sufficient proporti^ of Lime, or have
any part left bare and untouched (which ought to be touch^) but that all be
truly and arteficially d^cribed; for as too much may hind^ the coming of the
Birds, so too li^ will want strength to take them, wh^ they do come.

When your Bush is thus prepared, (...) The use of the Bushe.
Limed, you shall then carry it forth (...) the Field, (for it is intended that
(...) Tree ought not in any wise to be abo^ a man's usual and reasonable
burden, and finding where the haunts of the small Birds are, which in the
Springtime commonly is about quickset hedgges, or dead hedges, near unto
Towns ends, back-yeards, old houses, or any other covert and habitation where
people resort. In the Summer and Harvest, in Groves, Bushies, white-thorne
Trees, and quickset-hedges near Corn fields, fruit trees, Vinyards,
Flax-lands, Hemp-lands Rape-lands or the like, and in the dead of Winter about
Houses, houells, Barnes, Stacks or any place where either Corn, seeds or any
chafe or gabling is scattered, (for it is to be intended that this use of the
Bush will continue the whole year through) you shall then as near as you can
to any of these haunts, place your Lime-bush, as if it be a hegde, then close
by the hedge, if a Tree then close to the Tree, if a stacke, within a pace or
two of the stacke, and so of the rest, provided always that wheresoever you
pytch down your Bush, you may ever at the foot thereof, or as near as is
possible, ^aue some close Covert where your self may sit concealed, and
vnperceaued of ^he Birds, and in such manner that what^oeuer sound shall
proceed from you, it may still seem to the Birds to co^ from the Bush.

When these things are thus prepared, Of the Byrd call.
and your self placed, you shall then (...) you can (and the Art is easily
learned) with your lips and Tongue begin (...) chirppe like a Sparrow and
to call as they do when the Cock and the Henn^ (...) removed one from
another, then yo^ shall with another note (more whi^ like) call like the
Linnet, or Bull^, (...) your notes as your fancy pl^, yet ever and anon calling
conti^ in one note or other.

Now for as much as this Art is a litt^ How to learn to call Byrds.
hard and curious, and that no words (...) writing can express the true sound
the of, or show the motions, ordering o^ soundes which must proceed from the
Lips, Tongue, and breath, it is mee^ that he which is studious, and would
(...) skillful in this Art, do go into the Field where these Birds do haunt,
and there making their notes, chyrps, an^ whistels, practice as near as he
can (...) counterfeit the same, till he be grow^ to that exquisite perfectnes
therein, the he may perceive the Birds to gath^ bout him where he lies, and
sitting on the branches above him, harken and listen to the sounds he utters,
this when he perceaueth, he may conclude himself an absolute Master in the
Art, and then take upon him to go abroad with the great Lime-Bush, doing in
all points as has been before recyted: But if either nature or accident do
deny you this couning, and that by no means you can frame your Lips or
Tongue to these sounds, (as I have known diverse, that could never in all their
lives learn to whistell, others that could never learn to tune,) then you
shall either mak^ or buy a Byrd-call, of which there are diverse, and very easy
to be framed, some of wood, some of horn, some of Cane, and such like stuff;
the full proportion and making whereof, shall be at large set down hereafter in
a particular Chapter.

With this Call (having learnt artificially The manner of Taking.
how to use it) you shall sit under your Bush and call the Birds unto you, and
as any of them shall light upon your Bush, you shall let them alone and not
^oue till you see them safely entangled, with their own skipping up and down,
and struggling when they find themsel^ ensnared will do better, then any aff^
from you whatsoever, neither shall yo^ stir for a single Bird, one, or two,
(...) stay till many be entangled, for the (...) that are taken will with their
striving (...) fluttering in the Bush, be as good as stales, and make a world
of others repair unto them. Now as soon as you do perceive your Bush to be
pestered, you shall then rise up and take all such as are i^angled, and either
nip them in the heads, or put them alive into a bag at your pleasure, and
according to the purpose for which you intend them; and this ^ercise you may
use from before Su^ rise, till ten of the Clock in the (...) noone, and from
one in the afternoo^ till almost Sunne-sette in the Evening, (...) which space,
I have seen twenty do^ of Birds taken, and sometimes mo^ sometimes less,
according to the seas^ of the weather, (which would be (...) and bright,) or
the fruitfulness of (...) hauntes in which the Birds har^ (...)

There be others which take these (...) Byrds with Lime-twiggs only, (and (...)
with the great Bush) by rising early in ^king (...) ^ith Lime-twigges.
the Morning before the day break, and going to the hauntes, watch when the
Birds go forth to seek their food, (which is ever at the spring of the day)
and then finding that they have forsaken the Hedges, they go and place their
Lime-twiggs all along the Hedges, some vppright, some sloape wise, and some
cross, and there withal of such a convenient thickness, that the Birds can
come no way into the Hedge, but of force they must be entangled: this done they
go into the Corne-Fields, Meadows, or Grounds which are adjoining, and where
the Birds do feed, and there beating them up and scarring them, make them
retire to the Hedges in great flocks and dryfts, into which they are no sooner
entered, but presently they are entangled amongst the Lime-twiges, and so taken
in great abundance,: But this manner of taking small Birds, is not so general
as the former, for it is but for one certain time of the year, as in the
Spring, and fall of the Leaf, and at one certain time of the day, as an hour
before Sun rise, and an hour after, whereas the other is all the year long,
and at all seasons and houre^, so long as the weather is clear and the Sun
shines.

There is yet another way of taking Use of Stales with the Lime-Bush.
these small Birds with the great Limbebushe (before mentioned) and that is if
either you want a call, or have not the true vfe of a call: then you shall
employ the Stale, (of which there are diverse) as thus for instance: when your
Bushe is placed as was before showed, you shall then take a night Batte or two,
being alive, and place them upon the object which is next of all to your Lime
bushe, and in such apparent manner, that no Bird thereabouts but may behold
them, which will no sooner be perceived, but every Bird will come to gaze and
wonder at them; then having no other convenient lighting place but the
Limebushe, they will flock as thick into the same as may be, and so you may
take them at your pleasure.

Now as these night Batts, so the Oule is of like nature, and may be employed
after the same manner; and by reason that she is less stirring and more
melancholy then the Batte, as also of greater quantity, and sooner to be
perceived, she is a better Stale then the Bat.

Now if you have not a live Owl or a live Batte, if you can get but the skins
of either and stop them with woole or flocks, they will serve as well as if
they were alive, and continue (with careful keeping) twenty years and better.
I have seen some that for want of either of these has had an Owl so lively
cut out in wood, and so artificially painted, that it has served him for this
purpose, as well as any live one could do, and he has taken Birds in
wonderderfull great abundance therewith.

CHAP. XII.
Of the taking of Hawks of all kinds, and all Ages.

Having written of the general taking of Land-Fowle of all sorts both great
and small; and also descended to the taking of some particular Birds as has
been before showed; we will now write of the manner of taking of Hawks of all
kinds; especially such as are most frequent in our Kingdom, and with which my
experience has often been familiar, as the Goshawke, and her What Hawks breed
in England.
Tercell, the Sparrowhawke and her Musket, the Me^ne, Hobby, Castrell,
Ringtaile, and the like, all which have their Ayries and breed in this
kingdom, as also the Faulcon-Gentill, Haggard, Passenger, and diverse others,
which though naturally they breed not amongst us, yet by many accidents they
come into the Kingdom wild, and sometimes breaking out of the Mewe turn
wild, so that without some especial Art they are not to be recovered, because
having any long time preyed for themselves, the Luer, voice, and all rules of
obedience are then utterly forgotten.

To begin then with such Hawks as The taking of young Hawks.
breed in our Kingdom, you shall understand that they are to be taken three
several ways, and at three several seasons: that is to say, either from the
Ayery after they be disclosed (and then they be called Eiasse,) or after they
be full summed and begin to forsake their Nest, (and then they be called
Braunchers;) or lastly, after they have preyd for themselves (and then be
called Sore-Hawkes, or Hawks in their S^reage.)

For the taking of the Eiasse Hawke The taking of Eiasse Hawks.
or Hawks, from the Ayerie, which is as soon as they be disclosed, and have
cast off the first Down which covers their feathers, there is but small
difficulty to be used, more then in the finding out of the Ayerie or Nest,
which is soon done by walking up and down in the Woods amongst the tallest
and goodliest Trees How to find the Ayrie.
which grow in the thickest couerts and are furthest from paths, ways or
places where people accustom to frequent, for in such they build and no other,
and if you chance to come where the Ayrie is, you shall know it by the mutings
and slycings of the old hawks; which will not only bedaube the Tree and trences
under the Ayrie, but also the ground and other places; as also, commonly upon
the ground (at the foot of the tree) you shall find much plumage, feathers and
bones of birds scattered, any of which characters when you find, you may then
be well assured that there the ayrie is; so that if you please but to watch
near or about the same, either early in the morning, or at the closing of the
evening you shall see the male Hawke bring in prey for the female Hawke which
sits upon the nest, which when you see, you may then (if you please) when
the female rises to bath or solace her self (which commonly is about hie
noone) clime up into the tree, and look into the nest, and view how many eggs
she sits upon; but in any wise be careful not to touch any of them or give
any affright fright to the old Hawke, but only look upon them and so depart,
(for any gross affright will soon make her to forsake the ayrie.) This done
you must let them rest till the young Hawks be disclosed, which after they are
a week or ten days old you may take them from the nest at your pleasure,
and bear them home, and so bring them up, with war^ meat and live birds till
they be f^ll summed and hard feathered, and after reclaim and man them as you
shall find occasion. These Hawks be called Eiasse, or Fool hawks because
they will doat and be fond of the man as of their natural dambes, following
him up and down, and crying after him for food as often as they see him or be
hungry, yet this is not the best manner, nor the best season for the taking of
young Hawks; for neither can the man feed them so naturally and choicely as
the true dambe can, nor half so well preserve their feather from hurts and
bruises, which by reason of their tenderness and bloudines they are much subject
unto, and a hurt taken on the feathers whilst they are in the blood may disable
The rake^ of (...)
the hawke in flying most part of the year following.

The second season for the taking of young Hawks is when they are Branchers,
that is to say, when they are full summed; hard quill-featherd, and begin to
forsake their Nests and trust to their own wings, skipping from bough ^o
bough, (yet not far from the Nest) and as it were trying their feathers, and
by degrees enabling them to beai^ and carry their bodies, ever and anon
expecting food from the old Hawks, (for as yet these Branchers are not able
to prey for themselves.)

This as soon as you shall perceive, you The manner of placing the Nets.
shall then (being fitted of all such implements, as shall hereafter be
specified) very early in the Morning (as before day) arise and go to the
Ayerie, and there watch the rising of the old Hawks, when they go forth to
fetch their prey; and soon after they are departed, you shall see the young
Hawks also rife from the Nest and fly forth upon the boughs and branches of
the Tree, skipping and fluttering up and down from one arm of the Tree to
another; and h^rein in you shall observe the ways and passages which they take
when they first leap from the Nest, and through which boughs and branches
they go (for their goings out and their commings in are ever certain) and
marking which is the fittest for your purpose, you shall presently clymbe up
into the tree, and having diverse little nets of two foot, or two foot and a
half square, made of strong twisted Housewifes thread, and dyed as near as
you can to the color of the leaves of the tree, that it may give no affright
or dislike to the Hawks; you shall place one about the Nest (half circular)
and leaving one only passage in and out, from and two the Nest, and this Net
shall as it were penthouse over, or cover the Nest above head; yet at least a
foot and half higher then the Nest, and in such secret manner that it may not
be perc^ed, for to lie too close and near the Nest or to open and plain to
be perceived, will quickly scare the Hawks from the Nest, and make frustrate
all your labor.

This Nett shall be a running Nett so What kind of Nets
drawn upon a stroug line, that when any thing shall stricke against it it may
run together like a purse, and so enclose and keep fast the thing taken, and
to that end you shall make fast the strong lines to some knagge or branch of
the tree, that when the hawke or hawks are taken, they may not fall down to
the ground with the nets, but hang fettred in the same; and that in such
strait and little compass that they may not have liberty to beat or bruise
themselves but hang safe without the breaking or hurting of any feather; which
above all things is chiefly to be regarded, for the breaking and brusing of
any of the maine feathers, is such a disabling of the hawke, that either she
will not be able to fly at all, or if (...) do fly, yet through the want of
those hurt feathers she will not be able to make fourth her way with that
natural and true swiftness which otherwise she would do, and where the pray
is too hard in flight for the pursuer, there is not only all labor lost, but
the pleasure deprived and no contentment to be taken in the pastime; besides it
makes the Hawke grow cowardly and fearful, and forces her to turn Tail, by
reason of the knowledge she takes of her own inabillity and weakness;

When you have thus plast your first Net about and over the Nest, you shall
The placeing of the other Nets
then take your second Net of the same size and fashion, and place it
between the most thickest and usual branches, through which the Hawks pass
two and fro, both from and to the Nest, and which before you had principally
marked when the Hawks went first from the Nest, and this Net you shall
place, somewhat more upright then the first, yet as close and secretly, and
having great regard that the Hawks may by no means pass either under or
above it without danger of taking, and it shall also as the first run together
like a purse, when it is stricken into, and be fastened after the same, manner
to the branches, that it may by no means fall to the Ground, but contain and
hold the Hawke till you come to unloose her.

Now if you do perceive that every Observation in taking of Hawks. (...)
Hawke when she comes from the Nest, takes a several way, and that there be
several passages about the Nest, in which they take great delight, you shall
then in every one of those same passages and likely-hoods, place one of these
Nets so cuningly as may be, that they may neither go from the Nest, nor
come to the Nest without the danger of taking of them.

When you have thus placst your Nets What to be done when the Nets are placed.
and made every noose fast and sure from slipping, you shall then with all
speed come down from the tree, (for it is ^tended that this work must be
done withal speed, and before the old hawks return home with their prey to
the nest, for if they shall come home and fi^e you busy about the same, they
will not only find fault thereat, but also en^ce the young Hawks away from
the place, and make you both loose your present labor, and also make you
bestow a great deal more in finding out of their n^we haunts and passages:)
Being descended from the tree, you shall place your self close in some covert,
where neither the old Hawks, nor young Hawks may discern you; and yet so, as
the old Hawks may in no wise return, nor the young Hawks remove any whither
but where you may discern them, and see both their meeting and encounter, and
what prey they bring home to their young ones.

Now as soon as the old Hawke is come in with her prey, (which for the most
part are ever li^ Birds) you shall presently see the young Hawks flock^ about
her, and then will she drive them all before her to the nest (being ever her
self the last) and then as many of them as chance but to touch your Nets,
they are presently entangled, and what scapes in going to the Nest, you shall
be sure to take in the coming from the same again and what you fail of in
the first morning, you may be sure to accomplish in the second or the third.

Now if it happen (at the first coming in of the old Hawke as the young ones
pass to the Nest) that one or two be stricken and taken in your Net, you
shall not presently ascend the tree, and fetch them down, but let them hang
still in the Net till the old Hawke have fed the rest, and is again
departed, and that those young Hawks which escaped, likewise are come again
from the Nest; and if (by reason that the Nets are filled) they then go
free, you presently go up to the tree and fetch down those which are taken,
loosening the Nets, and foulding them about the Hawks so close that they may
by no means flutter and stir any feather about them, but lie still without
moving.

When you are descended and comen How to take H^kes from the Nett^s.
to the ground again you shall then in the g^lest so^t you can, take the (...)
of the nets, without stri^ or ^uffling of their feathers, and presently make
them up, and if you have any Ruster hoods, you shall put them on their heads,
for it will keep them the quieter, and make them less subject to struggle or
hurt themselves.

For the manner and form of Mayling The manner of Mayling Hawks.
of your Hawks, it is thus to be done; you shall take a handkercher, or any
square piece of Linen cloth, Canuas, or the like, and then knit the two ends
of any one side together in such strait and close manner that the Hawke may
only thrust her head through it and no more, and that the pynions of the wings
may rest upon the noosse, and stay the body from going through; then you shall
draw the rest of the handkercher all over the Hawks body, and folding it close
together about her train, wrap it in such sort fast about the body of the
Hawke that she may in no wise stir or move any feather about her; and if
herein you observe to draw out the Hawks legs, so as she may not pull them
up, or gather them closse to her body, it will be more easy for the Hawke, and
you shall carry her with a great deal less danger.

There is another manner of Mayling T^etrussing of Hawks.
of Hawks, and that is to take a soft flat string of leather, (or any other
gentle stuff, which will neither pinch much, nor yet yield much) and this
string you shall put down between the pinion of the wing and the hawks body as
low as you can; and then bringiug it about the outward part of the wing draw
the two ends together, and knit them of a reasonable straitnes, so as the hawke
may by no means move or stir any part of her wing, which do^ne you shall do
like to the other wing, so carry home your hawks, and then gently vnmaile or
untruss them as you shall findoccasion, for the less time your hawke lies
mailde or trnst up, the more wholesome it is for your hawks body, and the
longer she lies maylde or trusst up, the more apter she is to receive disease
or lamenesse.

And herein is also to be understood that this latter kind of Mayling of
hawks (a trussing up of the wings) is nothing near so good as the first
Mayling with the handkercher, nor carries a Hawke so easily nor yet so free
from danger, becanse it not only pincheth the wings and makes the pinions
sore and tender, but also, a little bruseth the feathers, which being but newly
quilled are not come to their full strength and hardness, and if any of them
chance to be in blood (as all Hawks (though of one Ayrie) yet some not at one
instant) then it is great odds but this trussing them either breaks or
bruseth them in their blood, whereby those feathers are made unserviceable, for
all that year following.

There be some that when they take The Seeling of Hawks.
these young Hawks, do neither Mayle them nor Trusse them, but only Seele
them after this manner.

They take a Needle with a square point (which we commonly call a Glouers
Needle) being fine, small and much worn, and put in it a Crymson silk, then
put the Needle between the Hawks eye, and the nether lidde of the eye, and
so draw the silk through it, and then bring it cross over the Hawks head,
and there taking the Needle from the Silk, bring the two ends of the same
over the top of the Hawks head, and so drawing both the nether liddes close
over the eyes, knit them with a fast knott upon the crown of the Hawks head,
and so carry her either in your handkercher, or upon your hand, at your
pleasure.

But this manner of Seeling of hawks Discommodities in Seeling of Hawks.
is both troublesome, painful, and dangerous to the hawke, and except the man
have a steedy hand and a cunning eye that does it, he may not only endammage
the putting out of the Hawks eye with the point of the Needle; but also by any
little over straining of the silk, tear out the skin of the lydde, and
thereby both cause a foul blemish and sometimes blindness as is continually
seen in daily experience.

To help then this discommodity of Help for the discom modities.
Seeling; If you have neither skill to Mayle your Hawke, nor to trusse your
Hawke (rather then you shall Seele her) you shall take a plain Ruffter hood
which some call the first hood) being made of soft and gentle leather, large
and easy for the head, and put it upon her, and so carry the Hawke home.

The next manner of taking of hawks Taking Hawks in their Soreage.
(according to their seasons) is to take them in their sorage, which is indeed
from that time they have preyed for themselves and are masters of their own
strengthes and courages, being able to make a true choice of their prey, and to
conquer it; until the first whole year be fully expired, and that they have
mewed and exchanged either all, or at least, most part of their first feathers,
after which time of the second coat, they are no more called Sore-hawkes, (or
hawks in their soreage) but entermewers, (or hawks of the second Coat) and
they are most easily to be distinguished from the first, for the feathers of
the second coat are a little more palish blew, and not so black as are those
of the first, and every time that she changes, her coat is paler and paler
till she come to be called a white Hawke, which you shall so much the easilier
distinguish, if you observe the differences of her feathers, for no hawk meweth
so entirely but she leaves ever some feather of the former year vnmewed, and
those are so easily to be distinguished one from an other, that any diligent
observation you shall be ever able to know of what year or age your hawke is.
Now to proceed to the manner of taking these hawks in their sorage, or after
they preyed for themselves, you shall (being perfect in the knowledge of the
ayrie for that is ever first to be intended) most diligently mark their
morning and evening going forth to find out their prey, and how and where they
prey, as also the manner of their returning home, and where they take their
stand (that is, on what branches of the tree they do most usually sit) for
hawks are the constantest of all birds to the places whereunto they inure and
wont themselves, neither will as others do sit one while in one place and
another while on an other. Therefore when you are acquainted with their hours of
going out and the places where they sit at their return, you shall then take
advantage of her going out, and when she is absent about her prey, you shall
climb the tree where her stand is and in a strait place through which
necessarily she must pass, you shall take a pair of those Nets, which
Faulkoners commonly do call Vrines, or Vrnes, being not much different in
shape from the nets formerly described for the Branchers only they are much,
larger and more hollow in compass, and indeed are to be bought almost of any
Barbar, or Nettemakers which dwell in the Wood Countries; and they must be of
strong twisted brown thride, and dyed either Blewe or Green, as aforesaid,
with a reasonable large mashe, for that sooner entangleth and holds the
faster.

These Vrines you shall place in every Placing of the Vrines
several passage, and in sundry Trees round the stand which the Hawks vsethso
as she may come no way to the stand without danger of the Nets, into which
if at any time she strik, she is presently taken, and then to be disposed as
was formerly described.

Now because you may not in any wise suffer the Hawke to hang too long in the
Net for fear of bruising and hurting her self, you shall as soon as your
Vrines are placed, take up some secret and unseen place, where you may lie and
watch the coming of the hawk and as soon as you see her strike or be
entangled, presently (with as convenient speed as you can, and not doing any
hurt to your other sport) you shall assend up to the tree, and take down the
hawk and mayle, trusse or hood her as you shall find occasion.

Now if by the uncertainty of the Taking with stales
Hawks coming home, or the opennes and liberty of the passages which these
young Hawks have, you find that this manner of work avails not, you shall
then rise two hours at the least before day, and come as near to the Hawks
stand (or resting place) as you can possibly get (without giving of any
affright or amazement to the young Hawks) and ascending up into such trees as
you see does most face those places where the Hawks sit, and are so plain in
their viewes that they cannot rise without beholding them, and in such trees
amongst the most convenient branches you shall pitch and place your Vrines, and
under the guard of them you shall fix Stales of such Birds, either great or
little, as you see the Hawke daily preyeth upon, and these Stales you tie at
such a convenient liberty, that they may flutter with their wings, and fly a
little up and down about the Net, yet by no means without the guard of the
Nets, nor so as the Hawke may not in any wise come unto them, or offer to
stricke at them without the certain danger of the Nets.

And having thus placst your Nets round about the stand in every convenient
place, you shall then descend and lodge your self in some secret place where
you may lie and watch what issue does follow of your business; Then you shall
see that as soon as the day opens, and the Hawke begins to rouse her self
upon her stand, and to gaze and look about her (as it is the nature and manner
of every Hawke) and has also cast up her casting of plumadge, or feathers
which she had received into her body the day and night before, and is then
sharp, eager, and hungry, as of necessity and likelihood she must needs be.
Then will she no sooner epsy your Stales, but with all speed possible she
will fly unto them, and stricking at them with great eagerness (as her hunger
will compel her) she will presently be entangled in the Neetes, so as you may
take her at your pleasure; and thus in one morning with a little diligence and
temperance, in one morning you may take the whole Ayerie; But if out of too
much rashness and hastiness, or for the covetousness to be Master of one
Hawke you rise up to soon, and show your self, whereby the rest of the
Hawks do take affright or dismay; presently those Hawks untaken will mout
and fly away, and so all the rest of your hope is utterly lost for that day,
and you must begin again and be more ad^ised the next morning.

There be some that for the taking of Taking with Lime diversely.
these Sore-hawkes do use Lime-roddes, or a little small Lime bushe
artificially made of fine twigges fixed so gently into a little socket of wood
made like a handle, that as soon as any thing touches or strikes them they
presently depart from the socket and clappe close to the thing that touches
them, whereby they are entangled, these little bushes are artificially placed
about the stand where the hauk uses to sit, co^passing it so about that the
Hawke cannot come to the same, whether with wings opened or wings close, but
she must of necessity touch the points of the rods, (for more then the
points must not come near the stand, or appear, above it for fear of giving
affright) and then as soon as the points are touched, (leaving the socket) they
clap under the Hawks wings and so entangle her.

As for the Lime-roddes which are to be used single by themselves, they must be
fixed to the nearest branches to the stand, coming sloapewise so near unto
the stand that the Hawke cannot come in, or settle her self upon the same, but
must of force touch some one point or other of them, which no sooner shall be
touched, but presently it must forsake the place where it was fixed and clap
unto the Hawke; which assooue as she feels, and begins to be angry, and
to beat or strugle with her wings, then instantly the rest clap about her, and
altogether entangle her.

And here is i^ to be noted that these Lime-rods must not be only placed in
and about the Stand, or that particular place where the Hawke most usually
sits, but also in and about all passages and places of likelihood through
which the Hawke goes, or flies when she comes to the stand; yet in such
secret and close manner and so sheltered with leaves, and other branches, that
the Hawke may by no means discern or distinguish them from the natural
spraies or twiggs of the tree. And here is further to be noted that these
single Lime-twigs or Limerodds may be of a good size or length, as a foot, or a
foot and a half, and Limed either half or three parts, as occasion shall
serve, yet the smaller and finer that these rods are the better they are, and
do much sooner catch and more safely entangle. But for those that are to be
used Bush-wife in the wooden sockets or handles, containing some a dozen, and
some sixteen rods in a cluster, yet so as one may not touch another; these
must be as small as small may be, as not above six inches at the most, and
limed about four inches and no more, two inches being left clean and vnlymed:
that is to say, half an inche which must stand in the socket; and also an
inche and a half above the Socket, which is preserved for the Man to handle
and touch, when either he puts the Rods into the Socket, or takes them
out of the Socket.

Now for the manner of making of The making of the little Lime bus^e.
this little Lime-Bush with the Socket, it is two ways to be framed, that is
to say, if the Socket be round and thick and of a large compass, whereby it
is to be fixed into the Stand, and nothing but the rods to appear above, then
must all the holes (in which the Lime-Rods must stand) be made above
sloape-wise all of one just height and just depth, and the Rods of one true and
equal length without difference.

But if the Socket must be small and slender whereby it cannot contain above
a hole or two on the top of the Socket, and that it is to be fixed amongst the
branches as a natural branch, or a maine spray of the Tree, then must the
holes be made sloapewise down all the length of the Socket, and in such wise
as you see twiges grow, that is to say not one just oposite to another, but one
in the mid part or middle space between two, as by cutting of any natural
bushie branch whatsoever, you may easily perceive.

And in this case you shall not have your Rods all of one entire length, but
the uppermost must be the shortest, (as about the scantling before mentioned
of six Inches) and then the next longer by so much more as there is difference
between the holes, and so as the tops may meet, and be of an equal
height, the next longer then that, so as it may also meet in an even height
with the first; and so consequently every one longer then other, yet so as none
at the top may be longer or shorter then the first, but all meet of one
equal height and make the Bushe of one entire and even proportion.

Now although this manner of taking Discommodities of taking with lyme.
with Lyme is very safe and certain and may be dove with more ease and less
trouble then any of the former, yet is it nothing so good nor so neat: First,
in respect it fouleth the feathers and gleweth them together, whereby the hawke
is deprived the perfect use of them, for the Bird-lyme (whose cleaving and
sticking nature almost no man is so Ignoraut as not to understand) when it is
gotten upon the feathers, does so stick and felter upon the same, that it is
almost in no wise to be taken away, but does so disable the Hawke, that I have
seen many in mine own experience, that albeit they did try many experiments,
yet could they never make their Hawks (once limed) clean again, till those
feathers were mewed and new came in their place; Secondly it fouleth and
disableth not the ordinary and vselesse feathers (as the plumage on the breast,
or the small feathers on the back, but the maine and principal feathers
belonging to the wings, and without which a Hawke cannot at all move, or
bear her self in the Air.

And lastly it is of such a melting and loose Nature, that albe it touch or
hurt but a feather or two at the first; yet with struggling and striving, or
much rubing and handling of the Lime, or seeking to wash away the Lime with
things not fit for that purpose, it presently spreads farther and farther, so
that where there was but a few feathers infected, presently you shall have the
whole Hawks body, and hardly any feather free from the anoyance of the Lime.

Now in as much as the manner of taking Remedies against Lime.
of Hawks is most common, (because most easy) both among Fowlers, and
Faulconers; and that indeed oulde Hawks are very hard or sildome gotton
without the help of Lime, as well in respect oftheir Natural winge, and skill
to apprehend and find out what they imagine may hurt them, as also in respect
of their vigilance and care to fly and eschew all manner of affrightes, and
shows which shall interpose and happen between them and the places which they
have chosen for their haunts: And because that every man is not a taker of
Hawks, but may and does many times buy his Hawke from the Fowler or other
Land-taker, and that indeed the Fowler or Land-takers, may and do happen very
many times light of excellent principal choice Hawks, both Haggards and
others, that therefore this offense of Lime may neither hinder you of a good
Jewel when it is tendered you. nor abate from the Fowler any part of the just
reward and merrite which is due to his labor, as also that ignorance in this
case may not hinder you of a full years sport, (as many times it does when
this mischance happens) but that you may cleanse and make clean your Hawke;
presently as soon as you see this pollution and foulness, you shall first
observe to take off your Lime-rods with your wette hands, (having for that
purpose ever water in readiness) so gently and easily as may be, not rolling
(as some do) the Lime-rods up and down and so spreading them farther, but
(lifting them upright and putting a white paper between the Lime-rodd and the
feathers) divide them gently without any further anoyance, and between every
feather and another that is touched with the Lime, (as near as you can) put a
little piece of white paper, for this will both keep the other feathers from
further infection, and also suck in the Lime and make it much apter and easier
to be taken away, nor will it let the lime spread any whitt further then it was
at the first applying, then having thus guarded all the rest of the feather,
you may very well mayle up your Hawke (if she be a wild one) or otherwise put
on a Rufter-hood, and so bring her home (but mayling is the better) when you
have brought her home, you shall vnmayle her; and first, take away one paper
(beginning with the principalest feathers) and then having very fine clarified
Capons Grease, or at least Goose-grease, anoint the lymed feather very well
and thick therewith, then take of the finest hour glass sand and scatter it
as thick as you can upon the ointment; which done go to another infected
feather and do as much, and so consequently to as many feathers as you can
well handle at one time, and then having warm water ready, bathe the infected
feathers (thus dressed as aforesaid) in the same, and then gently rubbing and
chafing the Lymed feathers between your fingers, working off the Lyme, which
you shall find will come away in thick little rough roules so fast as you can
wish or desire it. But if it so happen that you cannot come to bathe these
feathers in the warm water, then (having anointed them as aforefaide, and
pounvst on the sand) you shall take a piece of spundge, and dipping it in the
warm water, bath the feathers therewith and then working them between your
fingers you may easily bring away the Lyme as aforesaid, and make your hawk as
clear as she ewas before her taking, observing ever and anon when the Lime
sticks and comes not away so roundly and quickly as you would have it, then
presently to power on more of the sand, and so to continue, till the Hawk^ be
thoroughly cleansed.

Now there is another manner of taking Taking Hawks with the Lantern
of theseyoung Hawks, and indeed no more generally for them then for other
elder hawks of what nature or quallity soever they be, so they take their
stands either on Trees, Rocks, Towers, or any place aloft which is assailable,
and where a man may climb without danger or eminent peril, and especially
this manner of taking is excellent for the regaining of all such Hawks as shall
happen to break out of the Mewe, where having bin long kept and without
familiarity with the man (more then the receiving of their food) they are
becomed almost vterly wild and Haggard again.

And also for all such hawks as shall happen to escape or break away before
they be reclaimed or made to know the man and obey his voice, or for any other
wild hawke as has been before spoken. Any of which chances or mischaunces
The Art how to follow a hawk fled.
when they shall happen unto you, you must first diligently pursue and follow
the Hawke both by inquisition and Art: By inquisition, as by enquiring amongst
Field-keepers, Shepherds, Heardsmen, and the like, if they have seen or heard
of a Hawke, and by Art in taking advantage of the wind and weather, for if
there blow any stiff or loud gale of wind then commonly, a Hawke will fly
down the wind, but if the Air be mild, gentle, and pleasant, then now and
then she will put up into the wind. Also you must have a very diligent eye to
note in your pursuit if you see any Check arise, whether they be Crows,
Pydgions, Ravens, or any other birds, for it is ten to one that there you
shall be sure to find your Hawke.

Now that you may know what a Check What a Check of any Foul
is, you shall understand that whenever you see any flocks or multitudes of
Crows, Pidgions, Ravens or the like, to raise up and gather together in one
place and fly about and about in the same place making a noise, or showing
much rouble and vexation, one while feeing, a another while mounting, sometimes
stoopeing, and sometimes rainging and wheelin and every motion showing either
anger, fear, or amazement, according to the nature of the Foul which are
troubled, then you shall know that such an object is called a check, and that
these Foul (what soever they be) thus troubled are either pursued by some
other Foul of pray that is their enemy, or else have found some affright or
amazement which causes them thus to fly up and down^ and wonder: so that
presently when you perceive any such check you must make into it and behold
the reason thereof; and again as you have an eye and care to respect this
matter of check and the other observations before specefied, so also if your
hauk be a long wingd hawk and altogether traynd up at the River, and that the
time of the year and season is fit for that purpose then you must have a
diligent regard to look down to the valles and lower grounds, especially in
the morning and euenings, and at such times as are fite for pray, and there you
must beat alonge the River side, and about al blanke or standing waters as are
plashes, pittes, quarries, or any other place where either Ducke, Mallard,
Shell-fowle, or Greene-fowle have any haunt, and it is great odds but in some
one of th^se places and at these times and seasons, you shall find your Hawke,
but if it be not a long-wingd Hawke, but a short-wingd Hawke, as a Goshawke,
Tercell or the like, then you shall make your search about Woods, Groves,
plumps of Trees, and such like places where Birds great or little do
resort, as also about men's Houses, Barnes, backe-yardes, Pullenhouses, and
such places where Pullen do resort and use to feed, for Gos^wkes and such
like, especially those which are called Poulterers do ever most frequent those
places, and will ever for the most part take there stands either in high
Trees, or on the topps of unfrequented Houses, or on the top of some other
high stakes, or Houells near adjoining to such places.

Now when by this atificiall search and inquiry you have fonnd your Hawke, you
shall then with all care and diligence watch and pursue her from place to place
till you bring her to the evening or night stand, which will be about the
closing or setting of the Sun, (for it is to be presupposed, that this Hawke
is utterly ramadge and wild, and not to be taken by any Call or Luer:) when
you have therefore brought her to the stand, and see her safely and constantly
settled, which you shall know by the rousing of her self and shaking of her
feathers, as also by her feaking, pruning, and such like delights, which she
will take in her self after she is constantly settled, (for before you shall
see no such motion come from her) then you may be bold to depart and leave
her, for without some extraordinary affright, nothing will move her till the
next morning; then having provided all things, fit for your purpose, both for
clyming unto her, as also for the matter and manner of her taking, you shall
then in the dead of the night, and when it is at the uttermost darkness, (for
no night can be too dark for this purpose) come to the stand and having with
you a dark Lantern (which is that which shows the light at one side, and
by the turning of your hand may be extinguished and wholly dark at your
pleasure) you shall turn the light of the the Lantern just before your face,
and as directly against the hawke as you cau device, to carry it, and so with
as little noise as as you can possible make, you shall clymbe up to the Hawke,
observing ever to carry the Lantern so just before your face, that your Hawke
may in no wise perceive your face, for the least blinke thereof may affright
her, but being well guarded by the light of the candle, and the darkness of
the night, you are safe enough, and may by this means come even to the very
branch, or certain place whereon she sits, unto which as soon as you are
arrived and that the Hawke is within the compass of your reach, you shall then
very (...) artificially steal up your other hand in which the Lantern is
not, and with it take her fast by the legs, thrusting your great singer
between her legs, and your forefinger on the outside of one leg, and your
middle finger and little finger on the outside of the other leg, and so hold
her that she can neither stir nor move; then having a hook or some other
crooked engine at your side whereby to fasten your Lantern, presently clap
the Hawke to the contrary side with one hand and stay the batting of her wings
with the other, and then having your handkerchife or some other linen cloth in
a readiness, presently mayle the Hawke and so bring her down from the stand
and carry her home.

This is a certain and most infallible way for the taking of any of those
wild Hawks before mentioned, yet if in this work you observe to cover your
face with a close hood either, of green or blew color leaving only two
loope holes for your eyes and the rest of your face concealed, your work will
be more easy, and you shall come to your prey with a great deal less
suspicion, for nothing is so affrightfull in this case as the face of the man
only.

And albe the glimmering or light of the candle mixed with the darkness of the
night is a guard sufficient, because the flame of the candle is the only
object which takes up the Hawks eye, yet nevertheless in as much as your
hand may now and then chance sometime to fail in the carriage of the
Lantern, and partly by looking for your right way, and to avoid danger, and
partly to make sure your prey, so that you may neither come too rashly upon
her, nor yet go too far away or wide on either hand, you may now and then
let your Lantern slip from before your face to the hazard and loss of all
your labor, therefore it is most expedient that you have this hood before
spoken of to cover and conceal your face, and then you shall not need to
fear, but your work will prosper and go on according to your wish, and in
the fullness of perfection.

Now there is another wild Hawke Of the old wild Haggard.
(which is of a great deal more price and value then any of these which we
have formerly written of) which will hardly or never be taken with any of
these ways, means, devices, or engines before recited, because she is a Hawke
of more age, circumspection and cunning and that is the Haggard Faulcon gentil,
and now and then (though seldom) the Gerfaulcon or the Gerkin.

These Hawks come into this Land The coming of the wild Haggard.
(or any other of like clymat or temperature) in the beginning of Winter, and
(according to the opinions of the best Faulconers and Fowlers) to come in by
the pursuing of Wild-foule (at that season of the year) from other more colder
Nations, where the waters and rivers are closed up and covered with ice, so as
they can neither find relief nor pleasure, nor any thing to sustain them;
and here commonly they do continue from October to March (if the season of
the year do fall out any thing wet) but after that time they depart again
and will not stay by any means; whence it comes that your skilfullest
Faulconers will not (after March is spent, and sometimes before it be gone) in
any wise let their Haggards fly either at the River or at any other prey (as
the Hearne or the like) for by a very natural instinct and moving of their
own bloods at that time of the year, they are forced upon every toy or
conceit to fly away, nor will turn tail again, till they come into those
colder Regions from which before they departed; where finding the rivers
beginning to open, and all sorts of foul to come in and resort, there she
presently meets with her Tercel, where coopling and ingendring, they bring
forth their ayries together upon the rocks, clyffes, and other high places
bordering near the Sea side.

Now when the Haggard (whether it The haunts of Haggards.
be Tercel or Faulcon) is comed into this Kingdom, you shall understand that
their haunts are ever for the most part both upon great and small rivers which
run through low and lardge leuelled valleies or plains, where there is ever
some dry ground whereon to land her prey when she has taken it, and where all
kind of the middle sort of foul do resort, as Duck, Mallard, Tail, Widgeon,
Shel-foule and Greene-foule; and up and down these rivers she will beat and
fly at an extraordinary high pitch, so that if any foul happen either upon
affright or otherwise to rise up; or if any foul happen to come in unto that
river, th^n be sure one of them is ever her own, for her art and skill is so
great that it is hard for any foul to escape her.

As they do haunt thus upon the rivers and moving streams, so also they will
haunt upon the plashes and blanke waters; in the open seasons, and when they
are not closed and bound up with ice, and also upon pits and quarries where
stone has been dug, and upon small rundles or little narrow and shallow
streams when any Foul use but to frequent and lie upon the same.

Now here is a principal thing to To know the good Hawke from the bad.
be observed, that in searching the haunts of these Haggards, such Haggards as
you shall find to prey upon the great, lardge and strong waters, whether they
be rivers or blanke waters, that you shall account ever those Hawks to be the
best, as in that greatness and strength of conquest to be ever most valiant,
most cunning and nimble and the highest fliers, and such Hawks as shall prey
upon little pits, small plashes, or narrow rundels and small riuellets, that
those are the weaker Hawks, less skillful, and less valiant.

Now when you have either heard of, How to take these Haggards.
or shall by your own especial observation see the coming in of any of these
Hawks and from the knowledge of their own worth and value shall be desirous to
make your self owner and possessor of so gentlemanly and rich a treasure, you
shall first then early in the morning by the spring of day rise up to watch her
haunt, and as near as you can see her manner of preying (not so much for any
thing that is available therein to the taking of the Hawke, as to have a true
knowledge of her worth and excellency) when you have seen her take her prey
and feed, you shall then see her rouse her self and go to her place of
rejoicing, where after she has fea^t and trimmed her self, and pruned some of
her feathers, you shall then watch her unto day stand, which is never very
far from the place where she preyeth, and is most commonly either upon some
dead remoate rail or pale, or some old stake or poale set up for cattle to
rub themselves against in the Summer season, or else upon the withered trunk
or arms of some old, dead and decayed tree; To which stand when you have
watched her, and see her safely and constantly settled; you may then depart away
about any of your other business, for she will not begin to stir (from that
place) till it be toward evening, which commonly is between three and four
of the clock in the after noone; Now about three quarters of an hour, or
half an hour (at the least) before that time you shall come forth again, and
watch her as before unto her evening prey, and so from thence to her night
stand; which commonly will be either upon some medow-stake, mearestone, or else
some of the other things before rehearsed: Now when you have thus found out
both her day stand and her night stand, to which these Hawks are wonderful
constant, you shall then the next morning come to the day stand and having
noted the arm or the branch whereon she most usually sits: you shall mount
up to the place and having very fine small long lyme rods well lymed with the
best lyme, you shall of them make a cradle, that is, you shall crosewise The
Placing of the Cradle.
place your lymerods on the branch or stake on penthouse wise hanging over
another, that when the Hawke comes in with her spread wings to light upon the
stand, that then as she gathers in her wings together, she may so draw in the
lymerods under her wings, and by that means be entangled and taken, and these
lymerods you shall place so yare and nimble to rise and fall about the Hawke,
that upon the least touch of any feather they may presently in an instant
cleave unto her, and one lymerod must depend and by a small string be so
fastened unto another. that when the Hawke touches but one rod, presently in
an instant all the rest may suddenly clap about her.

Now that I stand not more seriously and in larger terms to discribe this
Cradle, the true manner figure and proportion, I hold it a matter half
needless because it is a thing so exceeding frequent amongst all sorts of
Faulconers and Foulers, that hardly one man in ten if he have any skill or
delight that way) but can show you how to perform it, Besides, these things
which consist only in action and not in relation, are so hard to be set down
in words (especially that an ignorant understander may get profit thereby,
multiplicitie of words confounding memory, and scarcity of words wanting
satisfaction) that I had rather refer the diligent learner to a Q^ere amongst
the skillful Foulers, then by an animation of imperfect words, make him do any
thing contrary to art and good order: let it suffice then that this Cradle is
nothing else then a row or circle of lyme-twigges which are fastened one to
another with an entire third, and placed so artificially about the stand that
the Hawke may by no means come to seat her self upon the same, without the
danger of touching some one of them; which one touched, does presently draw all
the rest after it and by that means the Hawke is taken.

When you have thus placed your cradle on the day stand, you shall then go to
the night stand and there do as much, placing your cradle in the same manner
as was before showed; and this must be done during the time that the Hawke is
upon her day Stand, which performed, you shall then go again to the day stand
to see what effect your work has taken and if you find that the Cradle is
either too largewhereby the Hawke comes into her Stand without touching it,
or too low and narrow, that all her feathers are so high above it that any of
them can touch it; then you shall upon her first departure reform all those
errors, and out of the true Judgment of your eye, make it so fite that by no
means possibly she may escape the second time, and then fourthwith having the
true scantling of the first Cradle, make the second (which is that upon the
Night-Stand) suitable and answerable in all points to the former, and so either
in one or the other, you cannot choose but accomplish your purpose, which
as soon as you have attained, you shall fourthwith take the Hawke and draw off
the Lime-rods in such sort as has been before showed, then Mayle her up,
bring her home, cleanse away the Lime, and then man and order her according to
the art of a skillful Faulconer: and so keep^ her either for use or sale, as
you shall find occasion or the necessity of you affairs requires.

There be other Fowlers which use to take these kind of Hawks) which go a
nearer way to work (yet nothing more sure then this, or certain) and that is
they will find out their hauntes, some times by the Check and trouble of foul,
which rising from the water will presently Enewe and turn back again to the
River as not daring to go forward in their passage, or by the coming in of
Foul, and presently seeing them wheel about and turn back again as fast as
wing can bear them, and sometimes by seeing the bald Buzzard, Ringtaile, or
other such like cowardly birds of pr^y, hanging and watching about the Rivers,
for it is the nature of them, as soon as they see the Haggard, to follow, watch
and alloofe to pursue him, and then when the Haggard has taken his prey and
fed thereon at his pleasure, as soon as she forsakes it and is gone away,
presently this cowardly bird ceazeth on the remainder and takes such leauings
as the Haggard had left behind her, so that you cannot have a better guide
unto the haunt of a Haggard then one of these Buzzards, for they will direct
you at a hair to the place of their preying.

Now therefore others which will not take this pains nether, but think it
much to tedious, and therefore they will only desire to inform themselves of
the Hawks stands, and they care for no further, whence it does come that they
wll labor about to search in the most likely places to find out the stands,
and when they come truly to the place indeed and where the stand is, they may
perfectly know it by the Mutings and Slycings of the Hawke, which indeed
differs much from any other Foul whatsoever, and these Mutings or Slyseyngs
will be in great plenty both upon the stand, and also round about the Stand.

Now if it be the day Stand, then you How to know the Day-stand from the
Nightstand.
shall find about it nothing but Mutings, and Slyscing without any mixture of
other matter; But if it be the night Stand, then you shall find lying amongst
the mutings many and diverse castings of feathers, plumage and the like, which
you may know to belong to a Hawke, and no other Foul, by the bigness,
proportion and substance; For if it belong to a Faulcon it will be almost as
big as a reasonable Almond in the shell, fully as long and somewhat more
ronnd, with both the ends alike of equal sharpenes, and for the substance it
will be all feathers and plumadge without any other mixture. Any of these
characters, when you have truly found, and have (...) great circumspection and
^are vie^ed them over and over, and see nothing to oppose and cross your
opinion, then you may assure your self, it is the sta^ of a Hawke.

Now whether it be her Stand for the present time, or were her Stand in so^
late time before, but is now forsak^, you shall know that difference by the
^stings, but if it be a forsaken Stand you shall find no casting, but such as
are dry, old, whithered, and without any substance; but if it be her Stand
for the present time, then shall you find ^stings there of all natures, as
some al^gether dry, some three parts dry, some half dry, and some less; Nay
if (...) make diligent and careful search, you shall find amongst them the
very casting which she cast but that Morning, which being wholly moist, you may
with a small pressing, press moisture out of it all which when you have found
true by a comparison betwixt them and your own experience, you may then assure
your self that you are right, and that this is the right Stand which you looked
for, so that then you shall here place your Cradle, in such sort as has
been formerly discribed unto you, and then going to the Day-stand, you shall
do as much there, and then giving good attention upon your work, you shall
quickly find that the effect will make good your hopes to the uttermost of
your wishes, and the full benefit of all your well taken labors.

Now forasmuch as this Haggard Faulcon Gentill and her Tercell which is the
Male Hawke, are of so much prise and worthy estimation here amongst us, and
that our Land affords them in the seasons before said in a reasonable plenty.
I thought good in this figure following to represent unto your view, the true
shape and Beauty of both these Hawks, the Haggard-Faulcon and the Goshawke.

The form and fashion of the Haggard Faulcon.


The shape and fashion of the Goshawke.


And thus much touching the necessary experience and knowledge for the
artificial taking of Hawks of all kinds, and all ages, which are familiar
with us here in England and do either breed, or come by chance intoour nation.

CHAP. XIII.
How to take diverse sorts of Land-Fowles, and Water-Fowle, with Baytes.

Having spoken thus of the general taking of Land-Fowle of diverse and sundry
natures, as also of the taking of sun dry other kinds of small Birds, great
Birds, Birds of prey, and the like, for all such I have showed the Engines,
Tools, Instruments, and devises which are to be applied in those businesses; I
will now descend to another general way o^ taking diverse kinds of Land-fowle,
and diverse kind of Waterfowle also, without any kind of engine or instrument
at al but only with Battes, and inti^ement of food; on which, (...) soon as
atany tim they shall feed, or taste, presently they shall be sticken senceless^
and sick, so as at your pleasure you may take them, and make your self master
of what prey soever you shall be disposed to spend your time upon, and although
I cannot give any singular commendations of these experyments, so far fourth
as they are applied to the taking of any Foul or Birds which are to be used
for food, because they are poisonous, and astonishing, and so may make the
flesh which is so poluted and infected both dangerous and unwholesome, yet
whenever at any time they are used for the destroying, killing, and consuming
of ravenous and wicked Birds, such as are Ravens, Kites, Buzzards,
Carryon-Crowes and the like, any of which are not only hurtful to flocks and
Foulds, by killing and destroying new yeand Lambs, sick weak sheep and the
like but also are very offenciue to Conny-warrens, Parks and other places of
Chase, by killing in great abundance many young Rabites, pecking out of the
eyes of young Faunes Kydes and the like, then is there no knowledge more
beneficial and excellent, or ought with greater violence to be pursued and
followed in this busy and arteficiall pastime of Fowling, then this manner of
taking and destroying Birds with these baytes and engines of food, which are
so much the more certain and assured and effected with greater ease and less
labor, by as much as the food is fearful and affrightful then the engines,
and that Birds will follow it with less suspicion and amazement, then either
Nets, Limerods, Springes, S^rings, or any other Engine, that carries a greater
show and presents affright in a more large and horrid manner.

To speak then first of the destroying How to destroy Kites Ravens, Buzards,
etc.
of any of these wicked, ravenous and offensive birds; you shall first do
well to observe their hauntes, and the places where they houer most for the
gayning and compassing of their prey; and above all things you shall observe the
times and hours in which they are most sharp and eager for the getting of
their prey, as namely, very early in the morning as soon as they do vnpearch
themselves and range about to get food, as also in the eueniug a little before
Sunset, at which time likewise they rise from their day Stand, and do with as
much painfulness hunt about and range to get food as in the morning; and
especially, if it be at that time of the year, when they have young ones, then
shall you not cast out any bait so fast as they will with greediness ceaze it,
nay, and with that extraordinary eagerness, that they will not many times
stick to strike at it, when you hold it fast within your fingers.

Having thus sorted your time and place couueniently, you shall take a pretty
quantity of Nux-Vomica, and first dissolve it either in wine vinegar, or wine
lees, of which the lees of sweet wines are ever the best; or for want of them
you may either take the lees of claret wine or white, then take the garbage or
e^trailes of any foul or bird whatsoever; as whether it be Chicken, Pullet,
Ducke, Mallard, or any other foul that you have occasion to kill either for
dinner or supper, or for want of such garbage you may take the intrals (which
is the small gutes and other such like reffuse stuff) either of Piges,
Rabites, or any thing that you kill which is of like nature, and these intrals
or garbage you shall all to besmeare and anoint with the confection of
Nux-Vomica, prepared as is before showed, and then cast fourth the garbage into
such places where these ravenous Birds do haunt, and then lodge your self in
some convenient place, where you may watch the bayte thus prepared, and you
shall see that it shall no sooner be ceazd upon, and but a bitte or gobbett or
two deuowred or swallowed down, that then presently whatsoever has so eaten
it, will presently grow dissie and as it were dumb, reeling and tumbling up
and down, until it fall into dead sound, so that you may come and with your
hand gather them up.

There be other Fowlers, which to Other ways to use the former Bayte.
work the destruction of these kind of ravenous Foul, do take little
pretty big pieces of raw lean flesh, as either Beef, Mutton, Veale, or
any other kind of Flesh, and do make little secret holes in the, flesh, then
take little pieces of Nux-Vomica, and put them into the flesh and so close the
holes close together again, and then cast out the bait into such places where
these ravenous Foul resort, and so watching it as soon as the bayte is ceazed
and preyed upon, presently it will work the same effect as was before spoken
of, and you shall take your prey both certainly and quickly, nor need you (if
you please) to take them single, or one by one, but if you please to cast out
many of these baits, you shall take many of them at one stooping, for you
shall fee them so eager and busy striving who first shall seize the first
bayte, that if you cast out twenty hardly will any one of them be found
frustrate, but each will take the full effect, that either your labor or wish
requires.

Now whereas some do use to stake Of fastening Baits to the Ground.
down these baytes, and fasten them so to the Ground that they may not be
taken away, but that the Foul shall be forced to prey upon them in the places
where they lie, that is nothing near so good as to let them lie loofe, and so
as they may trusse them and carry them away at their pleasure, for it is the
nature of these ravenous Creatures to snatch and catch at their preyes, and
ever to trusse it and carry it away with them, which when at any time they
find to be fastened, and that it will not rise and go with them, presently
they begin to doubt, and suspect that some mischief lies hidden therein, and
you shall see them presently forsake it, and then mounting upon their traynes,
fly whueing into the Air, nor will they ever after offer to strike at it or
come near it, for it is ^o be understood that these ravenous Kytes, as they
are fearful and cowardly out of their own natures, so are they likewise
infinitely jealous and suspicious, and apt to catch at any apprehension which
shall be offered, either of fear or danger, and what places soever they
suspect, from them they presently fly, nor can any intisement whatsoever
again draw them within the compass of their former fear, and therefore to
avoyde this suspicion, let ever your Baytes lie loose upon the ground, and so
as they may easily be trust up and borne away by the violence of any stooping.

Now as you use either the intrals (...) Of carrion to be used for baits.
garbage before spoken off, or else these smaller pieces of flesh, (of which we
hau^ already sufficiently entreated) so you may use any kind of Carrion
whatsoever, whether it be Horseflesh, or Dogs-flesh, or any other kind of
flesh made carrion by any mischance whatsoever, and either besmeare and daube
it with this confecttion of Nux-Vomica dissolved as before said, or else stope
the gum as beforesaide into the fleshie parts of the carrion, and
questionles you shall then take of these ravenous creatures in infinite
abundance.

Now if you have a desire to take any Taking of other foul with baits.
other Land-fowle with these baits, as House-doues, Stocke-doues, Rookes,
Chaughes, or any other, then you shall take Wheat, Barley, Fetches, Tares or
other pulsse, and boil them very well with good store of Nux-vomica in
ordinary running water, and when they are almost boiled dry, and as it were
ready to burst, then you shall take it from off the fire, and set it by, and
cover it till it be thoroughly cold, and that the Grain has suckte up and
drunk in all the moisture; which done, take this Grain thus boiled, and in
the several hauntes where any of these kind of Foul frequent, which you
would have taken, scatter and strew it as thick as you can possibly devise,
and be you then well assured of it, that as many of them as shall chance or
happen but to take or eat of the same, presently they shall fall down in a
dead swound, and you shall come and gather them up at your pleasure, for their
dissinesse and drunkenness comes suddenly and swiftly upon them, that they
shall have no time or leisure to slecke away or to hide themselves, but that
you may take and gather them up, and so carry them whether soever you shall be
disposed.

As thus you take these greater kind of Taking of small birds with Baytes.
Land-Fowle, so you may also take all manner of other smaller Land-Fowle, of
what nature or quality soever they be whether of the lesser, middle kind, as
are the Thrushes, Blacke-birds, Fell-fares, Iay^, Starlings, and such like, or
else of the smalest kind of Byrds, as Sparrowes, Robins, Linnets, Bullfinches,
Cordials and a world of such like, if you do but observe to boil in your
water with your Nux-V^mica, the seeds of Graynes in which any of these small
birds do delight, as Hem^sedd, Linseed, Rapeseed, and above all oth^ your
Mustard-seede, for though it be not so pleasant as any of the other seeds, not
yet so apt to intise Byrds to feed upon it, yet when it is thus used and boyld,
it then does take more surer and certain then any of the other seeds
whatsoever, both by reason of the natural sharpness and fume which it
carries, and sends up to the brain to amaze and intosticate it, as also the
strength of the other mixture, which joining with the former natural violence,
does so utterly take away all sense and motion, that not any thing is left to
the poor Bird but a most deadly slumber.

There be other Fowlers which instead Other Baits.
of the Nux-Vomica do only take the lees of wine, (and the sharper and quicker
such lees are, the better they are and the better effect does proceed from
their use,) and in these lees of wines, they do boil any or al of their
graynes, as wheat barley, fetches, or any other pulse, as also any or al of the
seeds formerly rehearsed, and do strew and scatter them in the haunts where
the foul or Birds do usually use to haunt which you would take, and it is
altogether as good and as fully effectual as the Nux-Vomica is, and is a
great deal more neat and more wholesome, and far better then any other, for
not being poisonous or infectit corrupts not the blood, or leaves behind in
the flesh any thing but what a man may with saftie taste, having in it only a
power to amaze and to astonish without any further danger or mischeife, which
on the contrary part to a scripulus conceit, is both offensive and loathsome
as we find in daily experience.

Now in the making of this confection need you to stand too strickly or
seuearely on the boiling of it, for if you have not every thing answerable to
your purpose, if you only steep and infusse your grains or seeds in the lees
of wine, it will be fully as effectual, and without any boiling at all will do
every way as much as can be desired herein, only it must then have a longer
time to stand and infuse, so that the Graynes or seeds may drink in the Lees,
and be as it were ready to burst before you make any certain use of them.

There be other Fowlers which in case Bait made with Hemlocke and Henbanne.
that they can neither get Nux-Vomica nor yet these lees of wine, will instead
(...) them take the juice of Hemlocke and (...) it steep these Grains or
seeds, and then mix with them in that juice a p^tie sprinckling of Henne-bane
seed or Poppie seed, or both if you can c^passe to get them, and having let
it stand in steep two or three days at the least, after draine it out, and
then scatter it amongst the haunts of these Foul or Birds, and as many as
shall taste or feed upon the same, so many will presently be taken with a
frenzy or dizines, that they shall have no power to fly or move, but that
you may take them up at your pleasure and do with them what your fancy best
likes, whether it be to kill them keep them, or to revive them again for
some other intent and purpose.

Now having thus attained to the full Taking of wild foul^with ba^ts.
perfection of all manner of baits for the taking of all sorts of Land-fowle
of what nature or quality soever they be, if then you have a desire likewise to
know the secrets, and how with the like baite^ to take all manner
ofWater-fowle, especially such as at any time do forsake the water, and range
up and down to find some part of their food upon the Land, as for the most
part do your wild Geese, Barnackles, the Gray Plouer, Mallards, Bytters,
Bustards, Curlewes, S^uellers, and a world of others like unto them, then shall
you for the taking of any of these kind of water-Fowle, take the seeds of the
herb called Bellenge, the leaves, roots and all, and having clens'd and
picked them from all filth as clean as is possible, you shall put them into a
vessel full of clear running-water, and there let them lie in steep fully a
day and a night and fomewhat better, then taking the same water in which they
were thus long steept, boil them altogether in the same, till the water be in
a manner all consumed, and the seeds and hea^bes left in a so^ dry then take
it off and let it stand and cool: then having occasion to use it, take as much
thereof as you shall think convenient, and then go to the haunts where any of
these water-sowle use, whether it be upon early Winter come lands, on Meddowes,
banks of Rivers in moist and watery Islands in Fennes as amongst Reeds, Rushes,
Sedge, and other course Stouer, or in any other haunt whatsoever, and there
spread of this bait in d^uers and sundry places, and as many Foul as shall
either taste or feed thereon, so many presently willbe stricken with a drunken
dizinesse, so that they will turn up their heels and lie in a dead trance
for a great while together, without any moving at all.

Now there be other Fowlers, which to this bayte or confection, do add good
store of Bri^stone and boyles it well with the same, and it is very good also,
for Sulphur is of such a sharp and peirceing nature, that if it catch but the
brain of any of these cold weak creatures, it presently suffocates it, and
makes the Foul loose all manner of sense and motion.

Now if after you have taken any of How to recover foul that are entranced.
these Foul, and having them in your own safe keeping, you defire to restore
them to their first health, whether it be against this Bayte last of all
rehearsed, or against any of the other formerly recited through out this whole
work, you shall then take a little quantity of Sallet-Oyle, (according to the
strength ability and bigness of the Foul; so having your Oil and every
thing fit for the purpose, drop it down the throat of the Foul, then
chafe the head well with a little strong Wine Vinegar, and the Foul will
presently recover again, and be as healthful and as able as ever she was.

And thus much for the taking of all manner of Foul whether belonging to the
Water or Land, with Baits and such like astonishing devises.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the taking of Pheasants with Nets, Lyme-bush^ or any other Engine.

Having thus passed over the general taking of Land foul and Landbyrdes, with
some particular use of diverse particular Engines, and have not only showed the
general use of all Nets, Lyme, Engines, and all ^ner of Baits: We will
descend to the more particular taking of some (...) particular Land-fowle, and
which indeed are of more particular renown and estimation, and of greater
price and value then any that have been heretofore spoken of: And of which in
the first rank I will place the Pheasant, as being indeed a Bird of
singular beauty, excellent in the pleasure of her flight, and as rare as any
Bird whatsoever that flies, when she is in the dish, and well cookt by a
skillfull and an ingenious workman.

To speak then of the manner of taking Diverse ways to take Phesants.
the Pheasants, you shall understand that it is to be done three several
ways; that is to say, with Nets, with the Lyme ^ush, or else with other
particular Engines of which there are diverse kinds, and do carry diverse
shapes, according ^o the seasons of the year when they are ^sed, and the
manner of the place in which they must be used as shall be at ^arge delared
hereafter.

For the taking of the Pheasant with The nature of the phesant.
^ettes it is to be done, either generally, ^r particularly: Generally as when
you ^ake the whole Eye of Phesants, that is (...) say, the old, the young, and
altogether, the old Cock, the old Hen, and all their poots as they flecke
and run together in the thick and obscure woods, or particularly when you
take none but the old Phesants, or such young Pheasants as are comed to the
age of coopling and payring, so as you can have no hope with your Nets to
strike at more then one Pheasant or two at the most at one instant or fixed
time, for these kind of Birds are of a melancholy, sad and sullen
disposition, and after once they be coopled and payred together, do no more
keep in flocks, or companies together, but live separated and assunder from
other payres.

When therefore you shall intend to The general taking Phesants with Nets.
put in practice this general way of taking of Pheasants with Nets, which
(as before I said) is to take the whole Eye of Pheasants both young and old,
and altogether without any reservation, you shall then first of all learn^ to
know the hauntes of Pheasantes and their usual and common places of breeding:
otherwise do what you can, your work will be frustrate, and your labor spent
in vain.

The hauntes then wherein Pheasantes Haunts of Phesants.
naturally do abide and breed are not in open and plain Fields, (for their
fears are so great, and their cowardlynesse so much that they dare not live
without covert or shelter) nor yet under the covert of Corn Fields; low
shrubbes or bushes, neither yet in tall old high Woods where every Tree may
fitly be employed for Timber.

But in thick young Coppses well grown and ready for ordinary sail of small
bush wood, Poales and the like, having bin diverse years reserved from the
haunts of Cattle of all kinds, and from the tracing and paths of men's feet:
by reason of which solitariness and safenesse, the Pheasant takes great
delighte herein, and will here above all other places breed and bring forth
her young ones, provided that it be ever thick grown and obscure, for if it
be otherwise thin, plain and passable, she will neither breed nor come
near it, for she accounts the strength of her covert to How to find the Eye
of phesants.
be her only safety.

Now when you have thus found out the hauntes and breeding places of the
Pheasant, then your next care is to find out the Eye or brood of Pheasants,
which you may do sundry ways: as first, by your eye, in searching up and down
those hauntes, and viewing the bushes and trees and other obscure places, where
for the most part they reside, and where you shall see them flecke and run
together in companies and heaps, as it were so many Chickins after the Hen;
or else by rising early in the Morning, or coming late in the Evening, and
observing, how and when the old Cock and Hen calls to the young ones, and
then how the young ones answers back unto them again, and so from that sound
to direct your pathe as near as you can to the place where they meet and
gather together, lying there down so close and secretly, that by no means you
may be discerned; but that you may take a true observation how they meet, and
how they lodge together, that from thence you may take a true knowledge, both
how, where, which way and after what manner to pitch your Nets, and with what
advantage both of wind and weather, for the gaining of you purpose. But if it
so fall out, that either by your own want of knowledge in this kind of
practice, or through any other natural imbecility either in your eye or ear,
that neither of these ways sort with your liking but seem either too tedious
or too difficulty.

Then the most certainest, readiest and Of the ca^ for the Phesant.
easiest way for the finding out of this pleasure, is to have an absolute,
perfect, and natural Pheasant-call, of which you must both by practice, and the
instruction of the most skillful in that Art, not only learn all the several
notes and tunes which the Pheasant uses, but also the several and distinct
applications of them, and the time when, and to what purpose she uses them: as
whether it be to cluck them together when she would brood them; to call them
to food and meat when she has found it, to chide them when they stragle too
far, and to keep them out of danger, or to call them together and to make
them rejoice and wanton about her, and to labor and seek for their own
livings; for any of all which she has a several Note or Tune.

All which when you have learnt perfitly upon your Call (of which Call I shall
speak a great deal more largely, in a particular Chapter hereafter) then you
shall with your Call come into these haunts (before spoken off) at such hours
as are most convenient and sitting for the purpose: as namely, very early in
the morning, at which time they stragle and go abroad to seek out their
food, which commonly is for the most part before the Sun rising, or else at
furthest just with the Suns rising, or else in the evening, somewhat before
the Sun begin to set, at which time they do the like also in straggling
abroad to to seek their food.

Now here is to be understood, that Times to use the Call.
albeit these two particular times of the day, as the earliest of the morning,
and the latest of the evening are the best times of the day for the use of the
Call, and the finding out of the Pheasants whether it b^e by couples, or
otherwise the whole Eye or company; yet neuerthethesse they are not the only
and alone times but you may as well use the Call any time in the forenoone
after the Sun rise, or any time in the afternoon before Sun set, by
altering and exchanging only your note or tune, for as before Sun rise, and
at Sun set, your note is to call them to their food, or to give them
liberty to range; so your notes after Sun rise, and before Sun set, which
are called the forenoone and afternoon notes, must be to clucke them together
and to bring them to brood, as also to chide them for their straggling, and to
put them in fear of some danger ensuing.

As for the notes of rejoicing or playing, they may be used at any time, yet
not so much for the discovery of these young Pheasants, as for the finding out
of the old couples, when they are separated and gone any distance one from
another, whether it be for food, through affright, or any other natural or
casual occasion whatsomener, as every hour happens to these fearful and
cowardly creatures.

Having thus the perfeit use of your The manor of using the Call.
Call, and the observation of the right hours and seasons, being comed to the
hauntes (that is to say into the aforesaid thick Copsies and Underwoods) and
having ranged through the same into the places most likely and best promising
for your purpose, which you shall know by the strength of the vndergrowth, the
obscurenesse, darkness, and solitariness of the place, you shall then lodge
your self so closse as is possible, and then drawing forth your Call, begin
to Call first softly, and in a very low tune or note (lest the Phesants be
lodged too near you, and then a sudden loud note may affright them) but if
nothing reply or call back again to you, then raise your note higher and
higher, till you make your call speak to the uttermost compass: provided that
by no means you ouerstraine it in the lest degree, or make it speak out of
tune, for that were to lose all your labor, and to give the Foul knowledge of
your deceit whereas keeping it in a most true pitch and natural tune, if their
be a Pheasant, (...) all the wood that comes within the compass of the sound
thereof, she (...) presently make answer, and call bac^ again unto you, and
that in your own no^ also, and as loud and shrill in every pr^portion. Now
as soon as you hear this answer or report back again, if you find it come
far, and is but one single voice and no more, then shall you as close and
secretly as you can by degrees steal and creep nearer and nearer unto it,
still ever and anon applying your Call, and you shall find that the Phesant
which answers you, will also come nearrer and nearter unto you, which as soon
as you perceive, you shall then observe that the nearrer and nearrer yon meet,
the lower and lower you make your Call to speak, for so you shall perceive the
Phesant her self to do, and her in all points as near as you can you must
imitate, and thus doing, in the end you shall get sight of the Phesant either
on the ground, or on the perch, that is upon the bows of some small Tree, as
it were prying and seeking where she may find you which as soon as you
perceive you shall then cease from calling a space, and then as secretly and as
speedily as you can, see you spread your Nets in the most conuenientest place
you can find betwixt your self and the Phesant, over the tops of the lowest
shrubbes and bushes making one end of your Net fast to the ground, and
holding the other end by a long line in your hand, by which when any thing
straineth it, you may draw the Net close together or at least into a hollow
con pass, which done you shall call again, and then as soon as you perceive
the Pheasant to come just under your Net, then you shall rise up and show
yourselfe, that by giueing the Pheasant an affright he may offer to mount, and
so be presently taken and entangled within your Net.

Now if it so fall out that upon your Taking of many Phesants together.
first calling you hear many answers and those out of many corners of the
Wood, then shall not you stir at all but constantly keep your place still, by all means i^ticeing them to come unto you, and you not moning to them, and as
you shall hear them by their sounds come nearer and nearer unto you, so shall
you (...) the mean space prepare your Nette^ ready and spread them in such
con^ ent places as you shall think fit rou^ about you, one pair of Nets on
(...) side, and another pair of anoth^ and then lie close and apply your (...)
till all the Pheasants be commed underneath your Nets, and then boldly
discover your self and give the affright to make them mount, which done take
them out of the Netts, and dispose of them at your pleasure; and in this manner
(before discovered) you may take either the single couples of old Pheasants,
if it be after the time of the year of their payring, or else the whole Eye of
Pheasants, according to the time of breed, and the true and proper use of the
season.

Now there is another manner of taking Of the driving of Pheasants.
of these Pheasans with Nets (but it must be only when they are very young)
when they are called pootes, or Pheasant poots and not altogether Pheasants,
and this manner of taking is called dryuing of Pheasants, and it is to be done
after this manner.

First, you shall either by the Art of your eye, still in their haunts,
diligence in search, or else by the cunning of your Call, find out the Eye of
Phesants, be they great or little, and as soon as you have found out any one
of them, you shall then (always taking the wind with you for they will
naturally run down the wind:) Place your Nets ^rosse the little paddes
and ways which you see they have made, and padled in the woods, (for they will
make little tracks almost like sheep trackes) and as near as you can come to
some special haunte of theirs, which you shall know by the bareness of the
ground, mutings and loose feathers which you shall find there, and these Netts
you shall hollow, loose and circular wise, the nether part thereof being
fastened close to the ground, and the upper side lying hollow, loose, and
bending, so that when any thing ru^heth into it. it might fall and entangle
them; which done you shall (taking the advantage of the wind) go where you
had before found the haunte, and there with your Call (if you find the Eye be
scattered abroad and separated one from another) you shall call them together,
and as soon as you find they are all commed in and do begin to cloocke and
peep one to another; then you shall cease from any more calling, and taking an
instrument which some Fowlers do call a Driuer, being made of good str^ white
wandes or Ozyers, such as bask^ makers do use, being set fast in a handle, and
in to or three places twisted about and bound with other wandes, carrying the
form and fashion of those wanddressers which Clothworkers do most commonly
use in the dressing of their Cloth, and not much different from this figure
here following.

The form and fashion of the Driuer.


With this driuer (as soon as you (...) the Pheasants gathered together) you
shall rake and make a gentle noise upon the boughs and Bushes which shall be
round about you, which as soon as the poottes do hear, they will presently
run in a heap together from it as fast as they can a little way, and then
stand and listen, keepeing all as close together as can be (for then they dare
not scatter) and then you shall give another rack or two, at which they will
run again as before, and thus by racking and dashing upon the small trees
and bushes, you shall drive them like so many sheep before you, which way or
whether you please, and if at any time they chance to go that way which you
would not have them, then you shall cross them, and making a noise with
racking, as it were in their faces, they will presently turn and go as you
would have them, for against the noise they dare not come for their lives, and
thus you shall not cease driving them by little and little till you have
brought them altogether in one flock wholly into your Nets, into which they
will run with all eagerness till they be so entangled that not any one can
escape, but will all rest at your mercy to dispose acording to your own
pleasure.

Now in this dryuing of the Pheasant, Observations in dryuing.
there are two things principally to (...) observed, either of which when you
shall happen to fail in may be the utter loss of your whole labor; the first
is secrecy in your concealment, for if you shall lay your self so open that
the birds may perceive you, or behold your face, it will be such a strange
affright unto them that their amazement will make them scatter and run one
from another and hide themselves in holes, and bottom of bushes, where they
will lie and not stir upon any occasion, as long as any day endures, and
therefore you must be very circumspect in any wise (...) to discover your self,
but to follow them so secretly and closely, that they may either not perceive
you at all, or if they do perceive you, yet not so that they may imagine you
do pursue them; which that you may the better do, it shall (...) be amiss for
you if you wear over (...) your face a hood of some green (...) stuff as
suitable as you can to the lea^ of the trees, having only loope-hol^ for your
eyes and nostrills; And al^ bout your head if you wear a wreathe Oaken leaves,
or other leaves, it will be very good, and will take up the eyes of the birds
from greater suspicions, as also if you tryme and hang your garments with
branches and leaves of trees, it will be very auailable and bring your work
to effect sooner and better.

The other observation is time and leisure in the work, for this business
has no greater foe in the world then rashenesse and hastiness, for any thing
that is done to these fearful creatures suddenly or rashely, breeds offense
and amazement, and every amazement is to them an allarum of death, nor will
their fears suffer them to argue or dispute with the object, but the very
first apprehension is sufficient to make them all fly at an instant, nor will
their fears let them stay till every one have beheld the thing which should
suddenly affright and fear them: But if any one of them take a scare, it is a
sufficent warning piece to set all the rest a packing, and therefore you cannot
take too great leisure or care in this business, and when at any time you
shall find any staggering or (as it were) astonishment amongst them, then
presently cease, and lie as still as if that you were dead, till the fear be
passed over and forgotten of them, and that you see they gaze no more about
them, but gathering themselves together do begin to peep and clucke one to
another, and to joy and rejoice amongst themselves; which when you do
perceive, then you may beginneagaine, and fall to your work as you did before,
til it you have brought to that fol period of your desires which your a^es
looked for.

The next way to these already recited Taking Pheasants with the Lymehush.
for the taking of Pheasants, is with the Lyme-bnshe or the Lyme-roddes, in
which business is to be observed all those things which were formerly recited
for the Nets both as touching the nature of the Birds, their hauntes,
fashion of breeding, and the manner of finding of them; only in the use of the
thing (...) self, you are to observe this manner (...) proceeding.

First, whether you deal with Bu^ or single rods, you shall make sure^
tri^ne them with the best and strong^ Lyme that can be got, and provide the
your rods be of a very good syze, as twelve, or ten Inches at the least,
and that they be lymed full out to the midst, but no further, except it be
upon some special occasion, where the Bushes are so deep that you cannot fix
them hansomely, at so shallow and small a proportion; and then in this case you
may lyme your rods fully to three parts at the least.

Now for the fashion of the Lymebushe The fashion of the lyme bushe.
to be used for this purpose, it must not contain above six or eight twigges
at the most, being the top (...) of some young Willowe tree, and the single
or nether end thereof, being almost a shaftment long from the twigges, which
shall be made sharp: so as you may either stick them gently in the ground
(yet so as they may always remove with the least touch whatsoever) or else
prick them into shrubs and little bushes, through which the Pheasants usually
run and trace when they are upon the ground; also if you see any little small
trees whereon the Pheasant uses commonly to (...), if one them, and near to
the branche which she makes her perch, you place two or three of these
bushes, and prick them so, that she can neither spread her wings to light on,
not yet take her wings to fly off witho^ touching some of them, you shall be
sure the Pheasant can hardly or never escape your taking.

When you have thus plast these little The manner to take with the Bush.
bushes, you shall then draw forth your Call, and then begin to call (as
has been formerly declared) but by no means remove from your place, or
discover your self, but ly as close as is possible, and cease not till you
have entist all the Pheasants about you; which you will quickly do if your
call be good, and your Art skillful in the tuning: and you shall see as soon
as they come within the danger of your bushes, presently upon the touch of any
of them, they will in an instant fasten, and when one is lymed, that one will
go very near to lyme all her fellows, for what by h^ own striving and
struggling amongst them, their coming to gaze, and seeking to escape or avoid
like danger some will be smeared by her that was ^ken; some will light on
other bushes, s^ that if there be twenty hardly will any one escape, or if it
hap some one or two do escape by mounting, and so get to the perch, as is the
natural quallity of them, and there sit prying and peeping to see what becomes
of their fellows; then it is ten to one that they are taken with the
Lyme-bushes which you had placed formerly on the perch, and therefore yon must
be sure to have a circumspect, busy, and diligent eye in all places.

Again of the old Pheasants when you Taking old Pheasants.
call, will not come in upon the ground (as it is their nature so to do,
especially in the Winter season, which is the chiefest time for the use of the
Lime-bush) but do mount and come flying from perch to perch, till they come
to that pearche which is next you, ever prying and peeping where they may find
out those which calls: then you shall see, that as soon as they light upon
any of these pearches, where your Lymebushes are placed, persently as soon as
they touch they are taken, and thus not any one, whether old or young shall
escape you.

Now for as much as you cannot ha^ Observations when they are taken.
an Eye in every place, but that whilst you are busy in gathering up one,
anoth^ may flecke away and run into the thickes and hide her self; or whilst
you are gathering up those upon the ground, you may loose the sight of what is
done or taken upon the perch, you shall therefore keep a true record how many
bushes you pricked down, after what manner and in what places, and then having
taken all such Pheasants as you can possibly find, yon shall then gather up
all your Rods again, and make suer that you have your full number, but if
you miss any one of them, then you may be assured that there are some limed
which you have not found out, and therefore that you may recover all such
losses, you shall be suer never to be without an excellent ftaunch Spaniell,
which will lie close at your foot^ without stirring, and this Spaniell must be
an excellent Retriuer, one that will fetch and carry, and that by any means
will not break nor bruise either flesh or feather, but having found his prey
will forthwith bring it unto you and lay it by you, this D^gge as soon as you
shall find that any Pheasants are escaped, you shall thrust into the thickes
and make him hunt and bring you fourth all such Pheasants as shall lie hidden,
till by the true number of your Lime-Bushes you find there is no more stricken
in that place, then you shall go and search all your Pearches, and if you
find any Bushes there missing, you shall then put in your Spaniell and make
him hunt and bring fourth whatsoever was there taken also, till your true and
iuft number of Lime-bushes be made up without the loss of any, for albe some
may object that by reason of the greatness of these Bushes (containing many
brainches in one stalk) that therefore by the wallowing and struggling of the
Bird (and espetially this being a bird of some power and strength) they may be
scattered and lost amongst other Bushes and Brambles, yet let them know that
these Limebushes as soon as they do once touch the more they are strugled
with, the more fast they do entangle and wrappe and catch about cuery feather
that moves and holds the foul so fast from stirring that he is not able to go
or creep through any chyncke, but where he is first overthrown, there he
commonly lies without moving, his own fear daunting him as much or more than
any other vexation or trouble, whereas indeed the single lyme rod lying light
and without (...) cumber (more then the taking away (...) the use of the wings)
they will fleike an^ run away with them sometimes mo^ then a quarter of a
mile, by which mean^ I have seen diverse Pheasants lost, an^ found dead in a
bush a month after, (...) they are so cowardly, that being o^ stricken they
never joy or will ever fee^ food after; now for the proportion and manner of
this Lyme-bush it is contained in this figure.

The form and fashion of the Lyme-bush for Pheasants.


In the selfsame manner as you place ^his Lyme-bush, so you may if you please
place single lyme-roddes also, and not a^one and upon bushes, shrubs, by tracts
and such like places but also upon the ground and in every open place where any
thing must pass from one (...) to another, or from one thick to ano^, and
these Lime-roddes must be pricked sloapewise and cross, shoaring along the
ground, and that not one way only but every way that the Birds (...) ly come,
observing in every place tu^ rows or files of Lime-roddes, the o^ turned
sloapewise one way, the oth^ sloapewise the quite contrary way, that the points
being severed a gre^ distance one from another, and so as Byrd may easily walk
between the^ without touching either, you shall the place a third row
between them all (...) sloape, clean contrary to either of the other
according to the form ofthis Figure. following.

The true manner and form how to place Lime-Rods.


Which being duly observed no Foul can come any way but they must of
necessity be within the danger of touching, and thus you may place according to
the quantity of your ground, as many L^eroddes as you shall think good and as
the place will contain, provided that you do not over charge the ground, or
place them so exceeding thick and apparent that they breed affright and
amazement, for that were to spoil your whole work and to be the utter loss
of your labor, and therefore you must by all means keep a true mediocrity
and set them neither too thick too scarre nor yet too thin to escape, but in
due proportion, as the length of a Rod or somewhat less between Lime-rod
and Lime-rodde. And as you have a care thus to the placing, so you must also
have an especial care to the number and to the true form and proportion in
which they stand, for when you either want of your number and do not take up
what you set down, or if you find that your proportion is in any place broken,
then you may be very well assured that some are touched and fled, which you
have not found, and then you must hunt with your Spaniell (as has been before
declared) and so bring them forth, for every time you look upon your
Lime-Roddes it is not necessary that you take them up or count them, (for that
were toil to no purpose) but only look upon your proportion, and if that
hold perfect then you may be well assured not any thing has commed amongst
them, but if that fail or be disordered, then there has been something
amongst them and something is taken.

Now to make any comparisson between The seasons for the use of Nets or of
Lyme
the use of the Nets, and the use of these Lime-roddes, or to give any
pre-eminence or place more to the one then to the other were needless and to
no purpose, since they are both of equal virtue and goodness, and have indeed
each of them their distinct times and seasons for their several employments,
for you shall here understand that those Lime-Roddes or the use of Lime is
only for the winter season, as from the beginning of November at whichtime
every tree has shed his leaf, and every bird is content to perch upon the
twigs which are the very figures and Emblems of Lime-twigs, until the beginning
of May, at which time on the contrary part every Tree is budded and does begin
to spread and open his leaf, so as all Birds may coutch and hide themselves
under the covert and shadows of the same, and the true use of the Nets are
from the beginning of May when Trees are leaued, till the latter end of October
when every tree does shed and loose his leaf, so there is no time of the
year, more then the very time of ingendring, but may be exercised in this
pleasure, whence what profit may arise I leave to be judged by those which
keep good Houses and such as have good Stomachs.

Now for the substance, fashion or The fashion of the Nets.
proportion of these Nets, they would first be made of the best twyned double
Huswifes thread that can be got, and if it be dyed either green or blew it is
so much the better, the mash would be reasonable square and large, as almost an
inch between knotte and knotte, it would be in length about three fadome at
the least and in breadth seven foot or better, it must be verdgd on each side
with strong, small fine coard, and as it were surfled thereon and the Net
placed not straight, but thick and large, so that at any time it is extended
it may lie com pass wise and hollow, also the two ends shall be verdgd
likewise with small coard, yet that more for strength then for any particular
use or purpose, some do use to make these Nets of a much more lardger size, as
seven fadome or five fadome, but such Nets are combersome and full of
trouble, and hardly to be ruled with one hand, and therefore in case there be
need of any such long Nets, then you may take a couple of the first size
(which was three fadome) and joining them together, or pitching them one close
by another, they will serve fully as well, and rather better then those long
sizd nets, and be both better to pitch, readier to take up, and a great
deal more yare and nimble for any purpose in which you shall employ them. And
thus much for the taking of Pheasants, in general either with theNettes, or
the Lyme-bush.

CHAP. XV.
Of taking of Partridges with Nets, or any other engine, of driving them, or
setting them, and the making of the setting D^gge.

Having spoken of the manner and form of taking of Pheasants, we will now come
to the manner of taking of Partridges, being a bird of no less use, worth and
excellency either for pleasure in her flight, or for food in the dish, then
the Pheasant before spoken of, only the difference holds in the quantity
and not in the quallitie, for the Partridges are birds of a much less size,
of no white less excellency, nor are they much in their nature different in
condition, for these Partridges are naturally cowardly and fearful, also very
simple and foolish and most easy to be deceived or beguiled with any train,
Bayte, Engine, or other device whatsoever, whether it be by intisement of Call,
or Stale, or any other allurement, or else by affright or terror, whence it
comes that albeit this art of taking these Partridges be pleasant, profitable
and necessary, yet it is neither much painful nor much difficult, but may be
attained to in the fulness of all perfection by a man's own and only labor,
judgment and industry, provided that his diligence be always accompanied with
an earnest desire and willingness, and that willingness must by all means
possible never be abandoned of temperance rest and discretion

To speak then generally of the taking 4. Ways to take Partridges
of Partridges, you shall understand that it is to be done four several ways
that is to say, by Nets, by Lime, by Engine, and by the setting Dog, for as
touching the Hawke, which curiosity may make a fifth way for the taking of
them, I will here omit it, as a strain too high for this discourse, and as a
peculiar Art belonging to the Noble faulconer, not the homely and honest plain
Fowler.

For the taking of Partridges with Hauntes of the Partridge.
Nets, it is likewise to be done diverse and sundry ways, according to the
manner of haunts, and the places wherein these birds do inhabit, for you must
understand, that Partridges are not like Pheasants, (in this case) constant to
one place of abiding, but do come into diverse; nay, if they have any small
covert whatsoever, be it so high as a man's hand they will lodge in the same,
and sometimes in the very plain Champaines where they have no shelter
whatsoever, more then the poor short grass.

But to come to the more particu^ and certain haunts of the Partridge, and
indeed where they take most delght and do most constantly abide, you shall
understand that for the most part it is in Corn Fields, whether spacious or
little, and especially during the time that Corn is growing or standing, for
under the covert and shelter of it they meet: engender, breed, and bring
fourth their young ones, now when the Corn is cut down, they do yet not
withstanding still remain in the stubbles, especially in the Wheat stubble (if
there be plen^ thereof) both by reason of the excellency of the grain on
which they love to feed before all other, as also for the hight and largeness
of the stuble, which makes their covert safer and stronger, but when this wheat
stubble is either scantie or of small circute, or when it is too much soyled
and trodden either with men or Cattle, then they forsake it and go either to
the Barley stubbles which albe they yield not so safe covert, nor so sweet
food, yet being fresh, pleasant and not so usually trodden or beaten they do
take great delight therein, and will in the furrows amongst the clottes,
brambles and long grass and fogge, hide and cover both themselves and their
whole Couies or Broodes very sufficiently, although they be very many in
number, (for no Bird brings fourth more then the Partridge) sixteen and
seauenteene being an ordinary brood or Couie, twenty, two and twenty, and
five and twenty many times found, and I have hard speak of thirty and one
and thirty, now after the Winter season comes and that these stubble fields
are either torn up with the Plough, or otherwise over soyled with cattle,
meanure, or the like, then do these Partridges resort into the enclosed
grounds or vpland Meadows and do lodge in the dead grass or fogge, under
hedges, amongst moale hills and under banks or at the roots of trees.

Also you shall find the haunts of Partridges all the year long in small
Copsies or Underwoods, especially if any Corn fields lie bordedring upon the
same, as also in bushie Closses where grow plenty of shrubs and Brambles, or
where there grows Broom, Brakes, Fern, Whinnes, Gorse, Ling, or any covert
great or little whatsoever; provided still that some Corn field be evermore
adjoining to these couerts and quiet places, for otherwise these birds will
take little or no delight and pleasure therein, but rather shun and eschew
them.

Again, in the height of harvest time when every Corn field is full both of
people and cattle, so that these Birds can have no quiet lodging in the same,
then you shall find them in the day time in the Fallow or tilthe fields which
are next adoyning to the Corn fields where they will lie lurking amongst the
great clottes and wild ketlockes; and only in the early mornings, and
likewise late in the euenings, fetch their food from the Corn shocks or
sheaues that are the nearest adjoining.

Thus when you know their haunts, How to find out Partridges
according to the Situation of the Coun^rie, (whether it be Champayne or
wooddie, Mountanous, or plain) and the sea^on of the year, whether Summer or
Winter, your next skill shall be to find them out in their hauntes and how to
know where they lodge, which is to be ^one diversely, for there be some that
will find out the Couyes of Partridge ^y their eyes, as Hare finders do find
Hares, in taking their rainges over the Stuble fields, or other hannts where
they do use, and casting their Eyes on each hand to both sides of the furrow,
will find them out though they be never so close couched together, and this is
a skill which can by no means possibly in the World, be taught by any
demonstration but only by exercise and the goodness of the Eye, which being able
at the first ^linke to distinguish of every object and to know the color of
the Birds from the color of the earth, and how, and in what manner they lodge
and couch together, will in ranging about find them, a good distance before he
comes near them; Nay, I have heard of some that have fonnd Partriges
threescore paces off, by perceiving the Eye of the Partrige only; but that I
hold a cunning more then ordinary and may be rather desired then enjoyed; sure
I am that any reasonable good sight which will apply himself thereunto, and
mark but truly the color of the Partridge, and how (...) differs from the
ground, as also ther^ manner of lodging, whether it be in o^ entire heap or
lump, and in one place, or else in diverse little heaps, as by couples and
payres in diverse places like so many brown clottes of earth, together with
their diversity and change of feather, may easily find out a Couey of
Partridges wheresoever they lie, alb^ he make his raunge a good distance from
them: And so much the rather and better, in as much as he may (when his eye^
has first apprehended them) wal^ nearer and nearer unto them, till (...)
absolutely know whether there be any mistaking in his sight or no: for these
Birds are so dull and slothful, and so unwilling to take to the wing to fly,
except by mere compulsion, that till you be ready to set your foot upon them
they will not stir; provided ever, that you do not at any time stand still
or gaze upon them, but be ever walking or moving; for such gazing or wondering
strickes freare unto them, and then presently they do spring up and are gone.

There be others, that find out these Partridges, by the hantes or places
where they did last couch and lie, which when they have by their ranging found
out, they first look whether the haunt be old or new, which they may know
by the newness or oldenesse of their dung or ordure, by their padlings or
treading, and by the warmth or coldness, for if the haunt be new, the dunge
or ordure will be green and soft, and the white ends will color your fingers:
the padlings and treadings, round about the haunt, will be soft and durty, and
the earth will be new broken and of darker color then the mould round ab^ it,
and being very new indeed the (...) whereon they sat will be warm and the
ground smoth and flat, with some down and small feathers scattered upon it.

But, if the hunt be old and long forsaken, then on the contrary part, the
ordure or durte will be dry and brickle and rather moulder and break in pieces
then cleave to your singers; the padlings or treadings will be roughe, dry,
and hard, and of the same color with the rest of the crust of the earth, and
the very hauut it self whereon the sat will be as cold as any other part of the
earth, without (...) there down or feathers, or any thing elso but what is
dried and backed into the earth, neither will there be any plainness or
smothnesse, but all of like color and roughness; which kind of old haunt^
when it is found out, it is to be neglected for it serves for no other
purpose or charackter then to let you know that there the Partridges have been
a^ such or such a time, as yesterday, the other day, or a week before, for the
less dry, the less clean, and the less^ soyled the haunte is, the longer
time ago it was since the Couy of Partridg^s were there, and the more moist,
the more durty and more troubled it is, the later is the time since they fled
away.

Now if you find the haunte to be new and warm (as aforesaid) then you may
assure your self that the Birds are but newly stolen off from the same, (if
no affright troubled them) and are but fleckt some little way (as a Land or two
off, or peradventure a little less or a little more) therefore then you shall
be very circumspect, and look as carefully as is possible about you, moving
by very leasurable and slow^ degrees, and having a special regard to the
furrows of the Lands, there is no doubt but in a very short space you shall
find the whole Couye out, which as soon as you do, you shall presently wind
of from them, and by no means look toward them, but as if you were
careless by casting your countenance a cleave contrary way, and so fetch a
great and lardge circumference round about them, keeping an ordinary round
march, making your circumference less and less, and casting your eye busilye
and carefully about you, till you h^ discovered the whole Couye, albe they lie
separated in diverse parts (as many times it falls out they do) for your eye
at the first may happen to glance but of a single Partridge (for it is the
nature of the old ones in these cases many times to lie alone and somewhat
removed from the Couye) or of a couple at the most, but then taking your
circumferance or walk about them, there is no one sha^ escape from your
knowledge-

There be others which to find out To take Partridge by the Iuke.
Partridges do go unto the haunts either very earlye in the Morning, or at the
closing up of the Evening, which is called the iuking time, and there do
listen for the calling of the Cock Partridge, which will be very loud and
earnest, then presently after some few calls the Hen will make answer, which
as soon as they hear they listen and follow them til they meet together,
which you shall very well perceive and know by their chattering and reioyceing
one with another which as soon as you hear, then you shall take your rainge
about them, and drawing in by little and little to the place where you heard
them iuke, you shall carefully cast your ^ie about you, especially toward the
Furrows of the lands, and there is no question to be made, but you shall
presently find where the Coouie lies, and after what manner, so that after you
may proceed to the business of taking them according as your delight and
pleasure shall lead you.

Now the last way for finding out of To take Partridges with the Call.
these Partridges (and which of all other is both the best, safest, most easy,
and most artificial) is with the call (of whose sharp proportion, and manner
of making I shall speak more largely hereafter in a particular Chapter) with
this call having learnt the true and natural notes of the Partridge and being
able to tune every several note in their right and proper key, and that you
know the due times and seasons for every note, and can fitly accommodate them
to the haunts and places wherein they are to be used, after the same manner as
has been formerly declared for the Pheasant; for you are to understand that
the Partridge has as variable notes and tunes, and differs as much in her
several callings as the Pheasant does, and in some cases more: having
therefore (as I said) your calls made ready and fit, and that the time of the
day (which must ever of necessity be either Morning or Evening, (for the
Noonday is never any good or seasonable time for this purpose or exercise)
you shall go to the haunts where you do know that Partridge^ do frequent,
whether it be champa^e or wood-land, corne-fields, meadows or pastures, and
having conuaied your self into some close and secret place, where you may see
and not be seen; as if it be in the champaine or plains, then under the
couerte of some Bank, Hill or Ditch; If in the wood-lands, then under Bushes,
Shrubs, or Brambles; If in corne-fields, then in the Furrows, or where the
Corn is highest and thickest; And if in meadows, then in the thick and high
tufted grass, or among^ high weeds and such other like places of shalter; and
being thus placed in secret, and fit for your pastime, yo^ shall fi^t lysten a
while if you can hea^ the Partridge call, which if you do, you shall then make
answer again, and that in the same note or tuen in which the Partridge
calls, and ever as she alters or changes her note, or doubleth it over
more or less, so shall you ever make answer and alter and change your note
and time, and double or treble as she shall give you example, and still apply
your call till you find that she draws nearer and nearer unto you, and not
one single Partridge only, but many, if many be within the compass of the
sound of your call, and not the old ones only single by themselves, but
attended and followed on by their several coouies, for this calling is so
delightful and natural unto them that they will pursue and follow it as far
as they can hear it, when thus you have drawn the Partridges unto you, and
that you see them and their whole flocks to becomed within your view, you shall
then cast your self flat upon your back, and lie without mooueing as if you
were dead, and then you shall see the Partridge come running and pecking about
you without any fear or dread, so as you shall not only take a full view of
them, but also if you please you may number and count them.

After thus you have gotten the full Taking of partridges with Nets.
perfection how to find out Partridges, your next lesson shall be to learn
how to take and entangle them: And first of the taking of them with Nets, you
must understand that the Nets wherewith you must take Partridges, ought to
be shaped and proportioned in all points, both length and breadth like unto the
Pheasant Net, only the mash would be somewhat smaller; It must be also of
the selfsame third, and in like manner dyed and colloured, or if it be
somewhat longer or somewhat broader, it will not be amiss, but a great deal
better, and you shall take your prey more certainly and with less care and
hazard, for you are to understand that the longer your nets are, the longer you
may make your circumference or walk about them, and the broader that they are,
the more ground you may cover, and so bring more within your danger, provided
always that they be not to^ broad or cumber some by reason eith^ of their
length or breadth, for thereby you may not only anoy your self and hinder the
work, but also breed affright to the birds, which are so fearful and tender
of their safeties, that upon the least blinke or dislike, they will presently
spring up and fly away leaving all your labor frustrate and disappointed;
Therefore (as before showed) having your nets of true size and compass, and
fitly accomodated to your purpose with Lines and Cords answerable; you shall
then (having found out the Couye by any means aforesaid, or by other accident)
draw forth your Nets and taking a great large circumference or ring about the
Partridg^, walk a good round pace with a careless eye, rather from, then
toward the Partridg^ ^ill you have made your Nets yare, trin^ and ready for
your purpose; which done you shall draw in your circumference or ^ing less and
less till you come within the ^ength of your Net, then pricking down a ^ticke
of about three foot long or better ^o which you must fasten one end of the
Line of your Net, and making it fast in ^he earth as you do walk about (for no
stay or stop must be seen in this action) you shall then (letting the net slip
out of your hands) spread it open as you go and so carry it and lay it all
over the Partridge.

But if there be so many Partridg^ that you cannot cover them all with one
net, by reason that they do lie straggling and not close together, then you
shall draw forth another net, and in like manner as you did with the former, so
you shall do with the second net, and spread it close before the fir^ which
done you may also pin it down and do the like with the third ne^, (...)
occasion shall require it (But ^ot otherwise) and having thus covered yo^
Partridge, you shall then rush into the^ and with an affrighting voice, as He^
Ret, or the like, enforce them to sp^ up, which they shall no soo^ do, (...)
presently they will be entangled, so tha^ then running in your nets close tog^
you may ^ould all the Partridge (...) within the ^ne, and so take them (...) at
your pleasure, and dispose of the^ as you shall find occasion, and in the
manner you may take either single Partridges, paires, or the whole coouies, and
that not at one distinct and proper time, but at all seasons of the year
whatsoever, and in any ground, champaine or Woodland, or any other haunt or
abiding place whatsoever.

The next way to take Partridges is Taking of Partridges with Lime.
with lime or lime-rods, after this manner: You shall first take of the
fairest, strongest and lardgest Wheate-strawe you can get (of which, that which
is called the whole straw wheat, is the best, or for want of it the fairest
and lardgest Rye-straw) and cutting them of between knot and knot (observing
the lowest ioints or knots are the strongest and best) you shall then lime
these with the strongest and best lime, in such manner as has been formerly
deelared in other Chapters for the liming of other rods or wands, and so
coming to the, haunts where Partridges do usually frequent, after you have
called a little, and find that you are answered again, you shall then in such
manner and form as has been formerly showed you for other rods, prick
down these limed strawes round about you in many cross rows and ranks, and
that not very near you, but a pretty distance off, yet not out of the compass
of your eye, but so as you may discern when any thing touches them: and these
lymed strawes you shall place not only cross the Lands but the furrows also,
taking at least two or three Lands within your circumference; which done, you
shall then lay your self down closse and secretly and begin again to call,
not ceasing till you have drawn them toward you, whither they cannot come, but
they must of necessity pass through the Lime, which they shall no sooner
touch, but presently they are taken and entangled and by reason that they come
flocking and closse together, like so many Chickins, they will so besmeare and
daube one another, that if there be twenty in the Coouy hardly any one will
escape.

Now here is to be noted, that this manner of taking of Partridges with Limed
^awes, is properly to be used only in Corn fields, and that principally, in
the Stubble time, or from Angust the Christ^as, for before or after it is not
so convenient: But if you will take them in woods, in pastures, or meadows
with Lyme, then you shall use the ordinary Lyme-rods made of wooden wandes, as
has bin before showed, and prick them down, and order them in all points in
such sort as is already mentioned of the Lymed strawes, for it is both the
safest certainest, and best course that can be taken

There is yet another way for the taking Taking partridges with Enggine, or the
driving them.
of Partridges, which is no less profitable and useful then either of the
other and indeed somewhat pleasanter and fuller of delight, and that is the
taking them with engine, or as some call it the driving of Partridges, which
albe it is especially applied to the wood-countrey, yet may it notwithstanding
be very well and commodiously used in any place or ground whatsoever. The manner
to do it is thus; you shall first make an engine in the fashion of a Horse,
which engine shall be made of Canuas, or some such staff, and stopped with straw
or such like matter, of which engine (amongst other engines) I have spoken very
largely of in the former part of this Book entreating of Waterfowle, and
therewithal set down the lively form or figure thereof, so that to stand
longer upon it, were but a double labor, needless, vselesse, and to small
purpose.

Having therefore this engine and your nets in a readiness, you shall go into
the haunts where the Partridges do frequent, and having by some of the means
or charracters before mentioned found out the coouy of Partridges, you shall
then in the most secretest and likelist place for that purpose, and taking the
best advantage of the wind (which is ever to go above it and drive down the
wind) you shall there pitch your net, not flat and couching, but sloapewise
and houering, and that so close and secretly and so ouer-shadowed either with
bushes, shrubs, leaves, weeds or some other that grows (natural to the
ground it stands) in that not any thing may perceive it till it be entangled
in it, when you have thus placed your net or nets, you shall then take your
engine and go to the place where the coouy of Partridges lodges, and having
your face covered or hid with some hood of green or dark blew stuff, you
shall (pntting the engine before you) make your foot stalk toward the
Partridges, and by gentle and slow steps or degrees, you shall steal upon the
birds, and raise them as gently upon their feet (not their wings) as may be,
and so make them run before you, which naturally they will do of themselves,
for their fear is such, the they will run from any thing albe ineuer so well
acquainted therewith, especially from Horse or Beast, because by reason of
their grazing or feeding amongst them, they are ^ill in fear to be trodden
upon by them; thus as by gentle and slow steps you do drive them before you
(for you must by all means shun ^ash, sudden; hasty and affrighcfull
motions) if they chance to run any by-way or contrary to that which you
would have them, you shall then presently cross (...) with your engine, and as
it were offer to face or oppose them, and they will presently recoile and run
into any tract that you would have them, and thus with these gentle
observations, you may drive them which way and whither you will, so that at
last they will run themselves into your net with such violence and
eagerness, that being overthrown and entangled therein, you may take and
dispose them at your pleasure, as you shall have occasion,

The fourth and last way for the taking Taking partridges with the setting
Dog.
of Partridges (and which indeed excels all the other for the excellency of
the sport, and the rareness of the Art which is contained therein) is the
taking of them with the setting Dog, for in it there is a twofold pleasure
and a twofold Art to be discovered: as first, the pleasure and art
proceeding from the D^gge, and is contained in this manner, of raunging,
hunting, and setting, and then the pleasure and Art in the bird hunted, and is
contained in their simplicity, folly, and fear, together with the (...) they
have to preserve themselves, by which means only they are circumuented and
ouertake^, making the old prou^ Too much pity spoils a City, and so too much
care of themselves is the destruction and loss of themselves.

To proceed then to our purpose, it is What a a setring Dog is.
meet that first before I wade further into this discourse, I show you what a
S^ting Dog is, you shall then understand that a Setting Dog is a certain
lusty land Spaniell, taught by nature to hunt the Partridge before, and more
then any other chase whatsouer, and that with all eagerness and fierceness,
running the fields over and over so lustily and busily, as if there were no
limit in his desire and fury; yet so qualified and tempered with Art and
obedience, that when he is in the greatest and eagerest pursuit, and seems to
be most wild and frantike, that yet even then, one hem or sound of his Masters
voice makes him presently stand, gaze about him, and look in his Masters face,
taking all his directions from it, whether to proceed, stand still, or retire;
nay, when he is commend eu^ to the very place where his prey is, and has, as
it were, his nose over it, so that it seems he may take it up at his own
pleasure, yet is his temperance and obedience so made and framed by Art, that
presently even on a sudden he either stands still, or falls down flat upon
his belly, without daring once to open his mouth, or make any noise or motion
at all, till that his Master come unto him, and then proceeds in all things
according to his directions and commandments.

When therefore you have either by How to set Partridges
your own industry made such a dog, or else by your purse, friendship, or
other accidents obtained such a dog, you shall then take Partridges with him
after this manner; being come into the fields or haunts, where Partridges do
frequent, you shall there cast off your dog, and by crying Hye-Ret, or
Hey-whyrr or such like words of encouragement according to the custom of his
own nature or education, give him leave to raunge or hunt, which as soon as
he begins to do, you shall then cease from any more words, except any fault
or mistaking enforce you, and then you shall use the words of correction or
reprehension due for that purpose, and in all his hunting and labor, you shall
have great and especial heed that he never raunge too far from you, but
beat his ground justly and even, without casting about or flying now hear and
now there, and skipping many places, which the heat and metal of many good
dogs will make them do if they be not reprehended, and therefore when any
such fault shall happen, you shall presently with a hem, call him in, and then
with the terror of your countenance so threaten him, that he shall not dare all
that day after to do the like, but shall raunge with that modesty and
temperance, hunting all the ground over at an inch, and ever and anon looking
you in the face, as who should say, do I now please you I or no; all which,
when he does, you must then give him cherrishments and encouragement.

Now if in this raunging and hunting you chance to see your dog to make a
sudden stop or to stand still, you shall then presently make into him (for he
has set the Partridge) and as soon as you come to him, you shall bid him go
nearer; which if he do, you shall still say to him, go nearer, go nearer;
but if you find he is unwilling to go or creep nearer, but either lies
still, or stands shaking of his tail, as who should say here they are under
mine nose, and withal, now and then, looks back upon you, as if he would
tell you how near they are; then presently, you shall cease from further
urging of him, and then begin to take your range or circumference about both
the Dog and the Partridge, not ceasing but walking about with a good round
pace, and looking still before the Dogs nose, till you behold and see
plainly, how and in what manner the Coouy lies, whether closse and round
together in one plumpe heap, or cluster, or else straggling and scattering,
here two, there three, and in other places more or less as fortune shall
administer: when thus you see how the Couye lies, you shall then first charge
the Dog to lie still, and then drawing forth your Net as you walk, having
pricked down one end to the ground (as has been before showed) then spread
your Net all open, and (as near as you can) cover all the partridges
therewith, even from that which lies next to the Dog to that which is
furthest off, but if you find that one Net will not serve to cover them,
then you shall draw forth another, and holding your raunge or walk still in
continual motion spread out it, and lay it before the first Net, and thus
you may do with as many Nets as you shall have occasion to use, till the
whole Coouye be covered, which done you shall then make in with a noise and,
spring up the Partridge, which shall no sooner rise, but they shall presently
be entangled in the Net so as you may take them at your pleasure, and dispose
of them as you shall have occasion, in which taking whether it be this way or
any other formerly spoken off, if after they are in your mercy, you will then
be pleased to let go again the old Cock and the old hen, it will not only
be honest and Gentleman like, but also good and profitable, and a means both
to continue and increase your pastime, for ^he young ones will be reward enough
for ^our labor, and the old ones thus let at ^ibertie will bring you forth a
new ^rood the next year, whereon to exer^ise your Skill and knowledge, whereas
^o take all hand over head is such an vn^aturall destruction, that when you ^r
any other in the Country would ^aue sport, both they and you shall ^ant it
and all the whole Country, (as I have seen where such destroyers live) will
not be able to produce, or to show forth one Partridge. And be^es these old
Partridges (which we commonly call Ruins) being thus taken, are never good
meat nor tastefull, by reason of their much toughness and hardness; so that
to take them shows rather covetousness and gredinesse, the^ delight or
recreation.

Now albe in this whole discourse, and Help in use of Nets
general use of Nets (whether this (...) spoken off, or any other contained
in any former part of this Treatise) I ha^ bounded them to the labor and ind^
(...) of one man; yet you shall understand that if in these recreations or
labors, you do take a companion or (...) friend with you, that after you ha^
found your game, or set your game, a^ soon as you do begin your raung^ or
round walk, he may presently co^ in ^o, you, and as you take one end^ of the
N^tte, so he may take the other and then carrying it up between yo^ you may
equally unloose it and spread^ oner your game, you shall find yo^ work a
great deal much more (...) and certain, and your labor more safe, and
without all kind of danger or trouble.

Now for a conclusion of this treatise, Taking of Rayles, Quails, etc.
when you are exquisite and pefect in all the things before spoken of and that
you can do them readily and perfectly, and with all Art and cunning, you shall
then know that from these, you may derive the taking of diverse other Birds, as
Qua^les, Rayles, Morepoots, and diverse others of like nature and condition, all
which are also very good flights, for the Hawke, and very dainty meats in the
dishe, as all that are ^ither of good tooth, or good bringing up can very well
witness.

Now for their manner of haunts they Their hauntes.
are as the Partridges are, most in Corn Fields, or in Pastures or Woods
near unto Corne-Fieldes, only the Quail loves most the Wheat Fields; the
Morepoots loves most the Heath and Forest grounds where is store of Lynge and
such like covert, and the ^uaile love the long and high grass wherein they may
lie closse obscure and hidden.

For the manner of finding them it How to finds them
is in all points like that of the Partridge, by the eye, by the ear, or by
the haunt all which ask the same observations and carracters which have been
formerly declared touching the Partridge, and with the same causions exceptions
and difficulties. But the chief and principal means of all, and which indeed
exceeds all, is to find them out by the call or pipe, to which they listen
with such earnestness that you can no so^ chaunt their notes but in an instant
they reply and make answer unto you, pursuing and following the call with such
greediness, that they will never cease till they come unto you, and skippe and
play about you, especially the Qudi^e, which is inamored to hear her own
tune, that you can no sooner make your quail pipe speak in the true tune but
in a trice she will make answer and not ^aue till she come to you, and sport
about you.

Now you are to observe in the calling Diversity of Notes.
of these Birds, that they have diverse notes and tunes, some belonging to the
male Birds, and some unto the female, all which you must have per^ in your
remembrance, and then when you hear the male Byrd call you must answer in the
note of the female, and if the female call, you must answer in the note of the
male, and so you shall be suer that both the one and the other will most busily
come about you, and never leave till they find the place from whence the sound
comes, to which when they do approach they will stand and gaze and listen
till the Net be quite cast over them.

Now for the manner of taking of any, How to take them.
or all of these Byrds, it is one and the same with the taking of the Partridge
and may be done either by ^ttes in such sort as is formerly declarred in this
Chapter, or else by Lyme (either bush or rod) by the stalking Engine, and
manner of driving, or lastly by the setting-Dogge in the same manner and form
as has been spoken of the Partridge. Of which Setting-Dogge since he is of so
great use and excellency, I think it not amiss here in this place to
demonstrate his true Figure and proportion.

The form and proportion of the Setting Dog.


Now although some may think it strange that a Dog should be brought to Set
this small game, yet there is no strangeness therein; for Dogs in this Art
are made to any thing that they are accustomed, so it be not a thing merely
contrary and against their natures, which this is not; for it is the nature of
every Spaniell, naturally to hunt all manner of Birds, or any thing that has
wing (though some with more earnestness and greediness then othersome.) Now
these are Birds and have wing, so that they are natural for the Spaniel to
hunt, and there then remains nothing but the accustoming the Dog thereunto,
and acquainting him with your mind and determination, that this is the thing
which you would have him hunt, which as soon as he understands, instantly he
pursues and follows it, and is as earnest in it, as in any other chase, prey
or pleasure whatsoever.

And thus much for the taking of Partridges and other smaller Birds of like
nature, as also of the Setting-Dog, and his seucrall uses.

CHAP. XVI.
More of the Setting-Dogge, of his election, and the manner of trayning him
from a whelpe, till he come to perfection.

H^uing spoken a little particularly of the Setting-Dogge, and (...) manner of
using him being brought to perfection and fite for the present use of the
pastime, I will here in this place speak more generally and largely of him,
and show how he is to be trained and brought to be trained and serviceable for
the purposes before treated off, for albe I know that in diverse places of this
Kingdom these Setting-Dogges are to be taught (so that most men of ability may
have them at their pleasures) yet likewise I know they are sold at su^ great
rates and prizes that no ind^ous man whatsoever (which either loves the sport or
would bepartaker of the benefit) but will be glad to learn how to make such a
dog himself, and so both save his purse and make his pleasure and profit
both more sure and more delicate; for this I must assure all men, (that buy
their dogs from mercinary teachers) that evermore those sales-men do reserve
in their own bosoms some one secret or another, for the want of knowledge,
where of the purchaser quickly finds his dog imperfit, and so is forced upon
every disorder or alteration of keeping to send the dog back to his first
master a new to be reformed, which drawing on ever a new price, makes the
dogs certain price without end, without valuation.

This falt to redress; and to make every man the true master of his own
work, I will show you here in a brief and compendious manner all the
mysteries and secrets which lie hid in this laboursome business.

The first thing therefore that you must learn in this art, is to make a true
election of your dog, which you intend to apply to this purpose of Setting,
and in this election you shall observe, that although any dog which is of
perfect and good sent, and naturally adicted to the hunting of feathers, as
whether it be the Land-Spaniell, Water-Spaniell, or else the Mungrell between
either of both those kinds, or the Mungrels of either of those kinds, either
with the shallow flewed hound, the tumbler, lurcher, or indeed, the small
bastard Mastiffe may be brought to this perfection of Setting (as I have seen
by daily experience, both in this and in other Nations) yet is their none so
excellent indeed as the true bred Land-Spaniell, being of a nimble and good
size, rather small then gross, and of a courageous and fiery metal,
evermore loving and desiring toil, when toil seems most yrksome and weary,
which although you cannot know in a whelpe so young, as it is intended he must
be, when you first begin to train him to this purpose, yet may you have a
strong speculation therein, if you choose him from a right litter or breed,
wherein by succession you have known that the whole generation have been
endued with all these qualities, as namely; that he is a strong, lusty and
nimble raundger, both of active foot; wanton tail, and busy nostrill, that
his toil is without weariness, his search without changeableness, and yet,
that no delight nor desire transport him beyond fear or obedience; for it is
the perfectest charracter ofthe most perfectest Spaniel, ever to be fearful
and loving to him that is his Master and keeper: I confess I have seen
excellent rare Setting dogs made in the Low Countries, which have been of a
Bastard tumblers kind (for indeed a true Lande-Spaniel, is there Gaysson) and
indeed, I have found in them (if I may so term it) a greater wisdom (which
indeed is but a greater fear) then in our Land-Spaniels, but comparing the
whole work together, that is the labor in raundging, the scent in finding,
and the art in Setting, they have been much inferior to our dogs, and not able
to stand up with them in the lardge and spacious Champaines, nor yet to brush
through or make their ways in the sharp thickets and troublesome couerts. To
speak then in a word touching the best choice of this Setting dog, let him
be as near as you can the best bredde Land-Spaniell, that you can procure, and
though some have been curious in observing of their colors, as giving
prehominence to the Motley, the Liuer-hude, or the White and Black spotted;
yet questionless, it is but a vain curiosity, for no color is amiss for
this purpose, provided the natural qualities be perfect and answerable for the
work to which end you intend them.

Now when you have thus made a good election of your Dog, you shall begin
to handle and instruct him at four months old, or at six month at the
uttermost, for to ^ferre longer time is hurtful, and will make the labor
greater and more difficult to compass, for the elder Dogs are the more
stubborn they are and do both unwillingly learn, and with less will retain
that which is learned. The first thing therefore that you shall teach your
Whelpe is, by all means possible to make him most loving and familar with you,
so that he will not only know you from any other person, but also fawn upon
you and follow you wheresoever you go, taking his only delight to be only in
your company, and that you may bring this the better to pass you shall not
suffer him to receive either food or cherishings from any man's hands but your,
own only; and as thus you grow familiar with the Whelpe, and make him loving
and fond of you, so you shall also mix with this familiarity a kind of awe and
obedience in the Whelpe, so as he may as well fear you as love you^ and this
awe or fear you shall procure rather with your countenance, frown, or sharp
words, then with blows, or any other actual crueltye, for these whelps are
quickly terryfied, and the vyolence of ^ment not only depri^ them of courage,
but also makes them dull and dead spirited, whereas on the co^ary part you are
to strive to keep your Dog (which is for this purpose) as w^ton as is
possible.

When therefore you have made your whelpe thus familiar and and unto you, so as
he will follow you (...) and down whithe^ soever you got without taking notice
of any man but your self only, and that he knows your frown from your
(...), and your gentle words from your rough, you shall begin to ^each him to
coutch and lie down close to the ground first by laying him down to the
ground, and saying unto him, Lie close, Lie close; or some such like word of
commandment, and terrifying him with rough language when he does any thing
against your meaning and giving him not only cherrishings, but food (as a
piece of bread or the like, which it is intended you must ever carry about you)
when he does any thing according unto your will, till you have made him so
perfitly understand you that when at any time you shall but say, lie close,
down, couch, or the like, that then presently he do the same, without any
stamering, stay or amazement, which by pains ta^ing, and continual use, you
shall perfitly bring to pass in a few days.

This done, you shall then make him after the same manner, and with the same
words not only couch and lie down (as aforesaid) but being couched you shall
then make him come creeping unto you with his belly and head close to the
ground so far or so little a way as you shall think good, and this you shall
do by saying, Come nearer, Come nearer, or the like; and at first (till he
understand your meaning) by showing him a piece of bread or some other food
which may entice him and draw him with more willingness to come unto you, and
in this lesson you must observe that when he offers to come unto you, if he
either raise from the ground his fore-parts, or his hinder-parts, or if he do
but so much as offer to lift up his head, that then presently you do not only
with your hand thrust his body down in such sort as you would have him, but
also accompany that action with the terror of your voice, and such ratings as
may not only a^ight the Whelpe, but make him with greater care to strive to
perform your pleasure, which performance if it come not so speedily as you
think fit, or not with the willingness which is to be required in such an
action, if then to the terror of your voice you add a sharp ierke or two with
a whip-coa^ ^ash, it shall not be am^, but much auaileable^; only by all
means forbear buffetings about the dogs head with your fists, for such
correction is naught, and not only makes a dog dull and of a slow spirit, but
also takes a way from him a^ pleasure and delight in that which is and should
be his natural exercise. Now when he does perform your will other fully as
you would desire, or in part according to the apprehension of his first
knowledge, you shall then by no means forget not only to cherish him, but
also to feed him, and then renew his lesson again, till he do every thing
as perfectly as art can require it couching when you command him, creepeing
upon his belly as far as you will have him, and pausing and staying, when and
as often as you bid him, and in this practis^ you shall continue him, and make him
so perfect and ready that when at any time you chance to walk abroad, and that
the wanton whelpe begins to play in the fields, (for rainge you shall not
suffer him till he have full strength) if you see him most busy, even then you
shall speak unto him, and make him in the ^eight of his pastime, presently
fall to the ground, and not only lie close, but also come creeping on his
belly unto you thi^ when you have perfited you shall ^lien teach him to lead
in a stringe ^line and to follow you at your heel close without either trouble
or straining of his collor, in which there is small art to be used, more theu a
daily labor and practice, and not striving too roughly with the Whelp, but by
all gentle means, first giving him understanding what to do, and then showing
the manner how to do, you shall see that in a day or less, he will do as
much as can be desired.

When all these things aforesaid are perfitly learned, it is to be imagined
that by this time the whelpe will be at least twelve months of age, at which
time (the season of the year being fit) you may very well adventure to go
into the field and suffer him to raunge and hunt therein, yet with such
carfulness and obedience, that albe his spirit and metal do never so much
transport him, yet upon the first ( Hem) or warning of your voice that he stop
and look back upon you, as who should say (do you call) and upon the second,
or reitteration of your voice, that forthwith he either forbear hunt further,
or else come into your foot and walk by you, till you give him new
encouragement; and in this raunging or hunting of the whelpe, you find that
through wantonness or foolishness he be given to babbling or opening without
cause, you shall then at first chide him therefore, but if that prevail not,
you shall then correct him much more sharply, as by biteing him hard with your
teeth at the roots of his ears, or else lashing him hard with a sharp
whip-corde-lash, till you have made him so staunch that he will hunt close and
warily, without once opening either through wantonness or the rising up of any
small birds before him.

Now when you have brought your dog to this staunch and obedient manner of
hunting, and that he will bestow himself in such manner as you please to
appoint him, then as soon as you find him to come upon the haunt of any
Partridge (which you shall know both by his greater eagerness in hunting, as
also by a kind of whimpering and whining in his voice being greedily desirous
to open, only fear and awe keeps him in an unwilling obedience) you shall
then speak unto him as warning him to take heed, by saying, ( Be wise, Take
heeede) or the like, but if notwithstanding he either rush in and so spring
them, or else open or use any other means by which the Partridge escapes, you
shall then presently take him and correct him very soundly, and then cast him
off again and either let him hunt those in such places as you have marked them,
or else in some other haunts where you are assured some Couey lodges; and then
as before showed, being commed upon the haunts, give the dog warning, and if
you see that out of fear he stands still and waueth his tail, looking
forward as if he did point at something, then you may be sure that the
Partridge, or that he hunteth, is before him, then you shall make him lie
close, and your self taking a lardge raunge or ring about him, shall look if
you can find the Partridge: which as soon as you have found, if he have set
them far off, you shall then by saying (go nearer) make the dog creep on
his belly nearer to the Couey, but if he be near enough you shall then make
him lie close without stirring, and then drawing your nets take the Partridge
as has been before showed, and then cheerish the dog exceeding much, first
by giving him the heads, necks and pinions of the Partridge, and then by
clawing and clapping him, and by giving him either bread or other food which
you must evermore at those times carry about you; but if it happen that as
before, so again he chance to spring up the game, by his awant of taking
heed or other rudeness, then again you shall correct him more then before,
and so take him up into your string and lead him home, tying him up for that
night, without giving him any thing more then a bit of bread and water to keep
and maintain life in his bosom, and then the next day have him to the field,
and do as before showed, yet with somewhat more terror and hard countenance,
that he may not only call to mind his former falt, but also see that yet he
has not gotten your favor, and there is no question but he will be much more
careful then he was before, and strive in all things more readily to obey your
commandments; and then when he performs your will and does according to your
expectation you must by no means forget to bestow upon him all the
cheerishings that may be, as those of the voice, the hands, and of food also,
whereby the dog may be delighted and encouraged to increase and go forward
in his well doing. And herein you are to observe also, that when your dog
sets the Partridge, if he do stand upright upon his legs looking as it
were at, or over the Partridge, that then such standing is a fault and may give
a blinke or offense to the Patridge, and therefore in this case you shall
speak unto the dog and chide him, saying unto him, Be wise, or lie close,
not leaving till you see him lay himself down upon his belly on the ground.

Again, you shall observe, that when you go in unto the Couey to spring the
Partridge up into your nets, that if the dog rush hastily after you, and
offer to spring them either before, or as soon as you, that likewise it is a
great fault, and you must correct him very bit^erly for the same; and to the
end no that fault in you, may bring on that fault in the dog, you must
observe to go very leasurely and with great discretion into the Couey and ever
as you go speak to the dog to be wise and to lie close, terrifying him in
such sort that he may not move till you give him liberty.

Many other observations there be, but none more material then these already
rehearsed; so that being careful and diligent to use and observe these
according to the truth of their natures, there is no doubt but you shall bring
your whelpe in one four or five months to that full perfection which can be
required of any reasonable judgment. And thus much for the bringing up of any
Spaniell-Whelpe to this excellent art of Setting.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the making of the best Lyme, and of the preservation, as also of the Lyming
of Rods, Bushes, Strings, etc.

NOw for as much as the perfection of this Art consists in the perfection of
the Instruments which are to be employed therein, and that whereas any of them
shall either grow or be defective, that there the whole work must necessarily
perish and fall to ruin, and for as much as there is no instrument more
available or more casual then Bird-lime is, both by reason of the strength,
and vigor, and ability to hold and entangle when it is good and perfect, and
also the aptness to loose, not to cleave or stick, when it is either weak
rotton or defective: I think it not here amiss to declare unto you how and in
what manner to make and compound the most excellentest and perfitest Bird-lime,
for all manner of uses or purposes, wherein soever it shall be employed,
whether it be in Winter or in Summer, in the Frost or in the Thawe, or whether
it be by Water or by Land, or for any general ^fe to be employed in this art
of Fowling.

To make then the best and most excellentest Making of Bird-lime
Bird-lime, you shall take at Midsomer the Bark of Holly and pill it from the
Tree, so much as will fill a reasonable big vessel, then put to it running
water, and set it on the fire, and boil it till the gray and white Bark rise
from the green, which will take for the most part, a whole day or better in
boiling, then take it from the fire and separate the Barks after the water is
very well drained from it, which done, take all the green Bark and lay it on
the ground in a close place, and a moist floare, as in some low Vault or
Cellar, and then with all manner of green weeds, as Docks, Hemlock, Thystels
and the like, cover it quite over a good thickness, and so let it lie for the
space of ten or twelve days, in which time it will rot and turn to a
filthy and slymie matter, then take it up from the ground and put it into a
lardge mortar, and there beat and grind it exceedingly till it be comed to
one universal paste or toughness, without the diserning of any part of the
Bark or other substance, which as soon as you see, you shall take it out of
the mortar, and carry it to a quick and swift running stream, and there wash
it exceedingly, not leaning any moate or foulness within it, then put it up
in a very close earthen pot, and let it stand and purge for diverse days
together, not omitting but to skum it and cleanse it as any foulness rises,
for at least three or four days together, and then perceiving no more skum
will arise, you shall then take it out of that pot and put it in another clean
earthen vessel, and cover it close, and so keep it.

Now when you have occasion to use How to v^ Lyme.
your Lyme, you shall take of it such aquantitie as you shall think^ fit, and
putting it into an earthen pipkin, with a third part of Hogges-grease,
Caponsgrease or Goose-grease, finely clarified (but Capons-grease or
Goose-grease is the best) and set it one a very gentle fire and there let them
melt together, and stir them continually, till they be both incorporated
together, and that you cannot discern any separation of bodies, but all one
entire and perfect substance, then take it from the fire and cool it, stirring
it still till it be cold

As soon as your Lime is well coold, Lyming of Rods, Strings, etc.
you shall then take your Lyme-roddes, and beaking or warming them a little
over the fire to make them warm and dry, then take some of the Lyme (so
prepared as aforesaid) and wind it about the tops of the rods, then draw the
rods asunder one from another and close them again, then open them and shut
them again, continually plying and working them together, till by smearing one
upon another you have equally bestowed on every rod a like quantity of lyme,
not any rod having more or lesser then another, but all alike both in
thickness and depth, always provided that you keep the full and entyre
breadth of your hand (at least) free and without any lime at all, ever and anon
warming the rods before the fire to make the lime spread and bed upon them
the better and to make it lie smoother and plainer, without any gross or
palpable show, whereby the Foul may take affright or amazement before they
come to touch it; If you lime any strings, you shall do it when the lime is
very hot and at the thinnest, besmearing the strings on all sides, by foulding
them up together and undoing them again, and by laying the places that are
untouched to the places that are touched, till all be generally touched and no
part of the cord free from lime, nor any part thicker or thinner then another,
the knots only excepted, which must be a little better lymed then any other
part of the cord; both because of their weight and that they may fasten a
great deal the sooner. Now lastly for the lyming of Strawes, it must be done
also when the lyme is very hot, and in such manner as the rods are done,
before the fire, only you must not do a few, but a great heap together, as
much as you can well gripe in your hands, for so they are the stronger, and not
so apt to bruise or break in pieces, and therefore in the opening and working
of them you shall not do it with a little quantity or a few together, but
still as many as you can well gripe, tossing and turning them, and working them
before the fire, till they be all besmeared, and that every straw have his true
proportion and quantity of lyme, which as soon as you see it is done in
perfection, you shall then have cases made of leather, in which to put in your
several bunches of rods, and so set them up and keep them till you have
occasion to use them.

Now if it so fall out that the weather do prove so extreme sharp and
frostie, that your Lime-roddes do freese, and thereby loose all their strength
and vigor, so as they cannot hold any thing at all; then when you mix your
grease and lyme together, you shall take a quatter so much of the oil of Peter
(which the Pothecaries call Petrolium) as you do of Capons-grease, and mixing
them together well, and working it upon the rods, it will ever keep your
^ime so supple, tough, fine and gentle, that no ^rost how great or violent
soever, shall by any means anoy or offend you. And thus much for the knowledge
of Lyme and the several uses, with which I end this brief Treatise or
Summarie Collection of this pleasant and delightful Art of Fouling, which if
it give any small satisfaction or contentment, to the industrious and diligent
Reader, I have the full accomplifhment of my desire, and hold my pain
sufficiently rewarded.

FINIS.

