

THE COMPLETE FARRIAR, OR THE KINGS HIGHWAY TO HORSMANSHIP. Experimentally
unfolding 1. The dyeting and governing of the Running HORSE. 2. How to order,
feed, and keep any Horse for War, Pleasure, Hunting, or Travel. 3. How to know
the age of any Horse. Lastly, Certain rare and approved secrets for the Cure
of the worst infirmities in Horses.

By G. Markam.



LONDON, Printed by J. D. for R. Young, and are sold by P. Nevill in Ivie-lane,
1639.

To all courteous Readers, and lovers of good Horses.
THis my ensuing Book (which I have styled, The complete Farriar, or the Kings
Highway to Horsemanship) was some years since collected for my own private
benefit, and now, by the request of many friends, sent to the view of the
World: It being the last of all my labors, I will not commend it; yet so far I
will allow of it, that it is not inferior, if not equal to any of my former
Books. For my bosom receipts, which I practiced daily, not known to any but
my self, (and being now aged) I was willing to impart to the benefit of all
well-wishers and lovers of Horses, to their posterity: for these will revive
my memory, when time has almost razed out the remembrance of me. And so
wishing you all good success in your experiments, I heartily take leave, and
rest,

Yours G. M.

A Table of the things handled in the first Book.
AN Introduction to the Work, or ^ giving of satisfaction to all reasonable
practicers, and confuting the wilful selfe-conceited, touching the limitation
of time, for preparing of the Running Horse. 1 The first ordering of the
Running Horse, according to the several estates of their bodies. 11 How to
diet an Horse (for a match) that is fat, foul, and either newly taken from
grass or soil, being the first fortnight. 15 Four principal considerations
touching heates. 30 The second fortnight. 32 The first bread. 34 The first
scowring. 46 The ordering of the Horse after his scow^ing. 48 The third
fortnight. 54 The second Bread. 55 The fourth and last fortnight. 56 The last
Bread. 57 Certain necessary observations and advantages for every Keeper to
observe in sundry accidents. 67 How to order, feed, and keep any Horse for
war, pleasure, hunting, or travel. 84 General observations, helps, and
advertisements for any man when he goes to buy an Horse. 92 An uncontrollable
way how to know the age of any Horse. 119
A Table of the second Book.
OF sickness in general. 123 The true manner of making the true Diahexaple.
126 The virtues of the Diahexaple. 127 The making of the Cordial balls. 129
For the Botts, and all manner of worms, and ^^ 133 Another for the Bots, etc.
134 An excellent purgation when a Horse is sick^ of grease, etc. 135 For
laxativenesse, etc. 136 An help for the stone, etc. 13^ T^cure and break an
old festered cold, and^ 138 Another for a violent cold, etc. 139 An excellent
cordial powder. 14^ An excellent medicine against scowring, etc. 141 A^ater
for sore eyes, etc. 142 Another for sore eyes. 143 For a bruise on the eye,
pearl, or pin, etc. 144 An excellent medicine for a back sinew strain,
etc. 145 Saint Anthonies cure for a strain. 146 Another for a desperate old
strain. 147 An excellent medicine for a new strain, etc. 148 A perfect cure
for a new strain. 149 My own Balm for strains, etc. and sinews that are
extended. 150, 151 To help a sinew strain in twenty four hours. 152 An
unguent to take away aches, etc. 153 For swelled or gourded legs, etc. 154
Another for gourdings, etc. 157 Another for scratches, etc. 158 For any splent,
spaven, etc. 159 Another for a splent, spaven, etc. 160 A cure for the
swiftcut, etc. 161 To cure saddle bruises, etc. 162 For any maunge, scab, etc.
163 For the ^oulest and most desperate farcie that may be. 164 For any founder,
frettize, etc. 165 To make hoofes grow quickly, etc. 166 A general salve for
any sore occasioned by a prick, etc. 168 An excellent remedy for decayed
rotten lungs, which we call broken winded, or any old dry cough, etc. 170 How
to make Balsamum sulphuris. 171 An approved cure for the swiftcut, or any
hewing on the legs. 172
AN Introduction to the work, or a giving of satisfaction to all reasonable
practisers, and confuting the wilful selfconceited.
CHAPTER I.
I will not dispute the several opinions of men in this kingdom touching the
keeping of the running Horse, because I know many are idle and frivolous, some
uncertain, and a few in the right way: only (in this work) I would clear one
paradox which is strongly maintained, and infinitely pursued by many of our
best professors, and that is the limitation or length of time for the preparing
or making ready of an horse for a match or great wager.

There be diverse, nay some which I know, carry the goddess Isis on their
backs, that affirm an horse which is exceeding fat, full, newly taken from
grass, soil, or lofty, liberal and unbounded feeding, cannot be brought to
the performance of his best labor, under six months; five is too little, and
four an act of impossibility: by which they rob their noble masters of half a
years pleasure, thrust upon them a tyring charge to make the sport loathsome,
and get nothing but a cloak for ignorance, and a few false-got crowns, that
melt as they are possessed: yet as heretics cite Scriptures, so these find
reasons to defend want of knowledge; as the danger of too early exercise, the
offense of grease too suddenly broken, the moving of evil humors too hastily
(which leads to mortal sickness) and the moderation or helping of all these
by a slow proceeding and bringing of the horse into order by degrees and time,
or (as I may say) by an ignorant sufferance.

These reasons I know have the show of a good ground; for too early exercise is
dangerous, but not, if free from violence. To break grease too suddenly is an
offense unsufferable, for it puts both the limbs and life in hazard, but not if
it be purged away by wholesome scouring; the hasty stirring up of humors in a
body where they superabound, and are generally dispersed and not settled, cannot
but breed sickness, but not where discretion and judgment eva^uateth them in
wholesome sweats and moderate ayrings; and for the moderation of all these by
the teadiousnesse of time, as two months for the first, two months for the
second, and as much for the last, it is like the curing of the Gangreen in an old
man, better to dye then be dismembered, better loose the prize then bear the
charge. For I dare appeal to any noble judgment (whose purse has experience
in these actions) if 6 months preparation, and the dependences belonging to it
and his person, do not devour up an hundred pound wager.

But you will demand of me what limitation of time I will allow for this
purpose of preparation, and I answer, that two months is sufficient at any
time of the year whatsoever, the horse having years, strength, and former
trayning, for I speak not of Colts, and he that cannot do it in two months,
shall never do it truly in fifteen.

But (reply they) no scouring is to be allowed; for they are physical, then
unnatural, they force nature, and so hurt nature, they make sickness, and so
empaire health, and that indeed nothing is comparable to the length of time,
because Nature works every thing her self, though she be longer, yet she has
less danger;

I confess, that slibbersauce scowrings which are stuffed with poisonous
ingredients, cannot choose but bring forth infirmity, but wholesome scowrings
that are composed of beneficial and nourishing simples, neither occasion
sickness nor any manner of infirmity, but bring away grease and all manner of
foulness in that kindly and abundant sort, that one week shall effect and
cleanse away more, then two months of dilatorie and doubtful forbearance; I
call it dilatorie and doubtful, because no man in this lingering course can
certainly tell which way the grease and other foulnesses will avoid, as whether
into his ordure, which is the safest; into sweat, which is hazardous; into his
limbs, which is mischievous; or remain and putrify in his body, which is
mortally dangerous; since the issue of any, or al of these, fall out according
to the strength of the horses body, and the diligence of the keeper; and if
either the one fayl in power, or the other in care, farewell horse for that
year. All this envy cannot choose but confess, only they have one broken
crutch to support them, which is, they know no scowring, therefore they will
allow of no scowring (for thus they have argued with me) Against Barbarism I
will not dispute, only I appeal to Art and discretion, whether purgation or
sufferance (when nature is offended) be the better doers.

To conclude, two months I allow for preparation, and according to that time I
have laid my directions: my humble suite is, out of a sincere opinion to truth
and justice, so to allow or disallow, to refrain or imitate.

But they reply (by a figure called Absurdity) that whatsoever is given to an
horse more then his natural food, and that which he will naturally and with
all willingness receive of his own accord, is both unproper and unwholesome,
and therefore he ought not to be forced with any thing against his appetite:
this I have heard them affirm, and to this I thus reply;

The natural food of man is Bread only, other things (according to the
Philosopher) are but superfluities and so to be refrained* The natural food of
an horse is Grass only, and so all things else to be eschewed: at this
argument both humanity and divinity laughs. For other helps, as physic, diverse
meats and diverse means are ordained for both, even by the power of the
Almighty: himself tells the contemners thereof, how grossly they err in this
foolish opinion. Nay allow them a little shadow of truth, that things most
natural are most beneficial, then it must follow that Grass is most
natural, and so most beneficial: now Grass is physical, for in it is
contained all manner of simples of all manner of natures, hot, cold, moist,
dry, of all qualities, all quantities, all mixtures; so that whatsoever I give
(that is good) is but that which he has formerly gathered out of his own
nature, only with this difference, that what he gathers, is in a confused
manner, clapping contraries together so abundantly, that we are not able to
judge where the: predominant quality lies; and that which we compound is so
governed by Art and Reason, that we know how it should work, and we expect the
event, if it be not cro^^ by some greater disaster.

But will they bind themselves to keep the Running-horse only with grass,
they know then the end of their labor will be loss. No, they will allow Corn,
nay diverse corns, some nourishing and loosening, as Oats and Rye, some
astringent and binding, as Beans, and some fatning and breeding both blood and
sperm, as Wheat; nay they will allow Bread of diverse compositions and diverse
mixtures, some before heats, some after, some quick of digestion, and some
slow, and if this be not as physical as any scowring a good horseman gives, I
report me to him that shall read the mixtures: nay these contemners of
scowrings will allow an egg, nay an egg mixed with other ingredients, and for
butter and garlic they will use it, though it be never so fulsome; the reason
is, because their knowledge can rise to no higher a stayre in physic, and
authorized ignorance will ever wage battle with the best understanding; like
foolish Gallants on Saint Georges day, who neither having ability to buy, nor
credit to borrow a gold chain, scorn at them which wear them, or Martine
Marprelatt, that not having learning worthy of a Deacon, found no felicity but
in railing against divine Fathers.

CHAP. II. The first ordering of the Running-horse according to the several
states of their Bodies.
WHen a horse is matched (or to be matched) for a running course, you are
principally to regard the state of Body in which the Horse is at The three
estates of Horses bodies.
the time of his matching; and this state of Body I divide into three several
kinds.





good usage and moderate exercise.

If your Horse be in the first Times for matching.
estate of body, you shall take longer time for his keeping and bringing into
order, as two months at the least, or more, as you can conclude your wager.

If he be in the second estate of Body, that is, very poor; then you shall
also take as long time as you may, yet you need not so much as in the former:
Grass cannot much hurt, and exercise may go hand in hand with feeding.

If he be in the third estate of Body (which is a mean betwixt the other
extremes) then a month or six weeks, may be time sufficient to diet him for
his match.

Now as you regard these general Particular estates of Bodies.
estates of Bodies, so you must have an eye to certain particular estates of
Bodies; As if an Horse be fat and foul, yet of a free and spending Nature, apt
quickly to consume and loose his flesh, this Horse must not have so strickt an
hand, neither can he endure so violent exercise, as he that is of an hard and
keltie disposition, and will feed and be fat upon all meats and all exercises*

Again, if your Horse be in extreme poverty through disorder and misusage, yet
is by nature very hard, and apt both soon to recover his flesh, and long to
hold it; Then, over this Horse you shall by no means hold so liberal and
tender an hand, nor forbear that exercise which otherwise you would do to the
Horse which is of a tender nature, a weak stomach and a free spirit; provided
always you have regard to his limbs, and the imperfection of lamenesse.

Thus you see how to look into the estates of Horses bodies, and what time to
take for your matchings, I will now descend to their several orderings and
dietings: and because in the fat Horse is contained both the lean Horse, and
the Horse in reasonable estate of Body, I will in him show all the secrets and
observations which are to be employed in the dyeting and ordering of all
three, without any omission or reservation whatsoever; for truth, Sir, I have
vowed unto you, and truth I will present you.

CHAP. III. How to diet an Horse for a match, that is fat, foul, and either
newly taken from Grass, or Soil, being the first Fortnight.
IF you match an Horse that is foul and fat, Matching of a foul Horse.
either by running at Grass, or standing at Soil, or by any other means of
rest, or too high keeping, you shall for the first fortnight (at least) rise
early in the Morning before day, or at the spring of day (according to the
time of the year) and having put on his bridle washed in Beer, and tied him to
the Rack, take away his dung and other foulness of the Stable; then you shall
dress the Horse exceeding well, that is Of dro^^ sing.
to say; you shall first currie him all over with the Iron comb, from the head
to the tail, from the top of the shoulder to the knee, and from the top of the
B^r^ock to the hinder Cambrell, then dust him all over, either with a clean
dusting cloth, or with an Horse tail, or such like thing made fast to an
handle; Then Currie or ^^^ him all over with the F^^^^^ Brush, beginning with
his Forehead, temples, and cheeks, so down his neck, shoulders, and fore-leg^,
even to the setting on of the hoof^, so along his sides, and under his belly,
and lastly all about his buttocks and hinder legs even to the ground: Then you
shall go over all those parts (which the Brush has touched) with your wet hands
and not leave (as near as you can) one loose hair about him, nor one wet hair;
for what your hands did wet, your hands must rub dry again: you shall also
with your wet hands cleanse his sheath, his yard, his stones, or cod, and his
Tuell, and indeed not leave any secret place uncleansed, as ears, nostrills,
fore-bowels, and between his hinder thighs; Then you shall take an
hayrie-cloath, and with it rub the Horse all over in every part, but
especially, his face, eyes, cheeks, between the chaps, on the top of the
forehead, in the nape of the neck, down his legs, feetlocks, and about his
pasterns; Lastly, you shall take a clean woollencloath, and with it rub the
Horse all over, beginning with his head, and face, and so passing through every
part of the Horses body or limbs, which has been before mentioned; then take
a wet Maincombe, and comb down his main, and tail; when this work is
finished, take a fair large bodycloath, of thick warm huswives Caresey (if it
be in the winter season) or of fine Cotton, or other light stuff (if it be in
the Summer season) and fold it round about the Horses body, then clappe on his
Saddle, and girt the foremost girt pretty straight, but the other girt somewhat
slack, and wisp it on each side the Horses heart, that both the girts may be
of equal straightness; Then put before his breast, a warm breast-cloath
suitable to the bodie-cloath, and let it cover both his shoulders: when the
Horse is thus accoutered and made ready, you shall take a little beer into
your mouth, and spirt it into the Horses mouth, and so draw him out of the
Stable, and take his back, leaving some ordinary Groom behind you to trim up
your Stable, to carry forth the dung, and to shake and toss up your Litter,
for you are to understand, and it is a general principle, that your Horse must
stand upon good store of fresh, dry litter, continually both night and day;
and it must ever be of Wheat straw if possible, or Oat-straw, if forced by
necessity; as for Barlie-straw, and Rye-straw, they are both unwholesome and
dangerous, the one does heart-burn, the other causes scouring. When you are
thus mounted, you shall walk forth your Horse a foot pace (which we call
Racking, for you must neither Amble, nor Trott) at least a mile ortwo, or more,
upon smooth and sound ground, and as near as you can to the steepest hills you
can find; there gallop your Horse very gently up those steep hills, and Rack,
or walk him softly down, that he may cool as much one way, as he warmeth
another, and when you have thus exercised him a pretty space, then seeing the
Sun begin to rise, or pre^^ily risen, you shall walk your Horse either to
some River, or clear Pond that is fed with a sweet Spring, and there let him
drink at his pleasure; After he has drunk, walk him gently from the water a
pretty space, to avoid evil qualities, which custom will gather, as
fearfulness to drink for fear of sudden gallopping, or furious running away,
knowing he must gallop (which may endanger his wind) then after calm usage,
you shall gallop and exercise him moderatly as you did before, then walk him a
pretty space, and after offer him more water: if he drink, then do as before;
if he refuse, then gallop him to occasion thirst, and thus always give him
exercise, both before and after his water; when he has drunk (as you think)
sufficiently, then bring him home gently, without a wet hair about him; when
you are come to the Stable door (before which your Groom shall ever throw his
foul litter continually and from time to time) there alight from his back, and
by whistling, stretching the Horse upon the straw, and raising up the straw
under him, see if you can make him piss, which if at first he do not, yet
with a little custom he will soon be brought unto it, and it is an wholesome
action, both for the Horses health, and for the cleanly keeping of your Stable.

When these things are performed, you shall then bring the Horse into his
stall, and first tie his head up to the Rack in the bridle, then with hard dry
wisps rub all his four legs down with as great strength as you can, then
unloose his breast cloth, rub his head, neck, and breast exceeding much with a
dry cloth, then take off his saddle, and hang it by, after take off his
body-cloth, then rub over all his Body and limbs, especially his back where
the Saddle stood, aad then clothe him up, first with a linen sheet, then over
it a good strong housing-cloth, and above it his woollen bodiecloth, which in
the winter it is not amiss to have it lined with some thin Cotton, or other
woollen stuff; but in the heat of Summer, the Carsey it self is sufficient:
when you have girt these clothes about him, stop his sirsingle round with
reasonable big, soft, and thick wisps, for with them he will lie at best ease,
because small hard wisps are ever hurtful.

After your horse is thus clothed up, you shall then pick his feet, and stop
them up with Cowdung, and then throw into his Rack a little bundle of Hay, so
much as an halfe-penny bottle in a dear Inn, well dusted, chosen, and hard
bound together, and this he shall tear out as he stands on his Bridle.

After the Horse has stood on his bridle an hour, you shall come to him, and
first rub his head, face, and the nape of his neck with a clean Rubber made
of new rough hempen cloth, for this is excellent for the head, and dissolveth
all gross and filthy humors; and then you shall draw his Bridle, and with a
very clean cloth make the Maunger so clean as may be, and if he have scattered
any Hay therein, gather it up, and throw it back in to his Rack; then you shall
take the quantity of a quart or better, of sweet, dry, old and clean dressed
Oats, of which the heaviest, and the whitest are the best, or those which we
call the Poland Oats, or the cut Oats, for those only are wholesome, the other
which are unsweet, breed infirmity, those which are moist cause swelling in the
body, those which are new breed worms and pain in the belly, and they which
are half dressed deceive the Stomach, and bring the Horse to ruin; as for the
black Oats, though they are tolerable in the time of necessity, yet they make
foul dung, and hinder a man's knowledge in the state of the Horses body; this
quart of Oats you shall put into a Sive that is less then a Riddle, and a
thought bigger than a Reeing sive, such an one as will let a light Oat through,
but keep a full Oat from scattering; In this Sive you shall Ree, dress, and
toss your Oats very much, that there may be neither dust, nor any other foul
thing in them, and so give them to the Horse to eat, and if he eat them with a
good stomach, you may then sift and give him as much more, and so let him rest
till it be near eleven a Clock: at eleven, come to the Stable again, and
having rubd the Horses head, neck, and face, you shall then take another quart,
or better, of Oats, and (as before) toss and Ree them through your Sive, and
so give them the Horse; then closing up your windows, that the Horse may
remain so dark as is possible, leave him till one a clock: and here you are
to understand, that the darker you keep your Horse in your absence, the better
it is, and it will occasion him to feed, lie down, and take his rest, when
otherwise he would not; and therefore we commonly use to arm the stalls
wherein these Horses stand, round about, and aloft, and over the Rack with
strong Canvase, both for darkness, warmth, and that no filth may come near the
Horse. At one a Clock or thereabouts, come to the Horse, and sift him another^
quart of Oats, and give them him* after you have rubd well his face, head, and
nape of the neck, then putting away his dung, and making the stable clean and
sweet, give him a little knob of Hay, and so leave him till Four a clock in
the evening if it be in the Summer, o^ after three, if it be in the winter and
short season. At four a clock, come again to the stable, and having made all
things clean, then bridle up the Horse (having we^ the snaffle with Beer) and
tie him up to the Rack, then take off his clothes, and dress him in all points
and every way, as was showed you for the morning; after he is dressed, then
cloth and saddle him, as was also showed for the morning; then bring him
forth, and do your best to make him piss and dung upon the foul litter before
the Stable door, then mount his back, and ride him forth as you did in the
morning, but not to the hills, if possible you can find any other plain and
level ground, as Meadow, pasture, or any other earth, especially if it lie
along by the River, but in this case you can be no chooser, but must take the
most convenient ground you can find, making a virtue of necessity; here air
your Horse in all points in the evening, as you did in the morning, galloping
him both before, and after his water, then Racking him gently up and down, and
in your Racking you must observe, even from the Stable door, in all your
passages, especially when you would have your Horse to empty himself (if your
Horse be stoned) to let him smell upon every old and new dung you meet withal,
for this will make him empty his body, and repair his stomach; After you
have watered your Horse, and spent the evening in ayring till within night, (for
nothing is more wholesome, or sooner consumes foulness, then early and late
ayrings,) you shall then Rack him home to the stable door, there alight, and
whatsoever you did in the morning, either within doors, or without, do the same
also now at night, and so leave the horse on his bridle for an hour or more,
then come to him again, and as you did in the forenoon so do now, rub him well,
draw his bridle, cleanse the Maunger, put up his scattered Hay, sift him a
quart and better of Oats, and give them him, and so let him rest till nine a
clock at night.

At nine a clock at night, which is bed time both for your horse and your
self, come unto him, and first rub down his legs hard, with hard wisps, then
with a clean cloth rub his face, head, chaps, nape of the neck, and foreparts,
then turn up his clothes, and rub over his Buttocks and hinder parts, then put
down his clothes, and sift him a quart of oats and give them him, then put into
his Rack a little bundle of Hay, toss up his litter, and make his bed soft,
and so betake both him and your self to your rests till the next morning.

The next morning (as the morning before) come to the Horse and do every thing
without the omission of any one particle, as has been formerly declared; and
thus you shall keep your Horse constantly for the first fortnight, in which,
by this double daily exercise, you shall so harden his flesh, and consume his
foulness, that the next fortnight (if you be a temperate man) you may
adventure to give him gentle heats.

CHAP. IIII. Four principal considerations touching Heats.
NOw touching Heats, which is the violent exercise of an Horse, you are to take
to your self these four considerations,

First, that two heats in the week is a sufficient proportion, for any Horse of
what condition, or state of body soever.

Secondly, that one heat should ever be given, upon that day in the weeek on
which he is to run his match, as thus, If your match is to be run upon the
Monday, then your fittest heating days, are Mondaies, and Frydaies, and the
Mondaies to be ever the sharpe^ heat, both because it is the day of his match,
and there is three days respite betwixt it, and the other heat. If the match
day be on the Tuesday, then the heating days are Tuesdaies, and Saturdaies: if
it be on the Wednesday, then the heating days are, Wednesdaies, and
Saturdaies, by reason of the Sabbath: if on the Thursday, then Thursdaies, and
Mondaies, and so of the rest.

Thirdly, you shall give no heat (except in case of extremity) in very rainy
and foul weather, but rather defer hours, and change times, for it is
unwholesome and dangerous, and therefore in case of showers and uncertain
weather, you shall be sure to provide for your Horse a warm lined hood, with
lined ears, and the nape of the neck lined, to keep out Rain, for nothing is
more dangerous then cold wet, falling into the ears, and upon the nape of the
neck, and the E^llets.

Lastly, observe to give you^ heats, the weather being seasonable, as early in
the morning as you can, that is by the spring of day, but by no means in the
dark, for it is to the horse unwholesome and unpleasant, to the man a great
testimony of folly, and to both an act of danger and precipitation.

CHAP. V. The second fortnights keeping.
NOw to descend to the second fortnights keeping, touching your first approach
to the Stable, and other by respects, as cleansing, shaking up of litter, and
the like, you shall do all things as in the first fortnight, only before you
put on his bridle, you shall give him a quart or better, of clea^ fifted Oats,
which as soon as h^^ has eaten, you shall then bridle him up, and dress him
in all points as was declared in the first fortnight; you shall cloth him,
saddle him, air, water, and bring him home as in the first fortnight, only
you shall not put any Hay in his Rack to tear out, but only draw with your
hand as much fine sweet Hay (which you shall toss and dust well, (as you can
gripe, and let him as he stands on the bridle, tear it out of your hand,
which if he do greedily, and earnestly, then you may give him another, and
another, and so let him stand on the bridle an hour or more after; then come
to him and after rubbing, and other ceremonies before declared performed, sift
and dust up a quart of Oats, and set them by, then take a ^oafe of bread that
is at least three ^aies old, made after this manner.

CHAP. VI. The First Bread.
TAke three pecks of clean Beans, and one peck of fine Wheat, and mix them
together, and grind them to pure Meal, then boult it through a reasonable
fine Raunge, and knead it up with great store of Barme, and lightning, but with
as little water as may be; labor it in the trough with all painfulnesse, tread
it, break it, and after cover it warm, and let it ^^ a pretty space in the
trough ^^ swell, then knead it over again, and mould it up into big loaves
like twelvepenny household loaves and so bake them well, and ^^ them soake
soundly: after th^^ are drawn from the Oven, tur^^ t^^ bottomes upward, and let
them cool; at three days old you may adventure to give this bread, b^^ hardly
sooner, for nothing does occasion Surfeit, or is more dangerous then new bread;
yet if necessity compel you sooner to give it, or that the bread be dan^ and
clammie, so as the Horse takes distaste thereat, then cut the loaf into thin
Shives, and lay it abroad in a Sive to dry, and then crumbling it small
amongst his Oats, you may give it without danger.

But to return to my purpose where I left, when you have taken a loaf of this
bread of three days old, you shall chip it very well, then cut it into thin
slices, and break three or four Shives thereof (which may countervaile the
quantity of the Oats) very small, and mix it with the Oats you had before
fifted, and so give them to the Horse.

About eleven of the clock you shall come to the Horse, and having performed
your by ceremonies before spoke of, you shall give him the same quantity of
Bread and Oats, as you did in the morning, and so let him rest till the
afternoon.

At one of the clock in the afternoon, or after, if you intend not to give him
an heat the next day, you shall feed him with bread and Oats, as you did in
the forenoone, and so consequently every meal following, for the day,
observing every action and motion as has been before declared;

But if you intend the next day to give him an heat (to which I now bend mine
aim) you shall then only give him a quart of Oats carefully sifted, but no
Hay, and so let him rest till four of clock in the evening.

At four a clock, before you put on his Bridle, give him a quart of clean
sifted Oats, and as soon as they are eaten, put on his Bridle, and tie up his
head, not forgetting all by-ceremonies before declared, then dress him, cloth
him, saddle him, air and water him as before showed; also bring him home, and
order him as before showed, only give no Hay at all. After he has stood an
hour on the Bridle, give him (as before) a quart of clean sifted Oats; when
he has eaten them, you shall then put on his head a sweet clean washed moosell,
and so let him rest till nine of the clock at night.

Now touching the use of this moosell, and which is the best, you shall
understand that as they are most useful, being good and rightly made, so they
are dangerous and hurtful being abused, or falsely made; The true use of them
is to keep the Horse from eating up his litter, from gnawing upon boords and
mud walls, and indeed to keep him from eating any thing but what he receives
from your own hands.

These moosells are sometimes made of leather, and stamped full of holes, or
else close, but they are unsavory and unwholesome; for if it be Allomd leather,
the Allome is offensive: if it be liquored leather, the grease and Tanners ^uze
are full as unpleasant, besides they are too close, and too hot, and both make
an horse sick, cause him to forbear rest, and retain his dung longer in his
body then otherwise he would do;

The best Summer moosell, is the net moosell, made of strong packthred, and
knit exceeding thick, and with small mashes in the bottom, and so enlarged
wider and wider up to the middle of the Horses head, and then bound about the
top with strong tape, and upon the near side a loop, and on the far side a
long string of tape to fasten it unto the Horses head.

The best winter moosell is that which is made of strong double Canvase, with a
round bottom, and a square latisse window of small tape before both his
nostrils down to the very bottom of the moosell, and upward more then an
handful, this must also have a loop, and a string to fasten it about the
horses head.

At nine of the clock at night, coming to the Horse (after your by-ceremonies
before taught are performed) give him a quart of clean sifted Oats, and as soon
as he has eaten them, put on his moosell, toss up his litter, and leave him
to his rest.

The next day early in the morning before day, come to the horse (if he be
standing on his feet, but if he be laid, by no means disturb him) now whilst he
is lying, or if he be standing, take a quart of clean Oats well sifted and
rubd between your hands, and wash them in a little strong Ale or beer, and let
them not be too moist, for fear of offense, and so give them to the Horse:
as soon as he has eaten them, bridle him up, and hang by his moosell in some
sweet place, then uncloath him, and dress him as has been before showed,
after put on his body-cloth and brest-cloth, and saddle him, then being ready
to go forth with him* take his bridle reine, and draw it over the top of the
rack, so as you may raise his head also, then take a new laid egg washed clean,
and breaking it in his mouth, make him to swallow it down, then wash his tongue
and mouth with a little Beer, and so lead him forth of the Stable: at the
door see if he will piss, or dung, then take his back, and Rack him gently
to the Course, ever and anon making him smell upon other horses dungs whereby he
may empty himself the better; when you are come within a mile or thereabout
of the starting-post, you shall alight from the Horses back, and take off his
body-cloth, and brest-cloth, and then girt on the saddle again; then sending
away your Groom both with those clothes, and other clean dry
rubbing-clothes, let him stay at the last end of the Race till you come, then
yourself Rack your Horse gently up to the starting-post and beyond, making him
smell to that post, as you should also do to the first post (which we call
the waighing post) that he may thereby take notice of the beginning and ending
of his course, and there start your horse roundly and sharply, at near a three
quarters speed, and according to his strength of body, ability of mind, and
cheerfulness of spirit, run him the whole Course through, but by no means do
any thing in extremity, or above his wind and strength, but when you find him
a little yield, then give him a little ease, so that all he does may be done
with pleasure, and not with anguish, for this manner of trayning will make him
take delight in his labor, and so increase it, the contrary will breed
discomfort, and make exercise irksome. Also during the time you thus course
your horse, yet shall with all carfulness note upon what grounds he runs
best* as whethe up the hill, or down the hill, whether on the smooth earth, or
on the rough, whether on the wet, or on the dry, or whether on the level, or
the earth that is somewhat rising; and according as you find his nature and
disposition, so maintain him for your own advantage.

When you have thus courst the course over strongly and swiftly, and after a
little slightly gallopt him up and down the field to ^ake his wind, and cheer
his spirits, you shall then (your Groom being ready with your clothes and other
necessaries) ride into some warm place, as under the covert of some Hedge,
Bushes, or Trees, into some hollow dry ditch, pit, or other defense from the
air, and there alight from his back, and first with a Glasing-knife, or a
scraping knife as some call it, made either of some broken sword-blade, some
old broken Sith, or for want of them, of a thin piece of old hard Oaken
wood, and fashioned like a broad long knife, with a sharp edge; and using this
with both your hands, scrape off all the sweat from your Horse in every part
wheresoever you find any wet, excepting his Buttocks, which must not be
touched; and thus do till you find there will no more sweat arise, and ever an
anon move and stir the horse up and down, and then with dry clothes rub him
all over exceedingly, his buttocks still excepted, then take off the saddle,
and having glazed, and rubbed his back, put on his body-cloth and brestcloth,
and then set on the saddle again, and girt it, then gallop the Horse gently
forth again a little space, ever and anon rubbing his head, neck, and body,
as you sit on his back, then walk him about the fields, or downs to cool him,
and when you find that he dries apace, then Rack him gently homeward,
sometimes Racking, and sometime gallopping, but by no means bring him to the
Stable, ^ill you find he have not one wet ^aire about him: when you have
brought him to the Stable door ^rie, there dismount, and having ^ntic'd him to
piss, and empty himself, then lead him into his Stall, and there tie his
head gent^y up to the Rack, with his bri^le, which done, presently (as having
prepared it before) give the Horse this scowring made in his manner.

CHAP. VII. The First Scowring.
TAke a pint of the best sweet Sac^^^ and put the^ ^^ an ounce of the clearest
and p^^ rest Rozen ^^^ sed to a very fine dust, and jumbl^ and brew them
together exceeding much, then when the Sack^ and it is incorporated together,
put thereto half a pint of the best Sallet-oyle, and brew the^ also well
together: Then lastly* take an ounce and an half of brown Suger-candie beaten
to^ to powder, and a spoonefull of London Treacle, and put them in also, then
mull all upon the fire, and being lukewarm, take of the Syrrop of Roses a
pint, and dissolve into it of Casfi^, of Agarike, and of Myrrh, of each a
quarter of an ounce; then being only warmed against the Fire, and the Horse
newly come in from his heat, as before I showed you, draw his head up to the
Rack, and with an horn give him this Scowring, for it is a strong one, and
this takes away and avoydeth all manner of molten grease, and foulness
whatsoever.

CHAP. VIII. Ordering of the Horse after his scowring.
As Soon as you have given your Horse this scowring, presently let your Groom
fall to rubbing of his legs, and do your self take off his saddle and clothes*
and finding his body dry, run slightly over it with your Currycombe, after
with the brush, then dust well, and lastly, rub all his body over exceeding
well with dry clothes, especially his head, nape of the neck, and about his
heart, then cloth him up warm as at his other ordinary times, and wisp him
round with great warm wisps, and if you throw over him a light loose blanket,
it will not be amiss in these extraordinary times, especially if the season
be cold; keep him fasting two hours after the receipt of his scowring, and
waking, and stirring three or four, for rest is hurtful to the medicine, and
motion a benefit.

After your Horse has fasted upon the bridle full two hours or more, then you
shall take an handful of wheat ears, being your Pollard wheat, that is without
Annes or rough beards, and coming to the Horse, first handle the roots of his
ears, then put your hands under his clothes against his heart, upon his
flanks, and on the nether part of his thighs, and if you find any nesh sweat
to arise, or any coldness of sweat, or if you see his body beat, or his
breath move fast, then forbear to give him any thing, for it is a pregnant
sign that there is much foulness stirred up, on which the medicine working
with a conquering quality, the Horse is brought to a little heart-sicknesse,
therefore in this case, you shall only take off his bridle, and put on his
collar, then toss up his litter that he may lie down, and so absent your self
(having made the stable dark and still) for two hours more, which is the
utmost end of that sickness. But if you find no such offense, then you shall
pr^ffer him the ears of wheat by three or four together, and if he ^^^e this
handful, then give him another.

After he has eaten the wh^^^ ears, you shall then give him a little bundle of
Hay, such as has been before declared, and draw his bridle, rubbing his head
well.

An hour or better after he has had his Hay, you shall sift him* quart of
Oats, and to them you shall put two or three handfulls of Spelted beans, which
you shall cause to be Reed and dressed so clean as is possible from all manner of
hulls, dust, and filth whatsoever, so as there may be nothing but the clean
spelted Beans themselves* to these Oats and Beans, you shall break two or
three shives of bread clean chipt, and give all unto the Horse, and so leave
him to his rest, for near three hours, or thereabout.

At evening before you dress the Horse, give the like quantity of Oats,
spelt-beans, and bread, and when he has eaten them, then bridle him up and
dress him as before declared, and after he is dressed, then cloth him up, ^on
you shall neither saddle him, nor ride him forth: for you shall understand
that this evening, after his heat, the horse being inwardly* foul, and the
scowring yet working in his body, he may not receive any water at all.

After the Horse is dressed, and has stood an hour and an half upon his
bridle, you shall then take three pintes of clean sifted Oats, and wash them
in strong Ale, or Beer, and so give them to the Horse, for this will inwardly
cool and refresh him, as if he had drunk water.

After he has eaten this wash meat, and rested upon it a little space, you
shall then at his feeding times (which have been spoken of before) with Oats
and spelt beans, or Oats and bread, or all together, or each several and
simple of it self, excepting Beans (as you shall find the stomach of the
horse best adicted to receive it) feed him that night in plentiful manner, and
leave a knob of Hay in the Rack when you go to bed.

The next day very early as may be, first feed, then dress, after cloth and
saddle, then air him abroad, and water him as has been before showed, after
bring him home, and feed him with oats, spelt beans, and bread, as was last of
all declared, only very little Hay, and keep your heating days, and the
preparation the day before in such wise as has been also formerly declared,
without any omission or addition.

Thus you shall spend the second fortnight, in which your Horse having received
four heats soundly given unto him, and four scowrings, there is no doubt but
his body will be drawn inwardly clean, you shall then the third fortnight
order him according to those rules, which hereafter follow.

CHAP. IX. The third Fortnights keeping.
The second Bread.
THis third fortnight you shall make his bread finer then it was formerly, as
thus. You shall take two pecks of clean Beans, and two pecks of fine wheat,
grind them on the black stones, searse them through a fine raunge, and knead
it up with Barm, and great store of lightning, working it in all points, and
baking it in the same sort, as was showed you in the former bread.

With this Bread (having the crust cut clean away, and being old as before
showed) with clean sifted Oats, and with clean dressed spelt-beanes you shall
feed your Horse this fortnight, as you did the fortnight before, you shall
observe his dressings, agreeings, and hours of feeding, as in the former
fortnight, also you shall observe his heating days, and the day before his
heat, as in the former fortnight, only with these differences;

First you shall not give his heats so violently as before, but with a little
more pleasure, that is to say, if the first heat be of force, and violence,
the second heat shall be of pleasure and ease, and indeed none at all to
overstrain the horse, or to make his body sore.

Next you shall not after his heat (when he comes home) give him any more of
the former scowring, but instead thereof, you shall instantly upon the end of
your heat, after the horse is a little cooled and clothed up, and in the same
place where you rub him, by drawing his head up aloft as you sit in the saddle,
or raising it up otherwise, give him a ball somewhat bigger then a French
walnut hull and all, of that which is mentioned in the fourth Chapter of the
book of cures, and goes by this Title. And thus you shall spend the third
Fortnight.

CHAP. VIII. The fourth and last Fortnights keeping.
HAving thus spent the three first Fortnights, you shall the fourth and last
Fortnight, make your Horses Bread much fine^ then either of the former, as thus

The last Bread.
Take three pecks of fine wheat, and but one peck of clean Beans, grind them
together on the black stones, and boult them through the finest boulter you can
get, then knead it up with very sweet Ale, Barme, and new strong Ale, and the
Barme beaten together, and also the whites of at least twenty eggs, but in any
wise no water at all, but instead thereof, some small quantity of new milk,
then work it up, and labor it with all painfulnesse that may be, as was showed
in the first batch, then bake it and order it as was declared in the other.

With this Bread (having the crust cut clean away) and with Oats well sunned,
beaten and rubbed over with your hands, then new winnowed, sifted, and most
finely dressed, that there may be neither light ones, nor foul ones, nor any
false grain amongst them; and with the purest spelted Beans that can be tried
out, feed your Horse at his ordinary feeding times, in such wise as you did in
the fortnight last mentioned before* You shall keep his heating days, the
first week of this last fortnight, in such wise as you did in the former
fortnight, but the last week you shall forbear one heat, and not give him any
heat five days before his match at the lea^t, only you shall give him long
and strong ayerings to keep him in wind.

You shall not need this Fortnight to give him any scowring at all.

If this fortnight, morning, and evening, you burn (upon a c^^^ingdish and
coals) in your Stable of the purest Oliba^^m, or Fr^^^incens^, mixed with
Storax, and Benjamine, to perfume and sweeten the Room, you shall find it
exceeding wholesome for the Horse, and he will take wonderful delight therein.

In this fortnight when you give your horse any washed meat, wash it not in Ale,
or Beer, but in the whites of eggs, or muskadine, for that is more wholesome
and less pursey.

This fortnight give your horse no Hay at all, but what he takes out of your
hand after heats and ayrings, and that must be in little quantity, and clean
dusted and dressed, unless he be an exceeding evil feeder, marvailous tender,
and a great belly-looser.

The last week of this fortnight, if your Horse be a foul feeder, you must
use the muzell continually; but if he be a clean feeder, and will touch no
litter, then three days before your match, is a convenient time for the use of
the muzell.

The morning, the day before your match, feed well both before and after
ayring, and water as at other times, before noone, and after noone, scant his
proportion of meat a little before and after evening ayrings, feed as at noone,
water as at other times; but be sure to come home before sun set. This day
you shall cool your Horse, shoe him, and do all extraordinary things of
ornament about him, provided there be nothing to give him offense, or to hinder
him in resting, in emptying, or any other natural or beneficial action.

It is true, I have heard some horsemen say, that when they had put on the
muzell, shod their horses with light shoes, and done other actions of ornament
about them, the night before the course, that their Horses have taken such
special notice thereof, that they have refused both to eat, and lie down; But
I fear there is a great mistake in this conceit, for it is not the thing (as
the muzell, the shoes, and other trifles) which draws on these apprehensions,
but the abuse, and misuse of them, as when the muzel is too close, unsavory,
or suffocats and overheats the Horse (which the netmuzell never does) when the
shoes stand uneasy, or any other toy of curiosity that gives offense, then no
question but these accidents happen; for mine own part, touching the nice and
straight pla^ing up of horses tails in the manner of Sackers, or docks (which
is now in general use) howsoever the ornament may appear great to the eye,
yet I do not much affect it, because I know if an ignorant hand have the
workmanship thereof, he may many ways give offense to the Horse, and in
avoiding cumbersomnesse, breed a great deal more cumber: therefore I wish
every one rather to avoid curiosity (which we call necessary ornament) then by
these false graces to do injury to the Horse. Now for the necessary and
indifferent things which are to be done to the Horse, I would rather have them
done the day before, then on the morning of the course, because I would have
the Horse that morning to find no trouble or vexation.

Late at night you shall feed as you did in the morning. Now I do not set you
down exactly what meat to feed withal, because you must be ruled according to
the Horses stomach, and what meat he best likes, of that give him most,
either of the simple, or with any other compounded, yet observing that the
meat which is lightest of digestion, is fittest for this purpose, and the more
(at this time) you forbear Beans, and bread, the better it is.

The next morning (which is the match day) come to your horse before day, take
off his muzzle, rub his head well, and give him a pretty quantity of Oats washed
in muskadine, if he will eat them, or in the whites of eggs, or if he refuse
both, then try him with fine dressed Oats mixed with a little wheat, or with your
lightest bread; as for beans forbear them. Of any of these foods give him such
a quantity as may keep life and soul together; then if he be an evil
emptier, and will retain meat long, you may walk him abroad and in the places
where he used to empty, there entice him to empty, which as soon as he has
done, bring him home, put on his muzzle, let him rest till you have warning to
make ready and lead forth, but if he be a good and free emptying Horse, then
you need not stir him, but let him lie quiet.

When you have warning to prepare for leading out, come to your Horse, and
having washed his navell in a little Muskadine, take off his muzzle, and bridle
him up, but before you bridle, if you think your Horse too empty, you may give
him three or four mouths full of the washed meat last spoke of, then bridle
him up and dress him, after having pircht your saddle and girthes with
shoomakers wax, set it on his back, and girt it as gently as may be, so as he
may have a feeling, but no straightness; then lay a very white sheet over the
saddle next his skin, and over it his ordinary clothes, then his body-cloth,
and brest-cloth, and wispe them round about with soft wisps, then if you have a
countepoint or cloth of state for bravery sake, let it be fastened above all:
when this is done, and you are ready to draw out, then take half a pint of
the best muskadine, and give it him with an horn, and so lead him away.

In your leading upon the course, use gentle and calm motion, suffering the
Horse to smell upon every dung, that thereby he may empty himself. And in
especial places of advantage, as where you find Rushes, long Grass, Lyng,
Heath, or the like, walk your Horse, and entice him to piss, but if you find
no such help, then in especial places, upon the course, and chiefly toward
the latter end, and having used the same means before, break some of your
wispes under the Horses belly, and so make him piss.

Also in your leading, if any white or thick foame, or froth arise about the
horses mouth, you shall with a clean handkerchiefe wipe it away, and carrying
a small bottle of clear water about you, wash your horses mouth now and then
therewith.

When you come to the place of start, before you turle or uncloath the horse,
rub and chafe his legs with hard wisps, then pick his feet, then wash his mouth
with water, then uncloath him, mount his Rider; start fair, and then refer all
the rest, to Gods good will and pleasure.

CHAP. XI. Certain necessary observations and advantages, for every Keeper to
observe in sundry accidents.
THere is no unreasonable creature of pleasure, subject to so many disasterous
chances of fortune, as the Horse; and especially the Running horse, both by
reason of the multiplicity of diseases belonging unto them, as also the
violence of their exercise, and the nice tenderness of their keeping, and
therefore it behooveth every Keeper to be armed with such observations, as may
discern mischiefs, and those helps, which may amend them when they happen.

The first observation therefore that I would arm our keeper withal, is, to
discern sickness from health, as thus,

Observations for sickness and health.

If you find in your Horses heaviness of countenance, extreme loosnesse, or
extreme costivenesse, shortness of breath, loathing of meat, dull and
imperfect eyes, rotten or dry cough, staring hair, or hair unnaturally
discolloured, a staggering pace, frantic behavior, yellowness of the eyes
and skin, faint or cold sweat, extraordinary lying down, or beating or looking
back at the body, alteration of qualities, and gestures, not casting of his
coat, leanness, hydebound, and the like, all these are apparent signs of
distem perature or sickness.

Observations from the dung.

It is necessary that our Keeper observe his Horses dung, for it is the best
tell-troth of a horses inward parts, yet he must not judge it by a general
opinion, but by a private discourse with himself, how the Horse has been
fed, because food is the only thing that breeds alteration, as thus. If the
dung becleere, crisp, and of a pale and whitish yellow complexion, hanging
together without separation, more then as the weight breaks it in the falling,
being neither so thin that it will run, nor so thick, but it will a little
flat on the ground, and indeed both in savor, and substance, somewhat
resembling a sound man's ordure; then is the Horse clean, well fed, and without
imperfection; If it be well colloured, yet fall from him in round knots, or
pellets, so it be but the first or second dung only, and the rest good as
beforesayd, it matters not much, for it only shows that he did eat Hay
lately, and that will ever come away first of all; but if all his dungs be
alike, then it is a sign of foul feeding, and he has either too much Hay,
or eats too much litter, and too little corn; If his dung be in round
pellets, and blackish, or brown, it shows inward heat in the body; if it be
greasy, it shows foulness, and that grease is molten, but cannot come away;
If he do avoid grease in gross substance with his dung, if the grease be
white, and clear, then it comes away kindly, and there is no danger, but if it
be yellow or putrified, then the grease has layne long in his body, and
sickness may follow, if not prevented; if his dung be red and hard, then the
Horse has had too strong heats, and costivenesse will follow; if it be pale
and loose, it shows inward coldness of body, or too moist feeding.

Observations from the Urine.

As the keeper has thus a principal respect to the horses dung, so he shall
take some little note from his Urine also; and though they be not altogether so
material as the other, because according to the opinion of Physicians, Vrina
est meretrix, Urine is a deceiver, chiefly in the horse, because he neither
eats, drinks, nor labors according to his own mind, but his Masters
pleasure: yet it has some true faces, as thus: that Urine which is of a pale
yellowish color, rather thick then thin, of a strong smell, and a peircing
condition, is a healthful, sound, and good Urine; but if you find any note or
complexion contrary to these, then in the horse is some imperfection, as thus:
If the Urine be of an high ruddie complexion, either like blood, or inclining
to blood, then has the Horse either had too sore heats, been over-ridden, or
ridden too early after winter grass; if the Urine be of an high complexion,
clear and transparent, like old March beer, then the Horse is inflamed in his
body, and has taken some surfeit; if the Urine carry a white cream on the
top, it shows a weak back, and consumption of seed, a green Urine shows a
consumption of blood, an Urine with bloody streakes, shows an ulcer in the
kidneys, and a black thick cloudy Urine, shows death and mortality.

Observations in Feeding.

Again our keeper must observe that if there be any meat, drink, or other
nourishment which he knows good for the Horse, yet the Horse refuses to
take it, in this case, he shall not violently thrust it upon the Horse, or by
force cramme him therewith, but by gentile degrees, and cunning enticements,
and by process of time win him thereunto, tempting him when he is most hungry,
or most thirsty, and if he get but a bit at a time, or a sup at a time, it
will soon increase to a greater quantity, and ever let him have less than he
desires; and that he may the sooner be brought unto it, mix the meat he
loves best, with that he loves worst, the drink he loves best, with that
he loves worst, till both be made alike familiar, and so shall the Horse be
a stranger to nothing that is good or wholesome.

Observations in case of lamenesse.

Again our keeper must observe if his Horse be subject to lamenesse, or
stiffenesse of joints or sinews, to surbating or tenderness of feet, first to
give him his heats upon soft and smooth carpet earth, and to forbear stony
ground, hard highways, cross cuts and furrows, till extremity, or the match
day compel him.

Observations from the state of the Horses body.

It is good for our keeper to observe, that the strongest estate of body, which
I account the highest and fullest of flesh, so it be good, hard, and without
inward foulness, to be the best and ablest for the performance of these
wagers: yet he must herein take to himself two considerations, the one the
shape of the Horses body, the other, his inclination and manner of feeding. For
the shape of body, there be some Horses that are round, plump, and close knit
together, so that they will appear fat, and well-shaped, when they are lean
and in poverty, others are raw-boned, slender and loose knit together, and
will appear lean, deformed, and in poverty when they are fat, foul, and full
of gross humors. So likewise for their inclinations, some Horses (as the
first before named) will feed outwardly, and will carry a thick rib, when they
are inwardly as lean as may be, and without all manner of fullness; There be
others (as the latter) that will appear lean to the eye, and show nothing but
skin and bone, when they are full of inward fatness, and have guts as foul as
may be. In this case the keeper has two helps to advantage his knowledge, the
one outward, the other inward.

The outward help, is the outward handling and feeling of the Horses body
generally all over, all his ribs, but particularly upon his short and hindmost
ribs, if his flesh generally handle soft, and loose, and your fingers sinck
into it, as into down, then is the horse foul without question, but if
generally it be hard and firm, only upon the hindmost rib it handles soft
and downy, then it is a pregnant sign there is grease, and foul matter within
the Horse which must be avoided, how lean or poor so ever he appear in
outward speculation.

The inward help is only sharp exercise, and strong scowring, the first will
dissolve and melt the foulness, the latter will bring it away in abundance.

If your Horse be fat, and thick, and as it were closed up between the chaps,
or if his jaws handle fleshie and full, it is a sign of much foulness both in
the head, and body; But if he handle thin, and clean, only with some
small kirnells, or lumps between his chaps, then it is only a sign of some
cold or pose newly taken.

Observations from the privi^ parts.

It is good for our keeper to observe his Horses stones if he be stoned) for
if they hang down side, or long from his body, then is the Horse out of lust,
and heart, and is either sick of grease, or other foul humors, but if they be
close couched up, and hid in a small room, then is the Horse healthful, and
in good plighte, if his yard befoule, stained, rough or skalie, then fear no
foul play, but if it be clear, bright, and as it were new scowred, then look
to your Groom, for he has covered a Mare lately.

Observations for the limbs.

It is good for our keeper to observe, ever the night before he runs either
match, or heat, to bathe his Horses legs well from above the knees, and above
the cambrells downward, with either dogsgrease, which is the best, or trotters
oil, which is the second, or the purest clarified hogsgrease that can be got,
which is most tolerable, and to work it in with the labor of his hands, and
not with melting at the fire, and what he gets not in the first night, will be
got in the next morning, and what he gets not in the next morning, will be got
in, when he comes to uncloath at the end of the course, so that you shall need
to use the ointment but once, but the fricasse or rubbing, as often as you find
opportunity.

Observations for the giving of water.

Our keeper shall observe, that albeit I give no directions for the watering of
his Horse, in the evening after his heat, yet he may in any of the two latter
fortnights (finding his Horse clear, and that his grease is consumed and come
away) somewhat late at night, as about six a clock, give his horse water in
reasonable quantity, being lukewarm, and fasting an hour after it; Also if
through the unseasonablenesse of the weather, you cannot water abroad, then you
shall at your watering hours, water in the house with warm water (as
aforesaid) nor need you in this case to heat all your water, but making a
little quantity very hot, put it into a greater, and so make all lukewarm, if
you throw an handful of wheat meal, or barm, or oat-meale finly pounded (but
Oat-meale is the best) into the water, it is not amiss, but wholesome, and
comfortable.

Observations in the choice of ground to run on.

Our keeper shall observe, that if the ground whereon he is to run his match be
dangerous, and ap^ for mischievous accidents, a^ strains, slips, bearings,
overreaches, and the like, that then he is not bound to give all his hea^s
therein, but having made his horse acquainted with the nature thereof, then
either to take part of the course, as a mile, two or three (according to the
goodness of the ground,) and so to run his Horse fourth, and back again,
which we call turning heats, provided always, that he end his heat at the
weighing post, and that he make not his course less, but more in quantity,
then that he must run, but if for some especial occasions he likes no
part of the course, then he may many times (but not ever) give his heats upon
any other good ground; either forth right, or turning, or round about any
spacious and large field, where the Horse may lay down his body, and run at
pleasure.

Observations from sweating.

Our keeper shall observe in all his ayrings, heatings, and all manner of
exercise, and motions whatsoever, to the sweating of his Horse, and to the
occasions of his sweating, as if an Horse sweat upon little or no occasion, as
walking footpace, standing still in the stable, or the like, it is then aparent
that the Horse is faint, foul fed, and wants exercise. If upon good
occasion, as strong heats, and the like he sweat, yet his sweat is white,
frothy, and like soap ^^^s, then is the Horse inwardly foul, and wants also
exercise, but ^^ the sweat be black, and as ^^ were only water thrown upon
him, then is the Horse in good lust and good case.

Observations from the Horses hair.

Our keeper shall observe well his Horses hair in general, but especially his
neck, and those parts which are uncovered, and if they lie sleeke, smooth, and
close, then is the Horse in good ease, but if they be rough, and staring, or
any way unnaturally discolored, then is the Horse inwardly cold at the heart,
and wants both clothes, and warm keeping, or else there is some sickness
creeping upon him. Many other observations there be, but these are most
material, and I hope sufficient for any reasonable understanding.

CHAP. XII. How to order* feed, and keep* any Horse for pleasure, hunting, or
travel.
T would have our keeper of these ordinary Horses, to rise early in the morning
by the spring of day, or before, (according to the season of the year) and to
sift the horse the quantity of three pintes of good old, and dry Oats, and to
put to them an handful o^ two of spelted-beanes, hulls and all, and so give
them to the horse*

After he has eaten them, ^^ him dress him according to the order of good
hors-manship, that is, first currie with the Comb, then dust, then currie with
the brush, then dust, then rub with wet hands, after with an hairy cloth, then
with a clean woollen cloth, after with a clean linen cloth, then pick all
obscure and secret places, lastly comb down the main, and tail, then saddle
him and ride him forth to water, warm him both before and after water, very
moderately, and so bring him home dry without sweat.

Then cloth him up (after you have rubbed his head, body, and legs,) and let
him stand on his bridle more than an hour, then give him the former quantity
of provender, and the same in kind.

After he has eaten his provender, give him into his Rack a pretty bundle of
Hay, and so let him rest till after dinner.

When you have dined, give him the former quantity of provender, and the same
in kind, and so let him rest till evening, only receiving his Hay, if there
be occasion.

At evening dress him well as in the morning, then ride him forth to water,
and do as you did in the morning.

When you come home and have clothed him up, let him stand on his bridle as
before, then give him the former quantity of provender, and so let him rest
till nine a clock at night, at which time give him the former quantity of
provender, and a pretty bundle of Hay, and so let him rest till morning.

Thus you shall do concerning his ordinary keeping at home, where the Horse
has rest, and that you may dispose of hours as you please; but if you be
either in travel, in sport, or other occasion, so that you cannot observe
these particular times, then you must divide the maine and whole quantity of
meat into four parts, and greater quantities, and so give them at the best
coveniency, ever observing, to give the least quantity before exercise, as a
third part before mounture, and the two other, after you come to rest: nor
would I have you to distract your mind with any doubt or amazement, because I
prescribe you five several times of feeding in one day, as if it should either
over-charge you, or over-feed your Horse; questionless there is no such
matter, when you look into the true proportion; for it cannot be denied, but
whosoever is worthy of a good Horse, or good means to keep a good Horse, cannot
allow him less then one peck a day; nay the Carrier, Carter, Poulter, and
Packhorse, will allow half a pecke at a watering, and this allowance which I
set down comes to no more; for fifteen pintes of Oats, and one pint ofspelt*
beans up-heaped, makes two gallons, and that is one pecke Winchester measure:
now to give it at twice, fills the stomach more, makes the digestion worse, and
the appetite weak, whereas to give less, but more often, the stomach is ever
craving, the digestion always ready, and the appetite never wanting; so that
health (without disorder) can never be a stranger, therefore once again, thus
much for ordinary keeping.

But if you intend to give the Horse an heat, as to hunt, gallop, travel, or
the like, which I would wish you to do once, twice, or thrice a week, then
observe your former observations, only the night before, give him little, or
no Hay at all.

In the morning before his heat, very early and before his dressing, give him
three or four handfulls of clean sifted Oats, washed either in strong beer,
or Ale, then dress him, saddle him, and give him his heat, but if it be
soddaine, and violent, then let it be when the Horse has emptied himself
very well.

After his heat rub him soundly, and bring him dry into the stable.

Then after he is clothed up warm, let him stand on his bridle at least two
hours, then give him a little bundle of Hay to tear out upon his bridle, and
an hour after, feed him as has been before showed; only with his first
Oats, give him an handful or better of hempseed well dusted and mixed.

At night, warm him a little water, and give it him lukewarm; then an hour
after, give him his provender, and a pretty bundle of Hay, and so let him rest
till the next morning.

The next morning do all things as in his ordinary keeping.

Let him stand on litter both night and day, yet change of^, and keep the
plaunchers clean.

If you intend to travel or journey in the morning, then give no Hay (or but
little) in the morning.

In journying ride moderately the first hour or two, but after, according to
your occasions.

Water before you come to your Innne (if possible) but if you cannot, then give
warm water in the Inn, after the Horse is fully cooled.

Trotters oil is an excellent ointment, being applied very warm, and well
chafed in, to keep your Horses limbs, and ^inewes nimble, and to help
stiffenesse, and lamenesse.

Neither wash your Horse, nor walk your horse, for the first endangereth
foundering in the body or feet, and breeds all surfeits, the latter is the
ground of all strong colds, which turn to glaunders, and rottenness, but if
necessity compel you to either, as foul ways, or long stays, then rather
wash your horses legs with pales of water at the stable door, then to endanger
him in Pond, or River. And for walking, rather set one on your horses back to
keep his spirits stirring, then to lead him in his hand, and with dull
spirits, to receive all manner of mischiefs.

This I think sufficient for clean and ordinary keeping.

CHAP. XIII. General observations, helps, and advertisements for any man when
he goes about to buy an Horse.
THere is nothing more difficult or intricate in all the Art of horsmanship,
then to set down constant and uncontrolable resolutions, by which to bind
every man's mind to an unity of consent, in the buying of an horse: for
(according to the old adage) what is one man's meat, is another man's poison;
what one affects, another dislikes. But to proceed according to the rule of
reason, the precepts of the ancients, and the modern practice of our present
conceived opinions, I will, as briefly as I can, show you those observations,
and advertisements which may strengthen you in any difficult election.

First therefore you are to observe, that if you will elect an Horse for your
hearts contentment, you are to take to your self this principal consideration,
namely, the end and purpose for which you elect him, as whether for the Wars,
for running, hunting, travel, draught, or burden, every one having their
several characters, and their several faces both of beauty and uncomelynesse.
But because there is but one truth, and one perfection, I will under the
description of the perfect and untainted Horse, show all the imperfections, and
attainttures, that either nature, or mischance can put upon the horse of
greatest deformity.

Let me then advise you that intend to buy an horse, to acquaine your self
well, with all the true shapes and excellencies, which belong to an horse,
whether it be in his natural and true proportion, or in any accidental; or
outward increase or decrease of any limb or member, and from their contraries,
to gather all things that may give dislike, or off^h^^.

To begin therefore with the first principles of election, you shall understand,
that they are divided into two especial heads, the one general, the other
particular.

The general rule of election is, first the end for which you buy, then his
breed, or generation, his color, his pace, and his s^atuity and these are said
to be generall^ because the first (which is the end for which you buy) is a
thing shut up only in your own ^^^^^ The other which is breed, you must
either take it from faithful report, your own knowledge, or from some known
and certain characters, by which one strain or one Country is distringuished
from another, as the Neapolitan is known by his hauk-nose, the Spanyard, by
his small limb, the Barbary, by his fine head, the Dutch by his rough legs,
the English, by his general strong and clean knittings together, and so forth
of diverse other.

As for his color, although there is no color exempt utterly from goodness
(for I have seen good of all) yet there are some better reputed then others,
as the Dapple-gray for beauty, the brown-bay for service, the black with silver
hairs for courage, and the Lyard, or true mixed Roan for continuance; as for
the Sorrel, the black without white, and the unchangeable Iron-gray, they are
reputed choleric; the brightbay, the fleabitten, and the black with white
marks, are sanguinists; the blankwhite, the yellow dun, the kiteglewed, and the
pyebald are phlegmatic, and the chestnut, the mousedunne, the redbay, and the
blewgray, are melancholy.

Now for his pace, which is either Trot, Amble, Rack, or Gallop, you must
refer it to the end also, for which you buy, as if i^ be for the wars,
hunting, running, or your own private disposition, then the trot is most
tolerable, and this motion you shall know by a cross moving of the Horses
limbs, as when the fa^^^ foreleg, and the near hinde^^Spand^^ or the near
foreleg, and the far^^ hinder leg move and go forw^^^ in one instant, and in
this moti^^ the neater the Horse takes (...) limbs from the ground, the
^p^ner, the evener, and the shorter he treads, the better is his pace; for to
take up his feet slovenly, shows stumbling, and lamenesse; to tread narrow, or
cross, shows enterfering, or falling; to step uneven, shows toil, and
weariness, and to tread long, shows overreaching.

Now if you elect for ease, great persons seats, or long travel, then ambling
is required, and this motion is contrary to trotting, for now both the feet on
one side must move equally together, that is, his far foreleg, and his far
hinderleg, or the near foreleg, and the near hinder-leg, and this motion must
go just, large, smooth, and nimble, for to tread false takes away all ease, to
tread short, rids ^o ground, to tread rough, shows ^olling, and to ^read
unnimbly ^hewes a false pace that never con^inueth* as also lamenesse.

If you elect for buck-hunting, for galloping on the high way, for post,
hackney, or the likes, then a racking pace is required, and this motion is the
same that Ambling is, only it is in a swifter time, and a shorter tread, and
though it rid not so much ground, yet it is a little more easy.

Now to all these paces, must be joined a good gallop, (...) naturally every
trotting and racking horse has, the ambler is a little unapt thereunto,
because the motions are both one, so that being put to a greater swi^^nesse of
pace then naturally he (...) acquainted with all, he (...) his legs
confusedly, and (...)der, but being trained(...), and made to understand the
motion, he will as well undert^k^ in as any trotting horse what (...) Now in a
good gallop, you ^^^ ^^ observe these virtues, First ^^^^ the horse which
takes his (...) nimbly from the ground, but does not raise them high, that
neither rolleth nor beats himself, that stretches out his forelegs, follows
nimbly with his hinder; and neither cutteth under the kn^^ (which is called the
swift-cut) nor crosses, nor claps one foot upon another, and ever leads with
his far forefoot, and not with the near, this horse is said ever to gallop
most comely, and most true, and is the fittest for speed, or any other like
employment. If he gallop round and raise his forefeet, he is then said to
gallop strongly, but not swiftly, and is fittest for the great saddle, the
wars, and strong encounters, if he gallop slow, yet sure, he will serve for
the highway, but if he labor confusedly, and gallop painfully, then is he
good for no gallopping service, besides it shows some hidden and obscure
lamenesse.

Lastly touching his stature, it must be referred to your own judgment, and
the end for which you buy him, ever observing that the biggest and strongest,
are fittest for strong occasions, as great burdens, strong draughts, and
double carriage, the middle size for pleasure, and general employments, the
least for ease, street walks, and Summer hackney.

Now touching the particular rule of election, it is contained in the discovery
of natural deformities, accidental outward sorro^gances, or inward hidden
mischieft, which are so many, and so inf^^^ that it is a world of work to
^^plaine them, yet for satisfaction sake, I will in as meth^dicall manner as I
can, and the rather because it is a labor I never undertood in this manner
before, briefly, and and according to the best conceived opinions, show what
you ^^^ to observe in this occasion.

First therefore, when an horse is brought unto you to buy, being satisfied for
his breed, color, and stature, then see him stand naked before you, and
placing your self before his face, take a strict view of his countenance, and
the cheerfulness thereof, for it is an excellent glass wherein to see his
goodness, as thus.

If his ear be small, thin, sharp, pricked, and moving, or if they be long,
yet well set on, and well carried, it is a mark of beauty, goodness, and
metal, but if they be thick, laved, or lolling, wide set on, and unmoving,
then are they signs of dullness, doggednesse, and ill nature.

If his face be clean, his forehead swelling outward, the mark or feather in
his face set high, as above his eyes, or at the top of his eyes, if he have a
white star, or white rache of an indifferent size, and even placed, or a
white ship on his nose, all are marks of beauty and goodness, but if his face
be fat, cloudie, or scawling, his forehead flat as a trencher (which we call
marefaced) the mark of his forehead stand low, as under his eyes, if his
star or rache stand worse or in an evil posture, or instead of a ship, his
nose be ^a^ and unhairy, or his face generally balld, all are signs of
deformity.

If his eyes be round, big, black, shining, staring, or starting from his head,
if the black of the ey^ fill the pit or outward circumference, so that in the
moving none of the white appears, all are signs of beauty, goodness, and
metal: but if his eyes be uneven, and of a wrinckled proportion, if they be
little (which we call pig-eied) both are uncomely signs of weakness: if they
be ^^^ and fiery, take heed of moon eyes, which is next doote to blindness, if
white, and walled, it shows a weak sight, and unnecessarie starting or
finding of boggards, if with white specks, take heed of the pearl, pin and
web, if they water or show bloody, it shows bruises, and if they matter, they
show old over-riding, and festered rhumes, or violent strains and colds, if
they look dead or dull, or are hollow and much sunk, take heed of blindness,
at the best the beast is of an old decrepid generation, if the black fill not
the pit, but the white is always appearing, or if in moving the white and
black be seen in equal quantity, it is a sign of weakness, and an aged
disposition.

If handling of his cheeks or chaps, you find the bones lean and thin, the
space wide between them, the throppell or wind pipe big as you can gripe, and
the void place without knots or kirnells, and generally the jaws so open, that
the neck beseems to couch within them, they are all excellent signs of great
wind, courage, and soundness of head and body, but if the chaps be fat and
thick, the space between them closed up with gross substance, and the
throppell little, all are signs of short wind, and much inward foulness, if
the void place be full of knots and kernells, take heed of the strangle, or
glaunders, at the best, the horse is not without a foul cold, if his jaws be
so straight that his neck swells above them, if it be no more but natural,
it is only an uncomely sign of straight wind, and pursinesse or grossnesse,
but if the swelling be long, and close by his chaps like a whetstone, then
take heed of the veins, or some other unnatural impostume.

If his nostrills be open, dry, wide, and large, so as upon any strayning,
the very inward redness is discovered, and if his muzle be small, his mouth
deep, and his lips equally meeting, they are all good signs of wind, health,
and courage, but if his nostrills be straight, his wind is little, if his
muzle be gross, his spirit is dull, if his mouth be shallow he will never
carry a bit well, and if his upper lip will not reach his nether, old age, or
infirmity has marked him for carrion, and if his nose be moist and dropping;
if it be clear water, it is a cold, if foul matter, beware the glaunders; if
both nostrills run, it is hurtful, but if one, then most dangerous.

Touching his teeth, and their virtues, they are at large set down in a former
chapter touching the horses age, only remember you never buy an horse that
wants any, for as good loose all as one.

From his head look down to his breast, and see that it be bread,
out-swelling, and adorned with many feathers, for that shows strength, and
endurance, the little breast is uncomely, and shows weakness, the narrow
breast, is apt to stumble, fall, and enterfarre before, and the breast that is
hidden inward, and wants the beauty, and division of many feathers, shows a
weak armed heart, and a breast that is unwilling, and unfit for any toil, or
strong labor.

Next look down from his elbow, to his knee, and see that th^^^ forethighes
be rush grown, ^^l horned within, sinowed, (...) and out-swelling, for they
are good signs of strength, the (...) show weakness, and are unnatural.

Then look on his knees that they carry an equal, and an even ^vall
proportion, be lean, sinowie, and close knit, for they are good and comely, if
one be bigger, or ^ounder then another, the Horse has received mischief, if
they ^ee gross, the horse is gouty, and if they have scarres, or hair broken,
it is a true mark of a stumb^ing jade, and a perpetual faller.

From his knees, look down his legs to his pasterns, and if you ^inde them
clean, lean, flat, and ^^nowie, and the inward bought of his knee without a
seam, or hair broken, then he shows good shape and soundness, but if on the
in^de of the leg you find hard knots, ^hey are splints, if on the outside, ^hey
are serewes, or excressions, ^f under his knee be scabs on the ^^side, it is
the swiftcut, and he will ill endure gallopping, if above ^is pasterns on the
inside you find scabs, it shows enterfayring, b^ if the scabs be generally
over ^^ legs, it is either extreme fo^^ keeping, or a spice of the maun^^ if
his legs be fat, round, and flesh^^ he will never endure labor, a^ if on the
inward bought of ^ knees you find seames, scabs, ^ hair broken, it shows a
malland^ which is a cankerous ulcer.

Look then on his pastern jo^ and on his pasterne, the first ^^ be clean and
well knit togeth^^ the other must be short, strong^^ upright standing, for if
the fir^^ big or swelled, take heed of ^in^^ strains, and gurding, if the o^^
be long, weak, or bending, ^^ limbs will hardly carry the b^^ without tyering.

For the hoofes in general the would be black, smooth, toug^ rather a little
long, then ro^g^ they must be hollow, and ^^ sounding, for a white hoo^^^
tender, and carries a shoe ill, a ^oughe, gross seamed hoof, shows ^ld age,
or over-heating, a brittle ^oofe will carry no shoe at all, an ^xtraordinary
round hoof is ill ^^r foul ways, or deep hunting, ^ flat hoof that is
pummifsed, ^ewes foundering, and an hoof ^at is empty and hollow sound^g,
shows a decayed inward part, ^ reason of some wound, or dry ^under, as for
the crownet of ^e hoof, if the hair lie smooth and ^ose, and the flesh flat
and even, ^ is perfect, but if the hair be sta^^g, the skin scabbed, and the
flesh ^^ng, then look for a Ringbone, ^^owne scab, or like mischief. ^ After
this, stand by the side of ^^horse, and first look to the set^^g on of his
head, and see that stand neither too high, nor too (...), but in a direct line,
and that ^ neck be small at the setting ^, and long, growing deeper, and
deeper, till it come to hi^ shoulders, with an high, strong and thin crest, and
his (...) long, soft, and somewhat curling for these are beautiful characte^^
whereas to have the head ill (...) on, is the greatest deformity, (...) have
any bigness, or swelling (...) the nape of the neck, shows (...) pole*evill,
or beginning of (...), to have a short think neck (...) a bull, to have it
falling at the (...) others, to have a low, a weak ^ thick, or a falling
crest, show (...) want both of strength, and a tall, to have much hair (...)
mane, shows intolerable (...) to have it too thin, she (...) and to have
none, or to (...) the worm in the mawe, (...) or else maunginesse.

Look then to the (...) back that it be broad, (...) straight, his ribs well
(...) and bending outward, (...) upright, strong, and short, and not above 4
fingers between his last rib and his huckle bone, let his body be well let
down, yet hidden within his ribs, and let his stones be close trust upto his
body, for all these are marks of good perfection, whereas to have his chyne
narrow, he will never carry a saddle without wounding, and to have it bendig
nor saddle backed, shows weakness, to have it ^ammell backed, it may show
strength, but ^is uncomely, to have his ribs flat, ^here is no liberty for the
wind, ^o have his filled hanging long, or weak, he will never climb an ^ill
well, nor carry burden, and ^o have his belly clung up, and gaunt, or his
stones hanging down, ^oose or side, they are both signs of sickness,
tenderness, founde^ing in the body, and unaptnesse ^or labor.

Then look upon his bu^tocke,

Then look upon his buttock^, and see that it be round, plumpe, full, and in
an even level with his body, or if long, that it be^ well raised behind, and
spread forth at the setting on of the tail, for these are comely and
beautiful, the narrow prime buttocke, the hog, or swine ru^^^, and the falling
or downe*let buttocke, are full of deformity, and show both an injury in
nature, and that they are neither fit or bee^^^ ming for pad, foot-cloath, ^^
pillion.

Then look to his hinder-thigh^ or gascoynes, that they be ^^ll let down even
to the middle (...) thick, brawnie, full, and swelling* for that is a great
argument^ o^ strength and goodness, whereof the lean, lanke slender th^^^
shows disability and weak (...)

Then look upon the (...) joint behind, and if it be nothing but skin and
bone, veins, sinews, and rather a little bending, then too straight, then it
is perfect as it should be, but if it have chaps or sores on the inward bought
or bending, then that is a sellander; if the joint be swelled generally all
over, then he has got a blow or bruise; if the swelling be particular, as in
the pot, or hollow part, or on the inside, and the vein full and proud, if the
swelling be soft, it is a blood spaven, if hard, it is a bone spaven, but if
the swelling be just behind, below the knuckle, then it is a curb.

Then look to his hinder-legs, and if they be lean, clean, flat, and
sinowie, then all is well, but if they be fat they will not endure labor, if
they be swelled, the the grease is molten into them, if they be scabbed above
the pasterne, he has the scratches, if he have chaps under his pasternes, he
has the pains, or males, and none of these but are dangerous, and noisome.

Lastly, for the setting on of his tail, where there is a good buttocke, the
tail can never stand ill; and where there is an evil buttock, there the tail
can never stand well; for it ought to stand broad, high, flat, and couched a
little inward.

Thus I have showed you ^^^^ shapes, and true deformities; yo^ may in your
choice please your own fancy.

CHAP. XIIII. An uncontrollable way how to know the age of any Horse.
THere are seven outward characters by which to know the age of every Horse.

As namely, his teeth, his hoofes, his tail, his eyes, his skin, his hair,
and the bars in his mouth.

the fore part of his mouth which are called gatherers, and make 36 then four
tushes one above, and one below of one side, and one above, and one below on
the otherside, which is just forty: now the first year he has his foales
teeth, which are only grinders and gatherers, but no tushes, and they be
small, white, and bright to look upon.

The second year he changes the four foremost teeth in his head, that is,
two above, and two below in the midst of the ^owes, and they will appear
browner, and bigger then the other.

At three years old he changes the teeth next unto them, and leaves no
apparent foales teeth before, but two of each side above and below; which are
also bright and small.

At four years old he changes the teeth next unto them, and leaves no more
foales teeth but one on each side, both above and below.

At five years old his form ost teeth will be all changed, but then he has
his tushes on each side complete, and the last foales teeth which he cast;
those which come up in their place, will be hollow, and have a little black
speck in the midst, which is called the mark ^n the horses mouth, and
conti^ueth till he be eight years old.

At six years old he puts up ^is new tushes, near about which ^ou shall
see most apparently growing a little circuit of new and young flesh at the
bottom of the ^oth, besides the tush will be ^hite, small, short, and sharp.

At seven years old, all his teeth ^ill have their perfect growth, ^^d the
mark in the horses mouth before spoken of) will be plain^ seen, although
decaying.

At eight years old, all his teeth will be full, smooth, and plain^, the
black speck or mark being hardly to be discerned, and his tushes will be
more yellow then ordinarily.

At nine years old, his foremost teeth will show longer, broader, yellower, and
fouler, then a younger years, and his tushes will be bluntish.

At ten years old, in the inside of his upper tushes will be no holes at all
to be felt with your fingers end, which till that age you shall ever most
perfectly feel, besid^ the temples of his head will begi^ to be crooked, and
hollow.

At eleven years old, his teeth will be exceeding long, very ^^^ low, black,
and foul, only ^^ will cut even, and his teeth will stand directly opposite
one again^ another.

At twelve years old, his (...) will be long, yellow, black, and foul, but
then his upper teeth will overreach, and hang over his nether teeth.

At thirteen years old, his tushes will be worn some what close to his chaps
(if he be a much ridden horse) otherwise they will be black, foul, and long
like the tuskes of a Boar.



bigness of an hazle nut, then you may presume the horse is ten years old or
above, but if his joints be all plain, and no such thing to be felt, then he
is under ten, and may be much younger.



his former place, then he is very old and wasted.





THE BOOK OF CVRES. Containing certain infallible helps and cures, for those
infirmities which are most dangerous, and do commonly attend all Horses,
especially, the Running- Horse.
CHAP. I. Of sickness in general.
Whenever upon any occasion you shall find your horse to droope in
countenance, to forsake his meat, or to show any other apparent sign of
sickness; if they be not great, you may forbear to let blood, because where
blood is spent, the spirits are spent also, and they are not easily recovered.
But if the signs be great and dangerous, then by all means let blood instantly,
and for three mornings together (the horse being fasting) give him half an
ounce of the powder called Diahexaple, brewed either in a pint of muskadine,
or malmsey, or a pint of the syrrope of sugar, being two degrees above the
ordinary mollosses, or for want thereof, Mollosses will serve the turn, or
where all are wanting, you may take a pint either of carduus water, or dragon
water, or a quart of the sweetest, and strongest Alewort, or in extremity, take
a quart of strong ale or beer, but then warm it a little on the fire, and
this must be given with an horn; and if the Horse have ability of body, ride
him in some warm place after it, and let him fast near two hours after
riding.

At noone give him a sweet mash, cloth warm, and let him touch no cold water.

Now for the exact and true making of this rare powder, which I call
Diahexaple, because no man that I know, either Apothecary or other, does at
this day make it truly, partly because it is an experiment lately come to my
knowledge by conference with learned Physicians, and partly because our
medicine-makers are in horse physic less curious then they should be;
through which errors, there is produced to the world an abundance of false
mixtures, which both deceives the honest horse-master, kills the harmless
horse, and disgraceth the well meaning Farrier:

To repair all which, I will here set down at large, the true manner of
making this admirable powder; together with the vertue^ and operations thereof.

CHAP. II. The manner of making the true Diahexaple.
TAke the roots of round Aris^^^gia, and the r^^^ of Gentian, ^^^ them, scrape
th^^ and purify the^ as clean as may be, then take ^^ niper-berries
unexcorticated, ^^^ Bay Berries excorticated, take the purest and best drops of
Myrthe and the finest shavings of ^^^ri^ of each an equal quantity, I ^ea^ all
but the Myrrh together in ^ mortar, and searce them through a fine searce,
lastly bear the mirrhe, and searce it also, then mix and incorporate all
together, press it hard into a gally-pot, and keep it, and use it as you have
occasion.

CHAP. III. The virtues of this rare powder Diahexaple.
THis powder (or indeed Methridate) called Diahexaple, is most excellent and
sovereign against all manner of poison, either inward or outward, cures the
biting of venomous beasts, and helps short wind, and pursicknesse. Dodoneus.

It mundifieth, and cleanses, ^uppleth, and makes thin all gross humors,
it heals all diseases of the Liver, and stomach, helps digestion, and being
given in a pint of sack, it cures all manner of colds, is good against
consumptions, breaks ^leame, helps the staggers, and all diseases in the head.
Garrets Herb.

It recovers tyering and weariness, takes away cramps, and convulsions, dries
up the skirvie, breaks the stone, opens all inward obstructions, and helps the
yellowes, the Gargill, and the Dro^ sie. Dioscorides.

It cures all diseases of the (...) as Glaunders, and Rotten^^^^ gives ease to
all gripings, and ^^Spam^^ dinesse of the belly, provokes (...) rine, takes
away infection, and (...) worms. Gallen.

CHAP. IIII. The true manner of making these Cordial balls, which cure any
violent cold, or glaunders, which prevent heart-sicknesse, which purge away all
molten grease, which recover a lost stomach, which keep the herat from
fainting with exercise, and make a lean horse fat suddenly. ^ide Chap. 9 or 4
in the cures.
TAke of Anniseeds, of Commin-seedes, of Fenegreeke-seeds, of Carthamus-seeds,
of Ely campane roots, and of Coltsfoot, of each two ounces beatenand feare't to
a very fine dust, then ^dde to them two ounces of the lower of Brimstone, then
take an ^unce of the juice of Liqu^rice, and dissolve it* on the fire in half
a pint of white wine, which done, take an ounce of the Chimicall oil of
Anniseeds, then of salletoyle, of life honey, and of the syrrop of sugar, or
for want thereof, then of mollosses, of each half a pint, then mix all this
with the former powders, and with as much fine wheat flower, as will bind and
knit them altogether* work them into a stiff paste, an^ make thereof balls
somewhat bigger then French walnuts, huls and all, and so keep them in a close
gally-pot, for they will last ^^ the year.

Yet I do not mean (...) shall keep them in the pot in balls, for so, because
they cannot ^^ close, the air may get in and ^^ hurt, as also the strength of
the oils will sweat outward, and weaken the substance, therefore knead the
whole ^^mp of paste in to the gally-pot, and make (...) balls, as you have
occasion to use them.

Now for the use of these balls, because they are cordial, and have diverse
excellent virtues, you shall understand that if you use them to prevent
sickness, then you shall take one of these balls, and anoint it over with
sweet butter, and so give it the horse in the morning, in the manner of a pill,
then ride him a little after it if you please, otherwise you may choose, and
feed and water him at home or abroad, according to your usual custom, and
thus do three or four mornings together.

If you use them to cure either cold, or glaunders, then use them in the same
manner for a week together. If you use them to fatten an horse, then give them
for a fortnight together.

But if you use them in the nature of a scowring, to take away molten grease or
foulness (of which I spoke in a former chapter). then instantly after his
heat, and in his heat to use (as I showed before also.)

Again, if you find your horse at any time has taken a little cold* as you
shall perceive by his inward ratlings, if then you take one of these balls, and
dissolve it in a pint of sack, and so give it the horse, it is a present
remedy. Also to dissolve the ball in his ordinary water, being made milk
warm, it works the like effect, and fatneth exceedingly.

To give one of these balls before travel, it prevents tyering, to give it in
the height of travel, it re^t^^^eth weariness, and to give it after, it saves
an horse from all su^fens and inward sickness. And thu^ you shall spend this
third ^o^night.

CHAP. V. An approved cure for the Botts, and all manner of worms of what
nature soever.
TAke a quart of new milk, and as much clarified honey as will make it
extraordinary sweet, then being lukewarm, give it the horse early in the
morning, he having fasted all the night before; which done, bridle him up, and
let him stand tied to the empty rack for more then two hours, then take
half a pint of whitewine, and dissolve into it a good spoonful or more of
black soape, then the horse having stood two hours as aforesaid, give it him
to drink, then ride and chafe him a little, and let him fast other two hours,
and the worms will avoid in great abundance.

CHAP. VI. Another most excellent receipt for the Botts, or any worms, which
is most easy, most safe, and mo^^ certain.
TAke the soft downy hair which grows in the ear of an horse, and which you
clip away when you coule him, and the little short ^^^ which grows on the top
of his forehead, underneath his ^oretop, and having a pretty quantity of them,
mix them well with a pottle of sweet oats, and so give the^ to the horse, and
there is not any thing will kill worms more ^^^^redly.

CHAP. VII. An excellent purgation when a Horse is dangerously sick of his
grease, or of costivenesse.
TAke a pint of old white wine, and set it on the fire, then dissolve into it
a lump, half as much as an Hens-egge, of castle-soape, and stir them well
together, then take it off, and put into it two good spoonfulls of hemp seed
beaten, and an ounce and an half of sugarcandie beaten to powder, and brew all
well together, then having warmed the horse to stir up his grease, and other
foul humors, give him this to drink, and walk him up and down a little
after it, to make the potion work, then set him up warm, and after a little
stirring up and down in his stall, if he grow sickish, give him liberty to lie
down. After two or three hours fasting, give him a sweet mash, then feed as
at other times.

CHAP. VIII. For laxativenesse, or extreme looseness.
TAke a quart of redwine, and set it on the fire, then put into it ^^ ounce and
an half of Bolearmonie in powder, and two ounces and an half of the Conserve
of sloes, then stir and ^^^^ them well together, after take it* from the
fire, and put to it a spoonful or two of the powder of Cinnamon, and brewing
all well together, give it the horse.

Let him fast two hours after it, and let him eat no washed meat: Hay is
wholesome, so is bread and oats, if they be well mixed with beans, or wheat,
but not otherwise.

CHAP. IX. An infallible help for the stone or pain of urine by wind,
causing sickness.
MAke a strong ^ecoction (that is to say boil your first quantity of water, to
an half part 3-times over) of keen onions clean ^ill'd, and chopped, and
parcelie; then take a quart thereof, and put ^o it a great spoonful of
London^reackle, as much of the powder of egge-shells, and give it the horse to
drink, and thus do diverse mornings, if the in fir mitie be great, otherwise
when you see the horse offended.

CHAP. X. An approved medicine to cure and break any old festered cold, and to
dry up a foul running glaunders.
TAke a pint of verjuyce, and put to it so much strong mustard ^^^^^ with wine
vinegar, ^^ will make the verjuyce strong and keen thereof, then take an ounce
and more of roach-allome, and beat it to powder, then when you give this to
the horse, as y^^ fill your horn, so with a knife or spoone, put some of the
allome into the horn, and so give it the horse, part at the mouth, and part at
both his nostrills, but especially at the nostrill which runs most, then
ride and chafe him a little after it, then set up warm; at noone give him a
warm mash, and at all times give no cold water, but when he may have exercise
after it. And thus drench the horse three days together, and it will be
sufficient.

CHAP. XI. Another for a violent cold.
TAke of white wine vinegar half a pint, and as much sallet-oyle, brew them
well together, and then put to it an ounce and a half of sugar-candie in
powder, and so give it the horse, and stir him a little after it; This is
exceeding good but it will occasion sickness for a small time.

CHAP. XII. An excellent Cordial powder for any ordinary cold, and to prepare
an Horse before travel, to refresh him in travel, and to preserve him from
mischief after travel.
TAke of English liquorice, and of elicampaneroots of each one ounce, of
sugar candy an ounce and an half, beat them to fine powder, and searce them,
keep the powder in a box, and when you have occasion to use it, if it be for
a cold, then give it in sweet wine, or strong ale, but if in ale, then take a
quart, and so give it both before travel, at your hair in travel, and in
your Inn, or at home, immediately after travel.

CHAP. XIII. An excellent scowring, when other scowrings will not work.
TAke of sweet butter a quarter of a pound, half so much Castle-soape, beat
them well together, then ad to them two spoonfulls of hempseed bruised, of
Anniseed, a spoonful bruised, of sugar-candie an ounce, of Rozzen bruise half
a spoonful, work all these into a paste, and give it the horse in the manner
of pills, immediately after his heat, or when you have warmed him and stirred
up the grease and foulness within him.

CHAP. XIIII. An admirable water for any sore eye, or to clear any dim
sight, at moone-eies, and the like.
TAke the stone Lap^^^ laminarius, and(...) red hot in the fire, th^^ quench it
in a pint (...) white wine, and thus do (...) times together, then add (...)
the quantity of wine, half so much of the juice of housleeke, and with this
water bathe the eye twice or thrice a day, and it is excellent against any
imperfection therein

CHAP. XV. Another water for any sore eye, no less precious then the former.
TAke a pint of Snow-water, and dissolve into it 3 or four drams of white
Vitrioll, and with it wash the Horses eyes three or four times a day, and the
effect is great.

CHAP. XVI. For any extreme blow or bruiseon the eye, for any pearl, pin,
web, or unnatural filme, or foulness.
TAke of woman's (...) (if it can be got) o^ f^^ want of it, new (...) from the
Cow, (...) three spoonfulls, and half (...) much of the juice of Sella^^^^,
mix them well together, and with a quill drop it into the eye; t^^^^ take the
whites of a couple of (...) and beat them to an oil, and mi^ with it half so
much of the juyc^ of housleeke, and the like quantity of Rose Water, and beat
all together, then make round plediants of flax, and dip them therein, and lay
it over the eye, and bind (...) thereon, then as you find it dries, so renew
it.

CHAP. XVII. The master medicine of all medicines for a back-sinew strain, or
any grease, straightness, shrinking, or numbnesse of sinews.
TAke a fat sucking (...) whelpe, slay it, and boil it, then stop the body as
full as it can hold of gray snayles, and black snayles, then roast it at a
reasonable fire, when it begins to warm, baste it with six ounces of the oil
of spike made yellow with saffron, and six ounces of the oil of wax; then save
the drippings, and what moisture so ever falls from it, whilst any drop will
fall, and keep it in a gally-pot, with this ointment anoint the grieved part,
and work it in very hot, holding an hot ^ar of Iron before it, and thus do
both morning and evening, till the cure be finished.

CHAP. XVIII. Saint Anthony, his only excellent cure, for any strain, or
swelling*
TAke Commin-seede and bruise it gross, and boil it with the oil of
camomile, then add to it so much yellow wax as will bring it to the body of
a Cerrot or plaster, and spread it on either cloth or leather, and very hot
apply it to the grief.

It is a wonderful sovereign for any man also.

CHAP. XIX. Another, for any desperate old strain, whether it be in the
shoulder, joints, hips, or back-sinewes.
TAke of Aquavitae a pint, of oyle-de-bay, of oil of swallows, and of black
soap, of each half a pint, work and labor all these together, till they come
to a thin ointment, then take of camomile, and of red sage an handful, of rue,
and of misseldine an handful, dry them and bring them to a fine powder, then
mix it with the former ointment, and bring all to a gentle salve; with some of
this salve made as hot as the horse can suffer it, anoint the strain, and hold
an hot bar of Iron before it, chafing it with your hand as much as may be,
and thus do once a day, and in nine days the cure has been effected.

CHAP. XX. An excellent charge for any new strain or offense on the sinews,
or any grief proceeding from heat.
TAke the whites of half a dozen of eggs, and beat them well with a pint of
wine-vinegar* and an ounce of the oil of Roses* and as much of the oil of
Myrtills, then take four ounces of Bolearmonie, and as much Sanguis draconis,
and with as much bean flower, or wheat flower (but bean flour is the best) as
will thicken it, bring it to a stiff salve, the^ spreading it upon hurds, lap
it about the grieved place, and renew it as it dries.

CHAP. XXI. A perfect cure for a new sinewstraine.
TAke a live Cat either wild or tame, and cut off her head and tail, then
cleave her down the chine, and clap her hot the bowels and all to the
strain, and remove it not for forty eight hours* and the ^ffect is great.

CHAP. XXII. Markhams one Balm, which has never failed him for any strain in
the shoulder, or other part, hid or apparent, or for any windgall, pain or
swelling whatsoever.
TAke ten ounces of the ^^^ and purest peece-grease, a^^ melt it upon the fire,
then (...) off, and put into it four ounces of the oil of spike, one ounce of
the oil of Origanum, and an ounce and an half of the oil of Exceter, stir
them well together, then put^ up into a gally-pot.

With this ointment (or indeed precious Balm) anoint the grieved part, the
ointment being made exceeding hot, and rub an^ chafe it in with all
painfulness^ holding an hot bar of Iron before it. And thus anoint it one in
two days, but rub and chafe it in twice or thrice a day at the least, and give
the horse moderate exercise.

This is approved and infallible.

CHAP. XXIII. For synewes that are extended, over-strained, and so weakened,
that the member is useless.
TAke of Cantharides, of mercury, and of Euforbium, of each a like quantity,
and of oylede-bay double as much as of all the rest, bring the hard simples to
powder, and beat all together to a salve, apply this to the grief, so there
be no scab or wound, and it will give strength and straightness to the sinews.

CHAP. XXIIII. For a sinew-straine newly done, to help it in twenty four
hours.
TAke of the grounds of Ale or Beer a quart, and put into it as much parsley
chopped gross, as you can hold in your hand, boil them till the herb be soft,
then put to it a quarter of a pound of sweet butter, and when it is molten,
take it from the fire, and put into it a pint of wine-vineger, and if it be
too thin, thicken it with a little wheat-bran, then lay it upon hurds, and
poultus-wise apply it to the grief, as hot as the Horse can suffer it.

CHAP. XXV. An admirable unguent to take away all aches, and hid pains, strains
and sinew strains.
TAke of Deere-suet, or for want of it, sweet butter half a pound, of
Aquavitae a gill, of saffron half a dram, of pepper finely beaten and searc't
three drams, of Garlic bruised three heads, mix all together, and let them
stew on the fire, and not boil, till it come to a salve;

With this very warm chafe the grief, then anoint a brown paper therewith,
and hot, apply it to the place also, and so roll it up: do thus morning and
evening.

CHAP. XXVI. For swelled or gourded legs, whether it be by reason of grease
falling into them, or other accident, as scratches, pains, mules, etc.
IF your Horses legs be ^^ell'd only because the gr^^se is fallen into them,
and that there is no other outward ^lcer, neither will the bathing with cold
fountain water, and other ordinay helps assuage them, then you shall take a
piece of strong course woollen cloth, and ther^ot make him an hose, a pretty
deal larger then his leg, to reach from the lower part of his pastern, up ^^
the Cambrell, or the knee, an^ make it close and straight at the pasterne, and
wide above. The^ take a pottle of wine lees (if yo^ can get them) or else the
ground^ or lees of strong ale or beer, and set them on the fire, and boil
them well, then put to it a pound of hogsgrease, and when it is molten and
stirred well together, take as much wheat-bran as will thicken it, and bring it
to the body of a poultus.

With this poultus (as hot as the horse can suffer it, only you must not
scald) fill the hose, or hoses, and then close the hose at the top.

With this poultus let the Horse stand two days, then the third day open the
hose at the top, but stir not the poultus, only take molten hogsgrease, hot
as the Horse can suffer it, and with a spoone lade it unto the poultus on every
side, till it will receive no more, for this will renew the strength of the
poultus, then close up the top of the hose, and so let the horse stand other 2.
days, or 3. then you may open the leg, and rub it down, and if strong
occasion, you may apply another new poultus, if not, your cure is wrought.

Now if besides the swelling of his legs, your horse has ulcers, and chaps, as
scratches, pains, mules, or the like, then you shall first apply the former
poultus in all respects as aforesaid, then after five or six days application
(when you take the poultus away) you shall take a quart of old urine, and put
to it an handful of salt, as much Allome, half an ounce of whi^^ copporice,
and boil all well t^ gether, then with this water (very hot) wash the sores
once or twice a day, and after a little drying* ^noint them with the ointment
called Aegyptiacum, and is made o^wi^ neger, 8 ounces; of honey, 12 ounces, of
verdigrease, two ounce^ of Allome one ounce and an half boiled to that height,
till it come to a red salve. And it will both kill the malignant humors, and
also heal and dry up the sores.

CHAP. XXVII. For gourdings, swellings, and pain in the joints.
MAke a very strong brine of water and salt, and to a quart thereof, put two or
three handfulls of Rue, and boil it till the herb be soft, then with this
water very hot, bathe the grieved part well; Then take a flat bag filled with
salt, and he ated hot at the fire, and lap it about the grief also, then roll
it up, and thus do once or twice a day, and it is a good cure.

CHAP. XXVIII. Another approved cure for the scratches, or any disease of that
nature, as Mallander, sellander, etc.
TAke of hogsgrease, and blacke-soape, of ^^^^ eight ounces, of (...) stone, of
lime, of ^^Spand^^ powder, of each three ounces; ^^^ of soote, as much as will
suffic^ to bring the rest to a salve; boil the hogsgrease and soap together,
and bring the other hard simples to a fine powder, and so mix all together,
and make a black ointment, with this anoint the so^^ once a day, after they
are clea^^ed and made raw.

CHAP. XXIX. For any splente, spaven, curb, ^ing-bone, or any hard knot, or
ex^rescion.
FIrst having taken view of the excrescion, clip away the hair as far as the
excrescion go^th, and a little thought more, then ^ake a piece of
Allomd-leather, ^ade as big just as the place you ^ave bared, and fitted to
the same ^roportion, then take a little shoo^akers wax, and spread it round
about the very edge, or verge of ^he same, leaving all the inward or ^iddle
part empty, and not touched* with the wax, according to this ^igure. O Then
take of the herb

Spear-grasse, which has the ver^ue to raise blisters, and bruising it in a
mortar, lay some thereof upon the leather, in the void and empty place, which
ought to contain the just quantity, of the kne^ or excression, and bind it
fa^ thereon, suffering it to lie (if i^ ^ in the spring or summer time when the
herb has its full strength and virtue) about half a (...) if it be in the
winter, (...) herb has less virtue; (...) if to renew the strength of t^^
herb, you ad to it a drop or t^ of the oil of Origanum, and ^ it lie half a
day fully. And ^^ sure to tie up the horses head tw^ or three hours, for fear
of ^^ting it away.

When you have taken off t^^ plaster, anoint the place wi^ Trayn-oyle warm,
and you she find no excression.

CHAP. XXX. Another cure for splent, spaven, etc. and to dry up windgalls, or
swellings.
FIrst hea^e the Sarrance with an hot pressing Iron, then vent it in several
places with your ^leame, then take a spoonful of ^alt, half a spoonful of
Nerve^yle, a penny weight of verdi^rease, and the white of an egg, ^eate all
to a salve, and dipping ^ax hurds therein, apply it to the ^riefe, and it
helps.

CHAP. XXXI. An approved cure for the swift. cut, or any hewing on the leg, and
(...) heal any wound.
TAke a pint of (...) wine, and put (...) or three (...) honey, and stir
the^ well together, then boy (...) till they come to the body of an ointment,
then take it from the fire, and put to it half so (...) turpentine as there
was honey; and stir all well together, then ^tra^ it, and with this salve
(...) hot, anoint the sores twice or thrice a day, and it is a most speedy
healer.

CHAP. XXXII. To heal saddle bruises, hard swellings, and all sorts of
Impostumations.
FInst ^ipen it with rotten Litter, or wet Hay, then when it is soft, open it
to let out the corruption, then fill the hollownesse with the powder of Rozen,
and lay a plaster of shooemakers wax over it, and thus do once in twenty
four hours, till it be whole.

If it be slow in skinning or drying up, take a spoonful or two of thick
cream, and mix it with soot till it be a salve, and anoint it therewith, and it
will dry and skin presently.

CHAP. XXXIII. For any maunge, scab, or ^^pr^sie wheresoever.
FIrst let blood; then take a quart of old urine, o^^ineger, and break (...)
it a quarter of a pound or better of the best Tobacco, then set it on a fire of
embers, where it may simmer, and not boil, and so let it stew all an whole
night* then with this water wash the infected places wheresoever they be, and
it is a certain remedy.

CHAP. XXXIIII. For the foulest and most desperate Farcie that may be.
TAke herb of grace, and the herb Cley-Cleys which is a weed growing by the
waterside, having a great broad, round leaf, and is green on the upper side,
and white on the nether; of each of them take an equal quantity, beat them in
a mortar, and strain them, then to a pint of this juice, put half a pint of
the juice of housleek, and half a pint of Aquavitae, and two good spoonfulls
of pepper beaten and finely searc't, of this liquor take a pint, and give it
the horse to drink, then with round plediants of flax dipped in the same, stop
both his ears, then with the strained bruisings of all the herbs, rub the
sores, and stop the holes if there be any hollownesse, do thus twice at the
least, and oftener if you find occasion.

CHAP. XXXV. For any founder, f^eltize, su^^ait, or any imperfection in the feet
FIrst pare thin, open the heels wide, and take good st^r^ of blood from the
toes, then (...) on a shoe somewhat hollow, after take of the best
frankincen^e, and rouling it in a little fine cotton wool, or bumbast, with an
hot Iron melt it into the foot, betwin the shoe and the toe, till the o^^fice
where the blood was taken be filled up; then take half a pound of hogsgrease,
and melt it on the fire, then mix it with wheat-(...)* till it be as thick as a
poultus, then boiling it hot as is possible, stop up the horse foot there with,
then cover it with a piece of an old shoe, and splent it up, and so let the
horse stand for three or four days, then if occasion serve you may renew it,
otherwise the cure is wrought.

CHAP. XXXVI. To make hoofes grow quickly, and to be tough and strong.
TAke of Allome beaten, and of the juice of garlic, of each seven ounces, of
herb of grace three handfulls, of old hogsgrease two pound, of Asses dung, or
for want of it, Cow dung an handful; mingle them, and boil them all well
together, then with this both stop the horses feeet, and anoint the crownets of
the hoofes, the medicine being hot, and the effect is great.

CHAP. XXXVII. A general salve for any s^re or swelling, prick, cloynige, or
tread.
TAke Turpentine, blacksoape, hogsgrease, green Treat, and Pitch, of each like
quantity, mix and boil them all well together, and apply it warm to the
grief, either plaster wise, or tent wise.

The best of Secrets. CHAP. XXXVIII. For decayed, rotten, or over strained
lungs, which we call brokenwinded, or for any old dry cough, of long
continuance.
TAke half a pint of the water of Coltsfoot, and put unto it ten drops or,
at the utmost, not above a dram of Balsamum sulphuris, and give it the horse in
the morning fasting, then ride him a little gently after it; be sure to keep
warm, and give no cold water without exercise; Do thus every other morning
till you find amendment.

CHAP. XXXIX. How to make Balsamum sulphuris.
TAke an ounce of the oil of Turpentine, and an ounce of the flower of
brimstone, and put them into a violl, then set it on a fire of embers or hot
ashes, and th^^e let it stew till the brimstone be dissolved, and incorporate
with the oil, and become a red unguent* Of this take a full dram at the least.

CHAP. XL. Another of Saint Anthonies cures for any strain or swelling.
TAke Commin-seede and bruise it gross, and boil it with the oil of
camomile, then add to it so much yellow wax as will bring it to the body of
a Cer^ot or gentle plaster, and spread it on either cloth or leather, and very
hot apply it to the grief, and renew it not above once in two or three days.

It is a wonderful sovereign for any strain in a man also.

CHAP. XLI. An approved cure for the swiftcut, or any hewing on the legs.
TAke a pint of whitewine, and put to it two or three spoonfulls of honey, and
boylethem till they be well incorporated together, then strain it, and with
this water some what hot, bathe the sores twice or thrice a day, and it is a
most speedy heale^*

FINIS.

