The Inrichment of the Weald of Kent: OR, A Direction to the Husbandman, for
the true ordering, manuring, and enriching of all the Grounds within the Wealds
of Kent and Sussex, and may generally serve for all the grounds in England, of
that nature: as, 1. Showing the nature of all Wealdish grounds, comparing it
with the soil of the Shires at large. 2. Declaring what the Marle is, and the
several sorts thereof, and where it is usually found. 3. The profitable use of
Marle, and other rich manurings, as well in each sort of arable land, as also
for the increase of Corn and Pasture through the Kingdom.


Painfully gathered for the good of this Island, by a man of great eminence and
worth.

Printed at London by G. P. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
near Fleetstret-Conduit. 1625.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir George Rivers of Chafford, in the County of KENT.
SIR,
HAd I no scale (more then this bare and plain molded Epistle) by which to
come to your Worships ears, yet in respect of the honest Livery which it
carries (being necessary and husbandly collections, especially gathered for the
Country and Soil wherein you live) I know, it cannot choose but find both
favor and mercy in your acceptance; but when I call up into my consideration,
the great worthiness of your experience in this and all other the like
affairs, which tend to the general benefit of the Common wealth, and weigh
the excellency of your wisdom, judgment, bounty, and affection unto
hospitality (which give both strength and advancement to proiects of this
nature) I could not but take unto my self a double encouragement, and boldly
say unto this work which I offer to your goodness; Go and approach with all
thy sweetness before him, he that so perfectly knows all which thou can or
would discover; he that is able both to correct and amend any thing that is
imperfect in thee, he, for virtues sake, will never forsake thee. Believe me
(worthy Sir) should this subject wish it self a Patron, I do not think, it
could wish beyond you; for you are a volumne full of all that of which it
entreats: witness your years, your place, your supportation of the poor,
and your continual employments; with any of which, there is not (of your
Rank) a second living in your Country, to walk hand in hand with you; Being
then (dear Sir) the oldest and best friend to your Country; forsake neither
her, nor this which comes to serve it; and though in this Glass some
lineaments may appear imperfect, yet by the help of your favor (though
little be exact or most excellent) nothing shall be gross or unworthy the
suruay of your worthier patience. And so I rest,

Your Worships to be commanded, R. I.

A discourse of the Weald of Kent; and a comparison of the arable Lands
therein, with the other parts of the Shire: Together with some necessary
counsels for the ordering and enriching of the Marleable Lands in the Weald, or
generally in any part of this Kingdom.
THE Weald of Kent is the lower part of that Shire, Further additions.
lying on the South side thereof, and adioyneth to the Weald of Sussex, toward
the West.

This Weald both in Kent and Sussex, was sometimes all (or the most part)
woody, wild, and (in the first times) uninhabited; and from thence took the
name of Weald from the Saxon word, Weal or Yeale, or Weald, which signifies a
woody Country, or Forrest-like ground. The Britons called it Andred, which
signifies Greatness or Wonderful, and in Latin it was called Saltus Andred,
(that is to say) the Chase or Forest of Andred, by reason of the great
circuit, or large bounds thereof.

Touching the true boundary or limits of this Weald, there have bin diverse
opinions, and most of them various and much differing both in place and
quantity; but that which is the nearest and best allied unto truth, both
according to the opinions of Assertus Meneuensis, Henry of Huntingdon, and
others of most credible report, is; that it extends from the Town of
Winchelsey in Sussex, an hundred and twenty miles in length toward the West;
and thirty miles in breadth toward the North. Now, although this report be most
agreeable unto verity, yet who knows not, that curiosity may raise up many
objections to withstand it; and therefore Master Lambert in his Perambulation
of Kent, has prescribed the best and most infallible way to find out the true
and certain bounds of this Weald, to be only by Iewry, or the verdict of
twelve men impannelled, for that purpose; either in case of controversy, or
other particular search; and this has bin in these later times brought forth
most plentifully; for it has bin found by diverse late Verdicts, upon especial
and most necessary occasions, that the Weald of Kent is truly Master Lamberts
second step in his Perambulation of Kent, reaching from Winchelsey in Sussex,
and that Hill there, unto the top of Riuers-Hill in Kent; and neither farther
toward London, nor shorter toward Tunbridge; which agrees so perfitly with
the former limitations, that both may be received as most true and sufficient.

This Weald was for many years held to be a wild Desert, or most unfruitful
Wilderness (as write the Authors before mentioned) and indeed such is the
nature and disposition of the Soil thereof to this very day: for it will grow
to Frith or wood, if it be not continually manured and labored with the
Plough, and kept under by Tillage, so as it may truly be said of it, Incultae
parantur vomere Siluae. It is through-out (except in very few places adjoining
to Brooks or Rivers) of a very barren nature, and unapt either for Pasturage
or Tillage, until that it be helped by some manner of comfort, as Dung, Marle,
Fresh earth, Fodder, Ashes, or such other refreshings; and that seems to have
been the cause for which in old time it was used as a Wilderness, and kept for
the most part with Herds of Dear, and Droues of Hogs, as is specified in
diverse historical Relations.

And as there be yet remaining in Sussex diverse great Forests, and sundry
Commons or Wastes, having five or six miles in length, which for the most part
are not fit to be manured for Corn, and yield but little profit in pasture; so
have there been also in Kent (within our memory) a great number of woody and
ouer-growne grounds, converted of late to Pasture and Tillage, even after such
a manner as in the said Perambulation is testified, where it is said, that
although the Weald of Kent belonged to sundry known owners long since, yet was
it not then allotted into particular Tenancies, as the other parts of the Shire
were, but it was, in process of time, by little and little gained, as men were
contented to inhabit there, and to rid it of the wood; And hereof it is also,
that besides sundry whole Parishes which be named Dens or Low places, as
Tenderden, Marden, Beneden, and sundry others, there be moreover many smaller
portions, almost in every part of the Weald of Kent; which he likewise called
Dens; as the Den of Cranbrooke in Cranebrooke; the Den of Hawkehurst in
Hawkehurst, and such others; the which (as it seems) were at the first
undertaken to be manured by sundry particular persons, whose names were then
taken from those very Dens, and continued many years together, as by ancient
evidences it does yet appear, howsoever the age of long time has now almost
worn and consumed them all out of knowledge. Neither does the Weald of Kent
contain so many great Manors or Courts (for the proportion of the largeness)
as the rest of the Shire does, but was appertaining, for a great part thereof,
to sundry of those Manors which do lie at large dispersed through the Shire;
whereof each one had a great portion in the Weald, which both in the book of
Doomes-day, and in sundry the Court Rolls, and Rentals, passes by the name of
Weald, and Silua Porcorum, or Swine gatts, which were granted to diverse of the
Farmers and owners of sundry Tenancies, which did belong unto those Dens, and
other Lands within the Weald.

And albeit these Dens be for the most part good large portions of Land, that
be now broken into many several possessions, so as the same one Den
suffices 20. householders at this day, yet it is very likely that each man at
the first had his several Den wholly and unbroken, whereof he and his posterity
bears name, until that the same was by the custom of Gauilkinde, by sale or
by exchange divided and distributed amongst others into parts, as we do now
see them. But howsoever this Weald be of it self unfruitful (as I said) and
of a barren nature, yet so it has pleased the providence of the Almighty to
temper the same, that by the benefit of Margle or Marle (as it is commonly
called) it may be made not only equal in fertility with the other grounds of
the Shire, as well for Corn as Grass, but also superior to the more and
greater part of the same. (...)he use of (...)arle is an(...)ent.
The which manner of bettering the ground is not now newly discovered, but was
the ancient practice of our Forefathers many a year ago, as by the
innumerable Marle-pits dug and spent so many years past, that trees of 200.
or 300. years old, do now grow upon them, it may most evidently appear,
besides the which we have mention of Marle in books of gainage or husbandry,
that were written in the days of King Edward the 2. or before, (...)rling was
(...) continued, (...) is now (...)iued.
howbeit the same manner of tillage, by means of the civil wars, maintained
many years as well in the time of the Barons wars, as of the wars between
the house of York and the Family of Lancaster, was so given over, and gone out
of use, until these 30. or 40. years, that it may be said to have been then
newly borne and revived, rather then restored, because the very true art of
enriching the ground by Marle, seems to lie hidden in part, as yet not to be
discovered to the full: for in this short time we have seen many arable
grounds, which for sundry years after the marling of them, have plentifully
borne Wheat and other Grain, to be now become unfruitful, and so will they
continue, albeit they should be now marled again. And this comes to pass by
the ignorance of the right manner of ordering the Marle, which is as strong and
cheerful as ever it was before, howsoever it works not his natural effect,
through the unskillfulness of the Husbandman, that both wastes the Marle, and
loses withal his time, his labor, his cost, and the profit of his ground. I
cannot deny but a man shall see some grounds, of nature fit to take Marle, and
of situation so near to Marle-pits long time opened, that they might be marled
plentifully with little charge, and have been heretofore marled indeed, and
yet the sameto lie now vnploughed, and not only barren of themselves, but also
unapt for Marle, and incapable of amendment by Tillage: but, I must say
withal, that albeit the men in those former Ages had the right ordering of
Marle, yet were they not all good Husbands alike, neither does the Field joy
alike under the Farmer, and under the very Owner of the same, the one seeking
the very uttermost gain that may be made during his short interest, and the
other indeuouring to perpetuate his commodity, even to the end of his estate,
which has no end at all, so that through unskillfulness of the one, and
greediness in others, the ground may sooner be cra^med to death with Marle,
then it shall be made the better or fatter by it. The reason whereof I will
reserve, until that I shall have cause to teach in particular, after what
manner and measure the ground is to be marled. In the meanewhile, I will open
the nature and conditions of this wealdish ground, comparing it with the Soil
of the Shire at large, and afterward declare unto you what the Marle is, and
what sorts thereof there be usually found in the Weald of Kent; and lastly,
enter into the true and profitable use thereof, as well in each sort of arable
Land, as also for the increase of Corn and Pasture through the Kingdom.

The arable ground of this Weald has commonly a fleet and shallow Mould to be
turned up by the Plough, so as in many places the dead Earth or Mould is within
three inches of the face of the ground, and in the best places, the good Mould
exceeds not six inches in depth at the most, and therefore it wants
convenient substance to nourish Corn any long time, but will faint and give
over, after a Crop or two; for the which reason also, it cannot yield any sweet
or deep Grass. Besides this, the Weald has many copped or hillish grounds,
out of which there do many Quits or Springs of water issue, that make it cold
and barren; and from these Hillocks, the best part of the good Mould is washed
down into the Watercourse and Dikes that be made to divide and draine the
Land. Furthermore, the Weald is divided into many small enclosures, the biggest
sort (for the most part) of which, are between sixteen Acres and twelve in
quantity, and thereby has it many Hedges and Trees, which in unseasonable
weather do keep both the Sun and Wind from the Corn, so as for want of
that succor and comfort, it grows, and many times rotteth in the Earth, so
that it carneth not, nor eareth, nor prospers not kindly many times. And
these small Closes are caused by this, that men are not able to marle any great
part or quantity of ground at once; and having marled a little, they are
desirous to sow it with Corn: for the preservation whereof, as also for
draining it, they are enforced to make so many and small seuerals: for all
which reasons it is plain, that there is little good arable Land there, and
rarely any good Pasture, those only places excepted, which are amended by
irrigations of floods, which there is called flowing and ouer-flowing.
Contrariwise, the arable Land of the Shire at large, has a deep and fat Mould
of good Earth, that is able to bear five or six good Crops together without
intermission; and, after three or four years rest, will do the like again,
and may so interchangeably keep that course for ever: yea, there be many
grounds that are sowed without ceasing, because the Mould is so deep, that
when the upper part thereof begins to faint and be weary, men can add some
strength of Cattle, and with the Plough go deeper, and fetch up a fresh Mould
that will continue for a long season. Furthermore, this arable ground is a
hollow dry ground, for the most part, on a deep Clay, that by tillage, and the
weather, will become dry and spongy, so as the Rain there washes in the fat
of the Earth, the rather, because it is not so hillish and sliding as the
Weald, but more level, even, and champion also, by which the Sun and Wind
do dry the Corn, and do make it both carne or ear well, and yield a purer
flower then that which is sobbed in wet, and has long time lain before it be
dried again. But forasmuch as the great odds between these two sorts of
grounds, may be made even by the help of Marle, if it be rightly ordered, as I
said, I will now show you what it is, and how many sorts thereof be found in
this Weald of our Country. Marle is indeed, as it is in name, the fat or
(marrow) of the earth: for so did the Germans, and so did our elders the
Saxons, term it, of the word Marize, which we found Marrow, and thereof we
call it Marling, when we bestow that fat earth upon our lean ground. Pliny
says, That the Brittanes (meaning us) did use to amend their Land with a
certain invention which they called Marga, that is, the fat of the earth, and
it is to be seen in Conradus Hereshachius, that the Germans do use it to
the same end, and do call it by the same name till this very day: it is
therefore a fat, oily and unctious ground, lying in the belly of the earth,
which is of warm and moist temperature, and so most fertile, seeing that heat
and moisture be the father and mother of generation and growth; howbeit this is
not a pure and simple marrow, (as that is which lies in our bones) but a
juice, or fat liquor mingled with the Earth, as is the fat which lies mixed,
and dispersed in our flesh, so as the one may be drawn away, and the other
remain, as it shall anon appear unto you.

(...) sorts (...) Marle.
Four sorts of Marle be found in this Weald, known asunder by the difference
of colors, and thereby also differing in degrees of goodness one from the
other: for there is a Gray, 1, 2, 3, 4.
a Blue, a Yellow, and a Red Marle, all which be profitable, if they be earthy
and fat, or slippery as Soap: and most times little worth, if they be mixed
with Sand, Gravel, or Stone. So the Blue is reputed the best, the Yellow the
next, the Gray the next, and the Red less durable then the other three; and
yet it is thought the Red to be the better, if it be found upon the Blue or
others. These Marles do lie in veins or floores, amongst those Hillocks or
copped grounds most commonly, whereof I have spoken, and do oftentimes show
themselves at the foot of the Hill, or about the midway between the foot and
the top thereof: some of them have over them a cover of ground, which we call
Cope, not exceeding 7. or eight foot in depth; some lie deeper, and other some
do arise, as namely, where the ground lies not high, and that Marle commonly
is very good; and there is in diverse level grounds good Marle.

And as Marle is for the most part of these four colors, so is arable ground
for the most part of these four sorts following; Four sort(...) grounds.
that is to say, either a cold, stiff and wet clay, 1.
which is either the Cope of the Marle, or lies near unto it, and is
therefore commonly called, The Marle Cope ground, or a Haisell mould, which I
count to be one of the best Wealdish Moulds, 2.
being a compound Mould, and very good for Marle, and will quit the cost very
well. 3, 4.
Then are there two sorts of sandy Mould, the one being a reasonable good
kind, but not equal to the Haisell Mould; for you shall have in diverse places
of the Weald, this Haisell Mould to bear two or three good crops of Wheat
being Summer-fallowed, together, which you shall hardly have of any sandy
ground, without mending: but as I said of the better sort of these two kinds of
sandy Moulds, you have commonly very rich Wheat, being well marled, which is
not so barren as the other; but this last kind of sandy Mould, is a very
barren kind of ground, and has a very fleet Mould, and you shall have very
Heath grow upon it in diverse places; and yet being ordered as follows with
Marle, will bear both good Corn and Pasture. And now that we may the better
understand how to marle and manure every of these sorts by it self, you must
know that the Haisell ground being dry, and not subject to Winter-springs, or
tears of water (for, which some call such, A whining or weeping ground) is to
be handled thus.

First, The orde(...) of the Ha(...) mould.
plough it as deep as you can, with the strength of eight beasts at the least;
and be not afraid to plough up some part of the dead earth that lies under the
upper good Mould, for the Sun, the Rain, the Wind, and the Frost, will in
time mellow and amend it; and besides that, the Mould: will be the deeper for a
long time after, and thereby keep it self the longer from being stiffened
with the Marle. Then may you bestow 500. Courtloads (as we call them) of Marle
upon each Acre thereof, every load containing 10. or 12. Bushels of eight
Gallons, and each Acre containing 160. Rods of 16. foot and a half to the Rod.
Then also you may choose whether, at the first breaking up, you will sow it with
Oats, to kill the grass, or else first marle it, and sow it with Wheat, or
otherwise Summer-fallow it, in the May after the Oats, and then Marle it, and
sow it with Wheat. Upon that fallow or Gratten (as we call it,) you shall do
well to sow it with Pease, and at Michaelmas following, to sow that
Pease-stubble or Gratten with Wheat again, which also will be the better, if
the Summer wherein it carried Pease, were moist, because the Pease being rich
and thick, do destroy the Grass, that together with the washing of the
fallowes by rain, does greatly consume the heart and virtue; or, as we call
it, the state of the ground. But if that Summer were dry, then is a fallow
best, because the Sun with his heat does much good to the ground, and
inableth it the better to bear out the weather in the Wheat season ensuing. If
you like to sow it, as I said, with Pease, sow them as early and timely as you
may, for they will be so much the sooner haruested, and then also you may
plough or stir your Gratten the sooner, whereby it will be the better hardened
to bear out the weather in the time of sowing of your Wheat: but I doubt,
Pease does somewhat stiffen it. Two bushels of Wheat do suffice for the sowing
of an Acre hereof, except it be for the first Crop, after the new breaking up
of the ground; during which time, there is found a Worm, called an Emble,
which in French signifies Corn in the ground, being of color yellow, and of
an inch in length, that will eat some part of the Corn; but if you sow it
thick, it will be both small-eared and thick, and slender of straw, which
the Rain and Wind will beat and hurlee down, and then it will scarcely rise
again; or if it do, yet through the neerenesse of the shadow of the Trees and
Hedges, that in so small Closes be many, it will rather rot for want of drying,
then come to maturity, that is, to perfect hard, and full grown Corn. After
your first marling, you must carefully foresee, that you plough not this ground
either with deep or broad Furrows, but fleet and narrow, lest you cast your
Marle into the dead mould; for Marle differs much from Dongue in this
behalf; Dongue spends it self upward, and howsoever deep it lie, the
virtue thereof will ascend: but Marle (as says Sir Walter Henly, Note.
in his Husbandry) sends his virtue downward, and must therefore be kept
aloft, and may not be buried in any wise. Furthermore, if your ground be
hillish or coppied, it shall be fit that you make your Ridges 7. or 8. foot
broad at the least; for in such falling lands, the more broad Furrows you
make, as you must make many, where you make small Ridges, the more of your
Marle shall be washed and carried into the bottomes. It is good also to draw a
cross or quarter Furrow, and opening the ends of all your land Furrows into
it, to leave the other ends of your Furrows stopped, that the water-shoot
run not all the length of the field. Again, this ground would always be
sown under furrow, and that also before Michaelmas, if the season will so
permit: for this ground (if it be well husbanded) will be mellow and hollow,
or loose, whereby through Rain and Frost, it would sink down from the root
of the Wheat; if it should be sown above Furrow, the which being uncovered,
must needs be bitten and killed with the cold. It is also very fit that you
harrow not this sort of ground too small, but that you leave the clods as big
as a Bowl, the which being mouldred with the frost, will both cover and keep
warm what is underneath it. Moreover, it shall be good, that upon some fair
and dry day, in the beginning of March, you put your flock of Sheep into your
Wheat, that with their trampling upon it, the Corn may be well and fast closed
with the earth; yea, and presently after (if it will bear foot) you may roll it
as you do Barley, whereby both the Clods shall be broken, and the Gratten or
stubble shall be more even and ready for the Mower. Generally you must
understand, that after you have bestowed your Marle in the field, you ought to
let it lie vnspred abroad, until you be ready to plough, and then immediately
after the spreading of it, turn it into the ground with the Plough; for
otherwise, if it should lie long spread in the field, the Sun will spend no
small part of the fatness thereof, although I know many desire it, because it
will be the smaller being burned with the Sun, which I like not. And
therefore also no good Husband will carry and spend his dongue in the time of
Summer, except he do presently withal plough it into the ground; for although
the Mould of the arable Land it self will take good, if it be turned to the
Sun, which will both dry and fasten it, yet the matter fares far otherwise
with the Marle, from which if the Sun shall draw and suck the fat moisture
that makes the Land fertile, then becomes it (as Columella speaks) of the
worst sort of ground, Solum siccum, pariter and densum and macrum, quod sieve
exerceatur, sieve cessat, colono refugiendum est. It becomes (says he) a dry,
thick, and lean Clod, which whether it be tilled or laid to rest, must be
forsaken of the Husbandman, as unprofitable. And now your Haisell mould being
thus marled, ploughed, sown, and manured, you may not charge with Wheat above
twice, and then must it rest 5. or 6. years together; all which time it will
bear a very good and sweet Pasture, well set with a white Clouer, or
three-leaued grass, most batning and profitable, both for Sheep and Bullocks.
After those years ended, it will grow to some Moss, or will peradventure cast
up Broom, and then it is time to break it up, and sow and handle it as
before, for two other Wheat seasons or Crops, leaving it a Wheat-Gratten or
stubble, rather then with an Oat-Gratten or stubble, which burns the Land
being marled. Being thus interchangeably sowed and rested, your Haisell Mould
will continue good arable and Pasture, by the space of 30. years together,
whereas if it should be continually sowed, 6.7. or more years together without
rest, it will become utterly unfruitful, both for Corn and Cattle also.
Neither will it any thing avail to marle it over again when it is so decayed,
because the former Marle having his juice exhausted by continual Tillage,
whereof the Corn sucketh one part, and the Sun, Wind and Weather dries and
wastes the rest, is but a dead Clod (as I said) that is not capable of new
Marle to amend it, nor casts any profitable grass at all; for proof hereof,
I my self, seeing that the common earth of Highways, were by treading of
Cattle, washing of Rain, and the drying of the Sun and weather, it lay
separated from that natural juice which it has in the pit, and spreading it
upon the grounnd, I saw that the land was not only not amended, but much the
worse by it. And now for an end of handling this sort of Haisell ground; if it
shall appear unto you, that 500. loads of Marle upon the Acre, have clanged,
stiffened, and too fast bound your land (as indeed the nature of Marle is to
bind and to stiffen) then take you some of these ways to help it: either
rest 4. or 5. years, or fodder upon it before you break it up with so many
Cattle as you may; or take the uppermost part of your Ditches or Forelands, or
waste places of your fields, which you may mingle with Dongue, and which,
before you sow your Wheat, you may lay upon your fallow, and stir it in with
your Plough, and by this you shall both loosen your Marle, and refresh your
ground, so that within 40. years the Mould of your ground will clean eat up
and swallow the Marle that you lay upon it; and then become hungry, and as
capable of Marle again as it was before at the first. And by this also, you
may see the very cause for which it is good not to sow your marled Land
continually, but to pasture it by turns and so give it rest; namely, because
the continual ploughing does exhaust and spend the fat of the Marle, leaving
the drossie, dry, and fruitless parts thereof, to lie and cover the face of
your ground; whereas Pasturage, through the donguing, treading, and foddering
of Cattle, does increase a new Mould, which mingling it self with the dead
Mould, does in the end give some life and heart unto it. And therefore these
Farmours and owners that have been at the cost to marle their ground, and will
not forbear to till it, but hasting to raise their charge, do thereby utterly
strike it with barrenness, are like to Aesops man, who having a Hen that
laid him every day a golden Egg, and being greedy to have all the gold at
once, did therefore kill the Hen, thinking to have found her belly full of
gold, and so was both defrauded of that he looked for, and lost also what he
had before. Hitherto of the nature, ordering and marling of this Haisell
ground. Generally now for the continual fallowing and stirring thereof, you
must understand, it may neither be fallowed wet, lest it answer more Grass
then Corn; nor yet so dry, that the dead bottom swell up, as in great drought
it will, and swallow the good Mould that lies above, and therefore bind not
your self to any precise time of any month, but the opportunity either in May
or June, as you shall find the weather to have prepared it for your desire. In
the like temper you ought to stir it after a shower, after Saint James his
day, or in the end of July; for so will it be dry and hard before the time of
sowing, whereas if it be stirred later, every small Rain will distemper it
into Dirt or Mire, by reason of the tenderness thereof, and then can you not
fitly bestow your Seed upon it.

The Marle Cope ground follows, which is most commonly (as I said) a stiff,
The ord(...) of the Ma(...) Cope gro(...)
wet, cold Clay, and not so fit as the former to be marled for Corn, except
in some few fleet places thereof, but yet it may serve for Pasture or for
Oats; such of them as be marled, must be fallowed fleet or shallow, lest the
Marle become drowned in the wet: then being marled, they may in dry Summers
(and not ouer-moist Countries) bear Wheat in some mediocrity. Three hundred
loads at the most of Marle are sufficient for an Acre of this kind, and two
bushels and a half of Wheat will sow the same, which must be cast above Furrow
fourteen or twenty days before Michaelmas. It requires round, high and
narrow Ridges, and that the water-Furrowes be stricken somewhat deep, the
better to conueigh moisture from the Corn, and that it be left cloddy as much
as may be: and yet to say the truth, such as will convert this sort of ground
to tillage, must provide a greater quantity of rich ground or Greet (as we
term it) and of fat Dongue, then of Marle it self, to amend this Land
withal. But if there be any ground that is light and whining, or weeping,
because of Springs that are therein, (...)
and therewith does cast up Rushes, let that be marled upon the green land
with four hundred or five hundred loads upon the Acre, about the latter end of
Summer; for so will the Marle sink into it, and cast up a sweet grass for
eight or ten years together, and until that the Marle be sunk so low, that
another sword or crust of earth be grown over it, and then is it fit time to
plough it, but yet very fleet and narrow, for so will it bear good Oats; but
if it be so wet that you cannot adventure to sow your Wheat upon it, because
the Rushes be not killed with this first ploughing, then may you sow it again
with Oats, drawing good water-furrowes to draine it, because it will be the
wetter for ploughing, and thereby the Marle also will the sooner lose his
force; thus doing, let it lie to Pasture again.

There be some other grounds of the Marle Cope, which carry a sour Grass,
weed.
and the Dyers Weed (commonly called Greening weed) and having a great tore
thereof, the which also may be amended by three hundred or four hundred load
of Marle upon the Acre of the green Land: for the Marle will both rot the tore
or vesture thereof, and also enrich the Mould very much; so as it will answer
good Pasture twelve years after: and when you shall perceive that the Marle is
well sunk, then may it be ploughed fleet and narrow, sowed with Oats, and
fallowed; so may it both bear good Wheat, if it find a good season, and be
the richer a long time after, partly by the benefit of the Marle, partly by the
rotting of the tore, and sword, and partly by the dongue and water of the
Cattle that pasture upon it: for the sweeter the Pasture is, the more Beasts it
feeds, and the more beasts it bears, the more it self is amended by it.

Touching the fallowing of this ground, great heed is required: for as it
swells more then the Haisell ground, if it be taken hard and dry, so is it
more grassie then that, or the sandy Soil, if you fallow it wet: The season
therefore follows commonly in April, or in the beginning of May, for to
fallow it, and to stir it about Midsummer, or so soon after as the Rain
shall have prepared it meet for your vn-shod Oxen to labor upon it. Many men
fearing to hit the right season for this ground in the Spring of the year, do
make it ready by a Winter fallow before Christmas, and by stirring it before
Midsummer, if they may; which manner is not to be misliked.

Lastly, comes the two sorts of sandy ground, The order of the san(...)
Moulds.
and grauelly Mould; the one being to be ordered much after the Haisell Mould,
saving he would have somewhat more Marle, and also would be favored more in
the often tillage, then it: for the Haisell Mould will bear or endure more
tillage then the Sand. But this last sort of sandy ground, being a very staring
Sand (as we use to call it) for much of it will bear Heathe, being of it self
very barren, and very fleet or shallow Mould, and ouer-hot and dry, and, by
reason of that extremity, is vnfertill, except it be marled very plentifully.
And therefore when you break up this ground, plough it as deep as you may,
not fearing to cast down the best Mould thereof, because the Marle will pierce
through, and sink down into it. An Acre of this ground requires five hundred
or six hundred loads of your Marle at the least. Sow always vnder-furrow
about Michaelmas, with two Bushels and a half upon the Acre, which it will
better carry then the Haisell ground: for although the Straw be small, yet will
it be harder, and stand better then that of the other. The worm whereof I
spoke, will be busy with that, that grows on this sort of ground, until
that the heat thereof be somewhat assuaged by the Marle. If your ground be
hilly, make your Water-furrowes in such sort, as I have said before, for the
saving both of your Marle and Mould; harrow it very little, leave it as cloddy
as you may. After that you have taken a Crop from it; fallow that Wheat Gratten
or Stubble in May; after that, stir it also, and then, about Michaelmas, sow
it with Wheat again: for it is not yet rich enough to bear you good Pease.
This done, let it rest four or five years, and if it send up any plenty of
Broom, cut or pull them when they be of some mean bigness, but plough not
the ground, until it have taken such rest, and after it, you may well break
it up of new, and sow it with Oats: which Oate Gratten or Stubble, you must
Summer-fallow, when it is at the Harvest; and then if you desire to have it in
good heart, you must marle it with three hundred or four hundred loads upon
the Acre again. After this Crop thus taken, rest it five or six years, and
then take one Crop more of Oats from it, and, after a Summer-fallow, sow it
with Wheat, and suffer it to ly a Wheat Gratten or Stubble, till it shall have
rested as before, is appointed for the Haisell ground, and so will it be the
better thirty or forty years after the marling. We have in this Weald a sandy
and grauelly ground that is wet and weeping, the which is scarcely worth the
marling, except the neerenesse of the Marle: and thereby the small cost and
charge thereof, may entice a man to bestow the cost upon it with Marle, and
then the best way is to marle upon the green Land, or upon a fallow, with five
hundred loads or more upon the Acre, or rather to take the profit thereof by
Pasture then by Tillage: for it will hardly bear good Corn, which is soon
killed with the wet vapor that is continually sent up from the wet Springs
that lie under it. This sort of ground is to be fallowed, when it is both hard
and dry, because it swells not as does the Haisell Mould, and may therefore
be taken in June, if former fair weather bring it not to a dry season; and it
is to be stirred also after a shower, in the like plight as the Haisell mould
before. Your marleable grounds being ordered in this wise, severally set down
for each kind of them will continually stand fruitful either for Corn or
Pasture: and albeit the high prices which Corn has of late years carried,
may allure some men to sow Corn incessantly, and thereby to spend their Marle,
and to choke their arable in the end, yet I doubt not but the wiser sort can
see that it is much better to maintain their grounds hearty and in good plight
for ever, then to raise a short gain, that will bring a long and perpetual
loss upon them, the rather also, because that Butter, Cheese, and the flesh of
Beef and Mutton, be advanced in price equally, if not beyond Wheat, Rye,
Barley, and the other Grains. Howbeit a good Husbandman will make his profit
of them both: for if he have one hundred, or one hundred and twenty Acres of
this Wealdish arable, he will so marle and manure them, that dividing his Land
into five or six equal parts, he may continually plough twenty or five and
twenty Acres for Corn, and yet lay to Pasture the rest by turns: so that by
the help of his Marle, his Land shall be continually rich and profitable, both
in the one and other of them. And as thus I have spoken of the Weald,
describing the nature and property thereof: so may every man of discretion and
judgment, which shall meet with earth of the same quality and condition (in
what part of this Kingdom soever) make application of these Rules before
rehearsed, and no doubt but the profit will make both the labor and cost,
profitable and pleasant.

The several ways, according to the opinions of Writers; and the certain
ways, according to the experience of Husbandmen, for the destruction of Moles,
or Moales, which dig and root up the Earth, and how to reduce and bring the
ground to the first goodness, having been spoiled by them.
IT is needless either to describe the nature and quality of this Vermin, or
the injury and hurt which they do to the Husbandman, Gardner, and Planter,
since no Country is exempt from their annoyance: but touching the remedies,
they are of greater secrecy, and therefore I thought good in this place to
insert them.

The ancient Writers are of diverse opinions touching the manner of destroying
this creature, and therefore have left unto us sundry Medicines how to work
the same: amongst the which, one writes, as an approved experiment, that if
you take Walnut-shells, and fill them with Brimstone, Chafe, and Perrofin, and
then setting them on fire, put them into holes or trenches, through which the
Moale passes, and the very smell or stink thereof will poison them; so that
if you dig, you shall find them dead in their holes.

Another affirms, That if you take Brimstone, and danke stinking Litter of
Horses, and burn it in the holes or haunts of the Moales, it also will
impoyson them; so as you shall find they will come out of their Caves, and lie
dead upon the green Grass.

A third affirms, That if you take green Leekes, Garlic, or Onyons, and
chopping them grossly, thrust it into the hoales, and the very fume or savor
thereof will so astonish and amaze the Moales, that they will presently forsake
the Earth, and falling into a trance, you may take them up with your hands. Now
there is not any of these Medicines which can be disallowed: for there is no
doubt but that they will work the effects spoken of, if the Moale can be
brought to take a full sent thereof: but it is a Vermin curious of sent, and
passing quick of hearing, and being in a spacious ground, will prevent these
baits; and therefore they are rather to be applied for Gardens or little
grounds, where there is but a Moale or two, then in large Fields, where there
be many hundreds.

To conclude, for this matter of Medicines, or for the helping of Gardens,
Hopyards, or any small spot of ground, there is not any thing held more
auayleable, then to sow in that place the Herb called Palma Christi: for it
is found by certain experience, that wheresoever that Herb grows naturally
of it self, or otherwise is either purposely sown or planted, there in no
wise will any Moale abide.

Thus much I thought good to show you for the use of Medicine, and for clearing
of small grounds: now for the annoyances which happen to great, large, and
spacious Fields, through the multitude of Moales; there are only three absolute
ways for the curing of the same.

The first is, in the months of March and April, to view where they cast, and
go about to make an extraordinary great Hill, in which they build them Nests,
which is known by the newness of the Mould; then look for the new trench
which leads to the same; for as she goes she returns: then with your
Moale-spade open the trench in diverse places, and then very still and silently,
and observing to take the wind, to prevent both hearing and smelling, watch
the Moale as she goes or returns, which is, Morning, Noone, and Evening,
and as soon as you see her cast, strike her with your Moale-speare, made of
many sharp pikes, and so cast her up, and kill her. Thus have I seen, by one
man, an hundred destroyed in one day.

The next infallible way for the destruction of Moales is: If you can by any
possible means bring in water to ouerflow and wash your ground, and as soon
as the earth is wet over, the Moales will come forth of themselves, and you may
gather them up with your hands at pleasure.

The last (indeed as much approved as any) is to take a live Moale in the
month of March, which is their bucking or ingendring time, and put it into a
deep brass Basin, or other deep smooth Vessel, out of which the Moale
cannot creep, and then at evening bury it in the earth up to the brimme, and
so leave it, and the imprisoned Moale will presently begin to shrike, or
complain or call, so that all the Moales in the ground will come to it, and
tumbling into the Vessel, they are prisoners also, and the more prisoners, the
greater will be the noise; and the more noise, the more Moales will come to
the rescue, so that I have seen 50. or 60. taken in one night, and in one
Vessel or brass Kettle.

Now, having thus learned how to destroy the Moales, it is meet you also know
how to prevent the coming in of foreign Moales; because though you keep
your ground never so clean, yet if your next neighbor be an ill Husband, his
field may soon impoyson yours again: therefore to prevent the coming in of
any foreign Moale, make but little Furrows or Trenches about your ground,
and scatter in them small round Balls made of Hempseede, or Hempseede and
Palmae Christi beaten together, and you shall not need to fear the coming in
of any neighbour-Moales, how many soever there be about you.

Lastly, for the reducing or bringing the ground to the first perfection again
(for howsoever some Husbandmen say, More Moale-hills, more ground; yet it is
certain, that more Moale hills, less good ground) for never yet was sweet
grass seen on a Moale-hill; therefore to bring it to perfection, which I
mean, to be Meadow-ground, or ground to be mowne, which Moale-hills cannot be:
you shall first with a sharp Paring-shouell, pare off the swarth about three
fingers deep, for fear of hurting the roots of the grass; and then the
swarth taken off, dig away the rest of the Mould, and scatter it as small as
you can round about the Hill, then take the green swarth, and cutting it
artitifically, lay it close, and fast, and level, where you took away the
Mould, as if there had never been Hill there: and thus do to all your Hills,
though they be never so innumerable; and after all your ground is leuelled, as
soon as the first shewre falls, run all your ground over with a pair of
backe-harrowes, or an Harrow made of a Thorn bush, and it will break the
Mould as small as ashes, which will so comfort and refresh the root of the
grass, that it will grow in infinite abundance; and the sowrenesse, which was
caused, by reason of the Hills, will come again to a perfect sweetness, and
the Meadow will be more fruitful then before by many degrees. And thus much
for the destruction of Moales, and reducing of the earth to his first goodness.

FINIS.



