The new pollecye of war, wherein is declared not only how ye most cruel
Tyrant the great Turk may be overcome, but also all other enemies of the
Christen public weal, lately devised by Theodore Basille.

Prouer. 21.

The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but the Lord gyuethe the
victory.



The prayer of King Asa.

ii. Parali. xiiii. O Lord it is all one with the, whyther thou helpest, in few
or in many. Help us, O Lord, our God. For we having our whole affiaunce and
trust in the and in thy name be come against this multitude. Thou art the Lord
our God, let no man therefore prevail against the.

The prayer of King Iosaphat.

ii. Parali. xx. IN us, oh Lord, there is not so great strength, that we may
be able to resist this great company, that commethe against us. But wh^^ we
know not what to do, tha^ have we none other refuge nor socour, but only to
lift up our eyes unto the.

King Iosaphat to his Soldiers.

Believe in the Lord your God, and so shall, ye be witheout all ieopardye.
Believe his Prophets, and all things shall be prosperous unto you.

To the right worshypfull Sir Thomas Wyet Knight, Theodore Basille wysheth long
life, continual health, and prosperous felicite.
I Think there is no man so far estrasiged from civil humanite, which
knowethe not, how much every one of us is endetted to his native country.
For all be it the duty that we owe to our parents, How greatly we are bound
to our country.
kynnesfolke, friends etc, be great eue^ by the very law and instincte of
nature, yet the det, where with we are obliged to our contre, seems to be
greater and of much more valor, than we may at any time be able to set our
selves francke and fre from it. Our pare^tes only give us this gross, rude
and moortall body. Our country does not only receive and joyfully suste^tate
it, but also opulently adourne and garnysh both that and the mind with most
goodly and godly virtues. It engraffethe in us the true knowledge of our
selves, Our country is to be more regarded the^ our parents.
the fear of God, the love of God and of our neighbor, the true faith in Gods
promises, the unfeigned obedience toward our superious. It tylleth our hearts
with the plough of paynful diligence. It eradicateth all vnfruytful wedes. It
eiecteth all unprofitable cloddes, and makes the earth of our hearts so fine,
pure, pregna^t and fertile, that it is ready to receive any manner of good
seed, that may be sown thereupon, and to produce innumerable increase. What
great commodities we receue of our country.
It sowethe also in the ^elde of our breasts many precious seeds, as modesty,
grauite, gentleness, honest behauour, affabilite, comite, liberalite, frugalite,
patience, long sufferaunce, moderacion, temperaunce, obedience, fortitude,
magnanimite, justice, equite, continence, humilite, erudicion, prudence,
learning, wisdom, probite of manners, with an whole see of good things mo.
All this does our country for us through the dilligent exercise of wise and sage
teachers. So that it may appear right well, men be not only much endetted to
their native country, but also allured unto the love and desire of the same
even by a certain inspiracio^ both of God and nature. For how glad is an
English man being in France, Germany, or Italy or else where, to know by the
transmissio^ of mutual letters, what is done in England, in what case the
public weal consists, how it prospers, how Gods word is set forward,
after what manner virtue is mayntayned, and vice detested. etc? Again, is not
the French man, Germayn, or Italion, being herein England very desirous to
know likewise, what is done in his native contre?

We read of some, The fervent affeccio^ that some have had to their country.
which, when they were in straung places, where they wanted no kind of
pleasures, desired rather to be at home t^ their own native country, and to
eat beans and dross with hogs, tha^ to be in y^ most floryshyng Realm in
the world, and to sit at the tables of Kings, Princes and such other terrene
potestates, and to affl^e with all manner of delicious meats.

To whom is it unknown, yt wha^ a certain noble man called Leo Byza^tius, Leo
Byzantius.
was grievously accused of certain of the City, where he was inhabited, and like
to be in danger of death, and therefore councelled of diverse of his fre^des to
fly into some straung country, he came boldly into the assembly, which
consulted about his matter, and said, O ye my Cytysenies, I am counseled to
fly but certes I had rather be slain of you, and so to dye among you, than once
to make my self captive to any straung country. O valeaunt and conrageous
heart. O noble and prince like stomach. O unfeigned lover of his native
country. He cho^^d rather to be flayne although unrighteously of his
contremen, and so to die among them, than he would once depart out of his
native contre.

The victorious Champyo^ Sertorius Sertorius.
also, being in the wars or else where, was wont to say, that he had rather be
at home in his own country, and to be the most base and vile Cytysen of
Rome, than being abse^t to be Emperor of al y^ world so sweet a thing is it
for a man to in his own native country.

Thus se we how every nation is led even of nature with such an unspeakable
loving affeccion toward his contre, as never dyethe, except paraduenture any
be of that pestiferous and poisoned nature, whereof one is, which being an
English man borne, dauncethe now like a Traytoure in a Carnalles wede at
Rome, and as a shameless mo^sture abasheth not to write, Roma est mihi patria.

The love of our country must needs be great, seeing that y^ grave, prudent,
sage, and wise governors of the public weal heretofore in all their acts
sought nothing so much as the prosperity and wealth thereof. What goodly sweet
sentences did they instille into the breasts of their yonglynges even from the
cradles, to encourage them unto y^ love of their country? As these are: Pugna
propatria. Mortem oppete propatria. Dulce and decoru^ estpropatria more. Fight
for the contre. Dye for the country. It is a sweet and semely thing to dye for
the country. And as they taught other to do this, so did they show goodly and
virtuous examples most worthy imitacion of their posterite For no kind of
perel did they refuse for the safeguard of their conntrey. No rytches, no
substance, no possessions, no not their own life did they spare for to
profyt their country. And this may we se done in y^ Histories not only of the
baser sort but also of most victorious Emperors, puissaunte Princes, and
noble Consulles.

King Codrus Codrus.
ascertayned by y^ infallible oracle of Apollo, that his contre men the
Athenians could by no menes enjoy the victory of their enemies, except he
himself were slain in the battle, came forth in to the field among the
other warriors with a iustye and valeaunt chere, fyghtyng with his adversaries
courageously. But in as much as it was not only known to yt Athenians, but
also to the contrary part what answer was given Codrus of Apollo, therefore
y^ enemies gave a commandment that no man should hurt the body of king
Codrus. Which when he perceived, he conveyed himself out of the army, put of
his princelyke armours, clad himself like a common Soldier, and returned
shortly into the host where both manfully and wyllyngly he dyed, and by this
menes saved his contre O most excellent Prince worthy immortalite. O condign
spectacle for all rulars to behold.

A like thing do we read of that noble Consulle Publius Decius, Publius Decius.
which wha^ he saw his army greatly disconforted and almoost slain, spoored
up his horse sharply, and with a valeaunt courage braste into the mids of his
enemies army, where after that he had slain many, and by his valeau^^e
encouraged of new the hearts of his Soldiers, he being grievously wounded
dyed at y^ instant, for the health of his country, so that notwithstondynge
by his wounds, blood and death the Romans gatte the victory, whereof before
they did so much despair.

A certain woman also among the Lacedaemonians, caulled Gyrtias, Gyrtias.
wha^ she herd y^ Acrotatus her daughters son was grievously wounded in the
wars, yea and dead thereof, answered with a lustye heart and said, when he
went forth unto the enemies, was it any other like, but that he should dye, or
else slay them? It is more merry to hear that he is dead, as it was worthy him,
and y^ city and his progenitors, than to live all his life like a dastarde,
and show no point of valeau^ce. O heart more courageous, tha^ the feminine sex
requires. Grand mothers are wont for the most part to love their neuewes
and childres children more te^derly than y^ very mothers. Yet this granddame
Gyrtias lamented nothing the death of her neuew, but entierly reioysed that he
died so valeauntly in the wars.

Another woman of Lacedemony, A woman of Lacedemony
after that she had sent forth five of her sons unto battle, stood before
the suburbs of the city, waytyng what should be the end of the battle. In
the mean season came a certain man and showed her that all her sons were
slain. To whom she said, I did not demand this of the, O thou sluggysh
slave, but in what case the country stondeth. When he had au^swered, that the
country had gotten the victory, she said, oh tha^ very well, I am glad that my
sons are thus dead. This noble woman did set more by the safegarde of her
country, than by her private affecte toward her children.

Damatria Damatria.
also an woman of that nation, slew her own son at his return from the
battle, because he behaved himself like a coward in the wars, and did not
fight manfully for the wealth of his country. This seems to smell barbaryke
immanite, and to be to much cruel, notwithstanding it is a goodly example to
show yt all mothers should desire nothing so much in their children as to
have them evermore bent to serve the public affairs of their contre, eue^ to
y^ very death.

The Emperor Otho Syluius Otho Syluius.
was determined at a certain time, I know not for what cause, to give over the
regimente of his Empire. Many came unto him, and desired him very instantly,
that he would not leave of his imperial dignite, and so forsake the common
weal, and the valeaunt company of noble warryours y^ he had besides other.
Among all one being but a Soldier taken at adventure, perceauyng that the
Emperor persisted in his determinacio^, took out his swerd and said, O
Emperor know thou, that we all are franckely encouraged thus to do for the.
And streyghte ways he killed himself. O lusty heart, and fra^ke courageous
stomach. Whom would it not animate to give his life for the health of his
country, seeing so many goodly examples viuely described and lyuishly set forth
in histories before his face? To much brutall is he, that is not moved with
these most memorable antique monumentes.

But if I should go forth to rehearse all the Histories, which declare how
greatly the fervent petie, the godly affeccion, and the reverend love toward
the country has been ever esteemed in times past of all gentle and natural
hearts, I should co^ pyle a work much longer than the Iliades of the Greek
Poet Homere, yea I should not only far excede y^ limits of an epistle, but
also onerate and ouercharge the reader.

But to make few words, we are no les bound to our country now than our
au^cetours were i^ times past.
even the very same godly affeccio^ owe we at this day to this our native
country England, that me^ of old time have showed unto their country, except
we be estrau^ged from all natural humanite. And what soever our Auncetours
have done in tymespast, unto the very same are we bound now likewise. So that
who so ever detrecteth and refusethe to do for his country, what so ever lies
in his power, is an unnatural brau^ che, and a corrupt seed, unworthy to
enjoy any fruit or commodite thereof, as I may add nothing here unto.

But all men have not all gifts, neither can every man profitte his country
alyke. Yet ought the studious endeavors and diligent employmentes of all men,
tend unto this, that the co^modite of the public weal and the health of the
country should be sought above al things. The rytche man with his rytches, the
strong man with his strength, the wise with his wisdom, the poletike with his
pollecy, the eloque^t with his eloquence, the learned with his learning, the
artificer with his science, the plough man with his tillyng, and so every man in
his degree according to his knowledge ought to serve his country. For unto this
does the law both of God and nature bind us, the which to resist is extreme
impiete and plain wickedness.

But if any nation be estraunged from y^ unnatural affeccio^ toward their
country, The hartye affeccion of English me^ toward there country.
certes I think England, I mean the Inhabitauntes thereof, may justly
contend with any country for the alienacio^ of this vice. It does me good yea
it makes me seriously to rejoice even at y^ very heart, to se how glad my
country me^ are to serve the commodities of this our country England. What so
ever our most excellent Prince, or any in his name commands, it is with all
reverent fear and loving expedicion accomplyshed. No man grutcheth, no man
muttereth no man thyncketh the precepte unrighteous, nor the burden heavy, so
feruente a love do they bear unto their country. All with one consent employe
their endeavors to satisfy even unto the vttermoste of their power the
imperial precepte of the kings most royal majesty. This has Gods word
wrought in them, so mighty and fruytfull is yt swerd of the spirit. Ephe. vi.
Thanckes be to God for it. The Lord of heaven might grant, that it may
long prosper, yea and flourish in this Realm of England. So may we be sure
never to be without his divine blyssyng. Lord let it so come to pass.

It will not easly be believed, The Gentle me^ of Kent.
after that y^ kings graces letters were delivered now of late to certain
Gentle me^ in this Cou^tye of Kent for the prepacion of certain men apt for
the wars, how expeditely his graces pleasure was accomplyshed in every
condition. The Gentyl me^ (all other businesses laid aside) immediately
provided theyrtofore appointed number of men, arrayenge them with dece^t
martial armours so that nothing wa^ted, but al things set at such a stay,
that they receyuyng premonicion of very little time, are ready at al hours to
bring forth their men apt and ready for the wars.

Again the men, The (...) of Kent.
which were pressed to go unto the wars, it is almost incredible to se and
perceive what alacrite and quickenesse of spirit was in them. They seemed to be
so desirous to defend their country, that they in a manner neglected their
domestical trauayles, their private businesses, not much esteemed there dear
wives and sweet children, no nor yet their own lives, so that they might in
any point do good to the public weal of England. When I saw this valeau^t
courage in the^, and perceived their unfeigned affeccion and love toward their
country, Lord God, with how great admiracion and stupore was I affected and
stricken? My joy was surely greater tha^ I ca^ here express, to se this
faithful obedience in them toward the Kings graces majesty, this fervent love
toward their country, this hearty affecte toward the commonweal of England.
And I doubt not, but that like obeysaunce and pro^ptitude was also found in
other places of this Realm.

These things thus done, The good mind and fervent affeccio^ of y^ Author
toward his country.
I began to think with my self on this manner, Lord God, under how
unfortunate star was I borne, that am endewed neither with wit, pollecy,
valeaunce, strength, wisdom, rytches, or any other thing, wherwythe I may do
good to my country, as other men do. The vain of my wit is barren, my
pollecye is gross, my valeaunce is nothing, my strength is little, my wisdom
is base, my riches are not worth a Gally half penny besides a few books and a
little slender apparel. Alas what shall I do? Shall I show my self in no
point thanckefull to my country? Shall other men ieopard both their lives and
goods for the safegarde of the public weal, and I in the mean season do
nothing? Shall I be found an unnatural brau^che and a corrupt seed: It
shameth me to live, and I may right well recount my self most miserable
seeing I am coniecte into such unfortunate state, that I am able by no means
to do that for my country in act, which my mind coueteth in will.

At the last I remembered ye poor wydowe of ye Gospel, Luke. xxi.
which although she were not able to cast into y^ treasury so much as the
rytche me^ did, yet offered two minutes and ware accepted for her good will. I
called also unto remembrance, how gentylly king Artozerzes, King Artozerzes.
with diverse other were wont to receive base, si^ple, homely and common gifts
of their subjects, and to give them rewards worthy a Prince for their good
will. When I perpe^ded these things with my self it encouraged me to do some what
(although ye somewhat may right well be recounted some little nothing) that I
may show my self not altogether unworthy the beneficence of my country. And
for as much as I have been trained up from my cradles in the court of Lady
Mnemosyne and her daughters, and exercised in the wrastlynge place of Apollo
(although I may justly seem to have been there but a vain gazer and idle
spectatour) I thought it not vndecente according to my profession of letters
to bring for the some litteral lucubracio^ which being diligentely red and
followed of my cou^treme^, should not be altogether vnfruytfull to our common
country. I have therefore in this tumulte and noise of wars compyled a
certain little Treatise, entitled, The pollecy of war, The cont^^tes of this
book.
not unworthy the reading chefely at this time. In it I have declared in how
pitefull case y^ christen public weal consists almoost universally. I have
showed also what is the cause of these cruel wars, that reygne n^we almoost
through out the whole world, and by what means they may be ceased. I have
furthermore openned after what manner we may get the victory of our enemies.
Again I have showed how y^ Soldiers ought to behave them selves both when
they go to ye wars, and wha^ they are in them, that God may be on their
side. Moreover I have declared, how they that tarry at home, ought also to
behave them selves, unless that for their iniquite and unrighteous behauoure
God forsake our army. Finally I have here ope^ned how christen men shall
return from the wars after they have gotten the victory, and on what manner
they shall behave them selves, y^ their country may enjoy peace and
tranquilite ever after.

All theyse things have I done in this little treatise followyng, Si quis
loquitur ut sermones Deiloquatur.
according as I trust, to the vain of the holy scripture And as gladly as I
have compiled this short work, so gladly would I have done any other thing
for the incolumite and safegarde of my country, if it had lyghen in my power.
Uerely let all men believe me, if my rytches and wisdom had been equal with
Salomons, if my pollecy and strength had been like with Sa^psons, I would no
less hartelye have employed the^ all for the wealth of my country, than I
have bestowed my labor in setting for the this little treatise. But when I
may not do y^ one, let it suffice that I do the other. The Poet says, In
magnis uoluisse satest. Nether is he altogyther ingrate and unkind, which for
his puissau^ce maynly co^te^deth to show himself tha^kefull and kind again,
although his act at all times does not greatly answer his good will.
Notwythstandyng I trust, if this my work be diligently read, marked and
followed, it shall not only declare my honest and natural heart toward my
country, but also teach men a more godly fasho^ in the wars, tha^ has
been hitherto used of many. I pray God, it may bring forth no less fruit,
than I have ente^ded. But this my labor what so ever it be I offer to your
right worshypful mastershyp, both because ye are one whom God above many other
has endewed with most goodly qualities, worthy the renown of worship, and apt
for the godly administracio^ of the public weal no less in y^ perfect
knowledge of the diversity of Languages, than in the actiuite of martial
affairs, and also for as much as ye have ever hitherto earnestely embrased not
only the studies of humayne letters, but also y^ grave exercises of divine
litterature, trusti^g y^ ye will accept this my little gift with that
benevolence, which al me^ commend and praise in you. If I shall may obtain
this, it shall not only not repent me of my labor employed i^ this behalf,
but also encourage me hereafter to atte^pte some other enterprises of no less
weyghty and grave importance, and dedicate the^ also unto your name. In the
mean season God the Author of all goodness and the mighty shield of them, that
repose their affiaunce in him, ^ought vouchsafe to preserve your good
mastership in continual worship, and daily increase the same more and more
unto the glory of his name, the conseruacion of the public weal, the
co^te^tacion of your good mind, and the comfort and joy of so many as
unfeignedly love you.

AMEN.


The pollecy of war.
I Think there is no man, that has ye Christen faith dwelling in his heart,
and look the for another world after this life much more blissed, well thy
and quiet tha^ this is, but that believes assuredly that the end of this most
miserable and wretched world with all the vain pomp and pompous vanite
thereof is at hand, at the leest not far of, as ye holy scriptures testify in
many places. For if we search the divine volumes diligently, and ponder what
tokens shall immediately go before the day of judgment, we shall have a just
occasion to think and undoubtedly to be persuaded, that the vain glory of
this sinful world, yea the world it self is at y^ latter age, and ready as they
say to be buried and wrapped up in y^ flood of Lethe. Among all the other
tokens and signs of the day of judgment, which are to many for to rehearse at
this present, does not our most merciful savior Jesus christ in the Gospel
of Mathewe declare, Mat. xxiiii.
that we shall hear of wonderful battles, and that nacio^ shall rise against
nation, and kingdom against kyngedome, and that there shall be pestile^ces,
honger and earthquakes in all places, again that the faithful preachers of Gods
word, and the true christen men shall be grievously afflicted ponyshed,
troubled, hated of all nations, yea and cruelly slain for his names sake? The
niserable state of this world.
As I may leave of to speak of the extreme pestilences, of the fervent
honger, and terrible earth quakes, wherwythe diverse lands now of late have
bengreuously troubled, and yet are not fre from them, as I may also speak
nothing of ye tyranicall persecucion, the ungentle handlyng, the cruel
empresonment the bocherlyke slayeng both by fire sweard, water, hemp, famine,
secret murder* etc. of the true prechers of Gods word and of the other
faithful Christians, which have boldly and gladly offered them selves unto the
very death for the glory of God and the name of his son Jesus Christ for a
wytnes agenst the popysh kingdom and all their wicked doctrine. What fears and
cruel wars reygne now almoost in every place thorowout the world? How many
foreign Princes do invade now a days one another Realm? What ambicion
occupyeth the hearts of temporal rulers, which moves them both with sword and
fire unmercifully to destroy the just and right possessions of other, that
they alone as Gods may reygne in this world? Does not y^ Prince recount
himself most happy, which with all kind of violence against all equite and
justice can most dilate and enlarge his Empire and dominion? Thus is the
christian public weal re^t and torn, and miserably defloured. Thus is all
good order chased away out of the bounds of Christendom. Thus is ye study
both of divine and humayne letters utterly neglected and set naught by. Thus is
justice and all kind of humanite exiled, and in their stead is entered
unpunished robbery, cruel theft. Insatiable spoylynge of other men's goods,
and an whole see of barbarous and beastlyke manners. To conclude, thus is it
come to pass, y^ we have scasely so much as a step of true godlynes left
among us, into such miserable case are we fallen in these perilous and latter
days, according to the prophecy of Christ. Who lame tethe not to hear theyse
things? Whose heart does not tremble and shake even as the quakynge flames of
Aetna, to remember this great calamite and grievous misery of y^ Christen
public weal? What man is so far estrau^ged from all natural humanite and
tender compassion, that wishes not rather to be out of this wretched world,
than to behold so dolorous syghtes and pitiefull spectacles? O the unspeakable
wretchedness of this world. O the infinite cares and innumerable troubles of
this poor life. O the madness of mortal men, which consider not these things,
but like brute beasts go forth to follow their sensual appetites and beast
like pleasures. Mark well.
Certes the state of this world requires not delicicious fare, but continual
fasting, not gorgious apparel, but weryng of sackeclothe, not annoyntynge with
sweet bawmes, but sprynkelyng with ashes, not resting in soft fether beds, but
lieng upon the hard ground, not laughyng, but mournyng, not iestyng but
lamentyng, not scoffing but waylyng, not wanton words, but feruente prayers,
not playenge at the dyse and cards, but continual meditacion in the law of
our Lord God, not heapynge up together of worldly possessions, but the glad
distribucion of them to the poor members of Christ, that we may be rytch in
the living God, and have all our trust and confidence in him. Woe be to them
that laugh at these things. Woe be to them that seek not unto y^ uttermost of
their power to redress these piteful enormities of the christen public
weal. Woe be to them that say, peace, peace, all is well, all is well, and
consider not that a final destruccio^ is at hand, if we correct not our
synnefull manners shortly, and amend our wicked lives. Cleanse your hands O ye
sinners, says S James, Ia^o. ^iii. v.
and purge your hertes O ye waueryng minded. Suffer affliccions, sorrow ye and
weep. Let your laughter be turned into mourning. Go to now ye rytch me^, weep
and howl on your wretchedness that shall come upon you. Ye prestes and ministers
of the Lord mourn, Iorl. ^^.
weep, lament, and cease not to cry both day and night unto God on this
manner: Be favorable, O Lord, be favorable to thy people. Let not thine
heritage be brought to confusion, leest the Hethen be Lords thereof. Psa.
lxx^iii
Wherefore should they say among y^ Hethen, where is now their God. For surely
surely we had never more occasion to mourn, lame^te and bewail our miserable
living, and to pray to God for a redress of these miserable enormities,
wherewith we are grievously oppressed the^ we have at this present day. As I may
speak nothing of England, (whom I most humbly beseech God graciously to
preserve i^ prosperous estate, and always to give her a glorious and triumpha^t
victory over her enemies) how are other foreign kyngedo^s miserablye vexed
with continual war? How are y^ goods of y^ faithful spoiled among them?
This also ought to move any true English heart to have pity and compassion
upon the Christen brothers, dwell they never so far from us, seeing that we be
knytte together in one faith, initiated with the same mysteries, profess one
God and one kind of religion, hope to be saved by one menes, that is to say by
the most precious blood of our savior Jesus christ etc While we have time,
Gala. vi.
says s. Paul let us work good toward all men, but chefely toward them, that
be of the household of faith. As I may speak nothing of y^ dissencio^ among
christen Princes (which is a thing more dolorous than can be sufficiently
lamented) whose heart does it not make to faynte, yea plenteouslye to blede for
to consider how grievously and without all marcye the people of Christ in many
places be most cruelly invaded, The Tur^es crudelite
handled, led captyue, miserably entreated, empresonned, slain, murdered, and
all their goods spoiled, brent and taken away of that most spytefull and
Nerolyke Tiraunt y^ great Turk, that mortal enemy of Christ's religion, that
destroyer of the christian faith, that peruerter of all good order, that
adversary of all godlynes and pure innocence? To whom is it unknown how like
an i^satiable ambicious Tyra^t he goes forth daily more and more to enlarge
his Ethnysh kingdom, to set forth the glory of his Mahumet, to deface the
honor of our Lord y^ alone and true God, to obscure the virtue of his word, to
hinder ye promocion of Christ's Gospel, yea and utterly to extinguish and
quench the says of Christ, that the glory may (...) given to his Mahumet
alone, and y^ his furious tyranny may reygne universally through out all y^
world and make men like bruyte beasts to do after his pleasure in all things
unto y^ utter dishonor of God, and the damnacio^ of so many as lean to his
most diuellysh commandments? Has not his fearce and furious tyranny gone
through out al Asia, Greece, Illiria and Thracia, Note.
with diverse other Regions? Has he not there both destroyed their chyrches and
showed such crudelite among the^ as was never heard? What shall I speak of
Hungarye, sometime a floryshynge and noble Realm, but now most miserably
assailed, invaded, yea and in many places thereof piteously oppressed both by
swearde and fire of this most cruel enemy of Christ's religion? I pass over
many other Empyres and kyngdoms, which also have tasted of his furious tyranny
and lyonlyke crudelite And who is able to express either by tongue or pen how
miserable a life the Christians live under the dominion of this Turkysshe
Tyraunte? Alas is it possible, that he should be a friend and merciful rulare
to men of the christen religion, seeing that he is an enemy to us both in name,
deed, law, profession, kind of religion, manners, ordinances. etc. Surely
surely Christen men with him are in worse case, tha^ brute beasts are with us.
Does not he writing to the king of Polonia, threate in his letters, ye he will
yoke his fat prestes in the plough, and make the^ to till his land? If he
handles them on this wise, whom we have in so high estimacio^ for the
ministryng of the holy mysteries, what is than to be thought of the baser sort
of the Christians. O Lord be merciful to us, I am sure he will scasely think
them worthy to take the breathe of the air.

Who seethe not now, how miserable the state of the Christiannes is under
this most cruel Tyraunte, which notwithstanding has exalted and increased
his might above all Christen Monarchies or Empyres* And it is to be feared,
seeing he has such prosperous success and tryumphant victories agenst the
Christians, that no nacio^ shall be able to resist and wythstonde his tyranny,
except there be some godly remedy found shortly. For all things prosper so
well with him, that no man needs to doubt, but that he is the scourge of God
to ponish us for our wicked and abominable living, which without all shame
is at this day used among us.

Thus se we in what state y^ christen public weal stondeth, yea rather
lies, and is trodden under foot: Let us now behold, what the occasion of it
is, and by what means it may be repaired and brought again unto the pristme
beauty and old glory, that we having the victory of al our enemies may with
one accord sing perpetual praises to ye name of our Lord God. Amen.

What the occasion of all these cruel wars is, wherewith we are so miserably
oppressed, it may easly be perceived by Histories of the holy scriptures. The
cause of wars.
For verily so often as I po^der this matter with my self, me thyncke I se more
clearly than the Son, y^ as the only occasion of Gods blissyng is, the true
worshyppyng of hi^ and the followynge of his word, so likewise the alone
occasion of his cursynge, that is to say, of his plages, whyther it be by
swearde, pestilence or ho^ger (for by these three ways God is wont to ponysh
the wickedness of his people) is Idolatrye, Note well.
straung worshyppyng of God, despisynge of his word* killing of the true
preachers, and wicked living. Do not the divine Histories show evidently,
that so long as the people of Israel obeyed God, served him according to his
word, hathened to his preachers, walked in his ways led a pure and innocent
life, they enjoyed all kind of felicite and pleasure, and ever gat the oue^hand
of their enemies? How did the public weal of Israel florysshe under that
most noble Captain and victorious Prince Iosue? What kingdom did they invade
and not subdue? What did they take in hand, and brought not unto fortunate
success and prosperous end? How came this to pass, by their own pollecye,
wit and strength? Na verily. For they dispayred of their own strengthes and
said, we are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than
we They are me^ of a great stature, yea we are like greshoppers in comparison
of them? It was God that did fight for them. Number. xiii. xiiii.
God slew their enemies. God gave them the victory, and brought them into the
possession of that land. Fear not y^ people of that land, said Iosue, for
they are but bread for us. Their shylde is departed from them, and the Lord
is with us, fear them not therefore. The Lord your God, Iosue. xxiii.
he shall expel and cast them out before you, and ye shall conquer their
lo^des, as the Lord your God has said to you. One of you shall chase a
thousand, for the Lord your God he fyghteth for you.

But how came it to pass, that they prospered on this wise, and had God so on
their side, that nothing was able to prevail against the^? Uerely because
they did abide steadfast in the law of the Lord. They ran not an
whorehuntyng after strange Gods. They did stycke fast unto y^ Lord their
God. They harkened to his faithful prechers. They worshipped and served him
not after their own fa^sy, but according to the prescripte of his holy word.
They sought his glory in all things, and wrought according to his holy will.
So came it to pass, that they were made blyssed and fortunate of God.

Again in the book of Judges and of Kings, do we not se in the^ that so long
as the Israelites walked according to Gods word, they prosperred and floryshed
above all nations, and when they fell unto Idolatry and wicked living, that
god stored up some Tyra^t, which oppressed the^ with cruel battle, sheddyng
their blood, and spoylyng all yt they had? Nether did God cease thus to ponyshe
the^, until they fell to repe^ta^ce, know ledged their faults, amended their
wicked living, and becam faithful to ye Lord. Moreover what was ye occasion y^
God at the last suffered the Israelites to be led away captive into Babylon of
the king of Caldey, iii^. Re. x^iii (...). xx^vi.
the young men to be slain with swerd in the holy Temple, yea nether young man
nor maiden to be spared, neither old man, neither yet so much as him y^
stouped for age, al ye vessels of ye house of God both great and small and the
tresures thereof, and y^ treasures of the king and of his Lords to be carried to
Babylon every whytte, the house of God to be burnt, the waulles of Jerusalem to
be broken down, and all the places thereof to be burnte with fire and all the
goodly stuff thereof? What was ye occasion, I say that all things went thus
to hauock without mercy? Forsorth ye scripture says, their king Sedechias first
of all did ye, which displeased y^ Lord. He humbled not himself before
Ieremias ye Prophet at the mouth of the Lord, but was styffe necked and hard
hearted to turn unto y^ Lord God of Israel. All ye rulers also of ye prestes
with the people trespassed apace after all abhominacions of ye Hethen, and
polluted the house of the Lord, which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the
Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messangers, sendyng them
betymes, for he had compassion on his people and on his dwelling place. But
they mocked the messangers of God and despised their words, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord so arose against his people, that it
was past remedy.

Here se we again that the occasion of this miserable captivity, which y^
Jews sustained, was because they received not the Prophettes, harkenned not to
Gods word, but followed their own sa^tasies, wroughte that which was good in
their own syghte, and lived after their own se^suall and beastlyke appetites.

What shall I speak of the final destrucciou of the Jews at Jerusalem after
Christ's ascension? What was ye cause of that their grievous misery and
vnoutspeakable calamite? Was it not because they crucitied the son of god,
despised his doctrine, slew his Apostles, walked after their own tradicions,
followed their old wicked forfathers, lived all in pleasure, regardyng nothing
the threatenynges of God. etc?

How chanced it, The Assyrians and Greeks.
that the mighty Monarchies or Empyres of the Assyrians and Greeks, which
floryshed not only with all kind of temporal rytches, but also with most
e^cellent and learned wits, are now so miserably oppressed of the Turks
tyranny? Was not their disobedience to Gods word cause thereof, and their wicked
living more lascivious and wanto^, than that effeminate king Sardanapalus?

How came it to pass, The Rhodes.
that the Rhodes even in our time is subdued of the aforsayd Tyrant, turned
from Christ unto Mahumet, from the christen religion unto the Turkish
profession? Was not supersticio^ Idolatry, Hypocrisye, feigned holiness, colored
chastity, that is to say, fylthy whoredom, stinckyng forntcacio^, unclean
aduoutry, dissolute living. etc. cause thereof? If we ro^ne through out all the
histories both holy and profane, where is entreated of wars, we shall find
that y^ contempt of Gods word and wicked living are the only occasions, that
such bloody battles and cruel wars have at any time been stoored up. For God
is a ryghteous Lord, Behold and mark.
and a long season provoke he unto repentance. If there follows none
amendment, than storeth he up one Tyrau^t or other to take vengeance on us, to
shed our blood, to oppress us with sweard, to ^yll our wives sons and
daughters, to consume with fire all that ever we have, to make our kyngdoms
desolate, and at y^ last utterly to root us out of this world, that his name
through our abominable living may no more be blasphemed, rayled upon and evil
spoken of. Esaie. i.
If ye will be obedient and hear me, says God by his prophet, ye shall eat
the good fruytes of the earth. If that ye will not, but provoke me to anger,
surely ye swearde shall devour you, for the mouth of ye Lord has spoken it.
Esaie. v.
Again, my people is led captive, and brought into bondage, because they have
no knowledge. And their noble men have dyed for honger, and their army have
peryshed for thyrste. They have cast away the law of y^ Lord of hoostes,
says the Prophet, and have blasphemed the word of ye holy one of Israel. And
therefore is the wrath of the Lord kyndled agenst his people, and he shakes
his hand at them, yea he shall smite so, that y^ hills shall tremble. And
their karkases shall lie in y^ open streets like mier. Esaie. xvii.
etc. Also in another place, thou shall be desolate, because thou have
forgotten God thy savior, and haste not remembered thy strong helper. Therefore
shalt thou plant a fair plant, and graffe a strange brau^che, but in the
day of harvest, thou shall reap an heap of sorrows and miseries. Again, these
people are obstinate, Esaie. xxx.
they provoke me unto anger, they are lyenge children, and even such children,
that will not hear y^ law of God. Dic nobis placentia.
They say to them that se, se nothing, and to the southsayers, tell of
nothing for to come, if it be either good or honest, but speak plesaunt
things unto us, and preach us false things. Tread out of the way, go out
of the path, turn away the holy one of Israel from us. Therefore thus says
the holy one of Israel, for as much as ye have cast away this word, and have
conforted your selves with power and nymblenes, and put your confidence
therein, therefore shall ye have this mischefe again for your destruction and
faull, like as an high waull, that falls because of some ryfte or blast,
whose breakyng comes suddenly. And your destruccio^ shall be like as an earthen
pot, which breketh no man towchynge it, but breaks so sore, that a man
shall not find a sheuer of it to fetch fire i^, or to take water with all out
of the pytte. For the Lord God even that holy one of Israel has promised thus.
Esaie. x^ii
Also in another place, who suffered Jacob to be trodden under foot and Israel
to be spoiled? Was it not y^ Lord him self agenst whom we have sinned? We had
no delyghte to walk in his ways, neither were we obedient to his laws.
Therefore has he poured upon us his wrathful displeasure and strange battle,
which makethe us have to do on every side yet will we not understand. He burns
us up, yet synketh it not into our hearts.

The Prophet Jeremy also says what man is so wise to understand this? Iere. ix.
or to whom may the word of the Lords mouth be spoken, that he may show,
wherefore the land is peryshed so, and burnte like a wyldernes, so that no man
goes through? Yea the Lord himself said: Because they have forsaken my
law, ye I gave them, and have not heard my voice nor yet walked thereafter,
but followed y^ wickedness of their own hearts, and run after straung gods, as
their fathers taught the^: Therefore thus says the Lord of hoostes the God of
Israel: Behold I will feed this people with wormeode, and give them gall to
drink. I will scatter them also among the Hethe^, whom neither they nor
their fathers have known. And I will send a sweard among them to persecute
them, and never leave until I bring them to naught. Iere. xxvi.
Ite^, if ye will not obey me, says the Lord, to walk in my laws, which I
have given you, and to hear the words of my servants the Prophettes whom
Isent to you risyng up tymely, and still sendyng: If ye will not follow them, I
say, than will I do unto this house, as I did unto Sylo, and will make this
city to be abhorred of all the people of the earth.

Thus se we not only by histories but also by manifest textes of y^ holy
scripture, The despysynge of gods word, and wicked living cause all these
plages.
that the despisynge of Gods word and the dissolute manner of living is the
occasion of all the grievous and fearce plages that God pours upon us. And we
need not doubt, but these very same things are even at this day the fountain
and head spryng of all the ponyshmentes that God lay upon us. For even as it
was in the time of ye old Jews, A comparison between y^ old world and ours.
even so is it now in the world. They hated Gods word tha^ even so do they
now. They persecuted the Prophettes and true prechers of Gods verite, eue^ so
do they now. They mayntayned the wicked tradicions of their forefathers, even
so do they now. They esteemed their own imaginacions above Gods word, even
so do they now. They preferred their own acts, laws, decrees,
constitucions, etc, above the ordinances of God, eue^ so do they now. They
could not abide their wicked living to be reproved, no more can they do now.
They hated the light of Gods word, and loved to walk in darkness, eue^ so
do they now. They lived in all kind of wicked abhominacion, even so do they
now. Their men of law for lucres sake mayntened false matters contrary to
equite, even so do they now. Their officers of the common weal did not behave
them selves uprightly in matters of contrauerly, but polde and pyld all y^ they
might come by, eue^ so do they now. Their prestes were all given to covetousness
even from the highest to the lowest, yea they were blind and as ^ome dogs not
able to bark, eue^ so are they now. They abused the name of God by unlawful
oaths, even so do they now. They were dihonourers of ye civil magistrates,
even so are they now. They were disobedient to their parents and superiors,
even so are they now. They were mans^ears and thyrsted innocent blood even so
do they now. They were abominable whoremo^gers, stynking fornicatours, and
unclean adulterers, eue^ so are they now. They did chose rather to live in
abominable whore huntyng, than in the state of christen wedlock, Hebre. xiii.
which is hono^able among all men, and the bed undefiled, even so do they now.
They were thieves and unjust usurpers of other men's goods, even so are they
now. They couytted their neighbors goods, wife, servant, hand maid, etc,
even so do they now. All kind of sin raygned among the^ vnponyshed, even so
does it now. The threatenynges of Gods law were laughed to scorn among
the^, even so are they now. What so ever sin raygned than, that same
florysheth and tryumphethe now. What shall we than say, but as the common
proverb is, like fault, like ponyshme^t? ii. Pet. ii.
If God that ryghteous Lord did not spare the old world in the time of Nohe
but drowned it: If he again favored not the filthy So domites and unclean
Gomorians, but consumed the^ with fire and brymestonne from heaven, what
terrible judgment and grievous plages shall we than look for, seeing we row in
the same haven, stycke in the same myer, and commit the very same abhominacions.

O England, Of England
England mine own native country, for whose wealth and prosperity I do not
only shed out prayers, but also salt tears continually to the Lord our God,
and am ready at every hour wyllyngly to sustain any burden, that can be laid on
my shoulders for thy safegarde: Would God, would God thou wast not partaker of
those grievous enormities and wicked sins, which I have now rehearsed. Would
God thou dyddest not aduse y^ most precious benefits, where with thou art
endewed from above before al other nations. Would God thou dyddest regard the
plesures, that God has done the by restorynge unto the the light of his holy
word, and by sending the so noble and virtuous a Prince to maintain y^ same.
Exodus xvi.
Would God thou wast not like to the old disobedient and murmuring Jews,
which had pleasure rather to be in Egypt with the grecy flesh pottes, than in
the seruyse of God with the celestial meat Ma^na. Would God thou myghtest not
justly be resembled to Lothes wife, Gene xix.
which after she was delivered from the fylthy Sodomites, had a delyght to
look back again unto them. Would God ye name of the most highest were not
dishonored by thy shameful and abominable oaths, which thou daily use.
Would God thou wast not disobedient, but faithful and true in all points to
thy superiors. Would God thou wast not polluted with fornicacion, adultry,
whoredom, in cest, and all other uncleanness. Would God thou wast not an unjust
taker away of other men's goods. Would God thou dyddest not thyrste after the
sheddynge of innocent blood.

Would God, thou wast not ready to bear false witness agenst thy neighbors.
Would God thy men of law were not eaters of gifts, and oppressors of the
poor people for lucres sake. Would God thy pastors and spiritual sheppardes
were not so given to pleasure, ambicion, pride, covetousness, delicate fare,
gorgious apparel, idleness, etc, yt they have no mind to feed Christ's flock
with the syncer word of God. Yea would god they were not callers back and utter
despisers of ye same, Math. xxiii
neither entryng into the kingdom of heaven themselves, nor yet sufferyng
other that would to enter. To be short, would God thou wast not a manifest
tra^sgressour^ and open offendour of gods most holy law, that thou myghtest be
fre from the vengeance and plages of God, ye are like to faull upon the, if
thou doste not shortly repent and amend thy synnefull living. O Englo^nd, God
calls England unto repentance diverse ways.
England, God calls the unto repentance diverse ways, as by his word, by
the preaching of the same, by sendyng the such a virtuous, mercyful,
fatherlyke and puyssaunt a Prince, by endewyng the with other innumerable
benefits If thou regardest not this goodness of God, surely England great will
be thy da^nacion, grievous will be thy plages, intolerable will be thy
ponyshmentes, to much lamen table will be thy final destruction. O England
with weeping tears I say unto the, Luke. xix,
as Christ said unto Jerusalem: If thou dyddest know eue^ at this thy time,
those things which belong unto thy peace, surely thou would be more
dilligent to look after them. For easyer and more tolerable shall it be for
Sodom and Gomorre, for Tyrus and Sydon at y^ day of judgment than for the,
except thou repentest and embracest with metyng arms, as they say, y^
goodness and great mercy of GOD which is now proferred the.

Of these things aforsayde is it evident that thoccasion of all these cruel
wars and other plages, wherewith we are so miserably oppressed, is the
despisyng of Gods word, and the wicked and dissolute manner of living that is
used among them that profess Christ by mouth, but live Mahumet in deed.

Now let us consyther again, by what means the christen public, weal
may be repared and brought again unto the pristine beauty and old glory,
that we having the victory of all our enemies may with one accord sing
perpetual praises to ye name of our Lord God. AMEN.

To obtain the victory of our enemies, Of gettyng the victory over our
enemies.
what than is to be done? Shall we prepare us innumerable thousands of strong
and valeas^t warryours? shall we make us stre^g Castles, mighty Bulwarks,
inu^^cible fortresses, gorgious charettes fears gunnes, well castyng bows,
swyft arrows, sharp speres, great pollaxes, courageous horses, with other
things innumerable, y^ pertayne unto martial affairs? How weak and unable
theyse things are to get the victory of our enemies, y^ holy scriptures show
in diverse places. How puyssaunt was Holofernes Holofernes.
and incomparable in martial affairs? what wa^ted he that should healpe any
thing at all to get the victory? What may be named, that he failed concerning
the pollecy of war? What Prince in the world thought himself of sufficient
puissaunce and strong enough to enter battle with him? He had such affiaunce
in his martial armours that he thought, he might lyghe upon his one side, and
get the victory. But how little all his valeaunce and strength profytted him,
Judith. xiii. xiiii.
the scriptures show evidently, which teach y^ by one woman he was not only
destroyed, but also all his army put to flyghte. So little do all the pollecies
and feats of men's brains avail where the healpe of God wantethe.

What shall I speak of that arrogant and proud tyraunte Sennacherib,
Sennacherib.
which gloried so much in his martial valeaunce and strong power in matters of
war, that he despised and blasphemed the living God, ^iii. Re. xviii ii.
Par. xxix
thynkyng himself able enough to subdu and overcome so many, as he should
war with all, though God himself took part against him? But to what point
came all his proud crakes? Esaie. xxxvi
What did al his martial armours and weapons of war profytte him? Did not
God in one night send his Angel, and slew of that tyrauntes company a great
sort of thousands, in so much that that arrogant king of the Astyrians
returned back with shame enough, and shortly after was slain even of his
own sons?

Let these two Histories suffice to show how little affiasice is to be reposed
in humayne stre^gthes and martial affairs. Psalm. cxxvi.
Uerely except ye Lord bylde ye house, he labors in vayn that byldeth it.
Except the Lord keeps ye citte, he watches in vain that keeps it. Psalm.
xxxii.
A king shall not be saved, sayethe David, by his own great host, neither
shall a gyaunt be helped in the abundaunce of his strength. A horse is but a
deceauable thing to save a man, it is not ye power of his strength that can
deliver him. Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, and
put their trust in his mercy, that he may deliver their souls from death,
and norysh them in the time of honger. Solomon also says, Pro^^^. xii
The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but the Lord gives the
victory. The Psalmograph says again, Psalm. xix.
some put their trust in charettes and some in horses, but we will caull upon
the name of our God. They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and
stand right up like men.

Here se we that all the pollecies of war, that the wits of men can invent,
are but vain, and of them selves not able in any point to get the victory.
What shall we than say? Are the armours of war to be neglected? Whither
armoures of war are to be neglected^
Are the pollecies for obtaynynge of victory to be despised? Is no provision to
be made for the conseruacion of the Christen public weal, but let all
things run at havoc, as careless swyne, chaunse what chaunie will? God
forbid. we may not attempt God by any means. A Prince shall imagine those
things that are worthy a Prince, Esaie. xxxii. The duty of Princes in
martial affairs.
says the Prophet Esaye, and he shall stand over his captains. Every Prince
therefore ought with all diligence and pollecy to provide all things that
should conserve and keep his Realm in safe estate, and fre from the danger of
such as would invade their dominion, and every subject ought not only to be
contented freely and wyllyngly to render up his goods to his King and Prince
for the prosperous mayntenaunce of ye kingdom, The dutyl of subjects in ye
time of wars.
wherein he is inhabited, but also with a glad heart to bestow his very life for
the safeguard of the same, which thing the very Gentiles never disdayned to do,
but recounted the^ selves than most happy, when they might most of all both
bestow their goods and their life also for y^ health of their native country,
as we read in diverse histories. And in this point, I mean for all things,
that should conserve and keep this Realm of England safe and free from the
invasion and danger of our enemies, what king dome in the world is to be
compared unto this Englysh Empire? How has our most puyssaunte and
redoubted King fortressed this his most floryshyng Monarchye, England
fortressed through the liberal and wise proussion of our King.
Empire and kingdom with all things that any man can inue^t for the
prosperous conseruacion of a co^mo^weale? Never was there Prince, yt took like
pains for the safeguard of his cominalte. Never was there father, that so
greatly watched for y^ health of his son, as he does for ours. To much
ingrate, ungentle and vntha^ckefull is he, that does not agnise and knowledge
the vnmeasura ble kyndenes of this most excellent Prince. If this title Pater
patriae might lawfully at any time be ascribed unto any temporal rulare,
certes to our most victorious Prince it is most of all due and convenient.
For he is a very right and true father to this our country of England, as his
most godly acts and virtuous enterprises do manifestly show every day more
and more. We read that Augustus the Emperor, Augustus Caesar.
when he had both garnyshed very pleasa^tly and fortressed very strongely the
City of Rome, so y^ so much as lay in his power he had made it safe and sure
against all insultes and invasions of enemies for many years after his time,
was wont reioysyng of his act to say, Roman lateritiam acce^i, marmoream
relinquo. That is to say, I took Rome made of tyles, but I leave it of marble.
How much more justly may our most bounteous King say, I took England made
of tyles, but I leave it of marble. If any Realm therefore may rejoice and
repose their affiaunce in martial armours and all kind of fortresses, that make
unto the safe preseruacio^ thereof, surely we Englysh me^ have most just
occasion to give God thanks for them, seeing that we above all other nations
unto our great consolacion and the utter consternacion of our enemies are most
opulently enryched with them through ye godly provision and divine pollecye of
our most redoubted King. But what, shall we fly unto them, as unto an holy
Anchore and invincible Bulwark, when the fearce tumul^te and cruel noise of
wars begyn^neth to rise up among us, and repose our whole affiaunce in
them? God forbid. Note of mar^tial armourtes.
For as weapons apt for war are not to be neglected, and as all kind of
pollecies, that may conserve the public weal, are to be proved, so is not
ye trust of a christen man to be put in the^, as though our safegarde or
delyueraunce did depend on them. For the scripture says, Psalm. xxxii
A king shall not be saved by his own great host, nether shall a gyaunt ^e
helped in the abundau^s of his own strength. etc. Notwithstanding we must
prepare all things, and with a lusty and valeaunt courage go unto the wars
eue^ as though there were no hope of victory, Mark well.
but of our own strength only, yet must all our whole affiaunce be reposed in
the mighty strength of our Lord God, and look for y^ victory at his hand
only, nothing doutyng, but that he will fight for us, and give us the ouerhand
of our enemies, if we enter bartell for a just and godly cause. For it is god
only, that gives over their enemies into the hands of his people. It is God
that fyghteth. We and all ye ever we bring, are but instruments and means,
where by God subdueth our adversaries unto us, even as bread and meat are but
means only, whereby God fedeth us. It is God that is the victorious and
triumphant champion as Solomon, says, Prouer. xil
The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but the Lord gives the
victory. Note that he says, the Lord gives the victory.

How came it to pass that y^ Israelites gat ye upper hand of their enemies
so often? By their own valeafice? Na verily, but by ye stre^gthe of Gods power.
Deuteronomy. xxxi.
The Lord thy God says Moses, shall go before the. He shall put away all
these nations in thy syghte, and thou shalt possess them. Go to it therefore
manfully, and take a good heart unto you. Fear ye not, nor be not once adrad
at the sight of the^, for ye Lord thy God, he is thy captain and gyde, and he
will not leave nor forsake the Again, Deuteronomy. xxxii.
how came it to pass, y^ one chased a thousand, and two put ten thousand to
flight, but that their God sold the^ and the Lord snarled them. For our God
is not as their GOD. Also in another place, Deuteronomy. xxxii^
Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto the? A people that art saved by
the Lord. He is thy shylde and helper, he is ye sweard of thy glory. And thyn
enemies shall hyde the mselues from the and thou shalt walk upon their high
hills.

How chaunsed it, Iosue. x.
that the noble captain Joshua had so many victorious co^questes over his
enemies? What says ye scripture, The Lord God of Israel did fight for him.
But let us hear what God said unto him, Iosue. ^
Arise and go over this Iordane, thou and all the people with the into the
Iond, which I shall give to the children of Israel. All the pla^ces that the
soles of your feet shall tread upon, will I give you. Again, Iosue. x^.
be not afraid of the^, for to morrow about this time will I deliver al thy
enemies slain in the sight of Israel, and thou shalt hough their horses, and
burn their charettes with fire.

Moreover after the death of Io^sua, (...). i.
the children of Israel asked the Lord, who should go up first unto the
Cananites to fight against the^. The Lord auuswered, Judah shall go up, behold
I have delivered the land into his hendes: Mark that it is said, ye Lord
delivered ye land into his hands. So that it is God that gives the victory.
Who gave the victory of their enemies unto y^ Israe^^e., (...)
when Othoniel, Ahod, Sange^, Delbora, Barach, Gede^o, I^pte, Samson. etc.
reigned, but ye Lord only, as it appears by the histories. How wonderful is
ye history of Gedeo^, (...).
as I may let pass y^ other and no less manifest and evident to show, that
God alone gives the victory and not the strength and pollecy of any man, be it
never so valeau^t and subtle. The Madianites which came to fight against
Gedeo^ and his company, had in their army an hundred and five and thyrty
thousand valeau^t men, Madianites.
which lay along in y^ valey like greshoppers i^ multitude and their camels
were without number, even as the sand by y^ sea side. Gedeon brings only
with him a company of two and thyrty thousand, and yet of these God commanded
him to put away all except three ho^dred. His words were, these: The people
that are with the, are to many for me to give the Madianites into their hands,
lest Israel make their boast unto my dishonor, and say, our own hand has
saved us. And when there were of Gedeons company xxii. M departed, so that
there abode with him only ten thousand, God said once again unto him, the
people are yet to many.

The conclusion was, that all went their way besides three hundred, and by them
only through his mighty power did God give the Madianites into Gedeons hands,
so that of them that were slain of the Madi anites, were an hundred and twenty
thousand men that drew swerdes. O wonderful victory. O the mighty and
stretched out hand of god O the valeaunce of this our Lord God, which is
almighty and full of puyssaunce to defend and save his servants. (...). xxxill
Here se we this to be true y^ one shall chase away a thousand, and that two
shall put ten thousand to flight. Hereto pertaynethe the saying of king Asa,
Asa. (...)
which pray^ed to God on this manner. O Lord it is all one with the, whither
thou helpest in few or in many. Help us o Lord our God. For we hauyuge our
whole affiau^ce and trust in the and in thy name become against this
multitude. Thou art y^ Lord our God, let no man therefore prevail against
the. And according to his prayer God gave him y^ victory and made the black
Mores to fly and so were destroyed.

Furthermore who gave Iosaphat Iosaphat.
the victory over the Moabites and Ammonites, but God alone? Did not he in his
prayer speak on this manner unto God? The (...) of Iosaphat.
In us, oh Lord there is not so great strength, y^ we may be able to resist
this great company, that commethe against us. But when we know not what to
do, than have we none other refuge nor succor, but only to lift up our eyes to
the. God therefore streyghtwayes stored up Iazi^l the son of Zacharias, which
said, Harken al Judah, and ye that dwell in Jerusalem, and thou king Iosaphat
also, thus says the Lord unto you. Be not afeard nor faynte hearted by the
reason of this great multitude. For the war is not yours, ii. Para. xx.
but Gods. It shall not be you that shall fight, only step ye forth boldly,
and stand to it like men, and ye shall se y^ help of the Lord upon you. O ye
of Judah and Jerusalem fear ye not, nor let not your hearts fail you. To morrow
ye shall go forth against them, and the Lord shall be with you. The king him
self also said when they went forth unto battle, Believe in the Lord your
God, and so shall ye be without al ieopardy. Believe his Prophettes, and all
things shall be prosperous unto you. And according to all these things
aforsayde came it to pass, so that Iosaphat and his company returned home with
a glorious victory, through the mean and puyssaunt power of God.
Notwythsta^dynge when Iosaphat afterward joined frendshyp with Ochozias king
of Israel, which was a wicked doer, and coupled him self with him to make
ships to go into Charlis for gold, and seemed by this means both to have his
mind estraunged from God, and his affiaunce reposed in mortal amite, God
deceived him of his purpose, brought his enterprises unto none effect, so
that his ships were broken on such sort, that they ware not able to go unto
Charsis.

What shall I speak of the noble and triumphante victories, which God gave to
Ezechias, Judith, Esdras, Judas Machabeus, Ionathas, Simon. etc?

Thus se we that it is God y^ fights for his people, subduethe their enemies,
and gives them the victory, and that without his aid, help and socour, all
is but vain and frustrate, what so ever man inuenteth of his own carnal
brain, seem it never so polletyke and wise. Cursed be he, Iere. xvii.
says Jeremy, that makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord. But blyssed is that man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the
Lord him self is. Psalm. ^.
For he shall be as a tree that is planted by the water side, which spreadethe
out the root unto moystenes, so that ne neadethe not to fear when the heat
commethe, and his le^ues shall be grene. etc. Woe be unto the^, says the
Prophet Esaye, Esa. xxxi.
that go down into Egypt for help and trust in horses, and comfort them
selves in charettes because they be many, and in horse me^, because they be
lusty and strong, and have not put their confidence and trust in the holy one
of Israel. Again, what presu^pcio^ is this that you trustest unto? Esa. xxxv^
Or by what counsel or strength doste thou determyne to go to war? upon whom
doste thou trust, seeing y^ castest thy self of from me? Lo, thou put thy
trust in a broken staff of read, I mean Egypt, which he that leans upon, it
goes into his hand and shu^teth him through. Esa. xxxiii.
The Lord is our captain, ye Lord is our law gyuer, the Lord is our king,
he it is that shall save us. For he gives strength to the weary one, and power
unto the faint. Esaye. x^.
Children are weary and faynte, and the strongest men ^aull like weakelynges,
but they ye trust in the Lord, shall be endewed with strength. They shall
have wings like Aegles, they shall run and not ^aull, they shall walk and
not be weary Fear not, says God, Esaye. xli.
for I am with the. Turn not once back for I am thy God. I have made the
strong, and I have helped the, and the right hand of my ryghteous one has
taken the. Behold all they shall be confounded and ashamed, that fight against
the. Yea they shall be, as though they were not, and the me^ shall perysh, that
once speak against the etc. Esaye. xlv.
I will go before the, and bring down the proud and arrogant of the earth.
The brazen doors will I break and burst the iron bars. And I will give the,
y^ hyd treasures, and the thing which is secretly kept, that thou may know
that I am the Lord. The unrighteous shall perysh at one clappe, as David
says, Psalm. xxxv^.
and the remnauntes of the ungodly shall utterly be destroyed, but the health
of the ryghteous is of the Lord, and he is their defe^der in the time of
trouble. The Lord shall healpe them and deliver them, he shall set them free
from the wicked, yea he shall save the^ in deed, because they have put their
trust in him. Again, Psalm. xxvi.
the Lord is my light and my health, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is
ye defender of my life, for whom than shall I be afraid? Wha^ the wicked came
unto me for to eat my flesh, they that wrought me any woe, and were mine
enemies, sto^bled and fell, so that now although an host of men were laid
against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid. And though there rose up war
against me, yet will I put my trust in him, God himself also says by the
Psalmographe, Psalm. xC.
for asmoche as he has trusted in me, I will deliver him, yea I will defend
him, seeing he has known my name. He cried unto me, and I will favorably
hear him. I am with him in tribulacio^ I will deliver him and glorify him. I
will replenyshe him with long life, and at the last I will show him my saving
health.

All the scriptures heretofore rehearsed declare evidently that God alone is
the mighty helper, and that he only it is, which gives the victory of their
enemies to his people, that is, to so many as believe and trust in him, and that
without him all hymayne industry, labor wit, conueyaunce, pollecy. etc. are
of none effect, yea rather hurts than profytteth, hyndereth then furdereth,
destroys than sauethe. Blyssed is that land, which has God their merciful
Lord and puyssaunt defender. For they shall prosper in all things, and what so
ever they shall take in hand, shall undoubtedly come unto good effect, nether
shall any man be he never of so great baleaunce, might, strength, puyssaunce
and power, be able to do them any harm. If God be on oursyde, who is able to
prevail against us, as the holy Apostle Paul says?

But it will be demanded peradventure, By what means God may give us the
victory.
how God may be made so merciful, that he will give us ye victory of our
enemies. I answer by our unfeigned conversion from wickedness unto true
godlynes. We heard before that all the plages that God casts upon us, whyther
they be battle, honger, pestilence or any other, chaunse unto us for our
sinful and abominable living, where with God is so greatly provoked unto anger:
Again, that he will not cease thus to plage us, if he loves us, until we
earnestly repent and studiously amend our life. If he sees, yt none amendment
will follow his correccion, yet will he go forth still to ponyshe us, and
never cease until he has rooted us and our memory out of the earth, because
his holy name may be no more blasphemed among the Hethen through our wyckednes
and abhominacion. Your misdedes says Esaias, Esaye. lix.
have separated you from your God, and your sins have hydde^ his face from
you, that he should not hear you. The Prophet describes the manner of this
world.
For your hands are defiled with blood* and your fyngers with unrighteousness.
Your lyppes speak leasynges, and your tongue sets out wickedness. No man
regards ryghteousnes, no man judges truly Every man hops in vain
things, and imaginethe deceate, conceaueth werynes and brings forth evil.
They bread cockatrice eggs, and wea^e the spyders web, who so ever eteth of
their eggs dies, but if one treads upon them, there comes out a serpent.
Their web makes no cloth, nether can they cover the^ with their labors.
Their deeds are the deeds of wickedness, and the work of robhery is in their
hands. Their feet run unto evil, and they make haste to shed innocent
blood. Their councels are wicked councelles, harm and destruction are in
their ways, but ye way of peace they know not. etc And a little after, our
offenses are many before the, O Lord, and our sins testify against us, yea we
must needs confess that we offend, and knowledge that we do amysse, namely
transgress and dissemble against the Lord, and faull away from our God,
vsyng presu^ptuous and traytorous imaginacions, and castyng false matters in
our hearts. For equite is gone aside, and ryghteousnes stondethe a far of.
Truth is fallen down in y^ street, and that thing that is plain and open,
may not be showed. Yea truethe is laid in presonne, and he that refraynethe
him self from evil, must be spoiled. When the Lord saw this, it displeased
him sore, y^ there was no where any equite. He saw also, y^ there was no man,
which had pity thereof, or was grieved at it. And he held him up by his own
power, and cleued to his own ryghteousnes. He putrighteousnes on hi^ for a
breast plate and set y^ helmet of health upon his head. Ephe. vi. v. Chess. ^.
He put on wrath instead o^ clothyng, and took gelousy about him instead of a
cloak, like as wha^ a man goes forth wrothfully to reco^pe^ce his enemies, and
to be revenged of his adversaries, namely y^ he might reco^^e^s and reward y^
ila^des, wherthorow y^ name of the Lord might be feared from y^ risyng of y^
son to the going down of ye son. For he shall come as a violent water
stream, which the wynd of the Lord has moved.

Hitherto have I rehearsed the words of the Prophet Esaias, whereof we learn,
that our wickedness is y^ cause of Gods wrath toward us, notwythstandyng if we
cease from our i^iquite, God will surely favor us, turn away his wrathefull
displeasure, pardonne our sinful iniquite, forgive our wicked living, wype
away our uncleanness, and be our mighty shield and defender against all our
enemies, Esaye. ^.
as he says in another place, your hands are full of blood. Notwythstondyng
wash you make ye clean, put away your evil thoughts out of my sight, cease
to do evil, learn to do well, seek judge me^t, help ye poor oppressed,
deliver y^ fatherles, defend ye wydow and come on your way, and reprove me,
says the Lord. If your sins be as red as scarlet, yet shall they be made as
whyght as snow. And if they were like purple, yet shall they be like white
wolle. Yea if ye will be contented and hear me, ye shall eat the good fruytes
of the earth. If ye will not but provoke me unto wrath, ye shall be devoured
with ye sword, for thus has the Lord promised with his own mouth, It is
commonly said, Iere. iii.
says God by ye Prophet Hieremy, if a man puts away his wife, and she
goes from him, and marryethe another husbonde, shall he resort any more unto
her? Is not that woman than defiled and unclean? But as for the thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me, says the Lord, and I
will receive the. Thou stynckynge Israel turn again, says the Lord, and I
will not turn away my face from you, for I am merciful, says the Lord, and
I will not be angry for evermore.

Thus se we y^ though God does plage us for our wyckednes, yet if we repent
and amend our sinful living, he will have mercy upon us, and turn away his
anger from us. For the Lords hand is not so shortened, Esaye. ^ix.
that it can not healpe, nether is his ear so stopped, that it may not hear.
To obtain therefore his favor, that he may fight for us, and get us the
victory over our adversaries, the only and most next way is to redress our
noughty ma^ners, to walk in the pathwayes of his holy commandments and to
do that, which he wylleth us to do. So may we be sure through his divine
valeaunce to subdue all our enemies, as he himself testifies, saying: Leu^ti.
xxvi.
If ye walk in my commandments, and and keep my precepts, ye shall pursue
your enemies, and they shall fall before you. Five of you shall chase an
hundred strangers, and an ho^dred of you shall put to flight ten thousand.
But if ye will not hear m^, but despise all my commandments, I will set my
face agenste you, and ye shall fall before your enemies, and ye shall be subdued
to them that hate you, yea ye shall fly, when no man pursues after you. For
if we enter battle with our adversaries, and yet be polluted with sin,
surely God will nether fight for us, nor yet with us. God is not the captain of
wicked and noughty people. He fightethe not for them yt embrace i^iquite, but
for such as seake after true godlynes, pure innocency, and love to walk in
his most holy commandments. To such as are transgressors of his holy
word, and yet dare presume to enter battle, and to look for help at his
hand, he says, se y^ ye go not up and that ye fight not, Nume. xiiii. Deuteronomy. i.
for I am not among you, unless ye be plaged before your enemies. If such
fight, it shall chaunse unto them, as it did unto y^ Israelites, which wha^
they had grievously offended God and disobeyed him would contrary to the
commandment of God take upon the^ to fight agenst the Amnorites, but for
their disobedience, notwithstonding their mighty valeaunce and polletyke
wisdom in martial affairs, they were chased away, kutte, hewed, and
grievously slain. So shall it chaunse to the wicked and ungodly.

Iosue had a manifest promise made to him of God, that he should sudue the
cananites, and enjoy their l^nde peasably, and that therefore he neded not to
fear for to fight agenst them, Iosue. vii.
yet notwythstondyng lost he at one time the field, and his me^ were slain
and put to flyghte for the sin of one man, which contrary to the
commandment of God had taken of the excommunicate things. For the offens of
him alone could not y^ children of Israel stond before their enemies, for
asmoche as God was not with them. Nota.
If the sin of one man deserved so great vengeance that for his offense only
many were slain and put to flight, what shall we than say unto that army,
which is replete with all kind of sin, as whoredom, fornicacion, adultrye,
theft, tyranny, shedyng of innocent blood, sweryng, glotony, dronckenshyp.
etc. How is it possible for them to prosper? How can God be among them to fight
for the^ and to give the^ the victory? A good lesson
If we will subdue our enemies, we must seake all means possible to have God
on our side. We may not only provide, that we scoore of the rust of our
harnes that it be clean, but that we also put out of our breasts the rusty and
fylthy sins, that have cankred our souls so long, and so become pure and
clean. For what is the cause that our battles do but little prosper many times,
but only that we be sinful, and God is angry with us? Could that Nerolyke
tyrant the great Turk have subdued so much of Christendom,
if we had lived according to our profession? Na verily, our sins have
gotten him so many victories. Our wyckednes has made us captyue and thraull to
his tyranny. Let us look what sin reygneth among us, and let us utterly
wype y^ out, so shall we prosper against the violence of our enemies.

It was not without a cause, y^ God, after Aca^ the son of Carmi, of whom I
spoke before, had transgressed his holy precepte by taking of the excommunicate
goods, commanded Iosue, that he should sanctify the people, and ^yd the^
sanctifye them selves before they went any more to battle, and kill him,
which had so tra^sgressed agenst the Lord. For wha^ that was done, they
prosperred tryumphantly ever after in all their wars, and God gave their
enemies into their hands, and they enjoyed the land in peasable possession.
Although this sanctifyeng of ye Israelites did consist in external ceremonies,
as in wasshyng, purging and c^ensynge them from the fylthynes of both their
bodies and garments, and in abstayning from the company of their wives, yet
shadoweth it to us also our manner of sa^ctifye^g, which is spiritual. How we
ought to sanctifye our selves.
It requires of us that we should purge our selves of all iniquite, wash away
the fylthynes of our hearts, and put from us all carnal co^cupisce^ces and
fleshly lusts, so that we may be clean both in body and soul, and be found
worthy to have God our captain. They that thus sanctify them selves, are fytte
to go unto the war of the Lord.

God gave a commandment to the Israelites and said, Deuteronomy. xxiii.
when thou go out with the host agenst thine enemies, keep the from all
wyckednes, for the Lord is among you. If there be any man that is unclean by
the reason of uncleanness, that chau^seth him by night, let him go out of the
host, and not come in again until he have washed himself with water before
the even: and than when the son is down, let him come in to the host again.
Thou shalt have a place without the host whyther thou shalt resort to, and
thou shalt have a sharp point at the end of thy weapon, and when thou wylt
ease thy self, dygge therwyth and turn, and cover that, which is deparred
from the. For the Lord thy God he walks in thyn host to rydde the, and to
set thyn enemies before the. Let thyn boost therefore be pure, that he le no
unclean thing among you, and turn from you.

Here God commands that the host should keep them selves fre f^o^ al
wickedness. The cause is this. For the Lord is among you, says he. God is
pure, (...)
therefore must y^ host be pure, that comes to b^ttell in his name. God is
without al sin therefore must his warryours detest nothing more tha^ synful
wyckednes. God hates ye works of darkness therefore must his Soldiers abhore
the works of darkness, and have a pleasure to walk as y^ children of light.
Again, he declares how pure and fre from all uncleanness the host ought to
be, seeing he would have them so clean and honest in those things that chaunse
naturally If God can not abide the pollucions, which chaunse in the night
time, how much less can he away with whoredom and adultry. If God will
have soche purite showed in things which corporal necessite c^pelle. ^ us to
do, is it to be thought y^ he will admit any thing, y^ is d^^^ contrary to his
commandment, as theft, tyrany, swearyng, droncke^hyp, glotony quarellyng.
etc? God walks in the host of his Servants, therefore ought they to be
pure and fre from al uncleanness, leest God turns from the^, and so altogyther
go to havoc. But alas it chances contrary with us now a days. For when
they, yt profess Christ, should go unto the wars, they prepare them selves
after a more wicked manner, How the H^th^n prepare the^ ^^lues unto battle.
than the Hethen do. For the Hethen come so berly together, co^sulte sagely of
thy ges that shall most auaunce y^ prosperous state of the public weal,
set all things in a goodly stey in their Bealme appoint certain wise and
prudent rulars to govern their lands in the mean season, exhort so many as
tarry at home to live well, and with al instans and hearty means to pray unto
the Gods for them, that they may have fortunate success i^ their wars and
return home again as noble conquerours with victorious triu^phe. This done
they prepare them selves soberly and prudently unto y^ wars, ever having
respect to an honest and innocent manner of living, that their gods by no
means may be displeased with the^, and diligently calling on ye name of their
Gods both day and night for help and strength against their enemies. Thus
go they unto ye battle, as me^ ready to give their lives for the heal the and
safegarde of their country, being desirous of nothing but only to defend
their Empire, and to enlarge the bounds and limits thereof.

How Christen men prepare the^ selves unto the wars, How christian men
prepare them selves unto battle.
it is more open than it need here to be expressed. As I may speak nothing
of such as go with an evil will unto the battle. What a number goes there
only to pycke, steal, rob, and that they may come home again well lade^
with spoils and robberies? How little respect have they unto the conseruacion
and defense of their native country, so that their packes may be well enfarsed,
laden and stuffed? What dysyng, cardyng, and all kind of volupteous royot is
used among them? What dryncking, gullynge, quaffynge and superfluous
banckettyng do they use? What manacyng, brawlyng, chydyng, and fyghtyng is
heard and seen daily among them? The wicked nes of Soul diours in y^ wars.
What whoredom is there committed among them? What maid escapes vndefloured?
What wife departs unpolluted, as I may ad nothing here unto? What abominable
swearyng is used among the^? How is God rent and torn among them by unlawful
oaths? How desirous are they to shed blood, and to make havoc of altogyther?

The rapacite of wolfes, the violence of lions, the fearsenes of tygres, is
nothing in comparison of their furious and cruel tyranny, and yet do many of
the^ this, not for the safegarde of their country (for so might it seem the
more tolerable) but for to satisfy their bocherlyke affectes, to boaste
another day, of how many men they have been the death, and to bring home the
mo prays, y^ they may live the fatter ever after for those spoils and
stolen goods.

As concerning the inuocacion and calling on the name of God, it is so far
out of remembrance, that many of them do not so much as once thyncke or
dream of it. How is it possible, that these wars should prosper, where
there is no regard of god, no respect to honest no desire of mutual
concord, no endeavor employed to make God merciful unto us. Surely these
warryours had need to sanctify them selves, or else they be not defe^ders but
destroyers of the common weal, for ye safeguard whereof they will seem to fight
For be their valeaunce and might never so strong, yet can they not prosper, if
God bliss not their labors as we heard before. How the Soldiers ought to
prepare the^ selves unto battle.
It is therefore expedient, that they which shall prepare them selves unto
battle, and offer their lives for the wealth of their country, sanctify them
selves, I mean, expurge and put away all uncleanness, and wicked behauour both
of body and mind, and so appoint them selves in every condition, as though the
time were come, y^ even now they should depart out of this world, and render
an accomptes of their life here spent.

They may not go unto y^ wars, as tyrau^tes, whose hearts imagine miscefe,
whose mouths breath manslaughter, whose words boste lyonlyke crudelite, whose
hands de sire to be embrued with blood, whose feet are swyfte to run unto
euel, whose deeds bring to pass final destruccio^, but as charitable parsons,
which (if the love of their country did not provoke them unto it, for whose
wealth even by the commandment of God and the law of nature they are bound
to give their lives) would by no means break the bond of Christen amite
with no man, but rather suffer much in jury, than they would be once at
displeasure with any man. But in as much as they are first provoked ye and
that unworthily, seeing also it is no private injury, but a common wrong to
invade any Realm, and to disturb the inhabitauntes thereof, therefore they come
now in the name of God unto battle, not for their own cause, but for the
co^seruacion of the public weal, that they enioyenge peace and tranquilite
for ever after, may the more freely praise God, and live according to his
most holy word.

Moreover all the time of y^ wars it shall be necessary, Clennes of life.
yt they keep the^ selves so pure, as they can, and by no means have any
felloweshyp with the unfruitful works of darkness, but apply them selves unto
the fruits of the sp^rite that they may remain in the favor of God, and have
him their mighty captain.

Let the^ that can read wha^ they have co^uen^^t leisure, Readyng of the holy
scriptu^es.
read the ho^y Scriptures. chefely such histories as declare the omnipotency
and almyghtye power of God, which he has showed to his servants in times
past by gyuyng them the victo ry over their enemies, and let the^ conceive a
sure faith in their hearts thereof, and nothing doubt, but that he will be that
same puyssau^t Lord to them, if they walk according to his word, that he in
times past was to the other. For he is still a Lord of that same puyssaunce
and strength. Let them that can not read, harken to them that do read, and give
undoubted and earnest faith thereunto. Preachers among the Soldiers


It would help much unto true godliness for to have faithful preachers also
among y^ soldiers in y^ time of wars, which might declare unto them the
fear of God, exhort them unto virtue, move the^ unto the true confidence in
Gods help, encourage them manfully to fight, when time requires, and show
them how honest and godly a thing it is to ieoparde their life for y^ welthe
of their country, which of all deaths y^ very Ethnyckes recou^ted most
glorious, and of highest renown.

It is also very necessary, (...) prayer.
that the Soldiers give them selves unto fervent prayer, and desire y^ healpe
of God with most humble supplicacions, that he will be their mighty shield and
defense, but chefely wha^ the time comes, that they must enter battle with
their enemies. Let them than with one mind caull upon God,
desire his help, and pray that for his mercyes sake he will strengthen them,
yea fight for the^, be their captain, and give them the victory of their
adversaries, yt they returnyng home again like valeaunt conquerours, may sing
perpetual praises to his most blyssed and holy name.

This done, let them go to fight valeauntly, having their whole affiaunce
reposed in God alone, and in his mighty help. Yet let them so fight, as
though the victory did only depend of their own stre^gthes wits and
pollecies. Let them not despair, but take a good heart unto them, being
perfectely persuaded that God is on their side, and will surely help them. But
if they should dye, seeing that their cause is lawful, just and ryghteous,
seeing also they fight not for their own private co^modite, but for the
wealth of an whole Realm, let the^ not doubt, Psalm. ^xv.
but that their death is precio^s in the sight of God, and therefore they may
be sure for this mortal life to receive a life of immortalite full of eternal
joy and glory.

Therefore let them not once fear, but step unto it with a lusty and
valeaunt courage, come their life, or come their death.

Thus much have I spoken concerning the Soldiers and them that shall fight
for the safegarde of the country, that they may know how to behave them
selves yt God may be on their side, and return home again with a glorious
and triumphant victory.

Now it remains to show how they shall behave themselves y^ remain and tarry
at home, How they ought to behave themselves that tarry at home.
unless the valeaunce and godly behauour of ye Soldiers do not profytte so
much, as our wicked and dissolute manner of living should hinder and hurt.
For how can GOD be in our army and fight for us, if we be wicked and
ungodly? If we therefore will have prosperous success in our wars, we must
first so lay aside all ungod lines, that there may appear nothing in us,
whereby God may be displeased. For whom god fights.
For God will only fight for them, that are pure, clean, faithful, charitable,
modeste, merciful, benign, honest, lovers of their country, haters of
discord, seakers of peace, maynteners of amite etc. The other he refuse the,
and knowledgethe the^ not for his people, nether will he fight for them. We
must therefore repent us of our old wicked manners, take upon us a new life,
if we will have God on our side in y^ battle. Let every man consider his
fault, wherein he knows himself gylty, and quickly put it away from him.
Let no man be quycke sighted in other men's faults, and sto^ne blind in his
own. Let al me^ seake how they may best please God.

For the stro^gest Bulwark and most invincible fortress that ca^ be made for
the safegarde of the country,
is to live well. If any damage chau^ceth to the country, our wyckednes is
cause thereof. And as I may speak my mind freely, certes it does much grieve me,
to behold the iniquite of the world, and to se how virtue is set aside, I
had almoost said, set at naught.

What shall I speak of the familiare co^municacion Familiare co^muni^^^^
and daily talk, y^ is used among y^ Christians? What other thing do we hear
in the^ tha^ cursings, bannynges, backebytynges, blasphemies, euel reports,
wa^ton words, idle tales, unclean communicacio^. etc? Of their thoughts God
shall judge, but their deeds are so manifest, that every man may easly judge
the tree by the fruit, and the lion by his paws.

How little do many civil magistrates regard the public affairs of the
cominalte, Civil magistrates.
so that their cofers may be enryched, and they live in all wealth and
pleasure?

Now little do many lawers Lawers.
tender the pytiefull complaynt and ryghteous cause of the poor oppressed?
How like gaping wolfes do many of the^ inhiate and gape after wicked mammon,
so that whosoever brings most money, is most allowed, and has the law
most on his side, in what so ever case the matter sto^dethe, be it right or
wrong? How long also do they suffer the cause committed unto them to hang in
the law, before any judgment can be given, or final determinacion had and
all to poll and pyll the poor men, and utterly to empouerysh them, so that
through their deceatfull craft and covetous mind, the simple people are
beggered, their wives and children brought unto extreme misery, and set in
such case, that they are never after able to help the^ selves nor their
neighbors, nor yet to profyt ye public weal of their country. O gapyng
wolfes. O ra^pynge lions. O insatiable dogs. O crafty foxes.

What craft, deceate, subtilite, Mer^h^^tes.
and falshode use merchants in byyng and sellyng? How rejoice they, when
they have begyled their christian brother? What a sport have they, to deceive a
simple hobbe and plain fellow of the country? How fair do they speak to
his face, and lowte him behind his back? How false and sleyghtye wares do
they utter for true and good?

The other men of al occupacio^s Men of occupacion.
use like craft and subtilite. Few walk vpryghtely. All give their mind to
covetousness. No man studieth to serve the public weal with their science, as
they are bound to do. All seake their own profyt and not that which is Jesus
Christ's. Where is y^ christen charity become, (...)
which seakethe not her own? Let no man seake his own, says saint Paul,
but the profyt of other.

How do many Gentle me^ Gentle me^.
not only get into their hands other me^nes lands and tenementes, yt they
may live like Lords alone in a town, and yet keeping slender houses and
hongry hospitalite, but also after such sort let out their lo^des to other,
yea and that for so high a price, as they were never wont to be i^ times past,
i^ so much y^ they which hyre the^, are utterly beggered and redact to extreme
pouerte? By this means is the galant pomp and lascivious pleasures of Gentle
men mayntened, but the poor fermers are greatly empouerished, hospitalite is
decayed, releuynge of the poor people is utterly laid aside, the common wealth
is miserably oppressed, penury, scarsenes and dearth of all things is brought
into y^ Realm. Few are able to help their Prince, wha^ need requirethe. No
man is able to set forth his child unto learning, whereby it is come to pass,
that such blind ignorancy, and rude Chaos of ba^barous and rusticall ma^ners
reynge now in the world universally. These things desire are dress, God
grant it may come to pass shortly.

What shall I speak of certain rich and gredy cormorauntes, Hoorders up of
corn.
those locustus and caterpyllers of the common weal, which, when they have
plenty of grain and se abundans thereof reygne among the people, are greatly
grieved thereat, and do not only not sell their own corn to maintain the
co^modide of ye poor but also by other men's grain, and hoorde it up, until
they have made a great dearth, and than, scarsenes of corn being in every
place, bring they forth their grain and sell it unto the utter empoueryshment
and extreme undoing of the poor cominalte. O cruel murderers and un
merciful bloudsoupers. The wys^ man says, (...)
the bread of the nedy is the life of the poor, he that defraudeth him of it
is a mansleare. Solomon also says, Proverb. xi.
Who so hooredeth up his corn, shall be cursed among the people, but
blyssynge shall lyghten upon their heads, that sell it. How can these
devouring caterpyllers than escape the vengeance of God, that hangs over
their heads, seeing they esteem more their own private fylthy lucre, than the
wealth of so great a multitude? God might once quench their outrageous
insatiable thyrst of covetousness, and give the^ grace to use his gifts unto
the profyt of the Christen people.

As touching the common buyers and sellers The common buyers and sellers.
and barga yne makers, what falfe swerynge, crafty i^glynge and deceatfull gyle
do they use among them, that they may beg^le their christen brothers? How
little is this cammaundement of S. Paul observed among them? ^. Thessalonians. iiii.
Let no man go to far and defraud his brother in bargaynyng, for the Lord is
a venger of all such things. Does not he thyncke him self most wise, y^
can most deceive his neighbor? Here is a wonderful charity and an hearty
neyghbourhoode.

As I may come to ye grosser sins what whoredom reygneth there now a days?
Whore m^ngers.
How little is honorable wedlock esteemed? How many wyncke, I will not say,
laughe at y^ abominable uncleanness, which not a few commytte at this time? Who
cares though it be known, y^ he has lyghen with an whore all night and so
defiled himself, men have so rubbed their forhedes now a days, and become
past all shame, so little ponyshment also is there ap poynted for this fylthy
abhominacion? I would whoredom were not grown up into such boldness, that it
dare compare with holy matrimony for pleasant and easy living. I would
stynckyng fornicacio^ were not so had in price, that it were preferred above
honorable wedlock. I would there were not, which, wha^ they have wrought
wickedness, Preuer. ii.
glory, rejoyse, and boste of it unto the evil example of other.

What shall I speak of false wytnes bearers, False wytnes bearers.
which for a little money or for hatred borne toward the parso^, are ready
streyghtwayes to give false evidence, yea and to be sworn also that it is
true, when nothing is more false? So that by their unjust and false wytnes
bearing, the innocent is wrongefully condemned, and the wicked has the
vppermoost hand. Through such is much innocent blood also oftentimes shed.
O pitefull case. O lamentable chau^se Would God al false witness bearers were
handled according to the commandment of God, Deutronomy, the.xix. Salomo^
says, A false witness shall not escape vnponyshed, Prouer.xix.
and he that speaks lies, shall peryshe.

I let pass manslaughter, Malorum mare.
theft, glotony, surfetyng, dronckeshyp, dysyng, cardyng, quarellyng, with an
whole see of euels mo, which at this day reygne in the world. Do not all
these things provoke God unto anger, and make him displeased with us? How can
God be in our army, and make the wars to prosper, seeing that they for whom
the battle is, are wicked and replete with all sin and abhominacio^? Certes
this our iniquite must he redressed, it we will have God merciful unto us, and
bliss our endeavors in martial affairs.

But as I may leave of to speak of gross and corporal vices, Spiritual vices.
and turn my communicacion unto spiritual matters, what shall we say unto y^
Idolatry, Idolatry.
supersticio^, false worshypipyng of God, confidence in ceremonies, trust in
popysh pardons, gaddyng on pilgrimage, gyldyng of images, setting up of
candelles, etc, which reygne yet in diverse places of the world? Mo^struous
sects.
What a sort of idle mo^struous sects also are there yet noryshed in many
Realms under the pretexte of holiness, which do nothing but like gredy
cormorau^tes devour the paynfull labors of other men's hands?

Moreover how slack almooste universally are the curates and spiritual
sheppardes to do their office? Spiritual sheppardes.
How negligent are they to feed chri stes flock with the sincerite of gods
word? How little do they esteem the souls of their parysheners (for whose
salvation our Lord Jesus A^um^^. xx.
Christ disdayned not to have his blyssed body broken and his precious blood
shed) so yt they may devour the sat of the sheep, and gorgiously be clad with
their wolle? How many of them daily hunte, hawke, fyshe, and what not, after
spiritual promocions, and when they have them, neglecte their office, be
absent from their benefices, commit their cure to such unlearned prestes, as
can scasely judge between A and B? what a number also of them come unto their
benefices, non per ostium sed aliu^de, that is to say, not by the door
Christ, Ioau.x.
nor for any mind or love yt they have to the glory of God, and the salvation
of christen me^nes souls, but for the desire of fylthy lucre, for an easy
living for to be called master Parsonne, M. Uicare, M. Curate, M. Chaplen, etc?
How little liberalite do they show to paryshners? How long is their hand
in receauyng, and short in gyuynge? How wicked and abominable is their
living? How cold and little fervent are their prayers? How rare and seldom
are their studies in the holy scriptures, wherein they are bound to be occupied
both day and night? Psalm. ^.
Are these fytte prestes to stand between the people and God to pacifye his
wrath? Are these fyt prestes to make intercession for the sins of the people?
Are these fytte prestes to whom the flock of our Lord Jesus Christ should
be committed? Our Lord be merciful unto us. Undoubtedly there is great
scasenes of sheppardes, when it is come to this point that wolves must have
the cure and charge of sheep. I fear much that if this great absurdite be not
redressed shortly, the flock of Christ shall be miserably spoiled, re^t,
torn and devoured. God send us once such sheppardes, as may feed his flock
with godly doctrine and virtuous living.

Again to whom is it unknown, Dissencion between the spiritualte and
temporalte.
what dissension reygneth among y^ Spiritualte and Temporalte, as they are
called, now a days in many places? Seldom does the one report well of the
other. The lay man hates the priest, the pressed again bur nethe not in
charity. The lay man thyncketh all yt ever the priest has, is to much, seeing
he takes so little pain in setting forth Gods word and in doing his duty. The
priest again thyncketh all to lytyl, though he may dispende hondreds yearly,
and do naught for it. Will this commandment of GOD by his holy Apostle never
be looked upon and earnestly put in execucion? ii. These. iii.
Qui non laborat, non manducet. He that labourethe not, ought not for to eat.
Certes until the prestes be more seriously bent to love God and his word, to
preach the Gospel of Christ, and to live according to their office, they
shall never be esteemed nor regarded among the people, but hated, conte^ned, and
detested. Let the prestes remember the saying of God the father by his
Prophet, Oze. iiii.
and take heed betymes: Seeing therefore thou haste refused knowledge, I will
refuse the, so ye thou shall no more be my pressed. Again by the Prophet
Malachy, Ma^a. ii.
The lips of a pressed shall keep knowledge, and at his mouth shall men require
the law, for he is a messanger of the Lord of hoostes. But as for you, O ye
prestes, ye are gone clean out of the way, and have caused ma ny to be offended
at the law. Ye have broken the covenant of Leuy, says the Lord of hoostes.
Therefore have I made you to be despised, and to be of no reputacio^ among all
the people, because ye have not kept my ways, but been parcial in the law.

Here may all men se why prestes are so little regarded at this day, Why
prestes are so little regarded now a days.
verily because they hate knowledge keep not ye ways of our Lord God, nor
endeavor them selves to feed Christ's flock with Gods most blyssed word.
If they will therefore be had age^ in price and reverent estimacion, as it is
convenient, let the^ cast away their old manners, shine as the light of the
world, Math. v.
savor as y^ salt of the earth, love God and his word, preach Christ's
Gospel purely, meditate in the law of the Lord both day and night, Psalm. i.
dissuade no man from readyng the holy scriptures, exhort all men unto pure
innocence, and a christen state of living, and above all things be the very
same unto the people in deed, that they profess in word. So shall they
recover their old dignite, and be had in honor of al me^. i. T^^. v.
Yea so shall y^ lay men have them in reverence as true spiritual fathers, give
them double honor, minister unto them abundauns of all things, receive them
as an Aungel of God, yea as Christ Jesus himself, and be ready at all times
eue^ to dygge out their eyes to do them pleasure, Gala. v.
as Saint Paul writes.

Furthermore now that y^ light of Gods word is come abroad among diverse
nations, Despisers of Gods word.
how vnthanckefully is it receued? How many wynke and spear their eyes,
because they will not se it? How many are obstinately blind? What a number is
there, that had rather walk still in ye darkness of men's tradicious, tha^ in y^
glorious light of gods truth? Yea I would there were not, y^ perse cute this
open verite of Gods word their conscience bearyng wytnes y^ they do evil, and
condemnyng the^ for so doing. This is the condemnacio^, Joan. iii.
says Christ, that light is come into the world, and men have looked darckenes
rather than light. For their works were euel. Every one that does evil,
hates the light, nether comethe he unto the light, because his works should
not be reproved. But he that workethe the truth, comes unto the light, that
his works may be perceived, that they are done by God.

Another sort of people there are which receive Gods word at the first
entrance very joyfully, Sliders back from the truth of gods word.
and make much of it, showing them selves so fervent, that they will seem to
be ready for to give their lives for it. But full soon is their whot love
cold. For wha^ they se that the word of God fyghteth so manifestly with their
wicked living, and condemns their ambicion. pride, covetousness, effeminate
ma^ners etc than are they weary of it, despise it, and cast it away, being
loathe that any man should meddle with all. Tha^ do they contemn the
celestial Ma^na, and chose rather to be fed with the greasy flesh pottes of
Egipte. Tha^ fall they again unto their old blyndnes, so that this common
saying may well be verefyed of them: Prouer. xii. ii. Pet. ii.
The dog is turned to his vomet again, and the sow that was was washed, to
her wallowyng in the mire. Better had it been for the^ not to have known the
way of ryghteousnes, tha^ after they have known it, to turn from y^ holy
commandment given to the^.

There be yet another sort of people, which desire to be called gospellers
Gospellers.
and earnest favorers of Gods word, promisynge many things for the glory
thereof, and yet in their conversation are they no less wicked, than the other
be. They confess that they know God, Tit^^^. i.
but with their deeds they deny him, and are abominable and disobedient, and
unto all good works discomme^dable. Through their iniquite the name of God is
not glorified, Roma. ii.
but blasphemed and evil spoken of among the Hethen. Such may be compared
to that son, which promised his father, Math. xxi.
that he would work in his vyneyearde, and yet did not. But what do I? If I
should go forth to declare the abominable wickednesses that raygne now in the
world universally, I should never make an end, though I had an hundred
tongues and an ho^dred mouths, as the Poet says. Psalm. xiii.
All are fallen out of the right way, they are all together become
unprofitable, there is none yt does good, no not one.

Where such a wicked sort is at home, though the Soldiers be never so good
and virtuous, how can God fight for the^? If God had pleasure in wyckednes, if
God did love them yt work iniquite, I would than thyncke in deed, yt God would
be in our army, and fight for us. But seeing that he hates all them that
work iniquite, Psalm. v.
and destroys them that speak lies, and abhorrethe such as be deceatfull
and desirous of bloudsheddynge, we may know right well, that except we
amend our wicked manners, and repent us of our sinful living, we shall never
obtain the victory over our enemies at the hand of God, with out whose
help what ca^ prevail: If we do, surely it is given us for the greater plage
and destruction, Mark well.
that shall fall upon us hereafter, as many things are oftentimes given and
granted to the wicked for their greater damnacion. Therefore if we will go the
right way to work, and have our Soldiers to prosper in the wars, How
they ought to behave the^ selves that taty at home.
let so many as tarry at home repent them of their wicked living, be sorry for
their offenses be wayle their mysery, and take a new life upon them. Bring
forth fruits says the Baptist, worthy of repentance. For every tree yt
bryngethe not forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.

Let the civil Magistrates procure above all things the wealth of the poor
cominalte. Math. iii. magistrates la. verse.
Let the lawers do all things vpryghtely, and not the devour the poor
oppressed. Let the merchants seake to live truly by their occupyeng,
Merchants.
and not to be to great gayners. Let the^ know that a christen man may not
only serve his own, but also his neighbors necessite. Let the Gentyl me^
Gentyl me^
be as fathers to ye poor people, that dwell in yc country by the^, and so let
out their lands, that men may be able to live thereby, to maintain
hospitalite, to set forth their children to learning, and to healpe to bear
the charges of the common weal when time requires. Let the^ that be rytche
men, Rytch men.
and have plentye of corn, not hoord it up, but gladly sell it to the other,
that the nedy may have whereof to live. Let such as be common buyers and
sellers Buyers and selers.
and bargayne makers deal justly with their christen brothers, and by no menes
deceive them. Let them that have hitherto ben adulterers Adulterers.
or unclean persons forsake their wicked living and learn to possess every
man his own vessel in holiness and honor. i. These. iiii. Falls witnesses.
Let them that have been false witnesses in times past, testify y^ truth ever
after this. wicked parsons.
Let them that have used ma^slaughter, theafte, glotony, surfettynge,
dronckeshyp, dysynge, cardynge, quarellynge or any other vice, utterly forsake
it, and become new men. Let the Idolaters leave their Idolatrye, Idolaters.
and learn to put their trust in the living and true God alone. Let them that
be spiritual ministers and Curates, Spiritual ministers.
take heed unto them selves and to all the flock, whereof the holy ghost has
made them ouersears to rule the congregation of God, which he has purchased
with his blood. Act. xx.
Let the^ be diligent to preach Gods word to their pary shners, ever setting
before their eyes this commau^deme^t of christ, Joan. xxi.
pasce, pasce, pasce, feed, feed feed. S. Paul also says, ii. Tin^. iiii
preach y^ word, be fervent, be it in season or out of season. Improve,
rebuke, exhort with all long sufferynge and doctrine. If they be not able to
preach them selves, let them get them coadiutors and fellowhelpers, or else
can not they stond before God with honest and clear consciences. Woe be unto me,
i. Cor. ix.
says s. Paul, if I preach not the gospel. Again, i. Cor. i.
Christ sent not me only to baptize, yt is to say, to minister the
sacraments, but al so to preach the gospel. Let them also lead a godly life
correspondent to their techyng. Let them be glad distributors of their goods
to there poor paryshners. So shall it come to pass, that they shall be dear
and well-beloved both of God and man.

Let the lay men by no means hate the prestes, The lay me^
nor the prestes the lay men, but being of one mind, love one another
fervently Let the lay man reverence the priest as his father let the priest
again receive and joyfully take unto him the lay man, as his son. By this
means shall much godly mutual love increase of both parties. Despysers of
Gods word.
Let the^ that have hitherto spered their eyes at the light of Gods word, open
their eyes, cast away their blyndenes, be glad to receive the light of
Christ's most blyssed gospel, being assuredly persuaded, that otherwise they
can not be the children of salvation. Let them that in times past received
Gods word, and did cast it away afterward, Slyders back from the truth
of gods word
lay hand on it once again, as Peter did, and be so earnest followers of it,
that they neuermore slide away. Let them that will be counted Gospellers
Gospellers.
and seriouse mayntayners of Gods truth provide, that their living may
answer to their love, and that they may be the very same in work and
truethe, that they profess in word and tongue. So shall they add much glory
to the Gospel of Christ, and cause it the more ferue^tly to be embrased of all
men.

If every manne of every degree, Let every man amend one
will on this wise redress himself, his life and conuersacio^, and become a
new man both in word and deed, how can any tyrant, be he Jew, Turk,
Sarace^, or any other, Rom^ viii.
overcome us? God is on our side, who can be against us? God fight the for
us, who can than prevail? The battle is Gods, how can it than be lost?

Now after that we have changed our old manners and put on a new life, Of
prayer ^ calling on y^ name of go^d
we must fall in hand with the other fruits of the spirit, chefely prayer and
calling on the name of God. For through prayer we read in the divine Histories,
that many have prevailed against their enemies, and gotten the victory. The
wise manne says, Prou. xviii.
the name of the Lord is the most mighty and strong Bulwark, unto that does
ye ryghteous man fly and is helped. Psalm. xlix.
Call upon me, says God, in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver the
and thou shalt honor me. The scripture also says, Joel. ii. Actum. ii. Rome.
x.
who so ever callethe on the name of the Lord, he shall be sa^e. Unto this name
of our Lord God let us fly with continual and seruent prayers. Let us
lament and bewail our cause to his divine majesty. Let us desire him to be
our captain and valeaunt defender in our wars. And that we may be the more
fra^ckely encouraged to go unto God for help, let us set before our eyes the
histories of y^ holy scriptures, which show how greatly y^ true and christen
prayer has helped the people of God in times paste, to get the victory over
their enemies.

Moses Moses.
was assuredly both a very good and valeau^t captain of y^ Israelites, and
procured nothing more than there health and salvation yet notwithstanding when
Amelech came to fight against Israel, Exo. xvii.
he went not forth straight ways with them unto battle, but took with him
Aharo^ and Hur, and went up into the top of an hill and there prayed,
appoynting Joshua to be captain of the Israelites in his stead. He doubted not,
but that he should do more good being absent with his prayers, than he
should do being present with the martial armours, as it came to pass. For
wha^ Joshua and his company began to fight agenst Amelech, who fought best, I
pray you? By whose valeau^s was the victory gotten? By the Soldiers that
were present in the battle, or rather by Moses, which was absent from it? Let
us hear what the scripture says: Wha^ Moses lyfted up his hands, Israel did
overcome, but if he did let his hands down never so little, than had Amelech
y^ better. Therefore when Moses hands were weary, Aharon and Hur took a stonne
and put it under him, and he sat down thereon. And Aharon and Hur steyed up
his hands, the one on the one side, the other on the other side. And it came to
pass, that his hands were steadye until the Son was down. So that Joshua
Joshua.
chased away Amelech and his people with the edge of the sweard.

Joshua Joshua. x.
also that most victorious captain through prayer did not only overcome his
enemies in the battle, but also caused the Son and the Moon to abide and
stond still without any remouyng for y^ space of an whole day, until he was
revenged of his enemies.

Wha^ y^ Philistines came to fight Samuel.
against the Israelites, the children of Israel were greatly afraid of the^ in
as much that they came to Samuel and said, i. Reg. vii
Cease not to cry unto the Lord our God for us, that he may save us out of the
hands of y^ Philistines. Samuel took a young lamb, and offered it all together
for a burnte offering unto the Lord, and cried unto y^ Lord for Israel. And
the Lord heard him. And it came to pass, that wha^ Samuel offered the burnt
offering unto the Lord, the Philistines began to fight against Israel, but the
Lord thondered a great thonder that same day upon the Philistines, and
turmoyled the^ that they were slain of the children of Israel, and so brought
under, that they came no more into the coostes of Israel.

Again by prayer king Asa Asa.
over came Zarach the Morian with all his army.

By prayer also his son Iosaphat ii Par. ^iiii.
valeauntly subdued the Moabites Iosaphat.
and Ammonites. ii. Para. xx.


Item Ezechias Ezechias.
that most holy Prince through prayer overcame ye proud tyrant Sennacherib
with all his host. iiii. Reg. xx.


Did not the most virtuous woman Judith Judith. xii.
by prayer overcome Holofernes and his army?

By prayer Judas Machabeus Judas Machabeus.
gat the victory over his enemies. But in two battles when he should fight
with Antiochus and prayed, not, he fled away. And when he did fight with
Bacchiddes and Alcinus, he was slain because he did not pray as before. i.
man. iiii ix.
By prayer Ionathas, when all had forsaken him, except a few, obtained the
victory.

Of these sewe histories it is evident Ionath^s.
and manifest how greatly y^ true and christen prayer, i. Macha. ii.
that proceeds from a faithful and repentaunt barte, profyteth in the time of
wars to obtain the victory of our adversaries.
Unto prayer therefore as an holy anchore must so many as tarry at home fly
incessantly, desyryng god for his son Jesus sake to have pity on us, to
strengthen our army, to be our captain, to sight for us, to disco^^yte our
enemies, and to give us the victory. But these our prayers may not be cold,
lasye, and only procedyng from the lyppes, but seruent, earnest, and rysynge of
the very effect of the heart. For to mumble with our lyppes, to bleate with
our tongues, to rore with our throtes, to shake our heads, to lift up our
hands. etc. profyteth nothing at all, except the prayer comes from a ^ayth
full and repentaunt heart, as we may perceive by diverse places of ye scripture,
Search the Pathwaye unto prayer Esa. x^i^. Math. xv. Lament. iii.
and as I have abundantly proved in my Pathwaye unto prayer. This people honor
me with their lyppes, says Christ, but their heart is far from me. Uerely
they worship me in vain. Let us look wel^ upon our own ways, says ye
Prophet Hieremy, and remember our selves, and turn again unto y^ Lord. Let us
lift up our hearts with our hands unto the Lord that is in heaven. Therefore
let our prayers be fervent and hearty, that God may se, that there is amendment
in us, and that we thyrst the glory of his name, and the health of our
country. Markewell
And although it be necessary to pray at all times, yet at that time chefely
let us heartily call unto God, wha^ our Soldiers shall fight. All ye time by
no means let us cease from prayer, but incessauntly cry upon God, and never
leave until he has given us the victory, which thing undoubtedly he will
do, Lament. iii.
if he perceive that we call feruentely unto him. For the Lord is full gentle
and good says the Prophet, to them y^ seake him.

But as concerning the public prayers, Public prayers
as Processions, Masses, etc ^t were expediente, that before any such things
were done, there were sermons Sermons
made to the congregation in the which they should be exhorted and admonyshed
to repent, to be^eue, and to take a new life upon the^ ^nles they pray in
vain and God ^eteste their supplicacions. For with ^ut repentance, ^ayth, and
renoua^ion of life, prayers both public and private are nothing acceptable
^n y^ sight of god. To al such as pray ^o, God the father by Salomo^ speaks
on this manner: (...)
Seeing that I have called and ye refused it, I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded it, but all my councils have ye despised, and set my
correccions at naught. Therefore shall I also laugh in your destruction, and
mock you, when the thing that ye fear, comes upon you, even when y^ thing
(...) ye be afraid of, fallethe in suddenly, like a storm, and your misery
like ^ tempest, yea when trouble and heuines comes upon you. Than shall they
caull upon me, but I will not hear, they shall seake me earelye, but they
shall not find me, And y^ because they hate knoweledge, and received not the
fear of the Lord, ^ut abhorred my council, and despised my correccion. Esa. i.
Also by the Prophet Esaye, when ye shall stretche out^ your hands, I will
turn away mine eyes from you, and when ye shall be still babbling of your
prayers, I will not hear you. Therefore when we entend to pray, let us bring
with us repentance, says, and amendment of life, so may we be sure to be
heard.

The sermon once done, let them fall earnestly unto prayer, and desire God with
one mind to be mercyful unto the country, as I taught before.

After the prayers let every man quietly return home ever bearing in his mind
the safeguard of his country with a continual eleuacion of his heart unto God
for y^ wealth of the same. And let them so behave them selves, y^ God may be
pleased with them. And as they have promised God to become new men so let them
walk in a new life, every man doing his office according to his vocacion
and calling. For if after our prayers and the promise of amendment of life,
Note.
we return again unto our old wickedness, what other thing do we, than
provoke God unto anger, mock him, and seake the very destruction of our
country. Let us therefore be the very same in deed, that we have promised in
word. So shall it come to pass assuredly, that God shall be in our army,
fight for us, strengthen our Soldiers, chase away our enemies, and give us
y^ victory, so that nether Turk, Jew, Saracen, nor any other Tyrau^t shall
may be able at any time to prevail agenst us.

When we have once gotten y^ victory over our enemies, After what ^orte y^
soldiers shall return ho^e after they have gotten the victory
so that now the time requires, that our Soldiers shall come home again, it
must be provided ye their return be godly, modest, sober and thankful unto
our Lord God for the victory which he has given us. And wha^ they be once
come home, let the people gather together, and the preacher make a solemn
sermon unto them, declaring how greatly we are bound to God for this tryumphant
victory that he has given us, and exhorting them to be thanckefull again to
God for inestimable kyndenes.

The sermon once done, let all the people both men, women, A sermon after the
victory with thanks and praises.
and children with joyful voices sing hearty praises to our Lord God,
confessyng that by his omnipotent power alone, it is come to pass, y^ we have
gotten the victory, as that noble man Pytho Pytho.
returnyng from the wars said to the Athenians, wha^ they meruelled greatly
at his prosperous chau^se, and praised him because he had slain king Cotys:
There is no thancke, says he, to he given unto me, but unto God alone, who
being the Author, this act is very nobly done. As for me, I did none other
thing but put my helping hand and diligence unto it. God alone gave the
victory, to him therefore be all the tha^cke, praise, honor and glory.

We read also in diverse places of the holy Scripture, that after God had given
the victory to his people over their enemies, they brast out straight ways
i^to praises, and gave God hearty thanckes, as we read of the children of Israel
at their delyueraunce out of Egypt, which wha^ they saw their enemy king
Pharao with all his army drowned in y^ see, Exo. xv.
and them selves preserved, what goodly songs, lawdes and praises, did they
sing to their Lord God? How did Debora and Barach after the victory praise
God, I^^ic. v.
because Sisara and his company were slain and they graciously kept safe?

When y^ Holofernes was slain, and his army put to flight, what a goodly song
did Judith Judith. xvi.
sing to y^ Lord? How joyfully came all the people together unto Jerusalem
for to give praise and thanks unto their Lord God, and to offer their burnt
sacrifices and promised offeringes?

After thexample of these devout and holy parsonnes ought we also, wha^ we have
gotten the victory, to give God thanckes, and to offer the Sacrifice of praise
unto him. So shall we show our selves not unworthy his beneficence, yea so
shall we provoke God to continewe a gentle and favorable Lord unto us, when
he shall perceive that we be tha^ckefull, and do not forget his inestimable
benefits, which he daily shows unto us.

Now remains the last part of this our work, which is to de clare,
after what sort we shall be have our selves, when we have gotten the victory
of our enemies, tha^ we may enjoy peace and tranquilite for ever after. How
we shall be have our selves, y^ we may enjoy peace ever after.
We heard before that the cause, why God plageth us either with wars,
pestilence or ho^ger, is Idolatry, false worshyppyng^ of God, y^ despisyng of
Christ's gospel, wicked living, effeminate ma^ners. etc. Now if we will be
fre from these plages, and live in rest and quiet, we must cease to commyt
such grievous sins against God, and seake both to serve him according to his
word, and also to lead a pure and innocent life. By this means shall God bliss
our country with peace, increase it with thabundans of all things, and make
it to floryshe above all other nacious.

That this thing may the more aptely be brought to pass, it is convenient
that the civil magistrates and head rulars of every country provide that
there be learned curates, Learned curates.
which may teach the people y^ true word of God, that they may know how
to worship him according to the holy scriptures. It shall profit also not a
little unto true god lives to have modest, learned, Wise and godly scolemasters.
grave and godly Scholemasters in every country, that may bring up youth not
only in ye knowledge of humayne letters and civil ma^ners, but also in the
fear of the Lord, that they may learn even from their cradles, as they
say, to know God, to understand his word, to honor him aryght, Fathers and
mothers. Masters and Mastresses
and to walk in his holy pathwayes. This thing also ought al fathers and
mothers, masters and mastresses do in their houses, that such as be under them
may know and serve God aright, By this means shall all Idolatry and false
worshyppyng of God shortly decay and vanysh away, and the true seruyse of God
only remain among us.

Now as concerning purite of life, Purite of life.
this shall easily follow of y^ true knowledge of God. For he that is engraffed
in God, is a member of God has Gods spirit in him, which exciteth and moves
hi^ unto all goodness, as Christ says, Joan. xv.
I am the vine, and ye are y^ branches. He y^ dwellethe in me, and I in him,
he brings forth much fruit. The fruytes that we bring forth must be for
every man to live according to his vocacion and calling. Let them that be
te^porall rulars Temporal rulars
procure peace in their Realms above all things, use their office justly,
seek not only to be feared but also to be loved, show them selves merciful
gydes and tender captains of the people, and so behave the^ selves in all
things, that they may be the very Image of GOD. By this means shall their
kyngdo^s well prosper and long continewe. Let them again that be subjects
show all reverent submissio^ to their Subjects.
heads and rulars, being always obedient even from the very heart without any
either preuy dissimulacio^ or open resistaunce.

Let them that be bishops Bishops
and other spiritual ministers lay aside all tyranny, and hawtynes of mind
and walk with all gentle softenes and tender compassion toward y^ sheep of
Christ committed to their cure and charge. Let the^ be as most loving fathers
to Christ's ^^ocke, and if any of the sheep chaunse to run astray and to go
out of the way, let them not therefore vngentylly entreat y^ sheep, but as it
is the office of a good sheppard, by fair mea^s call it home again unto the
fold and love it new again. Luke. xv.
Let them remember thistory of the lost sheep, and consider how tenderly the
head sheppard our master Christ fetched it home again even upon his shulders.
The servant of the Lord may not fight, says S. Paul, but be peasable and
gentle toward all men, ii. Tim. ii.
ready to teach, sufferyng the evil with mekenes, enformyng the^ that resist,
if that at any time God may give them repentance to know the truth. Let the^
that be paryshners and lay people reverence the Bishops and other spiritual
ministers, Lay people Malach. ii.
gyuynge them no less honor, i. Cor. i.
than the child gy^eth the father, Math. v.
remembrynge that they be the angels of God, i. Cor. iiii.
the messangers of Christ, Joan. xxi.
the light of the world, the salt of the earth, the dispensatours of the
mysteries of God the feders of their souls, the confortours of the weak, the
Phisicions of the sick, y^ vpholders of ye whole, the exhorters unto virtue,
the frayers away from vice. etc. which watch continually for the health of
their souls.

Let all other parsons public or private so live, Heb. xiii. Parsonnes of
every degree
that there be no dissencion among them, nor grudge one toward an other, ever
setting before their eyes this saying of the Psalmographe, Psalm. xxxiii
seake after peace, and maintain the same. Nether shall it be unsitting to
have in memory this verse of the Poet.

Candida pax homines, Ouidius Lib. iii, de art ama^di, Godly admonicions.
trux decet ira feras. If any discord chaunse to arise at any time among us,
let it not long remain, but let all means possible be sought, that friendly
concord and unfeigned amite may evermore reygne among us. Let us charitably
hear and monysh one another. Lee us report well one of another. Let us
enterpret all things unto the best. To conclude, let christen charity so bear
rule among us, that we may be al of one mind, (...)
even as we be all one body, and have one head, which is Christ.

If we will on this manner give diligence, that we may be at peace both with
God and man, we may be sure not only to exchewe all the assaults of our
enemies, and to be free from those plages, where with y^ disobedient be
turmoyled through the mighty hand of God, but also to enjoy perpetual
tra^quilite, peace ^este, quietness, and to have our Realms abunde with all
kind of commodities that pertayne unto y^ properous conseruacion of a public
weal. And if it should so chaunse at any time, y^ any forre^ Prince either
Christen or Hethen should be moved of some evil spirit to assail our contry,
God will so watch the borders and coasts of our Realms that no Tyraunte
should prevail, nor once be able to twytche against us: So mighty a Bulwark
and strong Castle is the hand of God for them that worship him according to
his word, put their trust in him, call upon his most blyssed name, and led
a pure and innocent life.

Wherefore I exhort all Christen me^, The conclusion of the book.
chefely my country men of England (for whose wealth and prosperity I have
co^pyled this little treatise, being moved unto it through y^ love that I bear
toward my country) that they will from hensforth (all supersticion laid
aside) fear, love, honor and worship God according to his word, and lead a
life so pure and innocent, that they may be known by their co^uersacion to
pertayne to Christ. So shall it assuredly come to pass, yt God shall not only
give us in this world a glorious victory over all our enemies both corporal
and spiritual, but also after this life bring us unto that celestial country
where all joy, peace, pleasure and felicite is. AMEM.

Give the glory to God alone.
Imprynted at London in Botulphe lane at the sign of the white Bear, by John^
Maylerre for John^ Gough. Anno Dn^i. 1542.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per Septennium.




