HONOR IN HIS PERFECTION: OR, A TREATISE IN COMMENDATIONS OF THE Virtues and
Renowned Virtuous undertakings of the Illustrious and Heroyicall Princes HENRY
Earl of Oxenford. HENRY Earl of Southampton. ROBERT Earl of Essex, AND The
ever praiseworthy and much honored Lord, ROBERT BARTVE, Lord Willoughby, of
Eresby: With a Brief Cronology of Theirs, and their Ancestors Actions.

And to the eternal memory of all that follow them now, or will imitate them
hereafter, especially those three Noble Instances, the Lord Wriouthesley, the
Lord Delaware, and the Lord Montioy.

-- At nunc horrentia Martis
Arma virumque Cano --
LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop, for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at his
shop in Pater noster Row, at the Sign of the Talbot. 1624.

TO THE HONOR, AND Eternal Memory of the Four Illustrious, Great,
Heroyicall and Noble Houses; The House of OXFORD, The House of SOUTHAMPTON, The
House of ESSEX, And the House of WILLOUGHBY, and to alll the living Branches,
Males and Females which truly derive themselves from any of those long honored
and Princely Families.
IF I should labor (right Honorably honorable, and you glorious Branches of
these goodly Cedars which I would preserve to Eternity) to give a general
contentment to all which shall vouchsafe to look upon this little Treatise: my
work would be infinite, and the end like a shadow ever farthest off when I
did covet to be most near it; for it is a maxim: That he which did well,
offended some, yet an Apostle; He that did worst, pleased many, and yet was
but a Beast; and He that did best of all, could not please all, and yet was
God; So various are the minds of men, and so curious the diet of those which
feed on variety; Besides Slander (who has much Tongue and little Forehead,
who is not pleased, but in licking of Ulcers. Is ever so Impudent, that it dare
mis-interpret, Nickname and abuse any virtuous meaning: therefore to these
children of Spleen and Passion (who are mouthd like Anius-Satire, and can blow
both hot and cold at one instant) I direct none of my Labors; But to You, You
that are the Issues of true Honor; You in whom they all live of whom I have
written; You whom Goodness will not gine leave to do or think any thing
evil; to You, in all humbleness, I direct this Servant of your Families
Virtues: do not imagine it is a Chronickle of all their Noble Actions, far
be it from my weakness to aim at a Work of such merit: let it suffice it is
but an Essay or Imperfit offer of those excellencies, which no doubt, will
hereafter draw a Pen of Immortality to to crown them. Nor was this done so
much to extol and renown them, as to quicken and set on fire the noble hearts
of many others, which now like some of the Statues or the Monuments in
West-Minster lie sleeping on their Elbowes: Thus if the Work be taken, it
has got a true Conjecture, if otherwise, that men be covetous, and will seek
for more then my Knowledge is able to pay; Let them not blame me, if I give
there expectations leave to perish, and only submit my self, and my Labor to
Your noble Censure, beseeching Your Charity to protect it, whilst my self
will ever live,

A devoted and true admirer of your honored Virtues G. M.

THE FOUR REGIMENTS.
The Ear. of Southampton. Col. Sr. John Burlacy Lieu. col. Sr. Iarret Ashley.
Ser. Mayor. Lord Wryothesley. Lord Montioy. Sr. Thomas Littleton. Captain
Henry Barkley. Captain Crumwel. Captain Hubbert. Captain James Iucks.
Captain Goring. Captain Conieres. The Earl of Oxford. Col. Sr. James
Leuyston. Lieu. col. Captain Seton. Ser. Mayor. Lord Delaware. Sir Dudly
North. Sir William Heydon. Sir William Brunckard. Sir John Weintworth. Sir
Henry Crofts. Sir Edward Hawley. Captain Henry Weintworth. Captain William
Ramsey. The Earl of Essex. Col. Sr. Charles Rich. Liu. col. Captain Swanton.
Ser. May. Sr. Walter Deuoreux. Sr. Robert Knolles. Sr. John Ouzley. Sr.
Sigismond Zinzan. Captain Throgmorton. Captain Terringham. Captain Weynman.
Captain Higham. Captain Daues. The Lord Willoughby. Col. Sr. Edw. Conwey.
Lieu col. Cap. Tho. Conwey. Ser. May. Sr. Peregrine Bartue. Sr. John Ratcliffe.
Captain Conwey. Captain Hunks. Captain Clapton. Captain Terwitt. Captain
Ashburnham. Captain Vane. Captain Goodrycke.
HONOR IN HIS PERFECTION.
THE greatest and most glorious work that ever the supreme and divine
Majesty brought to pass, was the Creation of the World: The excellency aed
necessity of a Soldier.
The most excellentest thing that he therein created was Man, And the most
necessariest function which he ordained for the propagation both of the one and
others Glory, was a Soldier: Then a Soldier nothing more needful, nothing
more absolute, more perfect. The antiquity of a Soldier.
It began with the World, for when Adam offended, a fiery Sword in the hand of
an heavenly Soldier drove him out of Paradise.

A Soldier is the right arm of Justice, What a Soldier is, and his duties
and carries the Sword; Wisdom is the left, and bears the Balance, without
a Soldier no estate, no Commonwealth can flourish: Who shall unmask false
pretenses, but the Soldier? who shall confound the secret subtle Traitor, but
the Soldier? who shall tread down the public daring Rebel, but the
Soldier? and indeed, who shall or can do right to all men, but the Soldier?

If then the Soldier be thus good, thus ancient, thus just, What Glories
attend a Soldier.
and thus needful, how many Glories ought to crown and attend him? why all
whatsoever that can be accounted Glorious, as the conquest over Danger, over
Labor, and over Passion; the defense of true Religion, true Titles, and true
undertakings: He shall have all the Glories of the Earth, as praise from the
Greatest, reverence from the wisest, and wonder from all: he shall have the
Glories of Garments; as Crowns, Garlands, Plumes, and Scarfes; the glory of
Place, as the Chair for Counsel, and the Chariot for triumph; the glory of
Burial, as Tombs, Temples, Hearses, Epitaphs; nay after all, the glory of
Eternity, that is, famous Cronicles to keep his Name and Reputation to
eternal memory, and Heaven for his soul, where he shall live with God for
ever.

Why the Soldier is glorified
But some here will ask me, why shall a Soldier have all these glories? only
because he is needful, because he is ancient, because he is just? yes, for
them an infinite number of other Virtues; for in the Soldier lies the
protection of Ladies, the defense of Orphans, the relief of Widows, the
support of weakness; the strength of goodness, and the utter destruction of
all that can be named vicious; it is his Actions which must make up the myrror
wherein true Honor is to be seen, his words that must pull Truth from
darkness; and his Thoughts which (being ever busy in Heaven) must keep the
Earth in form and true order: It is his Valor that must make all dangers
assaileable; his Wisdom that must make a separation betwixt good and evil,
his Temperaunce that must quench the flames of Princes angers, and his Justice
that must distribute to all the portion of equity.

Is the Soldier thus excellent? The Reward of a Soldier.
O then! what Reward can be good enough, great enough for so infinite
perfection? only three Coins must make up the full sum, wherewith to repay
and reward every well deserving Soldier: The first is Fame, Fame.
or Good report which all men owe, not only to those which defend them, but to
all that undertake or perform any noble Action; this if we scant, we take from
them the food of their Reputation, and starve all their worthy Actions; The
second is Wealth, Wealth.
or a competent and bountefull maintenance to support the Soldier in his
place, and make him capable of glorious undertakings, which abated or detained
it takes from the Body strength, from the Heart courage, and from the Mind
hope, leaving behind in the empty places nothing but anger and envy; The last
and best of all is Honor, this the Prince ought to give to desert; Honor.
this the Soldier ought to receive for desert: this when the Prince has
given, the people must and ought to admire, for Let all men honor whom the
Prince honors; this when it is neglected, Gratitude sits wringing of her
hands, and cries, O Seneca! where are thy Benefits?

But some will ask me, what is this Honor which I make so excellent, and that
it is the only Reward for a Soldier; I answer with Cassanaeus, What Honor is.
that Honor is the witness of the excellency in a man; but chiefly according
to his Virtue, and therefore according to Virtue and dignity are Honors to be
given; It is that (says he) which is to be preferred before all earthly
things, because it and honesty do walk continually hand in hand with man's
life, it is not comprehended within the compass of this word Praise or Laud;
The difference betwixt Honor and Laud.
no, it is of much greater excellency; for Honor is ever of it self and in
it self, but Praise is ever derived from another; to conclude, Honor is the
food of every great spirit, and the very god which creates in high minds
Heroical actions; it is so dilicate and puer that any excess does stain it,
any unjust action dishonours it, any motion that smells either of folly, of
sloth, or of rashness, puts it out of countenance; but an ignoble deed that
utterly ruins it: This is Honor, and this is no unnecessary thing, for it is
all the reward that Virtue can bestow upon her self or fix unto the deserts
of the Soldier which is the most needful calling. It is that which preserues
Order, and knits together the body of every Commonwealth, for take away
Honor, where is our Reverence? take away Reverence? what are our Laws? and
take away Law, and man is nothing but a gross mass of all impiety. Neither
is this Honor any new thing, The antiquity of Honor.
for it was invested into Adam at his creation, and thence decended to Noah;
from Noah it came to Abraham, from Abraham it came to Moses, from Moses to
Solomon, from Solomon to the Incarnation of our Savior, and from him to the
end of the World; and as it is thus ancient, so is Honor likewise eternal:
Honor is eternal.
for that Honor which is worthily given, worthily received, and worthily
preserved, that Honor can not be said ever to die, for the memory is
everlasting, and the reward can never perish; witness the Trumpet of Moses,
the Harp of David, and the holy song in four parts of the blessed Evangelists:
As it is eternal, Honor universal.
so it is also General and dispierced, not confined or bounded within limits,
it flies over all the corners of the Earth, and couers the face thereof as with
a Curtain; there is no Nation so unfortunate, nor no people so stupid, but in
some religious and formal manner they receive, prefer, and esteem of
Honor, witness the infinite Titles of Honor which are at this day given
through all Nations; And reason it should be so esteemed, if for no other
cause, The privileges of Honor
yet for the privileges which depend and belong unto it, as precendancie and
prioritie of place, and the glories and beauties which belong to the best
place; as to some the Throne, to some the Chair, to some the Bench, and to
some the Altar. It has privilege of Ornament, as Crowns, and Scepters,
Coronets, Swords, and Bautricks, Gloves, and Spurs, Mantels, Pales, and
Surcoats, and a world of other, according to the greatness of the Title, and
custom of Kingdoms: Honor has also the privilege of person, for it is held
ignoble in any man to do injury to a noble Captive, and howsoever they may be
commanded, yet they may not be tormented; it has privilege to dispense with
years, with Laws, with Customs, and to conclude, it is only Honor which
has privilege to bestow Honors.

Thus thou see O Britain (and see it with all thine eyes) what a true
Soldier is, Invocation on Great Britane.
how necessary, how ancient, how just, and how glorious: Thou see also the
Reward, which in duty thou art bound to bestow upon him, Fame, Wealth, and
Honor. O then rouse thee from thine easy bed of Security, and break from
thy heavy eyelids thy long slumber of Peace, and look O look now upon thy
Princely Soldiers, look upon these four Noblemen, The four Undertakers.
Oxford, Southampton, Essex, and Willoughby, who like the four Seasons of the
year, join together to make thee a plentiful harvest of thine own hearts
wishes: Look upon these, and love them, look upon these and admire them:
These go not, to acquire Honor, for they have infinite Oceans of their own,
and infinite Seas can derive from their forefathers Virtues; but these go to
do the work of Honor, a work which I hope God and his Angels will further
with prosperity, and all good men will praise to the very last Generation:
These go not to make themselves greater then they are, What they go to do.
but to manifest to the World, that they owe unto God this service for the
greatness which they hold; these clamber not up to catch the Moon, but rather
look lower then themselves, that they may find out Heaven; these go not to
pay a new fine for new Honors newly received from a bountiful Majesty. But
these go to pay the old rent which they do, and their forefathers did owe to
thee O Britain, and him that in thee is the Lords anointed; to conclude, these
go not to put thee in hope of what they may do by any new attemptings, but
rather to give thee assurance what they will do (God prospering them) by their
old most noble examples.

(...) Britain.
I say again, then rouse thy self O Britain, and give unto these thy
Worthies, give unto these thy Soldiers that Reward which is due to their
Goodness, give them Fame, give them noble Fame, give them Fame everlasting,
fill every Trumpet full of their praises, and let no sounds be heard in thy
Streets, but such as may bear upon them the echo of their renoune and
virtue; An Encouragement to her friends.
bless those which shall bless them, and curse those which shall curse them;
say unto those which shall wish them good luck, you are my children, and my
breasts shall nourish you; to those which sing praise of them, you are my
Swannes and I have Laurel to crown you; to those which shall Register their
good actions, I have Chronicles, and you shall write them; and to those which
shall pray for them, I have Pulpets, and only you shall speak in them. Who
are her foes.
But unto those who shall murmr against them; to those which mis-interpret,
disgrace, deprave, or wish ruin to their proceedings, say unto them, they are
the bastards of the great Whore, and they and their seed have been accursed
before all Generations; say indeed plainly (and say truly) that they are the
sons of the devil, begotten on the Pope, nursed up by the Jesuit (which is the
eldest son of Murder) and protected by that Nymrod which hunteth after
Kings, and thinks the whole World too little for his backe-Burthen: This say
unto them, and forsake them; spue them out of thy mouth, cast them from thy
breast, and let them only find their portions amongst those Fugitives, which
(having no Virtues to carry along with them) are truly wretched, truly
miserable, in every habitation.

Give unto thy Soldiers of thy wealth, Gifts for her friends.
of thy riches, bring them offerings and oblations of thy store, such as may
encourage them to go forward in thy work, and strengthen and support them
against all the deadly assaults of Necessity, nor of thy (...) and unworthy
store, Difference of gifts.
of thy lean Cattle, and thy blasted fruit, of thy moldy bread or putrifide
water, but bring them of the ripest clusters of thy best grapes, the fatlings
of thy flocks, and the best Jewels which adorn thee; this will express the
worthiness of thy nature, and this will make them find out doors and ways to
enter and conquer all impossibilities; The effects of good gifts.
this will make them so vigilant and watchful in occasions, so careful and
secure in all attemptings, and so provident and valyant in the conquest of
every danger, that as Pericles said to the Athenians, so will they say to
their followers, If no men but we lead you to death you shall be immortal.
Lastly, give unto these good ones the full measure of all true Honor and
Renown; let them have Honor in thy Streets, in thy Houses, in thy Courts, in
thy Churches, and in all places; let their Statues adorn thy best rooms, let
their Chronicles furnish thy best Lybraries, and let their memories keep thy
children awake to the end of all posterity. How to help weak mind.
When thou will seek to erect or build up a great Spirit in a weak breast,
when thou will underprop the declining or falling Virtue of a misled
goodness, when thou will reuiuee a courage that is murtherd by Fortune, or
Stiffled by Ingratitude, when thou would inflame a soul that has been
quenched with too much Austeritie, or dampt and half smotherd up with contempt;
or indeed, when thou would to any great one do a great, a good, and a noble
office, then read unto them the Stories of these Noblemens lives, and the
Stories of their Noble Progenitors; for believe it, if there be in those lost
ones any matter whereon to work, if they be not all dead flesh, all fleame, or
all snow water; these and their Ancestors are Suns, whose fires are able to
quicken and give life; nay even to create and give being to the driest piece of
Noble earth that ever was forsaken.

And first begin with Oxford, The Story of the House of Oxford compared with
Caesar.
whose Honor is as old as the Roman Monarchy; show them, that when Coesar
flourisht then Verus grew and brought forth flowers and fruits, as noble as
ancient, and though in every degree not so potent and admired, yet (by the
odds of ambition) a thousand times more wholesome and more glorious, and what
is a blessing above all blessings, many Ages longer lasting; for what is left
of Coesar but his name, when of that Verus is yet left a Vere, and to our
forefathers many Veres, as good, as excellent as Coesar, but by many degrees
much more fortunate; for though Coesar were never so Noble by his Birth, never
so happy in his Conquests, never so much beloved for particular Virtues; yet by
a Jury of two and fifty of his Peers, he was condemned of Ambition; every one
gave him a wound, and every wound sealed upon his body the sentence of guilty,
so that howsoever he fell after an unjust manner; yet he justly fell, for the
action was unjust to which he aspired: neither at this day is there left any of
his blood, no, not any small sprig or spray of his most extrauagant Branches:
the House of Austria, though they borrow his name for glory sake, yet they
cannot beg his pedigree for truth sake; they have much of Coesars Majesty,
but not all Coesars virtue: Whereas our Vere, was with Coesar as noble, as
good, as ancient as he was, and is with us as great, as worthy, as renowned,
and as hopeful as ever his Ancestors was, A memorabse note.
and what is the most memorablest and most glorious Sun which ever gave light
or shine to Nobility? our Veres, from the first hour of Coesar to this
present day of King James (which is above a thousand seven hundred years ago)
never let their feet slip from the path of Nobility, never knew a true
eclipse of glory, never found declination from Virtue, never forsook their
Country being wounded, or their lawful Kiug distressed, never were attainted,
never blemished, but in the purity of their first Garments and with that
excellent white and unspotted innocence wherewith it pleased the first
Majesty to inuest them, they lived, governed, and dyed, leaving the memory
thereof on their Monuments, and in the peoples hearts; and the Imitation to all
the Princes of the World, that either would be accounted good men or would have
good men to speak good things of their actions.

The Story of John Earl of Oxford the 15. Earl.
Witness to this (amongst the infinite Stories of this noble House) the
memorable Actions of that high and Illustrious Prince, that never enough to be
praised great one, John Earl of Oxford, who in the days of Henry the sixth,
took that devout and Religious King his Sovereign, and the son of Henry the
fifth (his fathers Sovereign) into his arms, and protected him against the
many fearful and terrible assaults of the great House of York; staid him
when he was falling, raised him up when he was fallen, retained him, and put
new oil to his lamp when all the first glory was wasted, and till the power
of all powers would give him leave to proceed no further, he held up the poor
weak royal bark (contrary to all probability) against all the waves,
winds, and tempests of misfortunes; Insomuch, that Edward the fourth (amazed
at his actions) said, Edward the 4. his opinion of Oxford.
that Oxford was an Eagle in the Wars, and soared above the Clouds when he
thought to take him, but fell suddenly upon those which held him farther off,
and showed them destruction: and the Duke of Gloucester being asked his opinion
of this Earl, said, He was the best Sword and Buckler that ever defended the
House of Lancaster, whereas if he had been his friend, his conscience would
have told him, that a wiser Prince there was not any found; a more courageous
the World bare not, and a better there could not be; and to this his after
actions gave testimony, for when he had seen the last ruin of his royal
Master, with whom although he could not utterly fall, yet he must of necessity
a little decline, and although the smallest capitulation might have made him
greater then his own desires, or full as great as the greatest of his friends
wishes, yet did neither the one nor the other move him, but he is content to
sit silent, and fixing his heart neither on this side nor beyond the love of
his Country, but just upon that object, watches and consumes his times to
behold what constellation rules her: as soon as he espies that Canicular
star Richard the third to arise, Oxford against Rchard the third.
and sees how he burns up the Nobility, wastes the Gentry, brings into
contempt the Clergy, and leaves no moisture to supple the whole face of the
Land, but blood and weepings; then this Roman Eagle, John of Oxford rouses
himself, Oxford comes to Earl Richmund,
shakes his wings, and flies into the bosom of Henry Earl of Richmund the
greatest and next suruiuing branch of the House of Lancaster: him she inspires
with the knowledge of his own right, with wisdom how to challenge that right,
and with courage how to gain it; he gives him a feeling of those calamities
which call upon him, shows how needful it is that those tears should be
dried; and lastly, with what ease his Sword may perform both the one and the
other cuer: Oxford brings Richmund into England.
This done, he brings him into England, pitches his Tents near unto Bosworth,
makes that field a Theater, where Richmund acts his part so to the life, that
Honor comes down from Heaven to dwell with him and his posterity for ever:
and Richard acts his part, so for life, that valor and courage appear
glorious, how evil soever the cabinet be which contains them; and betwixt
these, Oxford acts his part with such Justice, Oxfords actions at Bosworth
field.
that wheresoever his sword comes, Angels seem to weild it while Victory
Crowns it; neither did he in this Battle suit his place according to his
greatness, which Reason and the necessity of those times would have wished to
have been most secure, (for there were greater expectations in him then
Hazard) but he makes his Greatness now to serve the necessity of the place,
and where danger appeared most powerful, there he made his abode, and there he
triumphed. The Front or Vanguard that day of the Earl of Richmunds Army were
Archers, Oxford leads the Vanguard.
and these the Earl lead, these he brought on with such bravery, these he
ordered with such skill, and these he taught to fight with such noble
encouragements, that every shower of arrows which he sent to the Enemy, fell
like Tempests upon them, so that some split with the Lightning, some perished
with the blow, and a world of hearts fell down with amazement; whilst still
this brave Earl keeps his constant behavior, and like a Thunderbolt flies
through his enemies Battalions and breaks them asunder, and when any of his
party began to droope, it is said, that the very sight of him and his actions,
like liquid Bitumen set them new on fire and made their flames so strong there
was no power to quench them; Oxford won the field.
thus he brought victory to the wisest of Princes ( Henry the seventh) and
restored again to its former greatness the almost lost House of royal
Lancaster; and that it might never fall again, he joined it in a perpetual
loue-knot, with the House of York, making the white Rose and the Red one
entier flower, by the happy and blessed Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth daughter
to Edward the fourth; unto which Obligation only the Earl of Oxford first
bound the Earl of Richmund before he undertook his quarrel; what shall we
say more of this excellent Prince, this good Prince; Oxfords happiness.
but only thus, that as few or none equalled his great deeds, so few or none
arrived at his great reward, for his life was happy and crowned with all the
blessings which Greatness could desire; as the love and favor of a wise King,
the respect of a powerful Nobility, and the admiration of a strong and potent
people. So also was his death happy, for he dyed ere any of these blessings
could wither, and so carried them all to the grave green and flourishing.
Lastly, he was blessed in his posterity, for he left an Issue behind him, which
were then as hopeful, and proved after as fortunate, and of this Issue Time
has yet never found an end; neither do I think it ever shall while Virtue
rules.

A discourse of John the 16. Earl of Oxford.
After this, John succeeded, his son; who in the days of Henry the eight,
showed equal valor, and encountered with equal Fortune, all which to
express at large, were to turn a short Encomium into a large Chronicle, and
therefore to those Annals I refer you: only as Geographers do demonstrate
out infinite Rivers by small lines, and huge Cities by little pricks; so I
will by a short relation of one of his smalest actions discover the unbounded
greatness of his mind, and the rare temper of his condition.

Oxford kills a Wild Boar.
Being in France upon serious negotiations for the King his Master; this Earl
of Oxford was entertained with all the pomp and State that either Pleasure or
Magnificence could produce; and amongst the rest, by reason of his warlike
disposition, he was invited to the hunting of a wild Boar, a sport mixed with
much danger, and deserving the best man's best care for preservation of his
safety; whence it comes, that the Frenchmen when they hunt this beast are ever
armed with light Arms, mounted on horseback, and having chasing staves like
lances in their hands, To this sport the Earl of Oxford goes; but no
otherwise attyred then as when he walked in his own private Bedchamber, only
a dancing rapyer by his side; neither any better mounted, then on a plain
English Tracconer, or an ambling Nagge; Anon the Boar is put on foot (which
was a Beast both hudge and fierce) the chase is eagerly pursued, many affrights
are given, and many dangers escaped; at last the Earl weary of the toil or
else urged by some other necessity, alights from his horse and walks alone by
himself on foot, when suddenly down the path in which the Earl walked, came
the enraged Beast, with his mouth all foamie, his teeth whetted, his bristles
up, and al other signs of fury and anger; the Gallants of France cry unto the
Earl to run aside and save himself, every one hallowed out that he was lost,
and (more then their wishes) none there was that durst bring him succor: But
the Earl (who was as careless of their clamours, as they were careful to
exclame) alters not his pace nor goes an hairs breadth out of his path, and
finding that the Boar and he must struggle for passage, draws out his Rapyer,
and at the first encounter, slew the Boar: which when the French Nobility
perceived, The Frenchmens admiration.
they came galloping in unto him and made the wonder in their distracted
amazements, some twelve times greater then Hercules twelve labors, all joining
in one, that it was an act many degrees beyond possibility, and that he was
infinitely beholden to divine aid, for he had done more then man could promise
to himself, or was likely for man ever to perform hereafter; and some of the
greater sort (who had a stronger tie of his familiarity) began in the way of
admiration to reprehend his too much ouer-daring, saying O my Lord, why would
you engage your person thus dangerously, you have done an act above courage,
and escapt your death beyond hope: but the Earl seeing their distraction,
replied (my Lords) what troubles you, or what myrackle have I done of which I
have no feeling, is it the killing of this English Pyg? why every boy in my
Nation would have performed it, they may be Bug-beares to the French, to us
they are but servants; I tell you, had an heard of Lions been in his place, I
would have done as much, and said unto them with the Poet, Dominum cognoscite
vestrum, I tell you man was created Master of all living Creatures; at this the
French were mute and only said amongst themselves, that his valor and his
Fortune had shakt hands and agreed to raise his name above comparison and so
they returned to Paris with the slain Beast, where the wonder did neither
decrease nor die, but to this day lives in many of their old Annals.

Edward the 17 Earl of Oxford.
Descend but to the noble Father of this princely Oxford now living, and you
shall find, that although the blessed arms of Peace, in the blessed days of
the ever blessed Elizabeth, did so foulde and embrace our Kingdom about, that
every valiant arm for want of employment, lay as it were manakled and fettered
from the use of weapon; yet this Nobleman breaks off his Gyues, and both in
Italy, France, and other Nations, did more Honor to this Kingdom then all
that have traveled since he took his journey to heaven. It were infinite to
speak of his infinite expense, the infinite number of his attendants, or the
infinite house he kept to feed all people; were his president now to be
followed by all of his rank, the Pope might hang himself for an English
Papist; coffeehouse would not feed our enemies Armies, nor would there be
either a Gentleman or Scholar to make a Mass Priest or a Jesuit; that he was
upright and honest in all his dealings the few debts he left behind him to
clog his suruiuours, were safe pledges; and that he was holy and Religious the
Chapels and Churches he did frequent, and from whence no occasion could draw
him; the alms he gave (which at this day would not only feed the poor, but
the great man's family also) and the bounty which Religion and Learning daily
took from him, are Trumpets so loud, that all ears know them; so that I
conclude, and say of him, as the ever memorable Queen Elizabeth said of Sir
Charles Blount, Lord Montioy, and after Earl of Devonshire, that he was
Honestus, Pietas, and Magnanimus.

What shall I speak of the two famous wonders of our Land, Sir Francis Vere
and Sir Horace Vere.
the ever memorable Sir Francis Vere deceased; and Sir Horace Vere now living,
his noble brother: to speak of one action, were to draw thousands into my
remembrance; or to name one place, were to lay the Map of almost all Europe
before me: and therefore I will refer you to the Chronicles of Spain and
Portugale, where as long as there stands a Cales, or abides an Island of the
Azores, you shall see a Vere in a Soldiers Triumph. Look in many of the
viewes of France, and there you shall find Vere armed: see the Stories of the
dissentions in Germany, and there you shall find Vere struggling with Honor;
nay, look in all that has been written in the Neatherlands, within the
compass of the longest memory now living, and believe it in every page, in
every action, Vere cannot be omitted: only in that Story there is one pretty
secret or mystery which I cannot let pass untouched, because it brings many
difficulties or doubts into the mind of an ignorant Reader; and that is, the
mistaking of names, for the Author of that Work binds himself too strictly
to the Scripture phrase, which is to make one name to contain another; as the
name Adam to contain the name Eua also, and the word man to contain the word
woman also; and so the Author speaking of many notable and famous exploits
fortunately performed, delivers you peradventure but the name of Nassau, or the
Dutch, and such like; whereas in truth and true meaning, the name of Vere
should ever be included within them, and the sense so read, the Story is
perfect. I speak not this to derogate any thing from the excellencies of that
most excellent Prince to whose Virtues I could willingly fall down and become a
bond-flaue; for the whole World must allow him a Soldier unparalleled, and a
Prince of infinite merit: but only to show that the least spark of Virtue which
is, cannot choose but repine when it finds a great Virtue injured by a pen whose
blaunching might make the whole World forgetful.

Henry Earl of Oxford the 18. Earl.
Lastly, thou shall not need to read, but with thy finger point at the life of
the now Earl of Oxford, of whom but to speak reasonable truths (such is the
poison of Envy,) every good word would be accounted flattery, and to speak any
thing contrary to goodness, Truth her self would swear it were mere
Falsehood; Therefore I will forbear his Chronicle, and only say thus, that his
Cradle did point him out a Soldier; for he brought that spirit with him into
the World, and that spirit he has still nourisht; for divide his Age into
three parts, and I think two of them have been bestowed on Foreign Nations;
neither has he let slip any occasion (how great or low soever) which might put
him into action, Sir Horace Vere.
he has hung about the neck of his noble Kinsman like a rich Jewel, and the
one has so adorned the other, the one with Counsel, the other with obedience;
the one showing what to do, the other doing what was fit to be done, that if
there be a hope whereon mortality may build, there is none more strong, then
that we have of this Nobleman. Go on then great Prince in this brave careire
of Honor, and fix for thine object the designs of thy famous Auncestour; and
as he restored the lost House of Lancaster; so I Prophecy, if thou be not
the head, yet thou will be the right arm to the body which shall bring back
again to the royal owner the now wasted Palatinate.

Now for a Conclusion to this Noble House, Know thou whatsoever thou art which
shall read this discourse, that albe I nominate here but four Earls, and the
first in the days of Henry the sixth; yet there have been of the name of Vere
eighteen Earls of Oxford; of which the first, Aubery Vere was created Earl
of Oxford, and High Chamberlain of England, to him and his heirs males for
ever, in the days of Henry the first, who was son to William the Conqueror,
which is Honor almost as early as could be; for before the Conquest there is
no certainty any of Honor hereditarie in this Land: and thus they have
successively followed till this day.

Next (O Britain) read unto thy softer Nobility the Story of the Noble
House of Southampton; The Story of the House of Southampton.
That shall bring new fire to their bloods, and make of the little sparks of
Honor great flames of excellency; show them the life of Thomas Wriothesley
Earl of Southampton, Thomas Earl of Southamton.
who was both an excellent Soldier, and an admirable Scholar, who not only
served the great King his Master ( Henry the eight) in his wars, but in his
Counsel Chamber; not only in the field, but on the Bench, within his Courts of
civil Justice: This man for his excellent parts, was made Lord Chauncelour of
England where he governed with that integrity of heart and true mixture of
Conuience and Justice, that he won the hearts both of the King and people.

Henry Earl of Southampton.
After this noble Prince succeeded his son Henry Earl of Southampton, a man
of no less virtue, prowess, and wisdom, ever beloved and favored of his
Prince, highly reverenced and favored of all that were in his own rank, and
bravely attended and served by the best Gentlemen of those Countries wherein he
lived; his muster role never consisted of four Lackeys and a Coachman, but of
a whole troop of at least an hundred well mounted Gentlemen and Yeomen; he was
not known in the Streets by guarded Liuories, but by Gold Chains; not by
painted Butterflies, ever running as if some monster pursued them, but by tall
goodly fellows that kept a constant pace both to guard his person, and to
admit any man to their Lord which had serious business. This Prince could not
steal or drop into an ignoble place, neither might do any thing unworthy of
his great calling; for he ever had a world of testimonies about him.

Henry, second of that name Earl of Southampton.
When it pleased the divine goodness to take to his mercy this great Earl; he
left behind to succeed him Henry Earl of Southampton his Son (now living)
being then a child; But here me thinks Cinthius aurem vellet, something pulls
me by the elbow, and bids me forbear, for flattery is a deadly sin, The
Journey to the (...).
and will damme Reputation: But shall I that ever loved and admired this Earl,
that lived many years where I daily saw this Earl; that knew him before the
wars, In the wars, and since the wars; shall I that have seen him endure
the worst malice or vengeance, that the Sea, Tempests, or Thunder could utter,
that have seen him undergo all the extremities of war, that have seen him
serve in person on the enemy, and against the enemy: shall I that have seen
him receive the reward of a Soldier (before the face of the Enemy) for the
best act of a Soldier (done upon the Enemy:) Shall I be scarrd with shadows?
No; Truth is my Mistress, and though I can write nothing which can equal the
least spark of fire within him, yet for her sake will I speak some thing
which may inflame those that are heavy and dull and of mine own temper.

This Earl (as I said before) came to his Fathers dignity in his childhood,
The Earls education.
spending that and his other younger times in the study of good Letters (to
which the University of Cambridge is a witness) and after confirmed that
Study with travel and foreign observation.

As soon as he came to write full and perfect Man, His going to the wars.
he betook himself unto the wars, was made Commander of the Garland, one of
Queen Elizabeth (of famous memory) her best ships; and was Vice Admiral of
the first Squadron. In his first putting out to Sea, he saw all the Terrors
and Evils which the Sea had power to show to mortaiitie insomuch, that the
General and the whole Fleet (except some few ships, Robert Earl of Essex.
of which this Earls was one) were driven back into Plymouth, but this Earl
in spite of storms, held out his course, made the coast of Spain, and after
upon an Aduiso returned. The Fleet new reenforst made fourth to Sea again
with better prosperity, came to the Islands of the Azores, and there first
took the Island of Fiall, Fiall taken.
sacked and burnt the great Town, took the high Fort which was held
impregnable; and made the rest of the Islands, as Pike, Saint Georges, and
Gratiosa, obedient to the Generals service; Robert Earl of Essex.
Then the Fleet returning from Fiall, it pleased the General to divide it,
and he went himself on the one side of Gratiosa, and the Earl of Southampton
with some three more of the Queens Ships and a few small Merchants Ships
sailed on the other, when early in a morning by spring of day, This brave
Southampton light upon the King of Spaines Indian Fleet laden with Treasure,
Spaines Indian Fleet beaten.
being about four or five and thirty Sail, and most of them great warlike
Gallioons; they had all the advantage that sea, wind, number of ships or
strength of men could give them; yet like a fearful heard they fled from the
fury of our Earl; who notwithstanding gave them chase with all his Canuase;
one he took, and sunk her, diverse he dispierst which were taken after, and
the rest he drove into the Island of Tercera, which was the^ vnassaileable.
After this, The Earl of Essex.
he joined with the General again, and came to the Island of Saint Michaels,
where they took and spoiled the Town of Villa Franca; Villa Franca taken, and
a Carrackt split.
and at Port Algado made a Charrackt run on ground and split her self;
after being ready to depart, the enemy taking advantage of our rising, and
finding that most of our men were gone aboard, The Enemies assault, and are
beaten.
and but only the General, the Earl of Southampto^, Sr. Francis Vere, and some
few others left on Shore, they came with their utmost power upon them, but
were received with so hot an encounter, that many of the Spaniards were put to
the sword, and the rest enforced to run away: and in this skirmish no man had
advantage of safety, for the number was (on our part) so few, that every man
had his hands employment; and here the Earl of Southampton ere he could dry
the sweat from his brows, or put his sword up in the scaberd, received from
the Noble General, Robert Earl of Essex, the order of Knighthood. Southampton
Knighted.


After this, Southampton goes to Ireland.
he returned for England and came fortunately home, but fell he here a sleep
with any enchantment either of Peace or Pleasure? O no; but here he did, as it
were, but new begin the progress of his more noble actions: for now the wild
and sturdy Irish rebels (fatned with some Conquests, and made strong with
foreign aid, to get more Conquest) began to rage like wild Boares, and to
root up every fruitful place in that Kingdom, so that without a sudden
chastisement, it was likely the evil would grow past all cuer; To this work
the Earl of Southampton buckles on his Armor, and after the General was
chosen, which was Robert Earl of Essex, he is the first tenders his service;
he is instantly made Lieutenant General of the Horse, prepares for the
expedition, and with all possible speed came into Ireland, there he was a
principal instrument in calming all the turmoiles, and ceasing the seditions
in Munster, He appeases Munster.
reducing that fruitful and well peopled Province to their ancient and true
obedience, and making those which favor and grace could not reclaim, by force
of Arms to lie humbly prostrate before him; witness Mongarret, Donna-spaniah,
the Souggan, Oni-mac-Rori, and a world of others, which being the wickednest of
men, came and threw themselves at the feet of the General, and only cried out
for the Queens and his mercy; Thus he also reduced the Country of (...), and
diverse other places, and then returned.

But is here an end of his progress in the wars: questionless the whole
world would have so imagined, for his dear and dread Sovereign, the ever
memorable Elizabeth dying, the next that succeeds is the incomparable King
James; he enters not with an Olive Branch in his hand, but with an whole
Forest of Olives round about him; for he brought not Peace to this Kingdom
alone, but almost to all the Christian Kingdoms in Europe: he closed up both
ours and our neighbors Ianus Temple, and writing Beati pacifici, found both
the work and the Reward in his admirable proceedings; here our great Earl
stops, but retires not; he keeps his first ground, and the King (like the
Sun which suruaies althings) found hat he was fit for either the one or the
other service; Peace and War were to him but a couple of handmaids, and he
knew how to employ either according to their Virtue: hence he makes him a
Privy Counselor of the State, and in that service he spent the marrow and
strength of his age.

Now at last, when Mischief and Policy went about by delicate and enchanting
poisons, not only to stifle our Peace, but to murder and confound all our
loving neighbors which guard us; and that Charity her self complained how
our alms were much to penurious; he who is one of the first which rises up to
this labor of amendment: but our Southampton, he whom although the privilege
of white hairs, the testimony of his former actions, and the necessity of
his employments in the present state, might have pleaded many vnrefellable
excuses; yet he is the son of Honor, and with her he will live and die in
all occasions; hence he embarks himself into this present action: Go on then
brave Earl, and as thou art by years, experience, and the greatness of thy
former places and commandments in the wars, the eldest son of Honor in
this Army, so give unto these thy Companions examples of thy goodness; show
them the true paths of Honor, and be thou the Eyes and Conduct to lead to the
restitution of the lost Palatinate, for therein consists my Prophecy.

After this (O Britain) read to thy growing spirits the ever memorable Story
of the Noble House of Essex; The Story of the House of Essex.
every small tittle of that glory is able to make a very earthy soul glorious,
how much more then a soul of any reasonable good composition? thou need not
read it in any loud key, for the whole World is but a Theater of their
Renown, the Tongues of all people make but up the Trumpet which speaks them,
and it is Eternity it self which shall keep them to everlasting memory.

Speak then first of the Noble Walter, Walter Deuereux Earl of Essex.
Earl of Essex (I do not mean that in this Treatise thou should speak of
all his Noble actions; for great Volumes are to little to contain them:) But
like an Index or Table unto greatness, point out where those glories may be
better discerned: Let it suffice me to say he was a man compounded of the
four Virtues, as of four Elements, Honor, Valor, Bounty, and Humility;
for the first he had it from his Birth, and made an augmentation of it in his
life, for from Vicount he became an Earl; the second could never be separated
from his Blood, and he expressed it in his profession, for he was a Soldier; the
third was the foundation of his disposition, for he could not endure to see
merit weeping; and the fourth was the Issue of all the others goodnesses; for he
could never endure to imagine his own shadow a hairs breadth greater then
those that did walk hand in hand with him. This Earl was by Queen Elizabeth,
of famous memory, made Lord Marshall of Ireland; It was he that brought the
great O-neale into subjection made the first evil Desmund put on the yoke of
true, obedience, and reduced that barbarous Nation to their first rules of
noble ciuility: which when he had performed to the admiration of all men; he
then returned to Dublin, and there dyed, and was buried at Caermarden in Wales
(where he was borne) and there his memory will live for ever.

Robert Earl of Essex.
After him succeeded in his dignity his dear son Robert (surnamed the Great)
Earl of Essex, a man of whom it behooves every man to be careful how to
write, because his excellent parts were so great, and the envy which attends
such excellency is so boundless; that grow the Rush never so smoothe, yet
there will be a knot, and let the speech be never so modest, yet there will be
too much or too little spoken; Therefore, I will only fly to my Mistress
Truth, and under her protection give a glaunce at some part of his Story.

This Earl was by his father left young unto the World; The Earls education.
and therefore by his mother trained up to the knowledge both of Arms and
Letters, and that with such a careful (yet Noble) severity, that the
University wherein he lived will and must confess, that not the porest
Pentioner or House-scholler whatsoever kept his acts or disputations more duly,
freely, and out of his own knowledge and readings then this Earl did, nor had
the University (at that time) any wit more precious then other (being of his
time) to which he was not an oponent, so excellent ripe was his Understanding,
and so delicate his delivery of those things which he understood: As soon as
he left the University, he was called for to the Court, where his Sovereign
(the wisest of all Sovereigns) threw upon him all possible Favors; and
although for his youth and beauty he might, like Pirocles, have made Basilius
dote on his sweetness, yet such was his caryage, that he was able to have
given Ornament to any Counsel Chamber.

In this first flourishing time of his youth, His service in the Low Countries.
Spain tyranizing too hardly upon our best Neighbors the Neatherlands, the
ever memorable and renouned Queen Elizabeth, takes them to her protection, and
with a Royal Army, under the conduct of Robert Earl of Leicester preuents
those Tempests which else might fall upon them; In this Army, Robert Earl of
Essex is made Lieutenant General of the Horse, in which charge he bore
himself so nobly, and with such Bravery of spirit, that whilst Arnam, or the
Sconces, Duesburie, Zutfen, Deuentrie, Blankenburie, and a world of other
places (taken from the enemy) stand, the renown of this Noble man can neither
perish nor be forgotten.

The Earl of Essex service in Portugal.
He is no sooner entranchised from this service, but the poor King of
Portugale, Don Antonio (held violently out of his right by the King of Spain
after the death of Sebastian) comes into England, falls at the feet of the great
Queen Elizabeth; shows his Injury, and pleads to her mercy, for Succor: She
who was altogether a plentiful Fountain of pity; after cautious and
assurances given of the revolt of the Portugals, if an Army should be brought
to relieve him, presently vouchafes him aid, and sends away a Royal Army,
under the conduct of the second Hannibal of the World, Sir John Norris Knight,
and that much Sea-loued Gentleman, Sir Frauncis Drake.

The Earl of Essex service in France.
In this expedition, Essex desires to be employed; but his Sovereign, who held
him either too precious, or the action too low; or else had employments for him
of greater and higher nature, refuses to admit him; which he perceiving, and
being all then on fire, and such a fire as no employment of Peace was able to
quench, secretly and unknown to any creature, but his dearest obseruer Sir
Roger Williams, he stole from the Court (and the Ships being ready to
dis-imboage), put himself aboard, and so went the whole voyage, what there he
did the very Gates of Lysbone can testify, and the Suburbs at this day are
ficke of his ruins, and had the Citizens been half as faithful as he was
Valiant, Don Antonio and his seed had in probability worn the Crown till
this hour. The Groine will speak of him, for she felt him; nay, generally all
Portugale did admire him, and to the whole Kingdom and people of Spain his
name was dreadful.

Some few years after this expedition ended, The Earl of Essex service in
France
it pleased God by the hand of a paricide Villane (a Popish Friar, one that the
Devil and the Jesuits had been long in breeding) to suffer the life of Henry
the third of France to be taken away, whose next Successor was Henry the
fourth (surnamed the Great) of the House of Burbone, and then King of Navarre;
but up starts the Devils ministers, by the name of Leaguers, or the League, and
they with-stood that invincible Prince, so powerfully (though treacherously)
that the distressed King is compelled to complain to the great Mistress of
comfort, the renowned Elizabeth: She presently vouchsafes him aid, and under
the conduct of this most excellent Earl, Robert Earl of Essex (whom she made
her General) she sent into France (number for number) the goodliest, the
richest, and the most glorious Army that ever the Sun shined on. O! yet me
thinks I see the enter-view, The meeting of the Earl and the King.
or first meeting between the King and this Earl, where the Flowers of
England and the Flowers of France mixing together, gold so reflected upon gold,
that the Air and the Earth seemed all to be one flame, and the Sun blushing,
shrunk to see his glory ecclipsed.

The Earl had not been many days in France, but he reduced to the Kings
obedience all the Country of Normandy, the City of Roan only excepted,
against which the Earl laid a strong siege, and brought it to that low ebb of
safety, that he offered to give it the King when he pleased; for he had made
breaches so large, and passages so easy, that there was no difficulty in the
conquest; but the King said, He desired to win France, not to conquer France;
so that the work by sufferance grew longer, yet in the end he made it become
prostrate to the Kings obedience. What shall I say to the actions of this great
Earl? but only thus, that Fortune (in these days) was so far from displeasing
him, that she seemed to labor for nothing so much as for his exaltation.

The Earls journey to Cales.
After he had finished his great work in France, and was returned home with the
admiration and applause of both Kingdoms, and had received from his great
Mistress a condign reward (for the Queen made him the Master of the
Ordnance.) After some few years spent in Peace, occasion being offered, by the
injuries of the King of Spain (then living) who like a Lion lay ever sleeping
with his eyes open, to catch all advantages which might any ways molest us:
The Queen with a Royal Army, under the conduct of this thrice Noble Earl,
sent him into the very heart and bowels of Spain, I mean to the most feeling
members, and fruitfullest parts of all that Kingdom; here in this Journey, he
took the Town of Cales, sacked it and burnt it; and brought away not only
all the wealth of the place, but of all the Country round about it. After his
departure thence, he came into Portugale, and there took the Town of Pharo,
and sacked it, and had his Commission given his great heart liberty, I think
his Lordship found easiness enough to have sacked also both Siuil and Lisbone;
but laden with these spoils, he returned home, and brought into England an
infinite mass of wealth.

The next year following this expedition, The Earls journey to the Azores.
he (by the Queens appointment raised up an other Army, and went with it to
the Islands of the Azores, belonging to the King of Spain, being nine in
number, to wit, Saint Michaels, Saint Mary's, Tercera, Gratiosa, Fiall, Pike,
Saint Georges, Flores, and Coru^, and most of these well fortified, strongly
guarded, and of great consequence: for they are the very Storehouses or
garners which give relief to all the King of Spaines shipping, in their
return from the West Indies: All these Islands this Noble Earl took, some he
sacked, and some he ransomed, and the entier wealth he brought home into
England; for which brave exploit and many others, the Queen created him Earl
Marshall of England.

After he had reposed himself a little at home (for I cannot call it rest) the
Irish Rebels, The Earls service in Ireland.
under the General conduct of the Earl of Tiron, but especially in Vlster:
under the conduct of the bastard son of Desmount, Oni-mac, Sori; and others
in Munster: under the conduct of Filo-macesufe, and Redmeale his broin Lemster;
and under the conduct of Captain Terrol in both East-meathe and West-meathe,
had set all Ireland on fire by their treacherous and base combustions: To
suppress this, the Noble Essex is called for, and made Lieutenant of Ireland,
a Royal Army is raised, and with it he came into that much ruined Kingdom,
where betwixt May day and Michaelmas he brought Munster into obedience; drove
all the Rebels out of Lenster, made East-meathe and Westmeathe as peaceable as
any part of England; settled in quietness the greatest part of Conagh, even
from Athlone to the foot of the unfortunate Curlewes; and brought the Earl of
Tiron himself to a fearful Capitulation; But then other Planets rising, and
this Noble Earls fortunes being to be governed by new constellations; he is
compelled to return for England, and so shook hands with the wars for ever.

Robert, second of that name Earl of Essex.
After him succeeded in his dignities his son Robert Earl of Essex, now
living, whom he left unto the world young and tender, yet a Soldier from his
cradle; for his whole delight was in Martial Exercises, and of this I dare
judge, because I profess it, that when he was a very child, both in years and
strength, few horsemen in the Kingdom (the Gentleman that taught him excepted)
did ride better, Mr. Henry Alexander.
valianter, or with more discretion and judgment; In the University he spent
his first time, where he got both admiration, love, and Learning; and indeed
being the son of that Father, the very naming of his Name, was enough to
raise an army to gaze upon him, and cry out, That Heaven would protect him:
From the University, he betook himself to travel, wherein he spent many years
for the bettering of his knowledge, The Earl went a Captain into the
Palatinate.
and some in beholding the wars in the Neatherlands, being an object to which
his heart was fixed; as soon as occasion was offered he entered himself into
the list of Soldiers like a Soulder, humbling himself to the lowest degree
(considering his greatness) that thereby he might make his Scale more noble
and persit. In the Palatinate he did both Summer and Winter, held out all
extremities, and in despite of Famine, Sword, and Sickness returned home with
Honor.

Now last of all (new matter being offered) he has put himself on this
present action; The Story of the House of Willoughby.
Proceed in it brave Earl, and prosper; thou that art the Image of thy
Fathers body, be the imitatour of his actions, and I doubt not but Heaven will
power upon thee a ten times treble measure of his blessed and Glorious Rewards:
go on I say courageously, and be the Heart of this warlike preparation; the
large heart, the vnyeelding heart, that thou may inflame and burn all things
before thee, till the Enemy be glad that thy Masters Children will receive
their Inheritance, for so my hopes Prophecy, and so I hope God himself has
spoken.

Lastly, William Lord Willoughby.
read (O Britain) to thine vnkindled spirits the Story of the House of
Willoughby; a Story, that whosoever will turn over that great Volume, shall
find it full of Honor, full of wonder, full of Virtue, full of great actions:
for mine own part, I can but touch at the names, the matter and Substance lies
at large enrolled by a much better penman.

And first (as fittest for this short discourse, and omitting many that went
before him) I will begin with William Lord Willoughby, in the days of King
Henry the eight, who was a man of infinite courage and virtue, of high
thoughts, deep wisdom, and discreet caryage; he commanded (whilst he
lived) in all the Kings Wars; went on ever with renown, and came off ever
with glory; insomuch, that Henry the eight (that potent King) held him as one
of the richest Iuels which adorn his Kingdom, and thought no favor too dear
or precious for such great deseruings, but the best things on earth are ever
subject to Mortality; for it pleased God, when this brave Lord was in his
greatest prosperity of Fortune, and the highest favor with his Sovereign, to
take him to his mercy; and he died without any Issue male of his body, and only
left behind him a Daughter and heir called Katherine, Katherine Duchess of
Suffolk.
which was married to that great heroyicall Lord Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk, so that the King seeing the name of Willoughby, which he loved so
dearly, and had so dearly deserved at his Royal hands, likely to be lost in
this sweet Lady, began to take it to his consideration, and to make as it were
a monument to preserve this great Name, and to give it still a quickening life
in his remembrance; he called for a well-loued Kinsman of this Lord
Willoughbies, and created him (in memory of the other) Lord Willoughby of
Param: But see the effect and working of Providence, after the death of the
Duke of Suffolk, this Lady Katherine his Duchess married with Bar^ue, by whom
she had a son (borne beyond the Seas) which she called Peregrine, and was in
her right Lord Willoughby of Eresby. To tell the Story of this great Duchess
life, how worthily, Religiously, and bountifully she lived here in England;
how maliciously, cruelly, and treacherously she was hunted, and pursued for
her life, over all Christendom, by an whole Kennell of the Popes worst
devouring Woolues: to tell the dangers she escaped, the magnanimity she
used, the extremities she was put to; to tell the snares that were laid to
entrap her; and the pretty sleights, her sweetness used to escape them; to see
how busy the Devil was to undermine her, and how strong God was to protect
her, would raise up amazement, even in stones, and make the Earth cry out, O
Dea certe.

After her succeeded Peregrine, Peregrine Lord Willoughby.
Lord Willoughby, the myrror and myrackle of his time. This man must needs be
a Soldier; for he was borne in the Wars, nursed in the Wars, brought up in
the Wars; his whole life nothing but a Story of the Wars, and the last act
of his life was played in a Town of Garrison: Of this man's actions, all the
Neatherlands can report (and especially Bergenupzone) for in them, where was
any fury of War, out of which he brought not Triumph; and the Duke of Parma
himself, wheresoever his Chronickle is read of the Neatherlands, must be
contented (if Truth be witness) to have this Lord Willoughby triumphant
against him. France, thou must likewise be a Trumpet of this Noblemans Glory;
and Paris thou must be an evidence too strong to be refelled, thou know
he blew up thy Ports, and battered down thy Walls, and had not the Kings
mercy thrown cold water on his anger, it is well known he had wrapped thee up in
a bloody mantell; for exceeding great were his designs, and very good both his
success and Fortune; so that lawfully (without arrogance) he might have
assumed Coesars inscription, which was Veni, vidi, vici, for althings proved
easy to his undertakings.

The Lord Willoughby made governor of Berwicke.
Lastly, when he had performed all his great Mistresses commandments, and
brought peace to her Neighbors, he then returned into England, where in
recompense of his great services, she made him Governor of her warlike Town
of Berwicke, and in that Government, with peace of contience, and the love of
all sorts of People: he died, and was exceedingly lamented.

Robert Lord Willoughby.
After him succeeded in his dignity, Robert Lord Willoughby his son, now
living, who hitherto has followed his Fathesr step for step to Honor; put on
his Armor almost as soon, and had employments been as frequent and abundant
as in the days of his Father, doubtless he had arrived at a great part of his
glories: notwithstanding, he did neither neglect, nor loose time, but took
hold upon all occasions; neither did Peace or Ease cast any such mist about
him, but that our Royal King James his great Master, found him worthy of
employment; so that when his dear Brother, the King of Denmark stood
oppressed with Injurious Neighbors, it pleased him (for his Virtues sake) to
elect this Noble man, and made him General of an Army which he sent to his
succor: There this Lord acted all the parts of a most glorious Soldier; for
he gave to the King of Denmark all satisfaction, made the enemy feel his
courage, and his friends taste his love; he clothed every great desert with
Honor, and every less with his Bounty, so that after his work finished, he
returned home with praise, and found favor in the eyes both of his great
Master, and Royal Mistress.

After this expedition, the peacefulnesse of the times kept both his body and
mind a prisoner, till now at last, our Neighbors harms teaching us how to
husband safety, has given liberty to this new Army; in which this Lord is a
principal Commander: Go on then brave Lord in this brave design, and make
every obstacle the Enemy would find to deter or hinder thee, a new spur
to quicken thy resolution, and a new flame to kindle thine anger; thou have a
plentiful Catalogue of presidents in thine own Blood, read them over and
over; and when this great Substance of Martaill resolutions shall be brought
to a comely and invincible Body; be thou the prosperous and successful Foot,
which in despite of all oppositions, shall march forward and bring the rest to
the long wished for Palatinate. Do this prosperously, do this bouldly, for I
presage it is a work to which God has called thee, and Angels will clap their
wings when they see it effected.

When (O Britain) thou have read these four Chronicles to thy younger
Scholars; A remembrance of the Lord Wriothesley, the Lord De-Ware, and the
Lord Montioy.
if thou find any heavy or unapt for Noble Action; especially, where youth
and ability of body has given encouragement of better hopes, then point them
out these three young Coesars: the Lord Wriothesley; the Lord La-Ware, and the
Lord Montioy, let them look upon them with admiration, and when they have
perfitly viewed them, let them sigh and blush for shame that they are not
equal partners of their undertakings; let them behold the object whereat they
look, and they shall find it is sacred and not profane, a mark of holiness,
not a blazing meteor of greatness; look on the chain which draws them, and
they shall find it justice, not the quarrel of earthly passion; and let them
look at the end whereat they would aim, and they shall find it is Heaven and
the Community with Saints, not the Court (which is the Theater of worldly
praise) nor the Princes favor: But if all this prevail not, but still this
secure Slumber of Peace will lie heavy upon them; then stir up thy warm
blood, and modestly thus chide them:

Tell them, that as the King is the great maine Ocean or Sea of all Honor, and
may bestow his waters freely at his pleasure; so he expects from those which
are his petty Rivers, that hourly to him they pay back their Tributes: That
hand which gives Honor, ever looks from the honored hand to receive some
service; Then you (O you young men, you ablemen) you that have received honors
beyond expectations, favors past hope, and wealth past merit: Look whether
your Rivers be not converted to standing lakes, and no Tribute returned, and
whether your services be not concealed, whilst poor barren wishes only make
good the place of a dead duty; if you find these falts amend them, if you
find these falts forsake them.

Again, tell these great ones (whom hardly Thunder can awaken) that when they
neglect Honor, they neglect and are rebellious against God, and it is a mere
folly for them to hope to rule men, when they will not be ruled by him that
made them; But they will answer thee, that greatness of place, gives them
privilege from Censure, and so they can carry a fair show, no matter for
sufficiency. Reply thou that it is folly to think so, for assure them that a
superficial show of sufficiency, is but like small Wines which will not
keep, and being once tainted, no poison like that of Contempt.

Say unto those which are dull, and want good matter whereon to build great
thoughts, that as small springs are soon emptied if they be often drawn; so
spirits that have weak foundations, silence is good to make them seem wise;
but when Wisdom comes to prove them, every imagined good thing (in them) falls
asunder like so many disioyned pieces.

Tell the phantasticke Mimmickes of honor, those which are carried away with
every shadow of favor or fashion, that never fix upon any thing that is
constant or serious; that always hunt after vanities, and think no exercise
in Arms so meritorious, as tossing a Shyttelwike: tell them the study of vain
things is a toilesome Idleness, and a painful Folly; the spirit which is
struck with this disease, are very hardly cured; neither can their curiosity
in this kind (how careful soever) afford them any thing but Ignorance; and
believe it, there is nothing more dishonorable or dangerous either to Court
or Commonwealth, then an Ignorant great one: Tell them that Henry the Great of
France, called Ignorant Noblemen Golden Calves, and all that did Reverence to
them, were worthy to perish for Idolatry: It was his opinion, that Noblemen
might be borne good, Generous, and capable of Virtue; but Instruction only
makes them wise: Wisdom cannot be gotten without pain, she cannot be sold,
or if she could, it is ten to one, this sort of Nobility would never buy her,
there are so many follies to step betwixt her and them, which are both cheap,
and ever ready to pull down the market.

Lastly, and for a Conclusion of this small Treatise, say to him, whatsoever
he be that shall tax me of bitterness, or think I have gone beyond the
bounds of good manners in seeking to advise them, who are above the rule of my
knowledge, and that whatsoever is above me does nothing belong unto me, tell
them they are mistaken: Bid them call to mind, that the Tree which grew from
Romulus Iaueling (when he threw it into the ground) was walled about by the
Romans, and kept so carefully, that if any man (of what degree soever) saw the
leaves begin to wither, he presently gave an allarum to the whole City, and
cried for water as if all had been on fire: In like manner, Subjects have
cause to grieve and call out, when as those plants, from whence the hope to
gather the strength of Protection, the fruits of Justice and the shadow of
their rest, do wither either through the negligence of those which should
prune and preserve them, or through the want of good Sap, which might be
infused into them by due watering and manuring.

FINIS.

